Sci. Head: Ph.D., Prof. Մ. The role of risk management is parallel to Melkumyan's progress, the globalization of the scientific and technical economy, and the growth of the human factor.
  The latter is the process of risk identification, analysis and decision-making, which is aimed at reducing the risk-positive consequences.
According to Professor Hiebert Markle, Director of the German Research Institute, in the 21st century, globalization of market competition will be won not by large enterprises but by more dynamic and flexible ones responding to external changes10.
Global experience shows that entrepreneurship is possible without risk, so entrepreneurial risk assessment, risk assessment data collection, processing, risk assessment, risk detection, risk management, and mitigation methods should be avoided.
The entrepreneurial task should not be to avoid risk altogether, as this is not possible, but to study, forecast, evaluate risk, manage it, and, if possible, turn it into a positive factor, which can provide additional revenue to the most risk-averse economy.
 The latter sets itself the task of developing "effective risk management system" of assessment methods.
The choice of this or that risk management mechanism significantly depends on the variety of risks that accompany the business, the degree of their impact on the results of operations.
Implementation of the activity leads to an increase in the risk factor, which in turn leads to the separation of the enterprise as well as the general economy.
These losses can arise from the following areas: 1) Partial or complete loss of property, income, human life և values ​​as a result of non-profit potential losses due to accidental participation in projects due to unreasonably high risk-based management etc.
    All three areas of losses can be reduced to increase the efficiency of the cost point.
Losses in business activities can be classified according to specifics as follows: 11 are projected costs or direct losses of material objects in kind (structures, raw materials, materials, equipment, products, energy, etc.).
  Each of them has its own unit of measurement, but they are used as a value to estimate their total size.
11 Gagik Khachatryan, Enterprise Economics և Management, Yerevan 2009 The third Material Losses to be performed are these.
Losses of habitual duty (service), cargo: accidental delay from the planned work schedule, loss of working time due to unforeseen circumstances are lost in person / hours, person / days or just working hours.
  The working hour to make it look valuable is multiplied by the cost of one hour.
Financial losses due to direct monetary losses due to unforeseen payments, fines, penalties, payment of additional taxes, loss of funds, securities, as well as non-repayment of debts of the enterprise, non-receipt of money from the intended sources due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Loss of time arises when the process of entrepreneurial activity is slow (delay in timely delivery of orders, etc.).
 In order to monetize such losses, it is necessary to clarify what kind of loss of income from entrepreneurship is caused by accidental losses of time.
 Special losses: related to human health և loss of life, damage to the environment, as well as adverse moral and psychological consequences.
 As a rule, special losses are very difficult to express quantitatively, even more so in terms of value.
Manufacturing losses are typical of the enterprise as a result of business risk: • Decreased sales of products (services) due to reduced productivity of production systems (due to inactivity of equipment or under-utilization of production capacities, increase in labor losses, defective products, etc.).
  The amount of the mentioned losses can be calculated in terms of value by the following method կայ presented by the other method ուsocial leads to the loss of a product with a probable defined value number, which is K1 = ∆Q x C, where ∆K1 is the probable loss of the product expressed, the product C is abbreviated.
• Decrease in sales, which is due to favorable changes in the structure of quality-conditioned features, reduction in demand, etc., which are losses.
  The magnitude of the mentioned losses can be estimated by the following method: CC2 = CC x Q, where CC2 is the probable loss as a result of price reduction, CC is the reduction rate of the unit price of product, Q is the volume of products intended for sale by the production program.
The increase in material costs leads to losses due to the superconsumption of raw materials, materials, fuel, energy, which is calculated by multiplying the cost of each resource by its unit price: CK3 = JN 1 x C1 + JN2 x C2 +… + JN n x C n , ∆N is the probable over-expenditure of the n-nth material resource, C is the price of the n-nth unit resource.
In a similar way, it is possible to calculate the amount of losses due to increased taxes, duties and fines in the course of business activities, their level changes to the detriment of the enterprise, losses due to disasters (CP 5), although the losses resulting from the latter are difficult to calculate.
Thus, the total amount of losses in business can be calculated by the formula below: K = ∆K1 + ∆K2 + ∆K3 + ... + ∆K n where ∆K is the loss from the n-nth source.
The main condition for avoiding the above losses and minimizing them is the selection and implementation of effective ways of risk management.
Risk management as a system consists of two subsystems: subsystem subsystem (management manager (CP4), if object) manager, և others), management theory (management entity).
  Risk as an object of management, and as a subject of management - individuals or special groups of people (entrepreneur, financial risk manager, insurance professionals who have a purposeful impact on the object of management in different ways.
The main tasks of risk management are: identification of risk areas, assessment of the level of risk, analysis of the degree of acceptance of the given risk for the entrepreneur, development of measures to reduce risks, և if the risk has already occurred, taking measures to minimize losses.
Based on Risk Practice, certain principles and methods have been developed that enable the effective implementation of the risk management process.
Different step sequence of risk management.
 Thus, N. A. Kazakova proposes the phased sequence with risk management 12.1. Qualitative analysis of all possible risk factors, 2. Classification of risks according to the degree of predictability, 3. Risk assessment based on economical-mathematical methods, 4. Determining the permissible level of risks և limits, 5. Development of complex measures to reduce or neutralize the impact of risk factors.
 There are also various risk management economists 1. Risk Management Planning, Procedural Approach 1313 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge-http.
//www.pmi.org, specific 2. risk identification, 3. Qualitative risk analysis, 4. Quantitative analysis of risks, 5. Risk response planning, 6. Risk monitoring և control.
qualitative (in particular, risk management procedures have an assessment, general quantitative assessment, planning of risk response measures), but at the same time there are differences in the risk management features proposed by the author.
I.G. Lapusta proposes a post-risk risk management procedure14: 1. Business risk identification, 2. risk assessment, 3. Selection of risk management methods, 4. application of selected methods, 5. evaluation of results.
Based on the results of the examination analysis existing in the professional literature, we propose the following sequence of stages of the risk management procedure: analysis, 1. Goal setting, 2. Risk management planning, 3. Qualitative factors of risk factors 4. Risk identification, 5. Classification of risks according to the degree of predictability, 6. Quantitative risk level assessment based on modern economic and mathematical methods, 7. Risk classification by capacity, taking into account the allowable level և possible impairments, 8. Reducing the impact of risk factors 9. Monitoring և control.
Development of complex measures aimed at the development of such a risk management process արձր Increasing efficiency.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP RISKS MANAGEMENT AND EVALUATION Mkhitar Marina Keyword productivity, risk factors, insurance.
