Court of Appeals MIJANKYALDATAKAN ACTS AGAINST THESE COMPLAINTS KNNUTYANHIMNAKHNDIRNEREKaghakatsiakan case filing, investigation and resolution entatskumdatarane realizes their importance in different iravakanarzhek acts and accordingly makes the legal nature of the decisions that are aimed at solving Intermediate problems linelovkaghakatsiakan trial and ultimate goals, express procedural Judgments, reasonings and conclusions of a court nature in connection with the resolution of substantive legal issues are formulated in documents with procedural rules strictly defined by law - in judicial acts.
1 In the theory of civil litigation, many theorists distinguish between judicial acts and those who resolve the case on the merits - cases that do not resolve the case on the merits or intermediate judicial acts. 
As provided by the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, the court makes the following acts: judgment, court decision, payment order. 
  The Court of First Instance makes a decision while actually resolving the case. 
 A judgment is a judicial act made by a court of general jurisdiction, which, in essence, resolves the case, confirms the existence or absence of a disputed legal relationship. 
  When resolving certain issues that arise during the trial, as well as during the execution of the verdict, the court of first instance makes decisions.
  Essentially resolving or intermediate judicial acts are defined differently by theorists. 
 According to S. K. According to Zagaynova, the interim decision is a judicial act, which, being made with one substantive claim, is a basis for making a decision on another substantive legal issue2. 
 These decisions are of several types.
 And Z. K. Abdul 1S. Գ. Meghryan, Court Cases on Civil Cases of the Court of First Instance, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2010, page 9. 
arbitration process, M., Walters Clover, 2007, p. 153. He notes that judicial acts that do not substantially resolve the case are acts aimed at the administration of justice, which are made in connection with issues that arise during the hearing of the case, Zhoronk, in fact, do not solve the case 3.
 These և a number of other theorists identify intermediate judicial acts that do not substantially resolve the case, but a group of scholars also take a different approach. 
 Thus, according to S. K. According to Treushnikov, the court makes decisions and court decisions during its activity. 
 In particular, we are talking about the decisions that end the trial, settling the dispute between the parties, decisions that hinder the process of the trial or end it without settling the dispute, preparatory decisions aimed at the origin of the proceedings, ensuring further regular proceedings, decisions. which are aimed at making a decision.
 In the RA Law on Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code, judicial acts are classified as intermediate judicial acts resolving the case on the merits and not resolving the case on the merits. 
 The final judicial acts are the judicial acts made by the court, the case that does not resolve the case in essence.
  The judgment of the court of first instance resolving the case on the merits, the payment order of the final judgment that has entered into force, and the judicial acts not resolving the case on the merits are the case to be dismissed or the claim or application left without examination, the arbitral award or the financial system mediator's decision annulled. Decisions on issuing a writ of execution for the enforcement of a judgment or financial system conciliation, recognition of a foreign arbitral award, compulsory enforcement, recognition of a foreign judicial act. 
 In other cases, the court of first instance issues interim judicial acts.
Interim judicial acts are made throughout the course of the case և are aimed at resolving intermediate issues arising during that time. 
  They do not touch upon the essence of the substantive dispute, in fact, they do not resolve the dispute, they refer only to the sphere of litigation, but at the same time these acts affect the settlement of the case և outside of them 3 K., Determination of the first instance court in the Soviet civil process. 
Autoref. dis. ... kand. юрид. science. M., 1964. page 5.4 Treushnikov M. K., Civil process.
  Textbook. 2-ed, ed. and more. / In order. MK Treushnikova, M., OAO "Publishing House" Gorodec ", 2007, pp. 222-223. They have a leak in the final court act. 
 Interim judgments can address issues on which making the wrong decisions can directly lead to the wrong direction գործ obstructing the administration of justice.
 Interim judicial acts are made by the courts, the state bodies authorized to administer justice; they express the will of the court, but not in connection with the settlement of the dispute, but in the conduct of the examination of the case, in the settlement of this or that procedural issue. 
  Interim judicial acts create the necessary conditions for the persons participating in the case to exercise their rights and perform their duties during the trial.
  The ultimate goal of these acts coincides with the ultimate goal of civil litigation. 
Interim judicial acts are acts that directly affect the rights and responsibilities of the participants in the trial. 
Interim judicial acts, according to the formation of the horse, are included in the minutes of the court session made by the individual.
The acts that are subject to appeal are made in a separate act, adopted during extrajudicial proceedings. 
 The acts for which the making of a separate act by the egg is a direct requirement of the law are visited by a separate act. 
 In addition to these cases, the legislator allows the court to make any decision at its discretion with a separate act. 
Interim judicial acts are considered acts of justice5.
  In the Republic of Armenia, justice is administered only by the courts. 
 In carrying out their activities, the courts issue judicial acts, which establish rights and responsibilities for the participants of the civil circulation. 
  Everyone has the right to judicial protection of his rights, freedoms and legal interests, including the review of judicial acts.
 Appeal in civil proceedings is of a dual nature: • It is a judicial structure aimed at exercising the right to appeal judicial acts, which is an element of a person's right to judicial protection. Գ. Meghryan, Court Cases on Civil Cases of the Court of First Instance, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2010, p. 46. 
 It is aimed at revealing the mistakes made during the examination of the case in the court of first instance, correcting and eliminating the judicial mistakes.
• is a means of exercising control over the activities of the lower court ապահով to ensure the legality of the activities of the court of first instance6.
The main task of the appeal is to check the legality of the judicial acts, which in turn is an independent manifestation of the judicial right to the protection of subjective rights, which is carried out as a result of the appeal of the judicial act. 
 It is impossible for the appellate court to exercise control over the activities of the court of first instance without appealing the judicial act. 
 Մ. A. Gurvich notes that the reversal or change of illegal court rulings are procedural sanctions applied by the appellate court, which at the same time provide an opportunity to correct the wrong actions of the lower court. 
7 The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights, provides for the right to a fair trial and judicial protection.
  The appeal of judicial acts, the control by the appellate court over the proceedings of the courts of first instance are considered elements of a fair trial - the right to judicial protection. 
Persons participating in the case may file an appeal against their rights և intermediate judicial acts related to their freedoms in due time այն in cases when the law provides for the appeal of intermediate judicial acts.
 Article 320 of the draft RA CC lists the decisions that can be appealed, but this list is not exhaustive; it provides an opportunity to appeal against decisions that can be appealed directly to the Court of Appeal. 
 The fact that the appeal against the decisions to reject the lawsuit and to return the lawsuit is provided by law is conditioned by the fact that when making the mentioned decisions, the court deprives the person of the opportunity to defend his / her rights.
  There is an opportunity to appeal against the decision to suspend the proceedings, because when suspending the proceedings, the city 6V terminates indefinitely. Hovhannisyan, The Problems of Reviewing Judicial Acts in the Procedure of Civil Procedure, -Yer., YSU Publishing House, 2013, p. 6. 
  The decision to impose a court fine can also be appealed to the Court of Appeal. 
  The decision to impose a court fine imposes an obligation to pay a court fine, and the person must have the opportunity to challenge the legality of that act.
7 Gurvich M. A., Fateful decision. Theoretical Problems, Moscow, 1976, pp. 10-11. litigation, as a result of which the right of judicial protection of the persons participating in the case is not exercised. 
  The draft CPC of the Republic of Armenia also lists other decisions that have the possibility of appeal.
 It is noteworthy that the following lawsuits are not included in the list: decisions on dismissal of the case, annulment of the arbitral award or the mediation of the financial system; Decisions on recognizing the judicial act, allowing enforcement, issuing a copy of the writ of execution, restoring the missed deadline for submitting the writ of execution, making a turn in the execution of the judicial act, which, according to the draft CPC, are considered judicial acts that do not resolve the case.
  Unlike the current Civil Procedure Code, which provides for a general deadline for appealing interim judicial acts, the RA Law on Making Amendments to the RA CCP fills this legal gap, which contributes to the effective solution of the issue of protection of the rights of the persons participating in the case. 
  Judicial acts that do not resolve the case on the merits do not address the substantive dispute between the parties, but resolve it. 
 They have a final nature.
  It stipulates that an appeal may be lodged against the decision of the court of first instance within seven days of receiving the opportunity to appeal if the law provides for it, within seven days of the decision to leave the claim or application without examination, within seven days after the final act on the simplified procedure.
  In other words, the legislator envisages the same procedure for appealing judicial acts that do not resolve the case in essence, interim judicial acts, which, we think, is not very expedient. 
 When there are grounds provided by law, the court prevents the further proceedings in a civil case when deciding to terminate the proceedings without leaving the examination.
  It is therefore more appropriate to give participants in the case a longer period of time than the seven-day time limit for appealing a desired judicial decision in the event of a decision that does not resolve the merits of the case, so that they can see their rights and responsibilities arising from the final decision. to protect them, to be able to exercise their right to appeal.
  Since the final decisions made by the court are considered to be the verdict - the judicial acts that do not resolve the case on the merits, we think that a period of one month should be set for appealing the judicial acts that do not resolve the merits of the case, as provided for appealing the verdict. 
The person participating in the case, whose rights and freedoms an interim judicial act has been issued by the court, has the opportunity to appeal, regardless of whether the RA CCP provides for the possibility of appealing such a decision or not. 
  If there is no possibility of direct appeal of such a decision, then it can be appealed together with the decision. 
 This form of appeal is known in litigation as a deferred appeal.
Interim judicial acts of the Court of First Instance must meet the requirements of legality, justification and reasoning. 
  The appealed judicial act is examined in terms of legality և justification8, which is the most important issue of the appellate proceedings. 
 This also refers to the intermediate judicial acts of the court of first instance, the appeal of which leads to the examination of their legality, substantiation, reasoning by the court of appeal.
Examining the procedure for appealing judicial acts envisaged by the Draft RA CCP, we can say that it does not differentiate between the decisions of the court, including the interim judicial acts.
 The procedure for filing an appeal, the content of the appeal, the response to the appeal, the decision to accept the proceedings, the return of the appeal, the rejection of the appeal, the rejection of the appeal shall be the same criteria that the interim court 8 В. Н. Васин, В. И. Kazantsev, Civil Process. 
  textbook for cold. middle. prof. learnbook, - 3rd edition, p. - М., Издательский центр «Академия», 2008, էջ 209.
Complaints against acts are heard by a single court without a court hearing9. 
The grounds for appealing the judicial act are common. 
 These are: 1) violation or misuse of the norms of substantive law, 2) violation or misuse of the norms of procedural law, 3) new or new circumstance.
Violation of substantive law exists in cases when the court has not applied the norm that should have applied or has applied the norm that should not have applied or misinterpreted the legal norm or violated the fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia. 
  Violation or misapplication of the norm of substantive law can be a ground for annulment of an interim judicial act only if it has led to the conclusion of an erroneous interim judicial act.
V. Hovhannisyan considers the decision of the Constitutional Court as a basis for reviewing the judicial act in the context of both new and violation of the norms of substantive and procedural law, noting that if the court based its decision on a law contradicting the RA Constitution, it interpreted the law contrary to its constitutional content. Legal enforcement contrary to the decisions of the Constitutional Court can be considered a judicial error - a violation of the norm of substantive or procedural law, which affected the outcome of the case10.
Article 324 of the Draft CC of the Republic of Armenia states that violation or misuse of the norm of procedural law is a ground for reversal of a judicial act, if it has led or may lead to error of the case, ie the accuracy and legality of the judicial act in the case are questioned. 
  Violation or misapplication of a judicial norm can be a ground for intermediate judicial activation only if it has led or could have led to a substantially wrong intermediate judicial act. 
  Violation of the norms of the procedural law affecting the outcome of the case, which define the obligation of the court to manifest certain lawful behavior on the grounds provided by law, leads to the reversal of a judicial act.
  I. Մ. Visit, studying the outgoing 9 draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia", Articles 326332. 
10 V. Hovhannisyan, mentioned work, page 391. 
The impact of the violations of the procedural norms on him led to the conclusion that they can have a significant impact on the outcome of the case in both cases. when, by adversely affecting the outcome of the civil և resolution, they refer to the ևlegality of the substance of the judgment և, errors that do not directly affect the orthodoxy of the judgment, but are gross violations of the judicial power11.
 The law clearly defines the grounds for violation of the norms of procedural law, but at the same time it stipulates that the correct judicial act of the adoption can not be overturned only for personal reasons. 
  That is, when the appeal against the interim judicial act is well-founded, but the appealed interim judicial act is in fact correct, proceeds from the available evidence in the case, from the applicable procedural and substantive legislation, the appellate court must reject the appeal. 
The basis for the appeal of the judicial act is the new or new circumstance. 
 This basis is already provided for legal acts already in force, including intermediate judicial acts, which, according to the general rule, enter into legal force from the moment of their adoption.
  According to M. K. According to Treushnikov, the new circumstance is a legal fact that existed during the investigation of the case and has a significant significance for the resolution of the case12. 
  And V. V. Yarkov points out that the new circumstance, both in theory and in practice, is legal facts that existed at the time of the judicial act, but were not known, could not be both the court that made the judicial act and the plaintiff13. 
 The draft HKDO separates the new circumstances `the new circumstances, in both cases clearly defining the cases that can become a basis for reviewing the judicial act.
14 New circumstances may be appealed if the court did not know or could not have been aware of the existence of such a circumstance at the time the judgment was rendered. 
 That is, such a circumstance may have arisen or undergone corresponding changes after the interim judicial act has been made, up to a certain 11 Зайцев И. М., Устранение судебных ошибок в гражданском производство, Саратов, 1985, էջ 2612 Комиссарова К. I., Osipova Gj. K., Civil Process, M., 2006, p. 342.13 Morozova L. S., Review of solutions after new revelations of circumstances. 
  М., 1999, p. 14 The draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia", Articles 375, 376.
the expiration of the seven-day period for filing an appeal against the desired judicial acts. 
 The existence of such a short period of time reduces the possibility of appealing against judicial acts on this basis. 
 For this reason, in practice, interim judicial acts are mainly appealed on the grounds of violation of substantive or procedural law. 
The same is true for individuals who have the right to appeal both against a judgment and other court decisions, including interim acts.
  The subjects with the right of appeal are the persons who have a material interest in the case, disputed material legal relations or disputed legal relations related to the disputed legal subject matter, who are appealing the judicial act in their own interests, ie defenders of their rights, freedoms Persons who have not become participants in the case, whose rights and responsibilities have been judicially enacted, persons against whom a court fine has been imposed by the court of first instance.
  The subjects endowed with the right of appeal are those persons who are endowed with the right of appeal in order to fulfill their responsibilities. 
 Such a subject is the prosecutor, who has the right to file an appeal in cases provided by law. 
  It is noteworthy that a person can file an appeal against a judicial act only against his / her favorable part, except for the cases provided by law. 
The initiation of an appellate proceeding is conditioned by the exercise of the right of appeal in the manner prescribed by law, the purpose of which is to initiate a review of the judicial act, and the task of the appellate court is to find out the legality of the appellate appeal.
 Appeal against an interim judicial act և The attached documents are sent or submitted to the court of appeal. 
 The appellant sends the copy of the appeal to the persons participating in the case, and the copy of the complaint to the court that made the judicial act. 
  The law provides for an exception to this rule, stating that the appellant does not send the appeal կ the attached documents to the parties to the case if the appeal was filed: 1) against the decision to return the lawsuit, 2) against the decision to reject the lawsuit, 3) to impose a court fine against the decision.
Decisions to return a lawsuit or to reject a lawsuit are interim judicial decisions made by the court of first instance that prevent the lawsuit from being accepted if there are sufficient grounds provided by law. 
  In other words, in case one of these decisions is made, there is no case proceedings yet, these decisions are addressed only to the person who submitted the lawsuit. 
  The decision of the court of first instance to impose a court fine on a specific person envisages certain legal consequences only for him. 
 Therefore, it is not expedient to send the documents attached to the complaints against those decisions to the other persons participating in the case.
At the same time, sending the documents attached to the appeal to other persons participating in the case is intended to provide an opportunity for other persons participating in the case to file a response to the appeal. 
 The persons participating in the case have the right to submit a response to the appeal against the interim judicial acts within five days from the moment of receiving the decision of the Court of Appeals on accepting the appeal. 
In the absence of grounds for returning or rejecting the appeal against the interim judicial acts, the appellate court shall make a decision on accepting the appeal no later than three days after receiving the case.
  It follows from the RA Law on Amendments to the RA CCP that the grounds for returning the appeal against the interim judicial act, rejecting the acceptance of the appeal against the interim judicial act are the same as for all other judicial acts, as the mentioned law does not represent a differentiated approach. 
According to the general rule, appeals against the decisions of the court of first instance are examined; decisions on them are made without convening a court session. 
  Establishing a procedure for reviewing complaints without convening a court hearing is aimed at easing the workload of the courts; it is not considered a restriction on the right to a fair trial.
  But at the same time, the requirement to conduct an examination of appeals against interim judicial acts without convening a court hearing should not be of an imperative nature. 
 During the court session, the persons participating in the case have the opportunity to directly exercise their procedural rights, to bear obligations deriving from them. 
 The rights of a person to a fair trial և judicial protection are exercised right in the court session. 
  During the court session, a number of actions are taken, circumstances relevant to the resolution of the case are revealed, which contribute to the adoption of a judicial act.
  Therefore, the appellate court should not be constrained by the legislator's requirement to hear the appeal against the interim judicial act without convening a court session.
 However, hearing an appeal against an interim judicial act without convening a court hearing does not deprive the person of the opportunity to express his or her position, because if the person appealing against the judicial decision appeals, he / she expresses his / her position on the decision, ie disagreement. The court will conclude that in order to make a legal, substantiated and reasoned act as a result of the examination of the appeal against the interim judicial act, it is necessary to hear the explanations of the persons participating in the case, the court may appoint a court session, notifying the participants in the case.
 Therefore, we propose to provide a norm in the law on making changes in the RA CCC, according to which the appeals against the court decisions are examined. The decisions on them are made without convening a court session, unless the Court of Appeals decides otherwise. 
The Court of Appeal, as a part of the judicial system of the Republic of Armenia, aims to protect the subjective rights of individuals. 
  The protection of rights is carried out by checking the legality, substantiation and reasoning of the judicial acts of the court of first instance.
 The powers of the Court of Appeal are the combination of the rights and responsibilities of legal persons to participate in legal proceedings on the basis of appeals of other persons participating in the case based on the appeals of other persons15. 
  Մ. Ս. Shakaryan understands the entirety of the rights and responsibilities exercised as a result of the review of the Court of Appeals by the powers of the Court of Appeal.
  According to V. Hovhannisyan's powers of the Court of Appeal to carry out a legal action envisaged by law as a result of checking the legality and justification of the act of the Court of First Instance on the basis of an appeal. V., Appeal in the Arbitration Process, Dissertation, Moscow, 2005, p. 133. The incompleteness of the rights and responsibilities towards them is 16.
 Speaking about the powers of the Court of Appeals related to the review of interim judicial acts, specifying V. Hovhannisyan's position: we can say that the powers of the Court of Appeals are the totality of the rights and responsibilities to carry out legal actions envisaged by law as a result of checking the legality, justification and reasoning of the act based on the appeal against the interim judicial acts. 
As a result of the review of appeals against the decision, including interim judicial acts, the appellate court rejects the appeal, leaving the decision in force, or satisfying the appeal, annuls the decision և (or) makes a new decision.
 The powers of the Court of Appeal during the examination of appeals against intermediate judicial acts are exhaustively listed in the RA CDS Draft չեն are not subject to spatial interpretation. 
Decisions of the Court of Appeals in connection with appeals against interim judicial acts shall enter into force upon their adoption. 
Tatjik Gziryan THE ISSUES OF THE EXAMINATION OF COMPLAINTS IN THE CIVIL CIVIL COURT OF APPEALS IN THE INTERMEDIATE JUDICIAL ACTIVITIES Keywords: interim judicial act, case according to the case
