THE EFFECT OF DAILY RHYTHMS ON STUDENTS 'INTENTIONAL ACTIVITY The regularity of physiological processes underlies the vital activity of the human body.
  The rhythm of processes is described at all levels of living systems: molecular, cellular, organic, organic.
  This periodicity is conditioned by biorhythms.
  Biorhythm can be defined as statistically significant changes in various criteria of physiological processes that are repeated periodically [1].
Christopher Tufelyants is one of the founders of living studies. At the end of the 21st century, he showed that there are "internal clocks" in the human body, the operation of which depends on the rotation of the earth around its axis, as well as the rotation of day and night.
The study of biomarkers is of great interest among scientists.
  Human rhythms are a combination of different organ functions, they respond to every change in life.
 Human daily rhythms are considered to be permanent physiological patterns, which are built on hereditary elements acquired during life.
Living rhythms are different: daily, weekly, monthly, seasonal, annual, lunar, etc.
The most important internal chronometers of the human body are located in the brain - the pineal gland, the hypothalamus.
According to a more common hypothesis, a living organism is considered to be an autonomously changing system characterized by internally connected rhythms.
  They allow the body to adapt perfectly to the cyclical changes of the environment.
 Scientists believe that in the struggle of the millennium, there were organisms that not only understood the changes in the conditions of nature, but also adapted their rhythm system to changes in the environment.
 For example, in the fall, birds do not move south, and some animals fall asleep.
Scientists have now proven that more than 400 processes, including mental capacity, are performed on a daily basis.
Human intellectual capacity is characterized by the reception, dissemination, decision-making and implementation of information.
  Criteria for mental performance are memory, attention, and speed of information transmission.
Currently, the effect of daily rhythms on students' mental performance is almost not studied. Based on this, the aim of the work is to study the effect of daily rhythms on students' mental performance.
In order to achieve the goal, the following tasks were put forward: • Find out the students' affiliation to different types of work ability.
• To study the dependence of the speed of attention indicator, the accuracy of work, the useful ratio of mental work և mental-functional capacity of people with a special type of work ability on different hours of the day.
• Compare indicator values ​​at different times of the day և Indicator values ​​of people with distinctly different types of ability to work.
The object of study was 26 female students of 1-4 years of VSU.
  We used the Ostberg method to determine the specific type of performance.
  And we have determined the attention և mental efficiency by Bordon Amfimov's digital connection method (see appendix) [2, 6].
The results of the research: People according to the type of work ability are: larvae (severely և weakly pronounced morning types), owls (severely և weakly pronounced evening types) և pigeons (arrhythmics) (Table 1).
ChronotypeAwakeningPhysically Active
PeriodIntellectual PeriodSwitchingExperienceIndependent 6.
007.
00, to have an instant alarm clock
appetite
independently - 10.
0011.
00 և late, with a slow alarm և difficult.
Appetite application egalischashin 7.
00-9.
00, alarm clock
The dove is quite easy to get from the moment of waking up to 12!
00-13.
00. They have 2 peaks: 8.
00-9.
00 to 12.
00-13.
00, then drops to 16.
00.
 The second peak 16.
00-18.
00 is 21.
00-22.
It is easy to sleep at 00, 14 o'clock.
0021.
00 From waking up to 18!
00, but 3 peaks - 13.
00-14.
0018.
00-20.
0020.
00-23.
00 (01.
00) 00.
At 00, possible
Revenge
Equilibrium activity during the day 22.
00-23.
00 without which peaks can occur during the peak Table 1. Characteristics of chronotypes [9] The working type of 3 of the students of VSU was weak in the morning, 8 were weak in the evening, and 15 were arrhythmic.
 There were no very pronounced morning խիստ severely pronounced evening types among the respondents.
 We set the speedometer to A = N / t (dimension A sign / sec, where N is the number of characters selected up to the last, t is the time to work).
  Work accuracy index: T = M / n (dimension: T conditional unit, where M is the number of correctly selected characters, n is the number of whole characters that should have been marked).
  Useful ratio of mental work: E = N * T (dimension: E sign).
  Mental performance: Au = (N / t) * ((M- (O + P)) / n) (dimension: Au sign / sec, where O is the number of incorrect characters, P is the number of missed characters).
A pattern was observed in each of the students with weak morning work type: the maximum value of the speedometer was observed in the afternoon (Figure 1).
  The regularity of the work accuracy index was not observed for one student, it was almost stable, for one student it was high in the morning, it went down in the afternoon, it went up again in the evening.
 The other student has reached the maximum value in the afternoon (Figure 2).
  The useful ratio of mental work was highest for two students in the afternoon, for the other student it was almost stable (Figure 3), for two students the mental capacity was higher in the afternoon, and for the third student it decreased with the evening (Figure 4).
The attention span of 8 students with arrhythmic type of ability to work decreased during the evening, 4 was high in the afternoon, 2 was high in the evening, and one remained stable during the day (Figure 5).
  The accuracy index of the work was low for 7 students in the afternoon, for 5 students it was high in the afternoon, for 2 students it went down in the evening, and for one student it remained stable (Figure 6).
  The useful ratio of mental work decreased for 7 students in the afternoon, for 5 it was high in the afternoon, for one it increased in parallel with the evening, for another it decreased during the evening, for one it remained stable (Figure 7).
  The mental work of 5 students was low in the afternoon, high in 7 in the afternoon, low in 3 students in the evening (Figure 8).
The attention rate of students with weak evening work type increased during the evening with 4 students, was the highest in the afternoon of 2, decreased with the evening of 2 (Figure 9).
The accuracy index of the work rose for 4 students during the evening, for 2 it was the highest for the afternoon, for one it went down for the evening, for one the lowest result was written in the afternoon (Figure 10).
  The useful ratio of mental work in 3 students increased in the evening, in 3 it was the highest in the afternoon, in one it was the lowest in the afternoon, in one it decreased in the evening (Figure 11).
  The mental capacity of 3 students increased in parallel with the evening, in 3 of them it was at noon the highest, in one in the afternoon it was the lowest, in one it decreased in the evening (Figure 12).
Figure 1. Attention speed indicator in people with poor working ability in the morning. A1 in the morning, A2 in the afternoon, A3 in the evening. Figure 2. Accuracy of work indicator in people with poor working ability in the morning. T1 in the morning, T2 in the afternoon, T3 in the eveningFigure33.Integration of mental work efficiency with poor working capacity
unpredictable people: E1 in the morning, E2 in the afternoon, E3 in the eveningFigure 4. Mental work in people with poor morning work capacity: Au1 in the morning, Au2 in the afternoon, Au3 in the eveningFigure 5 A1 in the morning, A2 in the afternoon, A3 in the eveningFigure 6. Accuracy indicator of work in people with arrhythmic type of ability to work. T1 in the morning, T2 in the afternoon, T3 in the evening. Figure 7. Useful ratio of mental work in people with arrhythmic type of ability to work. E1 in the morning, E2 in the afternoon, E3 in the eveningFigure 8. Mental work in people with arrhythmic type of ability to work: Au1 in the morning, Au2 in the afternoon, Au3 in the eveningFigure 9. Attention speed indicator in people with poor working capacity in the evening. A1 in the morning, A2 in the afternoon, A3 in the eveningPicture 10. Accuracy indicator of work in people with poor working capacity in the evening. T1 in the morning, T2 in the afternoon, T3 in the evening. Figure 11. Useful ratio of mental work in people with a weak ability to work in the evening. E1 in the morning, E2 in the afternoon, E3 in the evening. Figure 12. Mental work in people with weak evening work capacity. Au1 in the morning, Au2 in the afternoon, Au3 in the evening. Thus, about one third of the students with a weak morning type noticed a change in their chronotype during the day. Mental work in people with poor working capacity. Au1 in the morning, Au2 in the afternoon, Au3 in the evening. Thus, about one third of the students with a weak morning type noticed a change in their chronotype during the day. Mental work in people with a weak evening type of ability to work. Au1 in the morning, Au2 in the afternoon, Au3 in the evening. Thus, about one third of the students with a weak morning type noticed a change in their chronotype during the day.
  Arrhythmic students did not have a regularity between their chronotype ևspecific type of workability և.
  In the weak evening, about eight-fifteenth of the typists noticed a change in their chronotype during the day.
 Based on the above, it is desirable to take into account the chronotypes of students when organizing classes to ensure a higher result.
APPENDIX [1] Khudaverdyan D., Fanarjyan V., Fundamentals of Human Physiology, Yerevan, 1998, p. 685.
[3] URL.
http:
//www.royal-cb.ru/interesting/zdorove/sutochnye-ritmy-cheloveka/ (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[4] URL.
https:
//www.kakras.ru/doc/bioritm-life-cycle.html (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[5] URL.
https:
//metodorf.ru/tests/korrekt_proba.php (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[6] URL.
https:
//www.psyoffice.ru/1-79-28.htm (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[7] URL.
https:
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/vliyanie-bioritmov-na-umstvennuyu-rabotosposobnost (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[8] URL.
https:
//www.eduherald.ru/ru/article/view?id=13832 (Link made: 16.11.2018).
[9] URL.
https:
//ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Хронотип (Link made: 16.11.2018).
Hovsepyan Arևik THE EFFECT OF DAILY RHYTHMS ON STUDENTS 'MENTAL WORK Keywords: rhythms, periodicity, arrhythmic type, morning type, weak evening type, mental efficiency, attention.
