PARADOXES OF LOVE It is difficult to imagine human life without such concepts as freedom, love, the search for meaning in life, happiness, faith, death.
  And since the central subject of the study of philosophy is man, so these concepts themselves become the object of philosophical reflections.
  However, it is not possible to address all these concepts in one article, so let's try to discuss the topic of human love, which is closely related to other key concepts that characterize human life.
A person without love, I think, is an incomplete being, deprived of the depth of real life, incapable of effective activity. he cannot adequately understand himself to others.
 Love greatly contributes to the social-psychological maturity of a person, the ability to enter into the state of another, to the development of empathy1.
 Love is absolutely necessary for human socialization, because it involves a person in a social system based on an internally motivated demand for higher values.
  In modern times, when social transformations have taken place, scientific and technical developments, people are showing aggressive expressions, indifference to universal values, cases of mass destruction of people, and other inhuman realities.
All this, I think, testifies to the lack of love, the consequence of which is the emergence and spread of envy, enmity.
  It must be stated that the study of love is a complex, multifaceted issue, the domains of which are intertwined between the "philosophy" of art and psychology.
In the field of psychology, the phenomenon of love becomes a topic of discussion when it comes to human emotions and feelings.
  The results of the psychological studies of love are necessary for people to understand correctly, to build self-awareness, and to build our relationships with others.
 It should be noted that the study of love is one of the ways of knowing a person, especially since that feeling and its manifestations are connected with almost all aspects of the person structure.
There are many discussions on the topic of love in the field of fiction and art in general.
 However, in the framework of this article we will try to find the general features related to art, psychology և philosophy և give the philosophical analysis of love as a paradoxical phenomenon.
Plato presented the essence of love more deeply, delicately and masterfully than the thinkers of ancient times.
 According to ancient mythology, man was androgynous, with the union of man and woman.
 But because they were angry with him, the latter divided them into two parts, and when they found each other, love arose.
  Since then they have been looking for each other 2.
  This difficult, almost impossible unity has led people to often think that expressions of love are rare, in many cases it is just an imitation.
  Add to this the fact that several types of love are often distinguished.
  In ancient Greece there were four types of love: underground, future, filia, eros.
 An emotional attachment and admiration for a person was called subordination.
 The future was called the generous attitude, in the case of which a person is generous and benevolent.
  This is a delicate emotional love, which the living person seems to want to assimilate spiritually with his beloved.
  Philia is understood as friendship or friendship.
  And the expression of passionate, romantic love they called eros.
  It was characterized by a desire to be physically close to the object of love.
  Modern 1 See Nalchajyan A., Fundamentals of Psychology, Yerevan, 1997, p. 464.
2 See Plato, Holiday, four-volume work, vol. 1, Yerevan, 2006, pp. 168-170.
Professional literature presents several variants of love: motherly love, brotherly love, love for God, love for one's own person, love for the opposite sex, etc.
  This examination is dedicated to these last types of paradoxes of love expression.
Given the variety of love, defining it becomes quite difficult - incomplete.
  However, speaking of the manifestation of love for the opposite sex, let us try to find some commonalities found in talismans.
  Nalchajyan, highlighting the love-value side, mentions that if someone acquires such a great significance for us that we can not imagine our life without him, then we can say that we are catching that person.
 "In case of such a high assessment, we have special emotional states և their series - feelings, կյանքում in everyday life those very feelings are called love" 1.
  Love is a direct, narrow personal deep feeling, the subject of which is first of all man, but there may be other objects that have a special vital meaning.
 "Love is the affirmation of another human being, his desire to be, to develop, to never die, by which he opposes the hatred that seeks to destroy his object."
Generally speaking, "love can be described as inclination, outburst, inspiration, willpower; at the same time, striving for fidelity, as a unique sphere of creation; Separation of slavery as a complex, multi-layered biological և social, individual և social significance, intimate, hidden և at the same time, seeking ambition ”3.
  Such a description in itself makes obvious the multifaceted, paradoxical manifestation of love, which we will try to present in more detail.
The word "paradox" is of Greek origin; it means strange, unexpected, unusual, literally translated "deviant opinion".
 The term was first used by the Stoics, who meant original views by the word paradox.
 Sometimes the so-called paradoxes are paradoxical, which, being true, contradicted the existing views, which is why they seemed strange.
The paradoxes of logical, mathematical, or so-called set theory are best known in the scientific literature.
  Linguistic as well as "literary" paradoxes are interesting.
The paradoxes of love are fundamentally different from the above-mentioned paradoxes; they must be discussed in a separate context.
  First of all, it should be noted that it is almost impossible to find a common definition of love.
  It should be noted that until now there is no clear demarcation between "falling in love".
 To love և to fall in love և the events in this article are identical.
 It is explained by the fact that, I think, to love the event follows falling in love, it is impossible to imagine one of them without the other.
  The secret of the secrets is exactly why you fell in love with this և not the other person.
 Of course, there is an attempt to explain this through biochemical reactions, but it is not well studied yet.
In the paradoxical first manifestation of love, the fact that he is inclined can be mentioned.
 On the one hand, it is said that love is the free expression of man, that it is impossible to compel, 4 but it is a tendency which presupposes compulsion.
  "Freedom ևdependence is closely intertwined in the feeling of love և we can say that it is self-existent" 5.
  "One can think that love in history arose as a psychological mixture of female slavery, subjugating her, the man himself falls into captivity."
The second manifestation of the paradox of love is an expression of jealousy.
On the one hand, the lover wants to be admired by his beloved, but when he notices such admiration և attention, immediately there is a warning և anger, on the one hand, jealousy7.
  This complication is especially intensified when the beloved creature in turn begins to show interest in possible competitors.
  This phenomenon is a bar of emotions 1 See Nalchajyan A., 1997, p. 464.
2 See Zolotukhina-Abolina E., Philosophical Anthropology, Moscow, 2006, p. 213.
3 See Philosophy of Love, Ch.1 (edited by Gorskogo D.), Moscow, 1990, p. 7.
4 See Fromm J., Experience in Love, Moscow, 2014, p. 43.
5 See Zolotukhina-Abolina E., 2006, p. 220.
6 See Philosophy of Love 1990, page 16.
7 See Nalchajyan A., 1997, p. 467.
It is a deed that includes several basic components: love for the "chosen" person, enmity towards the same loved one, enmity - hatred towards rivals, anxiety due to the prediction of possible loss1.
  "The jealous lover hates his rivals, at the same time he loves his chosen one and expects deep deprivations" 2.
Another paradox is observed in the "cognition" of maintaining loyalty to a loved one.
  On the one hand, man must remain faithful to his beauty, but, on the other hand, he is a being who knows man, longs for news; is it difficult to "recognize" or "remain faithful" between these two approaches to morality?
 In this connection, it is often said that love is voluntary, that if it were only a feeling, there would be no need to promise eternal love.
Another paradox of love appears when the issue of the object of love is discussed.
  Most people disagree with the idea that physical beauty is the most reliable way to find a partner.
  But research shows that this is not the case at all.
Of course, in movies and romances they try to present it that way, but the reality often proves something else.
 Studies show that we "choose" partners who are as attractive as we are.
 In that case, the ambition is higher that the partner will stay with us for a long time.
  It is natural to give preference to this horse, because even children are pushed towards the middle faces, and not the faces with blinding beauty3.
  This is the opposite of the popular opinion that it is possible to find a loved one through beauty.
 From a philosophical point of view, love is explained not by the object of love, but by the ability to love.
  It is not yet possible to explain the origin of love for other reasons.
Armen Khachatryan PARADOXES OF LOVE Keywords: love, paradox, freedom, cognition, jealousy.
