CHARACTERISTICS OF GENDER DESTRUCTION AND HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS DURING GENOCIDE Violence against humanity, including murder, mass extermination, has as long a history as man himself.
The way of human creation is one, the ways of destruction are many.
 Genocide is one of the most cruel and shameful events in the history of mankind, one of the concentrated manifestations of absolute evil.
 The genocide is not only a historical phenomenon or a scientific abstraction, but also a cruel reality of our time, a grave crime against humanity, the prevention of which can save thousands of lives.
 From this point of view, any scientific research examining the origins of genocide or its programs of violence against women (as in this article) can contribute to the selection and application of more effective means of prevention.
One of the most important, less studied areas of genocide theoretical research is gender murder և genocide1.
  The mention of each case by a genocide survivor inevitably provokes an outburst of sensitivity, which is accompanied by moral assessments.
  The very word "gender murder" carries a strong emotional charge, which makes it difficult to study the concept theoretically, hinders the posing of conceptual problems.
 In fact, gender killing, as a theory of a specific historical or socio-psychological phenomenon that would be acceptable to most professionals, is not yet clearly formulated, but the term "gender murder" (gendercide) 2 is circulating.
  The Oxford AmericanDictionary describes the term "genocide" as "deliberate murder of the human race."
  Comparing, we can say that the term "gender murder" will also be described as "deliberate destruction of persons of a specific sex (gender)."
  Other terms, such as "gynocide" և "femicide", have been attributed to the murder of women and girls.
  However, the term "gendercide" does not refer to a specific gender. It is neutral, it can apply to both women and men.
  In other words, the term "sex-neutral" needs to be used.… The term draws attention to the fact that often gender was as crucial as, for example, racial, religious or class affiliation.
Scientists have created a new direction of scientific research called "gender-selective" strategies, through which historians are able to conduct research based on classical reports.
  According to historian Leo Cooper, "it was very common to destroy besieged cities, to massacre their population or male defenders, and to take their wives and daughters captive."
  However, he indirectly opposes such realities as Troy և 1's English translation: "gendercide and genocide".
2 The term was first used in 1985. "Gendercide" by Marie-Anne Warren.
  In the book "Implication of Sex Selection", where the author compares the concepts of "genocide" and "gender murder".
3 Available at http.
//www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/genocide?q=genocide.
4 Warren MA, Gendercide.
 The Implications of Sex Selection, Totowa, 1985, p. 22.5 Kuper L., Genocide.
 Its Political Use in the Twentieth Century, London, 1981, p. 11. The classic extermination of his defenders and captives of women (as described in Greek mythology and tragedy) using the terms "destruction of roots and branches" to describe the massacres of women and children.
It is noteworthy how often we find in the literature information about modern mass murders, "what a disproportion there is between males and females."
  Moreover, the number of male victims is incomparably less than women.
 The best documented historical materials are 1930-1940. Stalin purge materials, where the use of the term "gender murder" is highly controversial.
At present, human rights defenders want to do more than just present a list of human rights violations that people suffer from.
 They try to prevent the violations, which refer especially to mass violations.
Recently, the idea of ​​violating the rights of a particular gender has become widely known.
The "Convention on the Political Rights of Women" entered into force in 1954. July 7, according to which women get the right to vote and hold public office.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, often referred to as the Bill on Women's Rights, entered into force in 1981. since September 3.
 The latter, in fact, being signed by 165 participating countries / 2000. March 20 /, gained wider recognition than the "International Bill of Rights".
 These two conventions are the result of a concerted effort to recognize and protect women who have been regularly discriminated against throughout human history.
  The principle of rape as a war crime has been enshrined in international law for some time.
 The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which for the first time in its history has convicted Jean-Paul Akayesu of genocide for genocide, has also convicted him of a number of crimes against humanity (rape). Hirota, Tokyo 's former foreign minister, has been charged with atrocities, including mass rapes during the "Nanjing Rape", on the grounds that he recklessly neglected his own business. to prevent offenses և war habits ”1.
Under the same law, the Trial Chamber emphasized that rape was an integral part of the genocide: "As regards points 11 (A) և 12 (B) of the indictment concerning rape and sexual harassment, the Chamber wishes to emphasize that the fact that, in his view, they (the above-mentioned acts) are an integral part of this genocide, as well as other actions taken, in whole or in part, to eliminate a particular group.
Indeed, rape and sexual harassment are considered bodily-mental harm to victims, համաձայն according to the Chamber, even one of the worst ways to intentionally cause harm to victims, as they suffer physically և soul / mental /.
In the light of all the evidence before it, the Chamber finds itself satisfied that the acts of rape and sexual assault described above were committed only against Tutsi women, many of whom were subjected to the worst humiliating acts, mutilated, raped several times by more than one attacker.
These rapes led to the psychological and physical destruction of Tutsi women.
 Sexual harassment was an integral part of the deliberate extermination of Tutsi women, which contributed to their complete extermination.
 These rapes were carried out systematically and purposefully.
 A Tutsi woman, married to a Hutu man, testified before the court that she had not been raped because of her ethnic wall (ICTR-96-4) "1998, accessibility is unknown… Sexual harassment of Tutsi women took place first with the aim of destroying their spirit, will and will to live ”1.
The same tribunal has for the first time issued an indictment against Paulin Nyaramasuhuko for war crimes against women, who was the Minister for Family and Women's Affairs.
 He was charged with crimes against humanity and genocide, including rape, accompanied by large-scale systematic attacks on civilians for political, ethnic and racial reasons2.
Over the past decade, the so-called human rights community has documented horror incidents faced by women in armed conflict.
 A vivid example of such conflicts is the case of Kosovo, studied by Human Rights Watch.
 The monitoring report recorded sexual assaults on Kosovo women not only during the NATO bombing, but also during the ten years that eventually led to the conflict between the "Yugoslav forces" of the Kosovo Liberation Army.
  According to the report, the conflict was initiated by the Serbs at the highest level, out of hatred towards Albanian women.
"In the period before the last decade in Yugoslavia, the official state propaganda served to dehumanize and stereotype Kosovo Albanian women.
  Serbian propaganda contrasted with Serbian women, who were seen as "educated, strong, fit for motherhood", while Albanian women were considered "productive / motherly" without discrimination… Nationalist propaganda raised concerns about Albanian population growth որոշ Some Albanians raped not Albanian He expects them to get married after being attacked.
  The war rapes were aimed at depriving Albanian women of future generations. ”3
A report by Amnesty International (AI) discusses violence against women during the Sierra Leone fire.
  The document describes all the horrors of desolate landlords, including sexual slavery, in which women are constantly raped by members of the armed forces, rebels.
 This speaks of systematic mass rape.
Then the report gives testimonies to the authorities to protect the civilian population.
 Strange as it may seem, the organization asks the Revolutionary United Front, which was also a rebel force, to "order the release of girls and women," perhaps with another group of civilian prisoners of war in mind.
The AI ​​noted that women were not the only victims of mass rape during the war. "The rebel forces terrorized the men, forcing them to rape their own family members, threatening to cut off their arms and legs if they did not obey."
 And this phenomenon refers to the murder of a male sexist.
 When the resolution was circulated, David Matas, an expert on Amnesty International Mandate A1, wrote: "The persecution of men is no more or less painful than the persecution of women or children.
  A question arises. Is it appropriate to ask A1 in connection with the resolution to single out the violations of this or that group of victims, be they women, men or children?
  When people are killed or disappear, they are equally killed or not (ICTR / INFO-9-2-196), 1999, available at www.ictr.org/ENGLlSH/PRESSREL/196.htm.3 Human rights Watch, Gender-Based Violations against Kosovar Albanian Women (New York.
  Human Rights Watch, 2000), available at www.hrw.org/reports/2000/fry/.4 Amnesty International, Sierra Leone.
Rape and Other Forms of “Sexual Violence against Girls and Women” (London.
  Amnesty International, 2000), available at http: // www.
//www.amnesty.ca/search/node/women%20genocide, regardless of whether they will be women, men or children.
 It minimizes the tragedy of one person, increases the other to cover the killings and disappearances of the group, and to present the other in a smaller amount. ”
But is the declaration that in 1994 In Rwanda, the Tutsis were axed only because they were Tutsis, it sheds "no less light" on the suffering of the Hutus who were killed during the genocide.
 Or the reports about ethnic Albanians who were forcibly evicted from their homes, raped or killed in 1999. Just because they were ethnic Albanians, does this fact "shed little light" on the suffering of Kosovo Serbs (some of whom were victims of the Kosovo Liberation Army)?
Of course, people would have stood up with guns in their hands if human rights organizations or the media had reported that some one million people in Kosovo had been forcibly displaced from Kosovo without mentioning that they were ethnic Albanians or if they had not mentioned the ethnicity of the Rwandan victims.
  The members of these ethnic groups were targeted because it happened that they belonged to this or that ethnic group.
  Or no one would say that the persecution of the Tutsis was more painful than that of the Hutus, because the Tutsis in 1994. They were the main target of the genocide in Rwanda.
 He would not say that the persecution of the Hutus was more painful when they became the 1972 The main target of the Burundian genocide.
As for Mark Lepine's problem, he said in 1989 He entered the Montreal Polytechnic in December, separating men from women, killing fourteen women and injuring thirteen.
  This case was an exception to the general rules of gender-selective mass murder, where surviving men mourned the death of their compatriots.
 Did not the fact that Lepine chose women just for those who were women shed "less light" on the suffering of men?
What is true of Tutsi, ethnic Albanian women, refers to men who were tortured, killed, because they were men.
  Many conflicts prove once again that just being born a man is tantamount to being sentenced to death.
 It is difficult to imagine a more convincing fact when this or that group is chosen as a target than the separation of a group from the rest of the population, followed by the massacre of its members, as in the case of Mark Lepine, as in the case of a group of men during the Kosovo conflict. .
 When in 2000 Russian authorities pass a law banning Chechen refugee men between the ages of 10 and 60 from entering or leaving Chechnya, human rights observers say. "It is completely unacceptable to forbid male citizens, including ten-year-old boys, to flee the place with heavy fighting.
 This is against international standards. ”1
 Can anyone say that this phenomenon "sheds little light" on the suffering of Chechen women (since human rights observers considered the incident to be blatant ruthlessness, one might expect that the outrage could have been greater for the entire male population to prevent them from escaping torture, death, or forced slavery and disappearance, as was the case in Kosovo.
  However, human rights monitors did not investigate the matter.
In any case, be it the raids of Alexander the Great or the four wars started by Slobodan Miloևiև, in all cases the violations of human rights against this or that group of the population are not accidental.
  Serial killers can choose their victims automatically, but Stalin և Hitler's death machine knew who his "enemy" was, they were meticulous in carrying out their massacre.
The important thing here is that the human rights report is not a zero-sum game, in which every word written for a male victim automatically leads to one word 1 Human Rights Watch, Russia Closes Chechnya Border to Male Civilians (New York.
  Human Rights Watch, 2000), available less to the suffering of women or vice versa.
  The OSCE report on Kosovo explicitly shows that mass violence against women and men can be discussed in a fairly balanced way, in the same source.
Moreover, AI has considerable experience in characterizing human rights violations that harm a particular group, even when discrimination is much more pronounced than in the examples above.
 In a press release announcing the report on the death penalty for racial discrimination in the United States, Amnesty Secretary-General Pierre Sane said: "Today in the United States, where you live or die as a result of the crimes you have committed, it turns out that a lot is due to the color of your skin's race."
 Furthermore, the report states that when it comes to the death penalty in the United States, it is not only blacks who are subject to discrimination. "Prejudice applies to Latinos, Native Americans, Asians, and other Americans of Arab descent."
Thus, AI speaks of racial discrimination, where women are the victims2.
  Given this, is it logical to think that spreading the word about men to the scales will not be catastrophically detrimental to justice (since it is the highest punishment, the death penalty), now what is the primary cause of skin cancer in the United States? Unity, race, ethnicity, intellect?
 I must say, none of them.
 The only answer is biological sex.
  According to the Center for Justice of the University of Alaska, "In the United States in 1608. Of the 19,000 confirmed executions, only 515 have been executed by women. ”3
 However, this is a topic of discussion on which the human rights organization is silent.
One issue that was constantly discussed in the international amnesty resolution (Amnesty International resolution). "Doesn't the amnesty already condemn the killing of civilian men during armed conflicts?"
  This refers to the violation of men's rights in some cases (we have already quoted from the events in Kosovo).
 Other examples refer to the bloody cases of Subanese. "Male villagers were killed during massacres. According to other reports, soldiers cut children's throats. Killed civilians whose foreheads were nailed with hammers during interrogation."
But two major human rights organizations, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, were shocked to document mass atrocities during armed conflict.
  Despite numerous allegations of sexual harassment of women by these organizations during the war, no reports of mass arrests, torture, killings, or disappearances of civilian men have been reported.
  Another question that was constantly asked by AI members was whether civilian men were killed during the armed struggle just because they were men or were they considered possible conscripts for the enemy.
  It is difficult to see why boys were "tortured, arrested or killed by men" (are human rights activists trying to find out the motives behind the mass rape, murder, mutilation, torture, political imprisonment or imprisonment of women during the armed conflict?) Are there any other reasons for the higher punishment?
 No, they condemn all this, considering it malice).
  If there is a fact of mass murder, then human rights organizations must condemn them, regardless of whether they are against women, men, or children, regardless of the reasons behind them.
1 Amnesty International, Death by Discrimination.
  Skin Color Influences Who Lives and Dies in the US Judicial System (London.
Amnesty International, 1999), available at www.amnesty.org/news!1999/25107599.htm.(London.
  Amnestyhttp.
//www.uaa.alaska.edu/just/death/index.html.International, End Secrecy.
  End Suffering International, 2000), Available: Available Several other analyzes have shown that the principle of gender has never been a criterion for human rights violations.
 Take, for example, cases of mass rape of women during armed conflicts.
 When women are raped by soldiers or secret police, it is not just because they are women, but because they represent the enemy (Serb forces did not rape Serbian women during the Bosnian war, nor did Bosnian Muslim soldiers rape Muslim women).
 Note that in 1915 ․ During the Armenian Genocide, men often changed into women's clothes1.
 According to the representatives of the human rights organization, “Rumors of rape were circulating when the families were trying to escape from their homes.
  Older women often wore loose dresses to their daughters, tying their heads with headscarves to present themselves as grandmothers.
 Others rubbed mud on their daughters' faces to make them look ugly. ”
It was not only women who were persecuted. Men were also blamed and convicted, but the main victims were women.
  So, it is logical to talk about gender-selective genocide, because the gender factor is very important here.
 As Stephen Keatz writes ․ "Statistics show that over the past three centuries, the majority of women (about 99-9%) were not directly harmed by the police or the church, although they could have done so, like the elite. he controlled them. ”2
In general, women who were seen as "strange" or "threatening" became targets.
We fully agree with the view of the genocide scholars that in the case of women we are dealing with a unique case of human rights violation, meaning the sexual mutilation and disgrace of women.
However, AI has cleverly avoided violating human rights and assessing those who violate those rights.
  In this sense, we are not trying to advance the idea that more men's rights have been violated.
  Instead, we propose an equal approach to the issue of human rights, which refers to the gender genocide. Just as AI sheds light on the violations of women's rights during armed conflict, such an analysis is needed in the case of men, obviously during military campaigns.
  Thus, sexual acts are part of genocides; their study can be used to fully study the concept of genocide.
Lilit Martirosyan CHARACTERISTICS OF GENDER DESTRUCTION AND HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS DURING GENOCIDE Keywords: genocide, women, gender murder, selective murder և human rights և human rights.
