FETULLAH is one of the most important figures in the world.
 Not long ago, Gulen's group was considered a religious community, and Gulen was a respected religious figure.
 Today, Turkey is presented to the world as the ringleader of a terrorist group.
Many call Gulen's activities "Gulen Movement", but Gulen calls the movement "Hizmet", which means service in Turkish.
From the mid-1960s, Gulen spread his preaching, ideas, established various centers, and avoided having close appeals to public political circles.
 And since the 1990s we see that he is in the focus of internal political processes, that he has always stated that he is the son of political Islam.
 Gulen was supported by prominent Turkish politicians such as Bulent Eևit, Suleyman Demirel, Turgut ալzal, Tansu Çiller and others.
 A number of members of the movement became involved in political and political processes and became influential politicians.
The first days of the military coup of September 12, 1980, were hard for non-Islamic circles.
 The coup leader, Kenan Evren, later allowed religious activity in the country, [2] as it was believed that the lack of religious education had created a chasm that was easily filled with extremist ideologies.
 As early as the late 1980s, Fethullah Gülen's community became one of the most influential Islamic organizations in Turkey.
 During 1986-1997, Gulen received support from the secular government.
  Gulen's current critics these days describe his position as's Gulen's real political position.
Turkish President Turgut Ozal (Prime Minister in 1983-1989, President in 1989-1993) was fascinated by Gulen's ideas.
  Ozal contributed to the birth of the ideology of neo-Ottomanism, the entry of economic, cultural and enlightenment into the post-Soviet territories with a Turkic-speaking population.
  The company of Gulen զ Ozal played a role in the success of this movement.
Turkish newspapers report that the "Gulen star" began to shine on Turgut Ozaliorok.
Thus, Fethullah Gülen's influence and prestige peaked in the 1990s.
 It happened with the development of the Islamic movement.
  The "Islamic threat" associated with this development made Gulen the winner of a non-political, divisive Islam, a central figure in religious and legislative debates.
Gulen's movement suffered when the military leadership concluded that the modernization of Islam, which had been partially supported by military figures since 1980, had reached alarming proportions;
 On February 27, 1997, another military coup took place.
 "February 28" stated that the Kemalists did not intend to cede political and economic power to the "Turks" (Islamists) and the Kurds.
  Elizabeth Ozdalga notes that Gulen's persecution culminated in 1999 when the February 1997 Velvet Coup "awakened".
 Back in March 1998, the National Security Council investigated Gulen's case.
 The group that wanted to liquidate Gulen did not stop its activities. they protested against schools operating abroad.
  Under the pretext of health problems, Gulen left for the United States on March 31, 1999.
 In June 1999, tapes containing the Gulen speeches and sermons were broadcast on one of the leading channels, ATV.
 On June 18, two weeks after its first screening, these films became the subject of much media interest.
  The recordings included his sermons from the late 1970s to the early 1980s.
  Based on them, the prosecution of the Ankara State Security Court demanded indictments against Gulen, claiming that he wanted to overthrow the state by establishing secret organizations.
The State Security Court on August 28, 2000, issued an arrest warrant.
 After several unsuccessful attempts, in the fall of 2000, Gulen was prosecuted.
 The Chief of General Staff, General Kքrverkoglu, noted that the backward groups had penetrated even the judiciary.
 The next day, a 79-page indictment was filed against Gulen.
 The accusations were far-fetched, as Gulen was already in the United States.
  The accusation said that Gulen was trying to deny Ataturk's principles with his own organizations, to abolish the secular republic, to create a state based on Sharia.
 The indictment emphasized that the Gulenists had infiltrated the Turkish Armed Forces.
 It was mentioned that they also penetrated the police network to use them if necessary.
 According to Article 1 կետ 1 of the 7th Anti-Terror Law, Gulen was sentenced to 5 to 10 years in prison.
  If Gulen returned to Turkey, he would be arrested.
  He preferred to stay in the USA.
 Later, when the AKP came to power in Turkey, it was decided during the court hearings to postpone Gulen's trial on the condition that he avoid problems with justice for the next five years.
 In 2006, the AKP government amended the Terrorism Criminal Code to կարճ Gulen's case was dropped.
After the Constitutional Court closed the Refah party in January 1998, members of the Nationalist Party founded the Fazilet (Virtue) party.
 "Disagreements arose in this party between the old generation of the National View, led by Erbakan, and the new generation."
  The leaders of the new generation were three people: Tayyip Erdo ։an, Abdullah Gül Bülent Arնչnç.
 These three leaders had better personal relations with the Gulen movement, unlike Erbakan.
Apart from personal relations, they were ideologically close to the Gulen Movement.
  The young generation of the national point of view and the Gulen movement are two places for the exchange of ideas.
 The first was Gulen's media networks, in particular the Zaman daily, and the second was the meetings on Lake Abant.
  The conflict between the conservatives and the "reformers" in the UN was inevitable.
 But in reality the ARC did not split, but was closed in June 2001 by the Turkish Constitutional Court.
 Not long after, the "National Viewpoint" ideological-political movement split. On July 20, 2001, the Conservatives founded the Happiness Party, and on August 14, the moderate reformers founded the Justice and Development Party, led by Erdogan and Gul.
 Following Gulen, Erdo ։an put forward the idea of ​​Hizmet as a principle of "people-to-people" cooperation.
  According to Erdogan, for centuries it has been guided by the principle of "nation for state", while now, according to him, it is necessary to be guided by the opposite logic - to turn the state into an institution providing services to the people. [5]
 As a result of its policy, the AKP was supported by the "Anatolian Medical Quartet", also known as the Gulen movement.
 There was active business cooperation between the "Anatolian Tigers" and the Gulenists, and cooperation was also manifested in foreign trade.
  Thus, the two group economic dynamics ensure the conservative Muslim population.
 Both groups have a strong Turkish mentality, common views: Turkey should become an influential power in the world and in the region.
 The AKP's neo-Ottoman policies, mainly reflected in Ahmet Davutoglu's book Strategic Depth, testify to the fact that Turkey was given a central place, considering it the epicenter of the region, the heir to the Ottoman Empire, which could become a Muslim superpower.
  The ideas of inheriting the Ottoman Empire are also present in the ideas of the Gulen movement, and the best evidence of its active activity in the region is at least the schools it founded in Turkey and beyond.
2002 In the November 3 snap parliamentary elections, just 16 months ago, the AKP won 34.17% of the vote.
  The AKP formed its government without a coalition.
  He received the greatest support in the elections from the Gulen community.
Since the establishment of the party, it has been coordinated with the community.
The community media field was in favor of the AKP.
 And in 2007 Speaking about the AKP's victory in the July 22 snap-election (46.5% of the vote), Taraf's journalist and associate professor at the Police Academy, Dr. Onder Aytach, said that a significant percentage of the votes in the parliamentary elections came from Fethullah Gulen's community. received at least 11% of the vote from the Gulen movement.
  "The Gulen movement did not support the center-right party as much as the AKP."
Aykut Erdogan, one of the journalists of Birgun newspaper, wrote in his column that there are no educated people outside the Gulen community, and the AKP, which came to power immediately, was not so ready.
  In this sense, the Gulen community "with the support given to the party" and with the prepared personnel, quietly settled inside the government.
 Ahmet Hakan wrote an article in Hurriyet newspaper in 2011, from which one can single out the following interesting and accurate idea. "To say Community means a little bit to say AKP.
To say that Fethullah Gülen already means a little is to say Tayyip Erdo »an. "[13]
Fethullah Gülen showed the greatest support to the AKP in 2010.
The preacher called on the citizens to support the AKP during the referendum to change the constitution.
 The referendum took place on September 12 և 58% voted in favor.
  This can be considered the last cooperation of the religious preacher և the government.
At first glance, there are many common principles of the AKP "Gulen movement": Islam, conservatism, nationalism, lifestyle.
However, it soon became clear that this was not the case.
 There are many differences that turned their "coalition" into a struggle against each other.
The man who has received so much respect and esteem from Erdo ։an is being criticized by him և gradually turning into the opposite image.
 These reasons can be divided into three main groups: foreign policy, conflict of interest - Kurdish issue.
Undoubtedly, one of the important spheres for the AKP is foreign policy, this sphere is also the most controversial sphere.
 In the first years of its rule, the desire to join the EU, the development of relations with the United States, rapprochement with Israel, the "zero problem" policy of neighboring countries, mainly Syria, were perceived as successful steps in the foreign policy of the AKP government.
  However, the above-mentioned steps worsened in 2009 when the Erdoողan-Shimon Peres process started in Davos.
 One of the reasons for the demarcation between "Erdogan and his government" in the West was Turkey's policy in Syria against Bashar al-Assad and his government, supporting Syrian and regional Islamic groups.
  Government support for groups such as al-Nusra, the Islamic State, or at least turning a blind eye to the activities of such groups has led to tensions.
 In such a situation, the position of the Gulen movement led to a clash between the two movements.
The Gulen community criticized the AKP's policy against it, independent of the West, even from time to time, which is extremely interventionist in the case of Iran, Syria, Iraq and Egypt.
 In this question, the Community with its ideas adheres to the general political line of the West.
 The attitude towards Israel caused a split.
This was due not only to Israel's policy against Palestine, but also to the fact that these two actors wanted to establish different relations with Israel.
 Radical Islamic groups are dangerous for Israel in the Middle East.
  Al-Qaeda and al-Nusra, which are growing stronger in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, posed a threat to Israel, and the government did not fight against these groups.
  The community, in contrast to the government, took a certain position that was desirable for Israel and the West.
  The first seeds of disunity can be considered 2010. Gulen and the AKP agreed on a navy to provide humanitarian aid to the besieged Gaza people.
 The initiator was the Humanitarian Aid Foundation, which is affiliated with the AKP.
 2010 On May 31, 1945, the "Gaza Freedom Flotilla" was attacked by Israeli special forces off the coast of Israel.
 As a result, eight Turkish citizens and one US citizen were killed and dozens were injured.
 What happened caused international tension.
  Davutoglu called it "Turkey's September 11".
  Gulen criticized the intervention in the Wall Street Journal, calling it an illegal interference in Israel's internal affairs.
 This led to an increase in AKP-Community tension.
The next point was the conflict of interests, which is one of the main reasons for tense relations.
 At a time when there were good relations between the AKP and the community, the role of government partners was clear.
 Erdoանիan's AKP continued to win elections.
 Their policy of liquidating military custody was successful.
  To this end, the community is taking steps, especially in the judicial and security systems.
  More figuratively speaking, the AKP was on the stage and the community was behind the scenes.
  In this way, the AKP received more votes and the community received more staff.
 The goal of both was to gain more power.
Another reason for the escalation of tensions is that Gulen's network members have been accused of engaging in politics for the purposes of the Gulen movement.
  Erdogan himself clearly blames such behavior, calling it "a state within a state."
The pro-government media began to openly accuse the Gulen movement of trying to create a "new foster care" community.
The political views of the ruling party և Gulen movement began to coincide.
The next area of ​​conflict is the Kurdish issue.
  2011 In September, the news was discussed in the public that the Kurdistan Community Union (KCK) was in secret negotiations.
  2012 year. In February, the Istanbul Special Court Prosecutor's Office summoned Hakan Fidan, the Azhar's chief adviser.
  A number of questions were asked: "disclosing secrets to the KCK", "providing secret services to that organization", "cooperation with the KCK to establish a Kurdish state".
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo ։an blamed state prosecutors for abusing their positions.
 Two weeks later, Erdoողan skillfully changed the law on PPPs through the parliament.
 This change guaranteed that the employees of the service would receive additional criminal immunity.
 2012 year. In July, Erdogan reduced the number of special courts and their functions.
  This allowed the state to marginalize the network associated with the Gulen movement.
  Today, the Gulenists deny responsibility for the involvement of state prosecutors in the KCK case.
 After all, during the incident, the Movement's press clearly defended the criticism of the AKP leader, and the pro-government media continued to show that the Gulen movement was a significant obstacle to resolving the Kurdish issue.
  The investigation turned into a struggle between two influential Turkish figures, Erdogan's "Gulen".
 The Turkish Revolutionary Guards launched a hunt against the Gulenists.
One of the reasons for the tension and clash between the groups is the corruption scandals that broke out in 2013. since mid-December.
  Prime Minister Erdogan's son, Bilal Erdogan, was also involved in corruption scandals.
 Erdo ։an reiterated several times that the fight against corruption is the cornerstone of their policy, and expressed his determination to eradicate the power of secret groups hidden within the government ("state within state").
 Although he did not name the Gulen movement or the prosecutor's connection between the Gulen movement, it was clear that Erdogan was referring to them.
 Erdogan first openly named Fethullah Gulen in 2013. [18] During a rally in Kayseri in March 2006.
  Both prosecutors in the corruption scandal, Akash and Oz, were known to be close to the Gulenists.
  During the corruption scandals, Zaman newspaper completely changed its policy.
 Zaman, who had previously been a supporter of the AKP, became one of its strongest critics.
Gulen had openly criticized the authoritarian policy of the Prime Minister, sometimes calling him "Pharaoh" in his sermons.
 In the aftermath of the corruption scandal, Turkey's ruling circles, the media supporting them, adopted the following tactic: Fethullah Gulen, his movement that works for Israel and the United States, is to blame for everything.
 Gulen and his lawyers denied the allegations.
When Erdoողan announced a "witch hunt" against Gülen, the arrests, threats and persecution became an "established order" for the Gülenists and their community.
 The movement started to be more targeted in 2013. after December, ie after the above-mentioned scandalous processes [20].
2016 An attempted military coup took place in Turkey on July 15-16.
  Its repercussions and consequences are still there.
Naturally, the attempt of a military coup was a great event, which received great and various assessments in different spheres, mainly in the socio-political sphere.
  The state, especially President Recep Tayyip Erdo ։an and his government, accuse Fethullah Gülen of following the established tradition, blaming the Gülen community, which they consider terrorist.
 Gulen and his followers, in turn, consider this coup attempt as a staging organized by Erdogan and his teammates, highlighting and presenting various counter-arguments.
In a statement on July 19, Prime Minister Binali Yildirim said: "During 9/11, when you wanted to catch the terrorists, did you ask for evidence?"
  In other words, in his message, the Prime Minister equates Gulen with the well-known terrorist Osama bin Laden, hinting that just as the United States once demanded Osama bin Laden from Afghanistan without evidence, so now they demand Gulen from the United States.
Gulen, who has been described in his homeland for years as a terrorist, a ringleader of a terrorist group, after the attempted military coup, is listed on the Aranan Terörist website of the Ministry of Interior, the General Directorate of Security, the Gendarmerie and the Coast Guard [22]. In five categories, Gulen was included in the Red List, the list of most urgently wanted and high-ranking officials.
In the events taking place in the country after the attempted military coup, the authorities are trying to find և as if "finding" Gulenimek.
  Of course, it is difficult, now to make clear conclusions, to separate this or that process, where there is really the participation of the Gulen network.
 But one thing is clear, Turkey presents Gulen and the Gulenists as the author of almost all crisis speeches.
  In other words, Turkey continues to follow its line adopted years ago: "Gulen is to blame for everything."
 One of the examples is the murder of Russian Ambassador to Turkey Andrey Karlov.
  On December 19, 2016, during the opening of an exhibition at the Ankara Contemporary Arts Center, police officer Mlyut Mert Altընntaş assassinated Russian Ambassador to Turkey Andrey Karlov.
Then Altընntaş himself was killed.
 Pro-government Yeni աֆafak says that since the Gezi events, forces trying to plunge Turkey into internal turmoil have been trying to damage foreign relations through terrorist acts and military coups, leading to the assassination of Russian Ambassador Andrei Karlov by FETÖ.
 The same article states that the PKK, ISIS, and FETÖ carry out attacks and terrorist acts in Turkey.
  According to the information, Altընntaş studied in a darshane belonging to the Gulenists.
  The ribbons of FETÖ Ö al-Qaeda (transliteration is ours - J. B.) were also found in the killer's house.
Note again that Turkey presents the Gulen community as one of the most genuinely terrorist groups in the world, here, for example, Yeni աֆafak (ie the Turkish government - JB) puts the community in the same line with the Islamic State as we mentioned above, In his statement, Yըldրrմm was compared to Osama bin Laden, so the community is on the same level as al-Qaeda.
In conclusion, we can say that the image of a religious figure who has established close relations with the representatives of the political field has changed over the years due to internal political developments and demands, such as Erdogan's personal ambitions and long-term goals.
 Erdoողan's revered religious image is now presented as a terrorist under his active influence.
 Until 2013, the religious community was introduced as FET սկս (Fethullah Emirate Terrorist Group) or PDY (Parallel State Organization).
 We see the gradual change of Gulen in the eyes of the people.
 Of course, the role of the atmosphere of fear is great here. The wave of arrests after the attempted military coup has led many in Turkey to hide their sympathy for Gulen, but the whole world is witnessing that not much has changed in 21st century Turkey, with people demanding the death penalty for Gulen.
LITERATURE [1] Ter-Matjosyan V., Islam in the social and political life of Turkey (1970-2001), Yerevan, 2008, p. 107.
URL.
 http:
//www.dusun-think.net/dosya/160148216.pdf (Accessed.
 17.11.2016) .URL.
    http:
//geurasia.org/panel/uploads/Ambasadori-Religia/Dvizenie-Fethullt-Gelena.pdf(Accessed.
 17.11.2016). http:
//www.noravank.am/arm/articles/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=513(Accessed.
[5] Safrastyan R. և Others, History of the Republic of Turkey, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 300, 302-304, 308-310, 344.
[7] Гюрсой И., Почему Эджевит не придал значения доносам о Гюлене ?, URL.
www.hizmet.today/ecevit-gulen/ (Accessed.
 18.11.2016) .national context.
 parallels with Indonesia. Islam in the Contemporary World.
 The FethullahURL.
 www.middleeast.org.ua/research/turkey.htm (Accessed.
 19.11.2016). [10] Pashayan A., The Islamic Pillar of the "Justice և Development" party, 18.10.2007 URL.
19.11.2016).
[11] Shakaryan A., Beyond Ararat. Decoding Turkey, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 95-96.
Annihilation in the Turkish Basin.
 Provide New akafak, Star, Time, Today and National Newspapers, URL:
savasi / (Accessed:
 07.12.2016) .URL.
 https:
//www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704025304575284721280274694 (Accessed.
 09.12.2016). [17] Jones D., Turkey.
  Between the orthodoxy of доrdogan and the movement Gюlenaanazrevaet open revelation ?, URL.
  http:
//russian.eurasianet.org/node/59802(trained address.
 09.12.2016). [18] Erdogan and Gülen.
 Political Battle Waged in Courts, Position Paper, Al Jazeera Centerhttp.
//medyascope.tv/2016/08/05/erdogan-ile-gulen-arasinda-varolmavarkalma [19] Carney J., Shifting the community press.
 a brief examination of Gülen-affiliated papers [20] Update.
 Persecution of the Gülen Movement in Turkey, Rethink Institute, Washingtonhttp.
//m.yenisafak.com/amphtml/gundem/terorist-basi-icin-4-dosya-gonderdik-2496648(Accessed.
 4.01.2017). [22] URL.
 www.terorarananlar.pol.tr (Accessed.
 19.01.2017). [23] URL.
  http:
//www.terorarananlar.pol.tr/detaylar/Sayfalar/kirmizi.aspxURL.
 http:
//www.yenisafak.com/gundem/suikast-soylemi-bitsin-gostergesi-2597310(Accessed.
 2.02.2017). [25] Mevlüt Mert Altıntaş F üldüren bldüren üldüren ldülen üldülen Fldüren FETÖ bağlantıları, 2017, URL.
http:
//m.posta.com.tr/rus-buyukelciyi-olduren-mevlut-mert-altintas-in-feto-baglantilarihaberi-1250909 (Accessed.
 2.02.2017). (Accessed.
Badikyan JemmaTURKIAYI SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TRANSFORMATION OF IMAGE ENKALUMNERUMFETULLAH scholar Fethullah Gülen, KRONAKANKAROZCHITS AHABEKCHIBanali words, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Gyulenakanhamaynk- "Justice and Development" party contradiction shaheribakhum religious figure transition terrorist.
