TYPES OF ENFORCEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT CLAIM AS TYPES OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAWSUIT The purpose of the enforcement claim is to oblige the competent administrative body to adopt the favorable administrative act, the adoption of which was rejected by the administrative body.
  A condition for the admissibility of this type of claim is that the plaintiff has been rejected by the plaintiff before submitting a claim to the administrative body with a request to adopt a favorable administrative act.
Moreover, the claim for obligation includes the demand for the administrative body to challenge the intervening administrative act rejecting the plaintiff's claim.
 In this case we are dealing with a non-independent dispute claim, about which the plaintiff does not need to have submitted a separate claim.
The claim for liability is automatically directed against the decision of the administrative body rejecting the citizen's application, in that sense the claim for obligation is always connected with a non-independent dispute.
 If the administrative court satisfies the claim, it obliges the administrative body to adopt the expected administrative act.
  There is no need to submit a separate demand for the annulment of the administrative act rejecting the citizen's application, as in such a case there is no need to protect the citizen's rights.
Under the previous Code, the law enforcement officer had problems with the issue of whether to file a lawsuit at the same time as the liability lawsuit.
 Therefore, Article 67 2 2 of the RA Code of Administrative Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the VDO) stipulates that a claim for liability includes the requirement for the administrative body to challenge the intervening administrative act referred to in part 1 of the same Article.
We believe that the RA Administrative Court should consider the inextricable link between the dispute and the liability claim when examining the case, and in the absence of a dispute in the submitted liability claim, the acceptance of the claim shall be rejected.
  Thus, the RA Administrative Court, considering the citizen's claim to invalidate the letter No. 04 / V-472 of the Municipality of Yerevan dated 29.04.2014 and to oblige the Mayor of Yerevan to make a corresponding decision, terminated the administrative case by the decision of 17.12.2014 on the grounds that it was obligatory to adopt a favorable administrative act. that the necessary precondition for filing a claim is the rejection of the favorable administrative act requested by the administrative body as a result of the substantive examination of the plaintiff's application1, but continued the examination of the case in the dispute, which is inadmissible as the claim cannot be separated from the dispute.
It should be noted that in the case of a claim for obligation, the requirement to oblige to adopt a favorable administrative act must arise from the legislation, from the competence of the given administrative body, as well as not to violate the rights of others.
  This issue was addressed by the RA Administrative Court of Appeal ․ "A claim for obligation may be filed against the administrative body whose powers are determined by the adoption of the given administrative act, moreover, the requested favorable administrative act must be lawful, not violate the rights of other persons.
  That is, by filing a lawsuit, the plaintiff should pursue the goal not only to achieve the adoption of an administrative act, but also to eliminate the consequences unfavorable to him, which in this case is possible by obliging the administrative body authorized to adopt the administrative act.
At the same time, it becomes clear from the analysis of the above-mentioned article that the plaintiff with a claim for obligation can demand the adoption of a favorable administrative act, for the adoption of which the latter has already applied to the administrative body, which was rejected by the relevant body.
Pursuant to Article 66 of the former Code of Administrative Procedure, the plaintiff in a claim for liability could demand the adoption of a favorable administrative act, the adoption of which was refused by the administrative body, or which he did not accept.
 That is, the notion of "claim" included the cases when the person applied to the administrative body to adopt an administrative act favorable to him, և the administrative body did not accept it.
  This, of course, is not the same as refusing to pass an administrative act. In this case, the point is that the administrative body did not refer to the person's application at all, that there is no written rejection, that is, the administrative body has shown inaction.
1 See the decision of 17.12.2014 on the administrative case No. VD / 2659/05/14 of the RA Administrative Court.
2 See the decision of 16.09.2014 of the RA Administrative Court of Appeal on administrative case No. VD / 2228/05/14.
There is such a regulation in the German Code of Administrative Procedure.
 Thus, according to Article 42 of the Code, a person may apply to the court with a demand to oblige the administrative body to adopt an administrative act (the adoption of which was rejected or which was not accepted by the administrative body).
 We think it is necessary to distinguish between rejecting an administrative act and not adopting an administrative act, because if in the first case the administrative body, examining the person's request, makes an unfavorable administrative act, then in the second case the administrative body does not take action to process the person's application.
The VDO rightly refused that regulation, removing those cases from the scope of the liability claim.
In practice, there is often a problem of differentiating the obligation-performance action claim, which we will address in the analysis of the action claim.
Also noteworthy in practice is the question of whether the decisions of the administrative body to suspend or terminate the administrative proceedings can be considered as a rejection of the requested administrative act, as a basis for filing a claim for liability.
Whether there are conflicting opinions on this issue, we think, only the rejection of the requested administrative act, that is, the act by which the administration will be terminated, can only be a basis for filing a request for commitment.
  The Administrative Court, considering Anna Avetisyan's lawsuit against the State Committee of the Real Estate Cadastre under the Government of the Republic of Armenia, ordered the respondent to lift the restrictions on the property rights of the apartment No. 59 of the building No. 38, Isahakyan Street, Yerevan, No. 81, attic. filed a claim for liability, as he demanded to take actions related to the adoption of an administrative act, thus considering the decision of the State Cadastre Committee of 15.01.2014 "On suspending the state registration of legal proceedings" as a rejection of the requested administrative act3.
We believe that in this case, the plaintiff's request to adopt an administrative act is correct, but the decision to suspend the proceedings can not be interpreted as a rejection of the requested administrative act.
  Or the RA Law on State Registration of Property Rights, 3 See RA Administrative Court Decision No. VD / 1251/05/14 of 17.03.2015.
Or the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings" envisages the grounds for the suspension of administrative proceedings.
 Analyzing them, we can conclude that the grounds for suspension of administrative proceedings are grounds hindering the implementation of that proceeding, only in case of elimination of which the proceedings can continue.
  In case of a decision to suspend the administrative proceedings, the legal consequence of eliminating the circumstance that is the basis for the decision is the resumption of the proceedings.
With the above justifications we can prove that the decision to suspend the proceedings does not reject the requested administrative act, but delays the adoption or rejection of the requested administrative act until the relevant grounds for suspension are eliminated.
It should be added that the person is not deprived of the opportunity to challenge these decisions by means of a lawsuit, as it is not excluded that the administrative body has misused or interpreted the grounds for the suspension of the administrative proceedings4.
  In any case, they can not be considered administrative acts refusing the adoption of a favorable administrative act on the grounds that in case of satisfaction of the claim, the court will oblige the administrative body to accept the favorable administrative act, which was rejected, and in this case, in fact, there is no administrative act.
Germany has taken an interesting approach to the application of a liability claim, allowing individuals to file a liability claim even when the plaintiff does not require an administrative act with a certain content, but wants the administrative body to make a decision on its application once, but correctly apply discretion or correctly assess circumstances.
  Here, the citizen demands the adoption of an administrative act by the administrative body.
 Because in case of success, the administrative court obliges the administrative body to make this decision only once, based on the legal position of the court.
Pursuant to Part 1 of Article 72 of the VDO, in the case of a claim for obligation, a person may apply to the court within two months from the moment of being notified of the refusal to accept the administrative act.
  During the court hearing on the obligation request, we believe that the court should find out the legality of the decision rejecting the adoption of the administrative act, 4 See the decision of the RA Administrative Court on administrative case No. VD / 5249/05/15 dated 03.03.2016.
such as the existence of the right to adopt a favorable administrative act in case of satisfaction of the claim, չ not to violate the rights and freedoms of others in that act.
Pursuant to Article 29, Part 2, Clause 2 of the VDO, the burden of proving the obligation is borne by the administrative body in terms of the grounds for refusing to accept the requested administrative act, և the natural or legal person in terms of the facts that justify the adoption of the administrative act .
Pursuant to Article 125, Part 1, Clause 3 of the VDO, in case of satisfaction of the claim, the administrative court makes a decision to declare the decision on the rejection of the administrative act requested by the administrative body invalid and obliges the administrative body to adopt that administrative act.
The action request.
 Unlike many countries, where the action claim does not exist as a separate claim, the VDO has dedicated it to a separate regulation.
  Thus, according to Article 69 1 1 of the CCP, the plaintiff may request to perform certain actions or to refrain from actions that are not aimed at the adoption of an administrative act.
According to part 2 of the same article, the plaintiff may request to provide the relevant document provided by law in case the administrative act is considered adopted due to non-adoption of an administrative act within the period defined by law.
It follows from the above norm that in case of a claim for action, the plaintiff may request from the administrative body: • to perform certain actions that are not aimed at the adoption of the administrative act, including providing the relevant document provided by law if the administrative act is not adopted within the period defined by law; from actions aimed at the adoption of a non-administrative act.
When passing to the analysis of the action request, we first consider it necessary to refer to the following questions: whether the person with the action request can demand any action, պետք how should the notion of "certain actions" be interpreted?
It only follows from Article 69 of the Code that the actions that constitute the subject of the action for enforcement should not be aimed at the adoption of an administrative act.
In the sense of Article 3 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration։ Administrative Proceedings", administration is also the action, inactivity of the administrative body, which causes factual consequences for the persons.
Many scholars studying administrative law have called the action or inaction of the administrative body, which causes not only legal but also factual consequences for individuals, 5 react.
The RA Court of Cassation, referring to the enforcement action, noted that the person requesting the enforcement action can demand from the administrative body to disclose only such behavior (both active and passive), the non-disclosure of which violates or may directly violate the RA Constitution, international treaties. , rights and freedoms enshrined in law և Other legal acts.
Subsequently, a person may request the administrative body to take such actions or to refrain from performing such actions, the fulfillment or non-fulfillment of which may provide the necessary conditions for the realization of the person's rights or eliminate the obstacles to the realization of the latter's rights6.
Taking into account the above, we believe that a person can not demand the performance of any action, but only the adoption of a real act, ie, an action or omission that violates the rights of that person, which causes factual consequences, it is not aimed at administrative action.
According to German Judge J Պrg Pudelka, the peculiarity of this lawsuit is that it can be used both in a positive way (when the plaintiff demands to take some action) and in a negative way.
 The most interesting thing is that in the case of the negative, that is, when the plaintiff wants to achieve the defendant's inaction, 5 See H. Tovmasyan, O. Lukhterhandt, G. Muradyan, V. Poghosyan, V. Reimers, R .; Rubel, Handbook of General Administrative Law of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2011, p. 279.
6 See the decision of the RA Court of Cassation No. VD / 6072/05/14 dated 29.07.2015.
he can prevent not only the concrete action, but also the administrative act7.
The German Code of Administrative Procedure does not provide for a separate type of action.
  Thomas Mann notes that in Germany, actions that are not related to the adoption of an administrative act can be appealed through a request to oblige to take joint action, although the latter has not been regulated in detail in the Code, but is often mentioned in it8.
The combination of the terms "obligation claim" and "action claim" makes it clear what the difference is.
 A claim for performance of an action is a claim for performance of an obligation similar to a claim for an obligation, but here, unlike the obligation bread, the obligation is not to accept an administrative act, but to perform a certain action or abstain from it.
In practice, problems arise in connection with the same requirement to perform an action or to consider a commitment claim.
  Thus, the requirement to oblige the plaintiff to recalculate the pension was, in one case, viewed by the administrative court as a claim for action, without considering whether an administrative act was required to perform the action required by the plaintiff.
 In the other case, the claim filed by the plaintiff was considered a claim for liability, taking into account the fact that the plaintiff applied to the administrative body with a request to recalculate the pension, was rejected 10.
  We think that in order to avoid such cases, it is necessary to check whether the required action can be carried out without an administrative act or not.
In the case of a request for action, it is always necessary to check whether it is not necessary to adopt an administrative act in advance for the performance of the requested action.
  If the adoption of an administrative act is necessary, 7 See Пуорг Пуделька, Судья, г. Berlin, Germany, Head of Regional GIZ Programs for example, Germany, 2015, p. 5.
8 See Konstantny A., Comparative-legal analysis, I saw the origin in the administrative court production of Ukraine and the state administration, "Legea si viata", 2014, p. 61.
9 See the decision of 04.08.2014 on administrative case No. VD6 / 0241/05/12 of the RA Administrative Court.
10 See the decision of the RA Administrative Court No. 24 VD / 0096/05/15 dated 24.07.2015.
then it is necessary to file a claim for obligation, not for performance of the action.
 In addition, if in the case of a claim for obligation it is obligatory to have applied to the administrative body before going to court, then in the case of a claim for enforcement of action, no such claim is made.
It follows from the filing of the action request that the respondent is the administrative body from which it is required to take or refrain from any action.
German lawyers V. Reimers, R. Rubel thinks that this type of lawsuit is used when the state demands from the citizen to perform a certain action or to refrain from it11.
  However, we do not agree with that opinion, as it follows from part 1 of Article 68 of the ICCPR that the required actions or abstinence from actions should not be aimed at the adoption of an administrative act, and the administrative act, as we know, is accepted by the administrative body.
  In addition, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, referring to the types of enforcement actions, noted: "The lawsuit for guaranteeing the protection of the rights and freedoms of persons violated as a result of inaction by state or local self-government bodies or their officials is called to guarantee both the obligation and the action.
»12.
  In these circumstances, the regulation of Article 125, Part 1, Clause 3 of the VDO is problematic, according to which, in case of satisfying the claim, the administrative court issues a judicial act on the merits of the case, obliging the trial participants to perform certain actions or refrain from performing them.
  The question arises whether the court can oblige the citizen to perform certain actions, or who are the "other persons" to whom the court can oblige to perform actions?
The action may be taken to refrain from taking action.
 A claim for abstention may be filed against an action once committed by an administrative body or against its repetition in the future.
 In this case, we can talk about the precautionary action to refrain from action13.
11 See H. Tovmasyan, O. Lukhterhandt, G. Muradyan, V. Poghosyan, V. Reimers, R .; Rubel, Handbook of General Administrative Law of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2011, p. 385.
12 See the decision of the RA Constitutional Court No. SDO-942 of 22.01.2011.
13 See H. Tovmasyan, O. Lukhterhandt, G. Muradyan, V. Poghosyan, V. Reimers, R .; Rubel, Handbook of General Administrative Law of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2011, p. 387.
The plaintiff may also request to provide the relevant document provided by law in case the administrative act is deemed to be adopted after the administrative act has not been adopted within the period defined by law.
The mentioned provision was fixed in the VDO for the practical implementation of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Administrative Proceedings of Administrative Principles".
  The following fiction is fixed in this article. "As a result of the administrative proceedings initiated on the basis of the application, in case the administrative body authorized to adopt an administrative act fails to adopt the administrative act within the period defined by law, the administrative act shall be considered adopted. The applicant may undertake the implementation of the relevant law."
 By virtue of this fiction, the legislator should define guarantees for the realization of a person's rights.
 The right of every person to submit applications to public bodies for the protection of both personal and public interests, to receive a proper response within a reasonable time, can be considered one of the most important human rights, which was enshrined in Article 27.1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia.
 As it was mentioned in the interpretations of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the state is responsible not only for the judiciary, but also for the non-observance of reasonable time guarantees by the administrative bodies14.
Taking into account that responsibility, the RA President's 2012 On approving the list of measures arising from the program "Legal-Judicial Reform Strategic Plan for the Republic of Armenia for 2012-2016" of June 30, 2012, Clause 5.1 of Annex 1 to the Law provides for the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration". A provision to ensure the realization of the rights provided by the administrative acts adopted in accordance with Article 48.
 The decree stipulates that the main purpose of the mentioned norm is to increase the responsibility of administrative bodies within the framework of administrative proceedings, the application of this provision can prevent or reduce the cases when individuals apply to the competent administrative body, favorable 14 See Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, edited by: Գ. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, page 316.
with the expectation of receiving an administrative act, and the administrative body responds to the application in some way15.
It should be noted that the manifestation of inactivity by the administrative bodies exclusively leads to the adoption of an administrative act by force of fiction.
 Of course, this backlash may not be unequivocally accepted.
 As an example, we can refer to a number of judicial acts adopted by the RA Court of Cassation, in which, referring to the interpretation of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings", the RA Court of Cassation noted that the above provision could not be interpreted as any requested act. norm confirming its existence.
  The requested administrative act, like the requested right, must be based on law, not violate the rights and freedoms of others.
  Therefore, the content of the mentioned norm should be the legality of the requested administrative act, the existence of which will be confirmed only after the existence of the right of the administrative act arising from it16.
In the light of the above-mentioned positions of the Court of Cassation, the courts with these lawsuits have to discuss the legality of the required administrative act each time they consider the mentioned issue.
  Thus, the RA Administrative Court, examining the requirement to be considered an administrative act, noted ․ "In order to clarify the validity of the claim, the court considers it necessary to address the question of whether the administrative act requested by the plaintiff, the right deriving from the RA legislation, is at the same time not a reason for violation of the rights and freedoms of others."
We believe that the purpose of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings" was initially to increase the responsibility of administrative bodies and to carry out proper administration.
  Therefore, in our opinion, in case of a claim under Article 68 2 2 of the CCP, the administrative court should only check whether the person has applied to the administrative body, whether the administrative body has shown inaction, whether the act is considered adopted, otherwise, by checking this administrative The legality of the act - in case the administrative act is considered adopted, by providing a document, the inaction of the administrative body, in fact, remains missing. 15 See http.
//www.president.am/en/Directives/item/753/.
16 See Case No. VD / 5557/05/08 of the RA Court of Cassation dated 17.04.2009 ․ Case No. VD / 4712/05/09 01.10.2010 decisions.
17 See RA Administrative Court Decision No. VD / 4657/05/12 dated 21.07.2014.
Sow.
 In order not to lose the inactivity of the administrative body, we believe that in case of such a request, the administrative court, guided by Article 128 of the VDO, should make an additional decision by which the relevant official of the state or local self-government body and, if necessary, the superior should pay attention to the inactivity.
Although the VDO does not explicitly state that a claim for action can be brought to court only after applying to the administrative body, we believe that without applying to the administrative body, a person should not have the right to apply to the court with this claim. According to Part 3, Clause 3, according to which a person may apply to an administrative court within one month from the moment of notification of the refusal of action by the administrative body, from the moment of expiration of the deadline for the requested action, as well as within three months from the moment To perform the requested action.
The burden of proving the action is borne by the administrative body in respect of the facts which led to the refusal or inactivity of the requested action, ը the natural or legal person in respect of the facts favorable to him.
If this claim is upheld, in accordance with Article 125 1 1 3 3 of the CCP, the court decides to oblige the participants in the proceedings to perform certain acts of others or to refrain from performing them, a definition which, as we have mentioned, is incompatible with the definition of an action claim. with content.
Lilit Petrosyan TYPES OF PERFORMANCE AND LIABILITY: TYPES OF ADMINISTRATIVE CLAIM Keywords: administrative claim, types of administrative claim, obligation claim, action claim, administrative summary.
