PROCEEDINGS OF PARTICIPANTS OF DECISIONS AND actions (inaction) Appeal against the pre-trial proceedings, ON CONSTITUTION 18TH, 19TH AND ECHR Article 6 of LIGHT NERKOIravakan current stage of development of civilization is obvious that the procedural guarantees datakanpashtpanutyan of the spectrum mshtapesgtnvum the development process. seeking to improve the mechanisms for exercising that right.
The issues raised in this paper have been studied, guided by the following tasks: 1) de facto de jure clarify the essence of the right to judicial protection in pre-trial proceedings; Prospects for the development of the right to judicial protection as a cornerstone of criminal procedure within the framework of further judicial control, taking into account the issues in legal practice;3) Analyze the reform of the right to judicial protection of a person in pre-trial proceedings in the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code in the light of the current Criminal Procedure Code by means of deductive and inductive logic.
These problems have been solved in this work by applying legal-commentary tactics that are typical of both passive commentary strategy (textual commentary, disclosure of the legislator's will) and active commentary strategy (value commentary, filling gaps in legislation, etc.).
The following are the cornerstones of labor: a) In the current Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the CPC), is a criminal case instituted on the fact or against a person, b) is it possible that the decision to initiate a criminal case violates the rights of the person? and legal interests, c) is it possible to appeal the decision of the public participants in the criminal proceedings, d) is it possible to appeal against the decision of the public participants in the involvement as a defendant or to accuse the person, if the person finds that the decision to involve him as an accused was not properly reasoned, requiring the court to oblige the public participant in the proceedings to provide sufficient reasoning.
The legal regulations on judicial control over pre-trial proceedings are given in Chapter 39 of the current CCP of the Republic of Armenia, Article 278, Part 2 of which stipulates: "The court, in the cases defined by this Code, in accordance with the procedure, examines the complaints on the legality of the decisions of the investigative bodies, the investigator, the prosecutor, the bodies carrying out operative-investigative activities."
Part 1 of Article 290 of the Criminal Code stipulates that appeals against the legality and justification of the decisions, actions and actions of the investigative body employee, investigator, prosecutor, operative-investigative bodies, actions envisaged by this Code may be submitted to the court by the suspect, accused, defense counsel. by the victim, participants in criminal proceedings, and other persons whose rights and legitimate interests have been violated by those decisions, actions, if their complaints have not been upheld by the prosecutor.
 Part 2 of the same article stipulates that decisions to suspend, terminate or terminate a criminal case, to terminate a criminal case or to terminate a criminal prosecution may be appealed to a court in case of receiving reports of crimes, initiating a criminal case, as well as in cases provided by the Code.
For a long time there was a dispute in the professional literature whether the initiation of a criminal case could be appealed or not.
 Proceeding from that circumstance, the Court of Cassation expressed the following legal position on Valeri Grigoryan by precedent decision No. EKD / ​​0031/11/08. "The Court of Cassation finds that the exclusion of the decision to initiate a criminal case from the sphere of judicial control is incomplete only on the grounds that no article of the RA Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that it can be appealed in court."
 We also agree with the position of the Court of Cassation, as Article 290 1 1 of the CCP states that all decisions, actions that violate the rights and legitimate interests of a person may be subject to judicial review.
According to the above-mentioned precedent decision, using the method of revealing the will (approach) of the legislator of the passive legal interpretation strategy, the Court of Cassation stated that rights and legal interests, then by virtue of the right to judicial protection enshrined in Article 19 of the RA Constitution, they are subject to judicial appeal.
However, by considering the same issue, whether the criminal case is initiated on the fact or on a person, the Court of Cassation found that a criminal case is initiated in the RA Criminal Procedure Court on the fact that an act containing a crime allegedly committed is not allowed by the Criminal Code. that for a person it does not cause any legal repercussions in the criminal proceedings, therefore, the decision to initiate a criminal case does not violate the rights or interests of anyone in the criminal proceedings, therefore, the decision to initiate a criminal case is not subject to judicial appeal.
With regard to Article 19 of the Constitution, the Court of Cassation stated that this right refers to the stage of the judicial examination of a criminal case; a person will be able to use this right when the criminal case is sent to court with an indictment for substantive examination.
We consider that the decision to initiate a criminal case is of fundamental importance for the whole criminal trial, as that procedural document summarizes the results of the preparatory procedure, gives preliminary but official assessments of certain facts.
 Therefore, we can not agree with the legal positions expressed in the above two paragraphs of the Court of Cassation, based on the substantiated considerations set forth below.
The Court of Cassation G. Regarding Mikaelyan No. EADD / 0085/06/09, V. Decisions No. EKD / ​​0031/11/08 on Grigoryan, Decisions No. EKD / ​​0136/11/11 on L. Poghosyan stated that a criminal case is initiated in the RA criminal proceedings on the fact that the institute of initiating a criminal case against a person is not envisaged by the RA Criminal Procedure Code. that there is no mention of a person in the requirements for the decision to initiate a criminal case.
 But does that justify enough to deprive the person of the opportunity to appeal in court against the decision to initiate a criminal case violating the rights and legal interests?
And in the cases when the decision to initiate a criminal case mentions the name of a specific person who has committed an alleged crime, does the latter have the right to appeal against that decision in the manner of pre-trial proceedings?
 This question was answered by the Court of Cassation in the decision No. EKD / ​​0136/11/11 on NKR Poghosyan, which states that in the decision to initiate a criminal case, in case of indicating a person as a perpetrator, he / she acquires the right to use certain judicial guarantees. including the right to protection.
When discussing the issue at hand, it is necessary to be guided by the basic principles underlying jurisprudence, that the judiciary should guarantee real and enforceable human rights, not illusory and abstract rights.
We believe that the tool to be used in choosing the method of disclosure of the right in connection with the resolution of the issue should be the specific constitutional value (a trick of value interpretation of the strategy of active legal representation).
  Thus, according to Article 18 of the RA Constitution, "Everyone has the right to effective remedies for the protection of his rights և judicial freedoms». "
  The Constitutional Court ruled in CC 673 that, from the point of view of ensuring and protecting the rights of the individual, the purpose of Article 18 of the Constitution is to guarantee the right to a judicial inquiry into allegations of violations of rights and to eliminate the consequences of such violations.
  This right is not subject to restriction, and the right to a fair trial is one of the basic features of any democratic society.
  At the same time, the law should not block the constitutional right of persons to appeal in court, but clarify the criteria for judicial control over the legality of those acts (in our case, the decision to initiate a criminal case), ensuring full access to judicial protection of individual rights.
 In addition, according to the decision of the Constitutional Court SDO-844, "նախատես It is the responsibility of the state to envisage effective and adequate means of legal protection and ensure accessibility."
At the same time, the right to judicial protection of a person is enshrined in Articles 8-10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of December 10, 1946. Article 16 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 16 December 1950; Article 4 1 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 2006 states that "Everyone ությամբ with regard to any criminal charges brought against him has ունի the right to a fair trial. "
And the ECHR, commenting on the above-mentioned notion of "criminal charge" in the "living" document (ECHR), in its precedent decisions stated that it should be understood not in the literal (documentary) but in the substantive (practical) sense (Deveren v. Belgium). Judgment in Deweer v. Belgium, 27 February 1980, application no. 6903/75, paragraph 44).
  The existence of an "accusation" by a person may be evidenced by the taking of measures that presuppose the existence of suspicion of a crime, as they significantly affect the situation of the suspect1.
In fact, if we look at the decision to initiate a criminal case through the prism of the above-mentioned legal positions given by the European Court, it turns out that the spectrum of judicial control over legal proceedings includes the decision to initiate a criminal case, because according to the ECHR, if a person decides on a criminal case Upon acquaintance with the "substantive" aspect, if he finds that a suspicion of a crime is being committed against him or it significantly affects the suspect's condition (in terms of aggravation), then the person should have the right to challenge the court order or its content.
Let us now try to "implement" the conclusion set forth in the above-mentioned paragraph into domestic legislation, clarifying what judicial control over pre-trial proceedings is.
  According to the decision of the Court of Cassation NARD 1/0003/11/08 on Nerses Misakyan, judicial control over pre-trial proceedings is a system of measures envisaged by the procedural law, aimed at fulfilling the constitutional functions of the judiciary in pre-trial proceedings, aiming to prevent to restore the violated rights and freedoms.
Now consider the following question. Is the constitutional function of the judiciary limited to the exercise of justice enshrined in Article 91 of the Constitution at the stage of judicial review, or does it extend to the right to judicial protection of a person before a trial?
We find that the exercise of the constitutional function of the judiciary is de facto nullified when the judiciary does not ensure the right to judicial protection of a person within the framework of its functions.
 As a result, we get two contradictory legal positions of the Court of Cassation, in particular the position of Valeri Grigoryan mentioned above by the decision No. EKD / ​​0031/11/08 (when Limit 19–
1 See Eclaine v. Germany, no. 81930/78's 73, ուբubinski v. Slovenia no. 19611/04 62 62, GK v. Poland no. 38816/97 98 98.
The article considered the definition of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings expressed by the decision of the Court of Cassation No. ARD 1/0003/11/08 on Nersik Misakyan, in the scope of which the examination of Article 19 of the Constitution was presented.
  In confirmation of the latter, we will present the issues of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings: (1) ensuring the protection of the rights and freedoms and legal interests of other participants in the trial; (3) as it is, according to the decision of the Constitutional Court SDO-844, as a result of checking the legality of the appealed decisions և actions, to find out the fact of violation of the rights անձ freedoms և to make a corresponding decision to eliminate the violation ի rights `freedoms: on the obligation of the body conducting the proceedings or to reject the complaint.
The decisions and actions of the public participants in the criminal proceedings are subject to judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings, and the legality and justification of the decisions և actions of the mentioned subjects are subject to judicial control (Decision No. VB-22/08 on R. Sukiasyan of the Court of Cassation).
So, let's conclude on the issue raised. the decision to institute criminal proceedings, which: (a) formally announces the commencement of the activities of state bodies aimed at exposing and exposing the perpetrators of the crime and its circumstances; (b) establishes the legal basis for restricting the rights and legitimate interests of individuals; if it primarily affects the rights, legitimate interests or in any way worsens the situation of the person, it is subject to appeal in court.
 After expressing various (also contradictory) legal positions on the issue in question, the Court of Cassation again reached such a conclusion by decision No. EKD / ​​0136/11/11 on NKR Poghosyan, as follows: “in case the decision to initiate a criminal case is approved by a specific person The fact that a person has committed a criminal offense, in other words, directly follows from the descriptive-causal or concluding wording of the decision to initiate a criminal case, that the person has committed a criminal offense, the Court of Cassation finds that the decision to initiate a criminal case is subject to court. appeal. "
  And in order for the decision on initiating a criminal case not to turn into a court hearing, “when examining an appeal against a decision to initiate a criminal case against a person through judicial control, the court is not authorized to address such issues, which should be the subject of a judicial examination later.
  In particular, the court should not investigate, give legal assessments to the evidence obtained in the case, their admissibility, relevance, sufficiency for the resolution of the case, address the issues related to the criminal qualification of the case. ”
If we try to interpret literally (as required by Article 86 of the RA Law on Legal Acts 2002 - Article 86 of the RA Law on Initiation of a Criminal Case), we can agree with the position of the Court of Cassation that a criminal case is initiated against a fact and not person, but in this case the next issue arises. and the decision to involve a person as an accused, which we can boldly say is made both on the basis of fact and in person, can it be appealed in court?
As we know, according to Article 201 of the current CCP, the decision on involving a person as an accused can be made by the prosecutor and the investigator, and the process of involving a person as an accused is entirely within the scope of the prosecutor's constitutional control.
The Court of Cassation, with the precedent decision NK / 0023/11/12 on Hovhannes Ginoyan, registered that the decision made as a result of the disputed decision or the prosecutorial control of the action may be the subject of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings.
 In case of a contrary interpretation, if a judicial review of the legality of the prosecutor's decision is carried out, the court will go beyond the problems of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings, without the purpose of protecting the rights of the person, as well as restoring the violated rights, will interfere in the preliminary investigation.
Consider also the fact that the decision to involve a person as an accused affects the rights and legal interests of the person, depending on the nature of the proceedings and the type of coercive measure applied, worsens the person's situation.
  Meanwhile, by re-applying the method of revealing the will (approach) of the legislator from the tricks of the strategy of legal interpretation, the legislator does not give the person the opportunity to appeal that decision, not considering it a subject of judicial control.
According to the position of the Court of Cassation, the decision to involve a person as an accused belongs to the number of decisions, the legality of which can be examined only during the substantive examination of the case, which is necessary for adhering to the principles of impartiality and presumption of innocence.
  In addition, the Court of Cassation found that an appeal against a decision to involve a person as a defendant at a later stage of the trial, during a substantive hearing in court, could not lead to an inalienable restriction on a person's rights or legitimate interests.
 Consequently, the decision to involve a person as an accused cannot be the subject of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings, just as the decision made as a result of the prosecutorial control of that decision cannot be the subject of control.
We do not agree with the Court of Cassation on this issue; we consider that in the event that an appeal against the decision to involve a person as an accused at a later stage of the trial, when the case is considered in court, may lead to a disproportionate restriction of legal rights, the decision is subject to appeal. .
 For example, an act of amnesty is applied to a person, but the body conducting the proceedings involves the person accused, in this case why not appeal the decision to involve an individual accused, when it already violates the rights of the person at that moment.
 The "accusation" brought against the accused as a result of the decision to involve the accused in the realization of the purposes of Article 6 1 1 of the European Convention is defined as an official notification given to a person by an authorized state body that there are grounds to claim that he has committed a crime (ECHR) v. Germa, judgment of 15 July 1982, paragraph 73).
 In addition, the charge is presented as a criminal procedure institution through which the activities of the public criminal prosecution system are ensured.
 After all, the accusation is a judicial means of connecting the crime with the circumstances of a specific crime and the person who committed it; therefore, the accusation can be considered as a procedural expression of the characteristics of a crime, from which it derives the function of criminal justice (Court of Cassation G. Chagharyan et al. 02/11 decision).
The reasons for the need to appeal the decision to initiate a criminal case in this case apply in the same way to the person (mutandis mutadis) appealing the decision to involve him as an accused.
It should be noted that the Court of Cassation, by Decision No. EKD / ​​0060/11/10 on Varuzhan Manukyan, expressed the position that all the decisions and actions (inaction) of the criminal prosecution bodies can be appealed to the court, which are appealed at a later stage of the trial. impossible, or will lead to an inadequate restriction of the rights of the person և legitimate interests.
Based on the above, we believe that the term "involve as an accused" should not be interpreted narrowly and be related exclusively to the content given to it in the CCP, otherwise the guarantee of judicial protection enshrined in the RA Constitution will be illusory, will not serve the goals for which it is envisaged.
As we know, one of the primary requirements for the decision to involve a person as an accused is the reasoning of that decision under Article 201 of the CCP.
  And if the person finds that the decision to involve him / her as an accused is not properly reasoned, can the person apply to the court, demanding to oblige the public participant of the decision to reason enough to make a proper reasoning?
Considering the following question, whether sufficient reasoning can be placed on the opposite scale of the right to receive sufficient information about the accusation, we find that yes, because sufficient reasoning is an adequate precondition for receiving sufficient information about the accusation made by the person.
  Thus, the European Court has repeatedly stressed that the question of whether sufficient information has been provided to the accused in a particular case about the legal-factual basis of the accusation should always be considered in the context of the right to a fair trial under Article 6 1 1 of the European Convention.
  The provisions of Article 6 of the European Convention give the accused the right to be informed not only of the material facts which give rise to the charges but also of the detailed legal characterization of those facts (Pelissier and Sassi v. France, judgment of 25 April 1999, paragraph 51). .
 Let us now emphasize two factors: (1) the right to be informed of the nature of the charge և to be seen in the light of the right to a defense preparation (Pelissier and Sassi v. France, judgment of 25 April 1999, paragraph 54), (2) " Եւ The use of the accusation is conditioned by the fact that its presence in the relevant court documents enables the person being prosecuted to effectively exercise his right to defense.
  Moreover, certain issues set out in the indictment (the scope of the evidence underlying the factual description of the act, their assessment, etc.) are essential for the proper exercise of a person's right to protection. ” Point 19 of the decision 01/09).
 And the right of defense, as a whole of the procedural rights reserved for the accused, enables the latter to act as an independent subject of the trial, to fully or partially refute the assertion that he has committed the crime he is accused of, as well as to defend his rights and legitimate interests.
 Moreover, as we know, the body conducting the proceedings is responsible for ensuring the actual possibility of exercising the right of defense.
Taking into account all the above-mentioned circumstances, as well as stating that the decision to involve the accused in a person is a precondition for the protection of the person's alleged crime, we find that when the person finds that the decision to involve the accused is sufficiently reasoned No, he / she has the right to apply to the prosecutor (based on the envisaged structure), and in case of non-satisfaction of the submitted claim, to apply to the court.
Let's try to transfer the above-mentioned legal regulations to the scope of the new draft CPC, taking into account the innovations made there.
 Let us now clarify the following questions, which are: a) whether the decision on initiating criminal proceedings can be appealed in court, b) whether the criminal proceedings are initiated on the fact or on the person, c) whether the criminal prosecution can be appealed on the person the decision to involve him as an accused, as well as the action of the public participants in the proceedings against the person.
The movement of criminal proceedings in the draft CPC starts from the moment of receiving the proper report on the alleged crime.
 The decision to initiate criminal proceedings on a legal basis for the performance of legal actions.
 First of all, let's clarify whether it is also initiated on the fact by the example of the decision on initiating a criminal case.
Thus, according to Article 177, Part 3 of the draft CCP, the protocol on initiating criminal proceedings shall indicate the officials initiating the criminal proceedings, the reason for initiating criminal proceedings, the factual description of the relevant crime, the article or part of the article of the Criminal Code. the proceedings, the list of materials attached to the report, if any.
 That is, the requirement to mark a person is absent again.
  In addition, the reason for initiating criminal proceedings under Article 174 of the draft CCP is the proper reporting of an apparent offense, the essence of which is clarified in part 2 of the same article, that is, the relevant report is considered an apparent offense if it proves such an act. or) inaction, which can reasonably be attributed to the criminal Republic of Armenia 1 See Deweer v. Belgi սm, judgment of 27 February 1980, paragraph 56, Urtico v. Italy, judgment of 13 May 1980, paragraph 32, Goddi v. Italy, judgment of 9 April 1984, paragraph 28, Colozza v. Italy, judgment of 12 February 1985, paragraph 26.
Preliminary legal assessment of compliance with the criminal act provided by the Code.
It turns out that neither the reason nor the decision to initiate criminal proceedings contain a note about the person.
 In other words, in the future we will presumably deal exclusively with the initiated proceedings on the fact.
 At the same time, we can not rule out the fact that in practice there may be cases when the public participant in the proceedings, based on the content of the report on the alleged crime, will refer to any person in the decision to initiate criminal proceedings, if the latter asserts that the act violates If he has his rights and legal interests, he will use the right of judicial protection.
The draft CPC, combining innovative solutions of advanced legal systems, without providing a person with a clear opportunity to appeal the decision to initiate criminal proceedings, at the same time did not rule out such a possibility.
  Thus, according to Article 306 2 2 of the draft CCP, "pre-trial acts are subject to judicial appeal, the challenge of which will be impossible during the trial or will obviously deprive the appellant of a real opportunity to defend his legitimate interests."
Based on the above-mentioned provisions, using the Ejusdem gereris method from the textual tricks of the passive legal interpretation strategy (in order to reveal the content of the unidentified element of open enumeration, it is necessary to proceed from the content of a certain element), we find that the decision to initiate proceedings can be appealed.
Let us now turn to the other important question of whether the decision to prosecute a person as an accused can be appealed, as well as the action of the public participants in the prosecution.
First of all, it should be noted that at the level of the draft CPC, the question of whether a person can go to court if he / she finds that the decision is not properly reasoned can not be discussed anymore, as Article 191 of the draft CPC, unlike the current CPC201 does not require "reasoning" in the decision to involve the person as an accused.
 The draft is also progressive in this context, in particular by establishing a new principle of proper proof, the draft requires that each factual circumstance of the accusation be substantiated to such an extent as to exclude any reasonable doubt as to evidence (Article 22 ի 2 of the CCP) .
 That is, due to the essence of the given provision of the draft, the private participant of the proceedings should not feel insufficient reasoning in connection with the accusation.
Turning to the last issue raised in this case, the appeal against the decision to involve a person as a defendant, we find that this issue was resolved in the draft CCP in the same way as the issue of appealing the decision to initiate criminal proceedings in this case, that is, without envisaging a specific appeal. At the same time, he did not rule out the possibility of such an appeal.
  And when resolving this issue, we must proceed from the same circumstances that were presented when addressing the issue of the possibility of appealing the decision to involve a person as an accused in the CCP in this case.
Based on Article 306 of the draft, we consider that in case the person finds that the appeal of the decision on involving the accused at a later stage of the trial, when the case is considered in court, may lead to a disproportionate restriction of his / her rights and legal interests, then that decision is subject to appeal.
Thus, in concluding this work, we would like to emphasize that in the field of jurisprudence, the legislature must always be guided by the European Court's adopted ideology that the European Convention is a guarantee of an effective, not an enforceable, unrealistic effect. .
  (Paragraph 24 of the judgment in Airi v. Ireland, 9 October 1979, Artico v. Italy, 13 May 1980, 33 33).
Arnold VardanyanVARUYTI PUBLIC OF DECISIONS AND actions (inaction) APPEALS pretrial decision on the initiation of CONSTITUTION 18TH, 19TH AND ECHR Article 6 of LIGHT NERKOBanali words, the criminal case, the defendant decided to involve the decision motivated judicial appeal, case law.
