DUKES OF THE ARMENIANS OF ANTIQUE ABOUT THE IDENTIFICATION OF KHACHATUR AND PEKHT (EPICHT) IDENTIFICATION 20s each The resettlement of the Armenians of Vaspurakan in Sebastia and the surrounding areas started a new wave of emigration of the Armenian society, which was a consequence of the conquest of the Byzantine Empire and, as it turned out decades later, of unpromising policy and undesirable political developments inside the country.
  It is characteristic that among the people leaving their homeland were representatives of the navy, as well as military figures.
  According to Aristakes Lastiverts. "Some cavalry roamed homeless, some in Persia, some in Greece, some in Virs."
 This process, in the end, caused a completely new situation. The scope for realizing the potential of the Armenians is expanding to include many other territories besides Greater Armenia.
 Significant changes were registered in K. Mutafyan described them as 2 occurrences of the Armenian world (Monde Arménien).
 In the context of all this, K. should be considered very eloquent. Kahen's observation. "The most important emigrations are to Armenians and Turks" 3.
  Armenian figures, appearing in different countries and often undergoing conversion, began to carry out impressive political and military activities, the logical result of which should be considered, for example, the appearance of Armenian viziers in Fatimid Egypt4.
 One such very remarkable episode is the arrival of Armenian dukes in Antioch.
 The sources of that city mention 3 figures: Pekht, Khachatur, Vasak Pahlavuni.
 A group of researchers, seeing some similarities in the activities of the first two, are in favor of their identification.
 In the context of such publications, we consider it necessary to re-discuss the issue on the basis of all the evidence contained in the original sources բոլոր all the studies recorded.
Four of the Byzantine historians, Hovhannes Skilitses, Ataliates, Nikephoros Brienos և Psellos provide interesting information about Khachatur, an Armenian, to whom the Emperor Romanos D. Diogenes (1068-1071 / 72) in 1069 entrusts the post of Duke of Antioch.
The sources are silent about his previous activity, being satisfied only with the registration of personal characteristics.
  1068-1069 They are marked by the emperor's Eastern campaign5, in response to which the Seljuk-Turks invade the region of Iconium, raiding and plundering it.
 Romanos Diogenes in Heracles, sending auxiliary troops to the Duke of Antioch, ordered the defeat of the returning enemy forces.
 Khachatur, however, does not manage to fully fulfill the received assignment. The only success in the region of Mamistra (Mamestia) was the recapture of the spoils from the Seljuks.
 The enemy, overcoming the resistance of Khachatur, passes through Sarvandikon (Sarvandikar) to the mountains of Amanos (SJ), and from there to Aleppo.
  The Duke of Armenia, however, was destined to play a more decisive role in the events unfolding in the near future.
1071 On August 19, 1945, a battle took place in the Manazkert plain between the "Seljuk-Turkish troops" of the Byzantine army led by the emperor, the crucial significance of which is indisputable in the context of world history.
  Byzantine Forces 1 Yuzbashyan K., History of Aristakis Lastiverttsu, with diligence, Yerevan, 1963, p. 60.
2 Mutafyan K., Middle East Armenia, Banber Matenadaran, h. 20, Yerevan, 2014, p. 447.
4 Baldaryan S., Fatimyan, the first Armenian vizier of Egypt, "The individual in the course of history" (collection of conference materials), Yerevan, 2015, p. 65.
Insufficient level of discipline, as well as the treacherous attitude of some military commanders, predetermined the outcome of the battle.
  The defeated Romanos Diogenes, falling into the hands of the opponent, was forced to agree to a very unfavorable contract.
 It envisaged, in addition to territorial concessions, the payment of 1,000 dinars a year in recognition of the rule of the Tseljuks.
 Under these conditions, the Byzantine elite chose to overthrow Romanos IV and declare the way to hand over the throne to Michael Ducas.
  Romanos Diogenes, released after the treaty, thus had no choice but to fight for the restoration of his imperial rights.
 However, after defeating Constantine Dukas, who was sent against him, he somehow escaped captivity thanks to the support of Antiochus.
  The latter not only stood in the defensive position of the emperor without a throne, but also established him in Adana, which fell within his domains.
 The story of Khachatur's key role begins from these events.
 On the one hand, he set about recruiting new military units, and on the other hand, he established contacts with the Seljuk-Turks, expecting to receive auxiliary forces.
  In fact, a very surprising situation arises when Romanos Diogenes and Alp Arslan (Alpaslan), who fought against each other in the battle of Manazkert, now find themselves in the status of allies.
 The efforts made, however, were not able to make a breakthrough in the development of events.
 Andronikos Doukas, who replaced Constantine Doukas in 1072. At Adana he not only defeated the allied forces, but also took their leader Khachatur captive.
  As for the question of the future fate of Romanos Diogenes, avoiding captivity while fortifying himself in the fortress of Adana, he was soon forced to surrender to the enemy.
 The former emperor freed from Seljuk captivity was blinded և, thus having an inglorious end1.
 Here is the reaction to that event in the picture of the Assyrian historian Anonymous Edesatsum. "Behold, the cruelty of Christians, the humanity of foreigners" 2.
 Thus, in 1069-1072. Khachatur, an Armenian who held the position of Duke of Antioch, played a significant role in the events following the Battle of Manazkert, assuming the role of a pioneer in the struggle for the restoration of Romanos IV's imperial power.
We consider it necessary to refer to a reality of special interest, that is, the reflection of the image of Khachatur in the Turkish epic novel "Sayid Battal Jazi".
  Based on the description of Melitene Amira, "warrior of the faith" (Ghazi) Sayyid Battaliskhrankner (9th century), it contains the reaction of the first period (Seljuk-Turkic conquests (11th century)).
 In memory of 1071 After the subsequent collaboration with the emperor Romanos Diogenes, the Turkish epic preserved information about the three Byzantine emperors who converted to Islam (Asator, Takfur, Kanathus).
  It is noteworthy that the researchers do not object to the Byzantine scholar H. The point of view put forward by Gregoire, who identifies Asator with Khachatur3.
 Considering it superfluous to present the suspicions about him in the epic novel4, let us only mention that the mention of Khachatur in the Turkish epic is both the memory of Emperor Romanos with Alp Arslan and the establishment of a political alliance of his Armenian supporter and the response to the unique role played by Antio. in events 5.
During the same period, Armenian sources mention Pekht as Duke of Antioch6.
 This name also appears in versions Epicht 7, Bekhd 8.
 It is noteworthy that A. Kajdan, for example, does not unite them in 1 person9, while according to H. Bartikyan's most popular 1 Cheynet J.-Cl., Manzikert.
 a military disaster ?, '' Byzantion '', t. L, fasc. 2, 1980, pp. 410-438.2 Edesatsi A., Chronology, from the original (translated by Ter-Petrosyan L., Foreign sources on Armenia and the Armenians), vol. 12, Yerevan, 1982, page 30.
3 Gregoire H., Khachatur-Asador, (translated by Berberian H.), Zion, 1952. 1-12, pp. 29-31.
For details, see pages 30-31.
6 Urhayetsi M., Chronology, (examination original Melik-Adamyan M., Ter-Mikayelyan N.), Yerevan, 1991, p. 170.
Smbat Sparapet, Yearbook, Venice, 1956, page 84.
7 Urhayetsi M., page 230.
8 Vardan Vardapet, The Collection of History, Venice, 1862, p. 105.
From a monastic point of view, these names are less accurate transliterations of the Greek word epichthes.
Speaking of 1065 Matteos Urhayetsi mentions the events that took place in the "city of Antioch" in Pekht, which provided military assistance to besieged Edesia.
 The local duke Proximos, however, instead of helping Pecht, who resisted the Seljuk-Turks, took a treacherous position.
  Finally, being able to defeat the enemy near Nshenik Fortress, the Duke of Antioch informed Constantine Ժ Dukas about what had happened, who dismissed the Duke of Edesia, and the latter's official was executed2.
According to the same historian, the prince Epicht of Andriun fortress in 1076 (The events of this year took place two years later, in 1078.3) was killed by a "wicked and defiled religious man" 4.
  Using Matthew Urhayets, he gives a similar description of the same cases - Smbat Sparapet5.
 Vardan Arceltsi, one of the Armenian historians, has testimonies about the circumstances of this figure's death.
  Reporting the murder "in his fortress Andrion", he gives the name of the Greek clergyman 6.
 According to A. Based on the information of the historian, it can be concluded that the duke was killed in the year following the conversion to Chalcedon7.
 All this shows that Vartan Ar-Yeltsushartsarkamm is independent of the description of Matteos Urhayetsi, who does not mention the mentioned details.
  In Armenian sources, the evidence about Pekht is exhausted by this.
Let us add that another report about him has been preserved in Arab sources8.
Most of the investigators of the fact of acting in the same period, having assumed the same position, forced to incline to the idea of ​​identifying Khachatur և Pekht.
  Still. This thinking, which started from Chamchyants 9, was continued by J. Alishan 10, A. Alpoyajyan 11, H. Acharyan 12, nowadays E. Kasuni 13, K. In Matosyan's 14 studies.
Another group of researchers, J. Loran 15, H. Gregoire 16, A. Kajdan 17, H. Bartikyan 18, Zh. Dedeyan 19, criticized that point of view, excluding the possibility of identifying the figures in question.
Before J. Those who studied the entry of Laurent's article without a thorough examination were, in fact, satisfied with the assumption that Khachatur mentioned in Byzantine sources must be Pekht, who held the same position in Armenian sources.
  After the publication of the study of the mentioned Byzantine scholar, the supporters of the point of view of the identification of the mentioned figures were already forced to put forward different arguments: J. To challenge Laurent և to substantiate his own position.
  Below, we will first try to show the insignificant arguments, and thus the insignificance of the point of view identifying Khachatur and Pekht, and then offer new, more grounded arguments in favor of the opposite opinion.
1 Urhayetsi M., page 500, note. 234.
2 Ibid., P. 170.
3 Ter-Petrosyan L., The Crusaders և the Armenians, vol. A, Yerevan, 2005, p. 418.
  Matosyan K., Pages of Ani-Shirak history, Yerevan, 2010, p. 151, note. 6.
4 Urhayetsi M., page 230.
5 Smbat Sparapet, page 84.
6 "Abel Horom, the father of his confession" (emphasis added). see The History of the Great Vartan Bardzrberdtsu Space, Mukua, 1861, p. 140.
9 Chamchiants M., History of Armenia, vol. B, Yerevan, 1984, page 972.
10 Alishan J., Sisuan, Venice, 1885, p. 46.
 Vardan Vardapet, page 105, note 1.
11 Alpoyajian A., History of Armenian Caesarea, vol. A, Cairo, 1937, page 439, note. 1.
12 Acharyan H., Dictionary of Armenian Personal Names, vol. A, Yerevan, 1942, page 404.
13 Kasuni E., XI. The Armenian rulers of Antioch in the 19th century, Pekht-Khachatur and Vasak Pahlavuni, Haykazian Journal of Armenology, 1971, vol. 2, pp. 123-134.
14 MatJosyan K., pp. 150-169.
15 Laurent J., Prince Khachatur of Antioch 1068-1072, Journal of the Day, 1930. 1-12, pp. 303-310.
  See also Laurent J., 16 Gregoire H., p.
18 Skilitses H. ,, (translation, preface և notes by Bartikyan H.), Yerevan, 1979, p. 376.
E. Kasuni, presenting the preserved testimonies about Khachatur and Pekht, concludes. "Wouldn't these similarities between the arena and the description give us the right to think that Pekht-Khachatur is the same person?"
 There is no doubt that the phrase "similarities between the arena and the description" is far from being at least sufficient for a serious argument.
 First of all, the "similarity of the arena" is very problematic, because besides Greater Antioch, there is also a well-known settlement in Mountainous Cilicia.
  On the other hand, the discussion of "similarity of description" is surprising.
 Thus, the Byzantine authors who kept silent about Khachatur's previous activities are satisfied with the recording of his military abilities. "The evidences given by this Armenian to his courage զոր proved his talent as a general" 2.
  E. Kasuni arbitrarily connects 1065. The events unfolding near Nshenik Fortress, thus "revealing" "similarity of description".
  It is obvious that by this logic Khachatur can be attributed to various military feats, ignoring the need for additional source-based argumentation.
As for K. The arguments brought by Matosyan, then they are based on the literary additions preserved in 2 manuscripts of Samvel Anetsi's work.
  The researcher puts into circulation two remarkable pieces of information about Pecht.
  According to the first, "In SHJT (1070) Gogdzakhmat destroyed the Black Mountain and was massacred by Grigor Pikht idashtn Harunoy i mamkhenut" 3.
  The second information refers to the circumstances of his death. "SHIA (1072) Pikhtn Andrion strangled his servant" 4.
In fact, in 1070 In the field of Harun, Pekht, whose name Grigor, due to a new source, becomes clear, defeated a Gogdzakhmat.
 K. Matjosyan, comparing this event with the clash between Khachatur and the Seljuks evidenced in Byzantine sources, identifies them, and accordingly, the figures.
 The researcher, in our opinion, does not take into account two possible circumstances.
 First, the clash of the Seljuks of Khachatur տեղի took place in 1069.5, while the information about Pekhtimas refers to the following year.
  In addition, the descriptions of the two collisions are different.
  In one case, the enemy passes from the west through the territory of Tarson and Mamestia to the region of the mountains, from there to Aleppo, and in the other case, the destroyed region of the mountains moves in the opposite direction, to the north, to the plain of Harun.
  It is obvious that we are talking about completely different events.
Passing K. To the next testimony circulated by Matosyan, let us mention that it is different from the testimonies of Matteos Urhayetsi and Vardan Arceltsi about Pekht's murder.
  The year (1072 և 1078) does not coincide with the perpetrator of the murder ("Father Horom" և "his servant".
 As we have shown above, what Vardan Arceltsi told about this case is independent of Matteos Urhayetsi's report, that is, we are dealing with two independent and complementary testimonies.
 Therefore, they are more credible and valuable than the literary supplement in question.
 We believe that it should be removed from the list of evidence in the inspection that mentions Pecht.
Summarizing the mentioned observations, we can state that in favor of the identification of Pekht and Khachatur, K. The arguments brought by Matosyan, which, as it was mentioned, are based on the breaks in Samvel Anetsi's work, are not convincing.
Let us now turn to 2 noteworthy considerations, which provide significant clarification on the issue under discussion.
 In our opinion, Khachatur, who, in a struggle with the dethroned emperor against Michael Doukas, had in fact taken an anti-state action, could not have survived in 1072. then.
  The leader of the coup attempt should have met the same fate as Romanos Diogenes.
  It is not accidental that the last information about him in Byzantine sources refers to 1072.
  Therefore, it is more probable that the Duke of Antioch, the organizer of the anti-government speech, in addition to being removed from power, met the fate of the former emperor.
 It is logical that he could not identify in 1078. with Pecht, mentioned as Prince Andrew.
1 Kasuni E., page 127.
2 Ibid., P. 126.
 Laurent Y., p. 303.
3 Matosyan K., pp. 156-157.
4 Ibid., P. 157.
As for Pekht, in our opinion, his title "tuk Antiochus" refers only to the settlement of Antioch in Mount Cilicia.
  This can be deduced from the toponyms mentioned in the references to him.
 Andriun, whose fortress was handed over to him, was a little west of Marashitsm.
 The Harun plain, during which Pekht achieved military success, lies a little south of Marash.
 These places are adjacent to Northern Cilicia, where the settlement of Antioch is located.
 On the other hand, if he had held the position of Duke of Greater Antioch, it would have been recorded in Byzantine sources as in the case of Nikephoritses, Nikephoros Botaniates, Khachatur.
  We think that Pecht should be considered the ruler of Little Antioch.
Thus, the arguments brought in defense of the identification of the Duke of Antioch Khachatur և Pekht cannot be criticized.
  1071-1072 Khachatur, who played a key role in the events in the region, left the historical arena after the unsuccessful outcome of his anti-government speech.
 As for Pecht, Apana, in our opinion, ruled only in Little Antioch.
Sargis BaldaryanKeywords: Antioch, Duke of Armenian descent, Pekht, Khachatur, impossibility of identification AROUND THE DUKE OF ARMENIANS OF ANTIQUE AROUND CROSS.
