WOMEN DURING THE GREAT FRENCH REVOLUTION OF THE 18TH CENTURY The most striking feature of the French Revolution that surprised and at the same time amazed contemporaries and its participants was the active involvement of women in politics.
  The revolution revealed women individuals who fought for freedom with men standing side by side, and many spared their lives for it.
 Before the revolution, women, due to their interesting ideas, received certain privileges in French society: they were allowed to attend a number of men's clubs, to participate in mass discussions.
  The talented woman figure of the French Revolution Manon Roland wrote: "The young generation of women, putting aside prayer books, began to read historical works, works of political thinkers" 1.
 It was for this reason that the famous 18th-century thinker, mathematician, and economist Jean-Antoine Condorsen, two years before the revolution, for the first time in history sharply raised the question of gender equality.
2 She took steps to make public education accessible to women.
Condorsen helped women get into higher education by offering individual courses in a variety of subjects.
  Before that, girls and adult women were kept in monasteries until they were in their twenties, where they were educated in old books approved by the priests.
 The active participation of women in the revolutionary movement was first of all conditioned by the desire to expand their rights.
 It is not by chance that many women warmly welcomed the revolution.
  However, it did not fully meet the expectations of women.
In particular, in 1789. The "Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" adopted by the Constituent Assembly on August 26, 1918, was a great achievement of the French Revolution, but it concerned only one part of the French nation, men, and completely ignored the other part, women3.
Many women, such as Manon Roland, Terouane de Mericour, Olympia de Guz, Simona Evrar, Claire Lacombe, Lucille Demoulin, Theresa Tallienne, Charlotte Corde, and others, were prominent in these years.
 Olympia de Guz stood out from them with his interesting thoughts.
 He greeted the revolution with great pomp.
 Olympia de Guz demanded the rights of women in society, the role of women in society, and the protection of illegitimate children.
  He was one of the first to call on the government to give women the right to divorce, to establish maternity hospitals and national workshops for the unemployed and the homeless.
 She founded a number of women's organizations and published more than 30 political brochures.
  Olympia de Guz in 1791, in the first story, formulated and published the "Declaration of the Rights of Women", which, however, was rejected by the National Convention.
  The first article of the declaration read: "A woman is born free ունի has equal rights with a man" 4.
  Having a very good idea of ​​the political situation, Olympia de Guz, speaking about women's rights, wrote: "If the law allows women to be taken to a cell, then let them allow them to speak from the pulpit."
Although Olympia de Guz supported the revolution, he opposed the bloodshed, the beheading of the king, as well as the policy pursued by Robespierre and Marat.
 Na 1 Щepkina E., Women's Movement in the Year of the French Revolution, http.
//istmat.info/node/377464 Adler Э., The Famous Women of the French Revolution.
 1789-1795, St. Petersburg, 1907, p. 242. wrote: "The blood of even the sinners, who shed so much cruelty, will forever carat the revolution" 1.
  He defended Louis XVI during the trial and even offered his help to the latter's lawyer.
 1793 In the summer of 1945, after the expulsion of the Girondists from the Convention, he published a political pamphlet, "Three Boxes How to Save the Homeland," in which he proposed a referendum in which the people would decide which system of government they preferred.
 Olympia de Guz believed that the two main branches of government, the legislature and the executive, should unite, like men and women, for the common good of society.
  On the day the pamphlet was published, August 6, he was arrested on charges of sympathizing with former Queen Marie Antoinette.
  The Revolutionary Court did not even provide him with a lawyer, finding that he was able to defend himself.
  While in prison, with the help of friends, he published his latest work, "Olympia de Guz's Revolutionary Tribunal."
  As expected, he was sentenced to death.
  He showed great courage in the penitentiary.
  The last words of Olympia de Guz were: "The sons of the homeland will take revenge for my death" 2.
Another prominent female figure during the French Revolution was Manon Roland.
  She was the wife of historian, economist, and interior minister Roland de la Plata.
 1789 The movement encouraged him.
 Manon Roland sincerely believed. that the revolution will renew the world.
 She is actively involved in French politics, leading the Girondists with her husband.
 It is not accidental that the common people of Paris said: "The only man in the Girondist party is Mrs. Roland."
Together with his friends, he creates his own salon in Paris, which in a short period of time turns into a political elite club.
 Deputies, journalists, including Robespierre, regularly gathered here.
 After the closing of the Constituent Assembly, Mrs. Roland and her husband left Paris, but continued to correspond with Robespierre and others.
  And when her husband is appointed minister, Manon Roland persuades her not to trust the court, the members of the royal palace and the king, because he thinks that their goal is to calm the ministers at the same time.
  He is arming the Girondists against the light-minded Dumourier.
 Under his influence, the Minister of War proposed to the National Assembly to deploy about 20,000 troops around Paris without the king's permission and the consent of the council.
 Manon Roland was actively preparing for the August 10 uprising.
 He did not like the council of Girondist ministers at all.
Manon Roland dreamed of a council consisting of non-corrupt, moderate Republicans.
After the decision to execute Louis XVI, Mr. Roland resigned as Minister.
 1793 In the spring he was accused of treason and managed to leave Paris to escape arrest.
 In the midst of such a tense struggle within the party, Manon Roland wrote a letter to the department, giving it to the Girondists against Marat.
  He was accused of having close relations with a number of royalists.
 When the arrest warrant was issued, Mrs. Roland tried to defend her honor and was arrested.
He listened to the death sentence very calmly.
  His last words to the court were: "Thank you, judges, for finding me worthy to share the fate of the great men who were abused by you.
 I will try to show the same courage that they showed in the barracks. ”3
  Manon Roland, looking at the Statue of Liberty erected in Revolution Square, bowed his head in front of the statue. "Freedom, they have mixed you with blood" 4.
  She had a great contribution in the activity of the Girondists, it is not accidental that the people called her "Queen of the Girondists".
  He was saying about himself. "I am the revolution."
  Manon Roland dreamed that the law in France would be equal for everyone, regardless of gender or social status.
During the Revolution, Theresa Cabarrius, later Mrs. Talie, was a member of the Bordeaux Revolutionary Council.
  He wanted to take a personal part in it, following the example of Mrs. Roland, a big fan of revolutionary ideas.
 Teresa Cabaret published pamphlets on women's political rights.
 But 2 Ibid., Page 250.
4 In the same place.
Paris accepted such statements չի does not pay attention to the former Marquis.
 This does not discourage Theresa և she continues her activities.
 When the Girondists failed, Teresa in 1793. He decided to go to Madrid to visit his father, because the revolution did not live up to his expectations1.
 However, in Bordeaux, she is arrested as an ex-immigrant wife.
  Here, Teresa meets her future husband, Jean-LaberTalier, who was sent here by Convet to seek revenge against the Girondists.
 Theresa, wanting to dispel all doubts, began to take an active part in Bordeaux public life.
 He compiled a report on "Education", where he proposed to introduce permanent education in schools.
 He strongly emphasized the need for physical education.
While in Bordeaux, he enjoyed the favor of Tallienne and rescued hundreds of people from the garrison.
  Tallienne, who was known for his cruelty, soon began to show concessions, as a result of which he received Robespierre's attention and was accused of moderation.
  He was recalled to Paris, and Teresa was arrested and imprisoned first in LaForce and then in Carm, where he became close to the future Empress of France, Josephine Boarne.
 While in prison, awaiting the verdict of his death, he writes a letter to his beloved, which, according to some historians, has a great influence on the further history of France.
 Its content was as follows: "A little while ago, the chief of police left my cell.
He came to inform me that I must stand before the revolutionary tribunal tomorrow. "
 This does not correspond to the dream I had tonight. Robespierre seemed to cease to exist; the prison gates were open.
 However, due to the cowardice of the French, there will soon be no one left to make my dream come true.
  "I am dying because I belong to a coward."
 This forces Tallienne to make a final decision և to take part in the coup, as a result of which Robespierre is dismissed and Teresa is released.
 Madame de Goncourt writes in her book "French society during the dictatorship": "The beautiful Talie reconciled women with the revolution, men with fashion, and the bourgeoisie with the republic."
He was also prominent in social activism - Lucille Demoulin.
  She was the wife of the prominent figure of the revolution Camille Demoulin.
 Interesting notes have been preserved in his personal diaries, which refer to 1792. On August 10, 1945, when the king of France was overthrown.
 He wrote: "Human cries were heard in the street, we thought that the whole of Paris was swimming in blood.
  Then we mustered up the courage to go to Danton.
  We wanted to be free.
  Oh, my God, how much we paid for it! ”
During the trial of Louis XVI, Lucille visited Convet regularly.
 Like her husband, she also supported the execution of the king.
 When the death sentence is announced, he exclaims: "Finally we will celebrate."
1794 The arrest of her husband on March 31 confuses her.
 Lucille did everything she could to save her husband, even writing a letter to Robespierre that went unanswered.
 In the end, he is accused of giving money to the Danton organization and trying to provoke a riot in Paris.
  Shortly after her husband was beheaded, on April 13, she was executed, Lucille.
During the years of the revolution, the female figure Teruan de Mercury had a great role in organizing mass speeches of women.
 In 1789, learning of the events in France, she gave up her dream of becoming a singer ում hurried from London to Paris.
 Returning to France, he took part in revolutionary events, including the Bastillegrave.
 1789 On October 6, 1944, Terouane de Mercury led the women's march to Versailles.
 Due to his high reputation in the society, all the noble newspapers called him a "wandering scoundrel" 2.
 He was the founder of the Friends of the Law Club.
 Against the violence carried out during the revolution, in 1790 He left Paris and settled in Lesh, where in 1791 He was arrested by Austrian agents on February 16.
 He is accused of attempting to assassinate Maria Antoinette and is imprisoned in Kufstein Castle.
  According to the decision of the Austrian Emperor Leopold II, he was released at the end of the year and returned to Paris.
 Here she is active in social and political activities, advocates for the expansion of women's rights.
 1792 In February, he presented a report to the Jacobins, arguing that the only way to strengthen France's freedom was to wage a relentless war against the rebellious, immigrant aristocracy's foreign insurgents.
He died in 1793. In the fall he defends the Girondists.
  This was due to the fact that there was a heated discussion among the Jacobins about the need to close women's clubs.
 Robespierre stated: "The majority of the society demands that women return to the family home" 2.
 Terouane de Mercury appeals to the citizens of France, where he says in particular: "The time has come when the common interest demands that we unite and sacrifice our hatred for each other for the welfare of society."
1793 On May 13, 1945, he was surrounded by numerous women, who were provoked by the Jacobins, stripped naked and severely beaten.
 Only Marat's intervention saves him from his death, but all this does not go unnoticed.
 Terouane de Mercury's health is deteriorating day by day, he is taken to a psychiatric hospital, where he remains until his death in 1817.
Claire Lacombe was an actress in Marseilles before the French Revolution, but worried about the revolutionary events in 1792. is coming to Paris.
  1793 begins to strike at left-wing extremists.
  Claire Lacombe is considered the founding member and secretary of the "National-Revolutionary Society" group, which could be joined only by women.
The purpose of the organization was to discuss all the means by which all the enemies of the republic could be paralyzed.
 The latter gathered at the Jacobin Library on St. Honore Street.
  1793 On May 19, 1945, led by Lacombe, they sent a message to the Jacobins demanding that tougher action be taken against the Girondins.
  However, all this was of a fictitious nature, provoked by the Jacobins themselves.
It should be noted that it was the members of the above-mentioned organization who beat Terouan de Mercury, as the latter was close to the Girondists.
Claire Lacombe fought for women's equality, played an important role in 1793. in the events of the period from May 31 to June 2.
 In August, he petitioned to remove all nobles from their positions in the army and from the government.
 After that, the Jacobins accuse him of betraying the revolution and the members of his club of inciting riots in the city market.
 This is the reason why the Jacobins close all the women's clubs.
  1794 Claire Lacombe was arrested on April 2, 1795. release.
 However, in 1798 then his traces disappear և we do not know his future fate.
Mrs. de Stahl is a famous French writer, prominent politician Jacques Neckerid.
 During the years of the revolution, using his influence and position, he saved many people from prison.
 He opened his own hall in Paris.
 The events of September forced him to flee Paris to England, where he wrote a pamphlet (1790) in which he complained about the execution of Marie Antoinette.
 1796 He returned to Paris, reopened his hall, which became a famous literary and political center.
 1816 Mrs. de Stahl wrote: "The reasons for the revolution should be sought in the historical context, not in the actions of individuals."
Among the prominent women figures of the French Revolution is Charlotte Conde.
  It belonged to an old aristocratic family, until it was closed in the monastery in the 1790s.
 During the years he lived here, he read books of historical and philosophical nature.
  As a result, he became a staunch supporter of democratic ideas.
The violence and extremism of the years of the revolution made him disgusted and terrified.
 According to one of his relatives, Mrs. Marom, at one of the dinners Charlotte Conde refused to drink the king's toast, stating that she did not doubt his virtues, but "either he is weak and the weak king can not be kind or not strong enough to prevent his people." misery ”4.
 Nevertheless, the beheading of Louis XVI caused him great emotional pain.
  The girl who became a republican after the revolution 2 Ibid., P. 22.
3 Ibid., P.
Not long ago, he mourned not only the death of the king, but also the death of others.
 He wrote in his memoirs. "Here he is, our kind France, handed over to the power of the people who caused us so much damage.
"People who promised us freedom killed it themselves."
1793 On May 31, a group of Girondist deputies arrived in Cannes.
Having personally met them, Charlotte plots to assassinate the leaders of the perpetrators of atrocities in France.
  1793 He arrived in Paris on July 1, 1944, but was still hesitant between Robespierre and Marat.
  Charlotte stops at the latter when she reads his statement in one of the newspapers. "We still need 200,000 heads to strengthen the revolution."
On July 11, he requested a visit from Marat to find out about the Girondists' machinations in Cannes, but received permission to visit only on the evening of July 13.
 And when Marat was recording the names of the apparent conspirators, Konde stabbed him in the heart.
  Marat dies on the spot.
  On July 17, Charlotte Condenque stood before the Jacobin court, where she displayed great courage, declaring, "Marat's death is a blessing for France."
 He was beheaded that evening.
Women's activism and social and political activity in the French Revolution had a great impact on women in other countries.
  In England, women began to be inspired by the Declaration of Olympia de Guz «" On the Rights of Women և Citizen »", and in the Nordic countries, clubs supporting Olympia de Guz և Lacombe appeared.
Zoya ChatinyanKANAYK 18th century French Revolution ENTATSKUMBanali words of the Great French Revolution, zhirondistner, yakobinakanner prominent female figures, Manon Roland, engaged de Merikur, Olympia de Guj, Simona Evrar, Claire Lakomb, Lucile Demulyien, Teresa Talyan, Charlotte Korda, Mrs. de Stahl.
