EUROPEAN VALUES AND GEORGIAN PUBLIC-POLITICAL THOUGHT IN THE SECOND HALF OF XIX CENTURY Many important events took place in the socio-economic, political and cultural life of the Georgian people.
  Capitalist relations turned into the ruling formation, which was followed by radical changes in social relations, the placement of class forces, social thinking, and other spheres of material culture.
  New phenomena were drawn in all spheres of public life, which, fighting with the old, eventually won.
After graduating from the gymnasiums in Tbilisi and Kutaisi, Georgian youth went abroad to receive higher education.
  Most of them were returning to their homeland, having mastered the new ideas spread in the civilized world.
  Armed with other ideas of French enlightenment, political enlightenment, the Georgian "enlighteners" faced a rather difficult task.
  The "arena" for the spread of their new ideas was the Georgian society oppressed by the Russian Empire.
In order to reveal Western political values ​​in Georgian socio-political thinking, let us single out three main points conditioning political systematization: 1. Political freedom, 2. Rule of law, 3. Democracy.
The ideas of the Georgian progressive intelligentsia of the time about these political values ​​can be seen in their artistic and publicist works.
  We will single out the works of Ilya Chavchavadze and Niko Nikoladze from the figures enjoying love and prestige in the Georgian society.
The basis of today's independent Georgian society should be sought in the XIX century. In Georgian socio-political thinking, when the Georgian realized, he evaluated and described Georgia under Russian colonial rule.
Speaking about Western political values ​​in Georgian socio-political thinking, one should single out Ilya Chavchavadze's work "Corrections", which was considered by Georgian historians to be I. Chavchavadze կյանքի life և activity program.
 Moreover, it was a manifesto for the creation of a nation-state for the Georgian society that lost its independence.
  In "Direct Notes" he developed his cherished idea of ​​liberating Georgia from Russia, which was very important in the 19th century. In the second half, to which the Georgian intellectual drew attention in his publicist works of art, despite the strictest restrictions on tsarist censorship.
 That is why many of his works remained unpublished.
In "Direct Notes" I. Chavchavadze presents his thoughts in person on behalf of a passenger leaving Russia for Georgia.
  On the significance of the symbols in both Ph.D., Prof. Vakhtang Guruli writes: "The cart is Russia.
The wheelchair և officers, the native children of Russia.
Traveling by cart is an unbearable and dangerous way.
The way is Georgia, adapted to the situation.
The Frenchman, the European who learns about the unbearable life of the guide.
The prospect of traveling by cart is to lag behind the civilized world. ”1
The Europeans use the acquaintance with the Georgian և ask that the acquaintance be the basis for their further meeting և cooperation2.
  It should be noted that before the XIX century. Georgia-Europe relations have a centuries-old history, but after the unification of Georgia with Russia, the political path of those relations passed through Russia.
The attitude of the "Frenchman" towards the Russian carriage, which well expresses the 19th century, is ridiculous and ironic. The "political machine" of the Russian government.
  The Frenchman expresses sympathy for the trip of the Russian cart driver, which symbolizes the movement of Georgia by the Russian "political car".
  "I feel sorry for you that you have to fool your brain with this, mix your heart and stomach" 3.
 The Georgian answers this. "Nothing, the whole of Russia is moving with this, what happened to me not to go with this?"
  This is an expression of the Georgian's acceptance of fate, which causes confusion among Europeans, he responds: "Is that what he is moving with?
 That is why he has gone so far. ”5
 The Frenchman, who was well aware of the tragicomedy that took place in the life of a Georgian, smiled. "It moves with that!"
 Who else will reach him ... ”6.
 Such an attitude, regardless of the representative of the country, is, of course, natural.
1. On political freedom.
 XIX century Russia subjugated Georgia, began to implement its policy there, and a threat to the Georgian identity arose.
  The Georgian political elite, I. Led by Chavchavadze.
 Relying on the history of national culture, they deepened the national self-consciousness.
I. The active propaganda of Chavchavadze's ideas led to the revival of political thinking, և XX century. After the fall of the ruling communist regime in Georgia, the restoration of Georgia's independence was carried out on the basis of the same ideas.
 "We must be the master of our own head." This was the motto of the Georgian great thinker7.
Of the Western values, the focus was first on political freedom.
  Freedom, according to them, was a political goal, 1 Guruli V., From Ilya to Ilya, Tbilisi, 2006, pp. 22-23 (Georgian).
2 Chavchavadze I., Direct notes, stories և plays, vol. 2, Tbilisi, 1988, page 10 (Georgian).
3 In the same place.
4 In the same place.
5 In the same place.
6 In the same place.
7 Ibid., P.
The leitmotif of life, but the open promotion of such issues in the colonial state, led to persecution and severe repercussions.
 Such a policy fell victim to the XIX century. Many Georgian figures of the first half.
  Taking into account the path of their predecessors, the "Tergdaleuli" had to find other ways and means to convey the message to the Georgian nation.
 Newspapers and magazines were such means at that time.
The idea of ​​freedom I. Chavchavadze comments as follows. "Freedom is a person's life and everyday situation, where everyone obeys only the law, where the law is higher than each individual.
  This is how the ancient Romans and the ancient Greeks perceived freedom.
  This true և absolute idea about freedom is still known և accepted in civilized countries.
  The stable structure of human society must be based on this very cornerstone.
  Where this is not the case, the use of force, oppression, persecution, and robbery are part of human life.
 Then the life of the people is like a wild life, "the man, who is a divine being, turns into a beast, because" their fate is decided by the sword and the shield.
 "Intelligent and conscious souls cannot survive in this life."
2. On the rule of law.
  In Russia in 1864 After years of judicial reform, the Court of Jurors was established for many years.
  However, in Transcaucasia, including Georgia, the institute of jurors did not establish the administration of tsarist Russia, reasoning that the population of the region is not ready for that yet.
 However, there is information that the representatives of Georgia have repeatedly applied to the Russian Empire with a request to establish an institute of jurors.
 I. Chavchavadze և Georgian society was skeptical of the bureaucratic court of the Russian Empire, so there were high hopes that the general public would be able to participate in the administration of justice, which could ensure the establishment of the institution of jurors.
I. Chavchavadze writes. "The judge is the chosen person to whom we owe our property, our dignity, our life, our soul and body. In a word, our humanity and humanity.
  He is the collective image of the whole nation, his conscience, the chosen one, standing at the proper height. ”
 I. Chavchavadze առաջ The leading part of the Georgian society in the beginning really hoped that the institute of jurors would be established in Georgia, they were even preparing for it.
I. Chavchavadze thought that the judges in the jury should know the local language, that is, Georgian. "If judges do not know the local language, if lawyers and prosecutors compete in eloquence in Russian in court, should Georgian jurors fly flies or what to do? "դեպքում in that case justice will become the monopoly of the officials" 2.
1 Chavchavadze I., Selected works, vol. 5, Tbilisi, 1887, pp. 1-2 (Georgian).
2 See http.
//www.msajuli.ge/index.php?m=795.
The tsarist government inspired the hope of establishing a jury for Georgian politicians և XIX century. The latter even takes certain steps in that direction.
  The Assembly of Aristocracy of Tbilisi և Kutaisi states establishes a commission for the developers of the Institute of Jurors, one of the members of which was I. Chavchavadze.
  However, the institution of jurors is not approved by the Russian government.
  On April 15, 1889, the "Iveria" newspaper wrote: "Tsarism denied the Georgian people not only the right to a fair judiciary, but deprived them of the" mercy "of founding the Institute of Jurors."
3. About democracy.
  XIX century Deep knowledge of world political events I. Chavchavadze was given the opportunity to take practical steps to create a political mindset in Georgia, to save the Georgian nation, which at first glance seemed impossible even in the atmosphere of the policy of the world's dominant empires.
XIX century Russia started threatening the identity of the Georgian nation and national self-consciousness with its policy in Georgia.
  I. Chavchavadze understood the danger և began to do everything possible to promote the preservation of identity, relying on the common history և culture, independence, freedom, democracy գաղտն secret և open calls for freedom.
In "Sakartvelos Moambe" ("Georgian News", 1863), in 11 I. Chavchavadze edited Kirile Lortkipanidze's article "The United States of North America, the Captives There", where the author showed the way to the liberation and restoration of Georgia's independence by the example of US independence.
1888 In the "Equality of Titles" public discourse published in I. Chavchavadze criticizes the title of Tavad-Aznavour. "It is in vain that they think that in human relations it is possible for someone to build a separate house for himself, to be limited by self-interest, and finally to benefit.
  Such a structure and structure of a society or a nation will not last long; a tendency like a house built on sand will collapse from the wind ”2.
I. Chavchavadze's thoughts are still relevant today, his activity is exemplary for every patriotic Georgian, his work is the basis of an independent Georgian state, because, as the great thinker noted. "The cornerstone of the country's happiness ... has always been the foundation, every building rises from the foundation", the foundation of the modern Georgian state is the Georgian nation, its past, and in the XIX century, when the Georgian nation was in danger of extinction, I. Chavchavadze deepened the national self-consciousness.
XXI century At the beginning of the 19th century, when the Georgian state aspired to the European Union, the North Atlantic Alliance, Niko Nikoladze's ideas deserved attention and appreciation when talking about Western values.
Ն. Nikoladze was lucky to live in three major periods of Georgian history.
 He was a citizen of the Russian Empire (1843-1918), the Democratic Republic of Georgia (1918-1921), a citizen of Soviet Georgia (1922-1928), and in each of them his contribution is huge.
1 See http.
//www.msajuli.ge/index.php?m=795.
2 Chavchavadze I., Selected works, vol. 5, page 19 (Georgian).
In the article "Georgia's orientation" N. Nikoladze wrote: "The physical and political life of the earth is governed by the force that the moon revolves around the earth, those two around the earth ... Orientation by inspiration is not possible. Humans, like all living things, always look to the other side, from where the sun scatters and spreads its rays.
  In the past, Georgia directed its orientation towards the direction from which light was moving.
 The one who thinks that any king, title or generation was able to turn Georgia this way or that according to his will is mistaken. As long as education flourished in Byzantium, Georgia turned its face like a flower, and when Persia flourished, nourished by Indian culture, our renaissance turned to Persia, and when Peter the Great, through the efforts of Catherine II, Russia evolved from physics to physics. stretched north.
  When different forces pull the same object towards each other, the position of that object is determined by the strongest of the fighting forces. willy-nilly, the winner always dominates the subject ”1.
Ն. Nikoladze was concerned about the fate of Georgia as a state, a political unit.
  In the article "Georgia Orientation" he mentions. "The subject of orientation is neither foreign nor unfamiliar to Georgians, he has been faced with the crucial question of who to turn to, which way is preferable ... This question was known among the people as" Kartlis Tskhovreba ". ».
And now, when it was called "Georgia's political orientation", it seems that we have created something new, we turn these old issues as we want ... From this it becomes clear that in "orientation" we have nothing to choose or argue ... We just have to concentrate, watch with a watchful eye to understand what forces are competing around us, what is their mutual mood and position ”2.
In conclusion, we can say that XIX-XX centuries. Georgian great thinker N. Nikoladzeigit և philosophical thought is a part of global historiography.
To the question whether, according to N. Nikoladze, that the political formation can be considered perfect, was answered by the author himself, in 1875. In the article "On social and political transformations" he wrote: "There is still no international people on the face of the earth, whose social structure can be considered sufficient.
 The most civilized and happy peoples - the French, the British, the Americans, if not others, suffer from an undesirable state of economic and social relations.
  They realize that modern social relations are not eternal, that the best division of social responsibilities and rights should be sought.
Dissatisfaction with current systems ձ The desire to establish "social harmony" in the sphere of human relations is typical of all peoples.
 Political forces and aspirations have nothing to do here: royal England, republican France, imperial Germany and federal America equally suffer from this "disease of the future."
  The depth of pain, the eggs of disease, depend as much on the political power of government as on economic conditions.
 Net Kavtaradze G. Kavtaradze G., Western values ​​in Georgian socio-political thinking (models of political, economic and social systems) from the 60s of the XIX century to the beginning of the XX century, Tbilisi, 2012, p. 58 (Georgian).
2 Nikoladze N., Orientation of Georgia, "Georgia", 1917, page 16.
Only the strength of the crisis and the methods of treatment directly depend on the political structure ... ”1.
  Thus, already in 1860-1870. Ն. Nikoladze defined his approach to Western political systems, made his choice.
  It was not enough to have deep knowledge to make such a choice, it also required civic courage.
  I. Chavchavadze և N. Nikoladze's activity has greatly contributed to the development of Georgian social and political thought.
Tsovinar Yolchyan EUROPEAN VALUES AND GEORGIAN PUBLIC-POLITICAL THOUGHT SECOND HALF OF XIX CENTURY Keywords: XIX century, Georgian socio-political thought, European political values, Ilya Chavchavadze,
