SOCIAL PARTNERSHIP IN THE SECONDARY PROFESSIONAL AND LABOR MARKET MANAGEMENT The viability of each area of ​​human activity depends on how timely it is.
  When talking about the labor market, the education system, individual schools and their relations, it is necessary to take into account that correspondence.
 The often circulated approach that there is a low level of professional education-business cooperation in the Republic of Armenia is to some extent justified.
 The prevailing opinion is that in the Soviet era a centralized "manageable" system of social security was formed, where the state was the only large employer that defined the requirements for specialists.
  After the independence of the Republic of Armenia, a number of processes took place in our country, including the privatization of state-owned enterprises and privatization.
  Vocational education in Armenia, mainly under the support of the state, partially lost contact with the labor market, appearing in the background.
  We call this "state paternalism" in another way.
  This is a situation where the state plays an overwhelming role in social-labor relations, or the type of social-labor relations is formed entirely by state regulations [1].
  The transitional stage of socio-economic development in Armenia had a negative impact on the secondary և primary vocational education system.
  Inefficient activities in different spheres of the country, reduction of state expenditures on education have led to a decline in the quality of primary (vocational) և secondary vocational education services, while improving the quality of primary (vocational) և secondary vocational education (hereinafter referred to as VET) programs is considered poverty alleviation.
  If we try to hold 2008 in parallel. Expenditures on education և 2017-2018 Among budget transfers to education, there is evidence of at least a doubling of spending (Figure 1).
Year 2008.2017 2018 Preliminary professional
(vocational) և Vocational education Amount (in thousands of drams) Higher education
Amount (in thousands) Drawing 1 ․ Budget Expenditures on Education The development of primary և secondary vocational education needs to be viewed in the context of the country's overall development, national և state security, based on sustainable economic growth, international և regional cooperation, welfare, poverty և managing labor market's management և management.
  The sectoral regulation of primary and secondary vocational education in Armenia was initially connected with the 1999 resolution of the National Assembly. With the RA Law on Education adopted on April 14.
 In particular, Articles 22 և 23 of this law define the purpose of primary և secondary vocational education և the institutional structures where the relevant educational programs are implemented [3].
  The next legal regulation is related to the adoption of the "Primary (Vocational), Secondary Vocational Education and Training Strategy of the Republic of Armenia" approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in 2004 [4].
 Then the RA National Assembly in 2005 In July 2006, the RA Law on Primary Vocational and Secondary Vocational Education was adopted.
  This law is the main legislative document in the field of vocational education, which, among other relations, defines the term "social partner" as defined as "vocational secondary secondary education" system supporting or cooperating in the development of a system or association of organizations, including: any type of educational institution "[5].
  However, within the framework of this law, the transition to the formation of partnership relations as a development perspective in the field of vocational education was not outlined.
  Based on the principles of "National Security of the Republic of Armenia", "Strategic Program for Poverty Alleviation", "Strategy of Primary (Vocational) և Secondary Vocational Education and Training of the Republic of Armenia" was developed. Protocol No. 51 of December 18, 2006 approved the "Concept for the Development of Pre-Vocational and Secondary Vocational Education in the Republic of Armenia" [6]. the program of events և the schedule ”[7].
The main goal was the harmonization of the VET system արդ modern European standards ․ Provision of material and technical base of the sphere, creation of information base with system optimization, development of educational standards, establishment of training funds [8].
  All this was followed by the RA Government in 2008. The new Strategic Development Document of the Republic of Armenia, approved on October 30, 2003, is the "Sustainable Development Plan", which, in fact, was a revised version of the "Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper" implemented in our country since 2003. [8]
The document emphasizes the application of the principles of the participatory management system of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), based on the ideology of social partnership.
  Within the framework of the Sustainable Development Program (SDP), the goal of the social partnership is to harmonize the inter-interests of different public sectors, public institutions, social groups, and stakeholders to coordinate efforts to effectively implement, monitor and evaluate the program and, if necessary, review [9].
 Appropriate goals are set within the framework of the Sustainable Development Program under the heading "Quality Education".
  Point 4.3 states that by 2030 It is necessary to provide equal conditions for high-quality technical, secondary vocational and higher education, accessible to all։ men [[10].
  In Cairo in 1994 In the context of the International Conference on Population Development Action Plan, education is seen as a key factor in sustainable development, but it is also a component of well-being, a factor of well-being that is linked to demographic as well as economic and social factors.
  In addition to all this, the RA Government's 2014 The Strategic Plan for Perspective Development of Armenia (2014-2025) adopted in March 2010 (2014-2025), in general, emphasizes that education is the main tool for sustainable development of the country, that increasing the quality, efficiency, relevance and accessibility of education at all levels The main goal [12].
   RA Government 2009 The "Concept of Social Partnership in the Sphere of Primary Vocational and Secondary Vocational Education of Armenia" was approved by the Protocol Decision No. 19 of May 7, 2006. [13]
 This concept presented the strategic issues related to the establishment and development of social partnership in the field of primary, secondary vocational education and offered solutions based on the interests of all stakeholders.
  The concept stipulates the cooperation of "other social partners of the Government of the Republic of Armenia - employers" trade unions, as a result of which the prestige of the primary vocational education system, competitiveness of graduates of educational institutions, protection of interests, overcoming poverty and socio-economic development of the country.
 It aims to promote cooperation between the Government of the Republic of Armenia, employers, trade unions, civil society, and the institutionalization of social partnership.
 By making social partners equally involved in VET reforms, it is planned to increase the credibility of the system and the competitiveness of graduates by protecting their interests in the labor market.
  As a result, it is expected to minimize poverty in the country and improve the socio-economic situation.
  The formation of social partnership is a common problem in the field of vocational education, in the implementation of which it will be possible to create a social partnership environment.
 Vocational education and training should be developed based on social partnership.
  The decision-making of the social partners is a guarantee of meeting the requirements of the labor market, and their large-scale long-term investments in different levels of the VET system can ensure the sustainable development of the economy and the vocational education system.
 All components of vocational education should be created on a three-dimensional basis of cooperation, as social partners in the labor market should recognize the qualifications and skills of professionals.
  Various statistics show that VET graduates do not fully meet the growing demands of the labor market չեն are not competitive enough.
 More than 8,000 young people graduate from VET institutions each year, but the education they receive often meets the requirements of employers in terms of quality standards.
 At the same time, in the face of growing demand in various sectors of the fast-growing economy, VET graduates do not acquire the appropriate skills and knowledge to secure employment in the labor market.
  How are partnerships formed in this context?
  In general, when starting the process of forming social partnerships, it is very possible to answer the question, what is its goal, what do the participants of the initiative to form such a system expect.
 In this respect, the existence of an institutional structure is meaningless if there is no major problem.
  In the case of social partnership, the main task is to make public life as stable and balanced as possible.
 The parties that have become social partners must be able to resolve, resolve or create preconditions for stressful or controversial situations in public life or situations that create such a situation. [15]
  If we summarize the role of social partnership, it is aimed at regulating various work processes at all levels, from regulating the relations of potential employees to employment, education, and the socio-economic issues of strategic importance.
  In this case, the hired worker is a citizen who has an employment agreement with the employer, the director of the enterprise or an individual [1], and the potential employee is the graduate or student who, having acquired certain skills, must become a certain part of the labor market.
  The state, taking into account the composition and structure of the labor market of the Republic of Armenia, guarantees for the citizens of the Republic of Armenia vocational admission to vocational secondary vocational schools at the expense of the state budget, vocational secondary vocational education, vocational training, etc., funded by social partners.
  With regard to the establishment of partnerships with employers, vocational և secondary vocational institutions develop և approve curricula of specializations և specializations համապատասխան specializations in accordance with state educational standards ծրագր subject curricula that guarantee the educational process of students at different stages of education.
In fact, the social partners, in this case employers, are given the opportunity to personally participate in the development and drafting of professional educational programs.
 This initially gives the employer the opportunity to hire professionals to meet their needs.
  Nevertheless, a number of vocational education institutions have established a partnership environment, work with social partners on short-term projects, internships, and come up with a number of other business education initiatives.
  In the structure of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia, the Department of Vocational Education մշակ Strategy Development, which is based on the willingness of cooperation between the EU and the Government of the Republic of Armenia, aimed at the development of the VET sector [16].
  In the framework of the study of this topic, a questionnaire was conducted in five primary-secondary professional educational institutions.
 In particular, 100 students were selected as respondents, at least 20 students from each institution, with whom a survey was conducted.
  The questionnaire was conducted in N 1, 4, 6, 9, 10 primary և secondary vocational educational institutions.
  The purpose of this questionnaire was to find out the nature of the employer relationship կապ Is there a mutual interest in the college / employer relationship? Does the college provide a place for the graduate in the job market?
  Within the framework of the questionnaire, it becomes clear that most of the students have passed professional internship, moreover, the colleges have provided the internship in the colleges.
 More than 60% of the students mentioned that they had a professional internship at their college, and 40% answered that in addition to internships, they also had an extracurricular internship.
  As a result of the surveys, it became clear that only 10% of the students combine learning with work.
 10% mentioned the fact that they went to work on their own, not with the help of a college / college.
  At least 90% responded positively to the existence of theoretical-practical curricula in the process of organizing the class.
  As for the school-employer relations, it is only in one college that the students visited the employers, and the employers were present at the lectures.
  To the question whether there are guidance Career centers in colleges, at least 95% of the students gave a negative answer.
However, the management of the three colleges stressed that there is a position of a person in charge of the unicorn with a corresponding employee.
 In the other two colleges a negative answer was registered on this question.
  In addition to the above-mentioned question, it can be said that at present there is almost no psychological guidance work aimed at professional, systematic orientation in educational institutions in the conditions of continuous education.
 Psychological work of professional orientation's guidance is based on the assessment of a person's needs և opportunities not only on his / her professional orientation, but also takes into account the demands of the given profession in the labor market and the job standards presented to them.
 In this regard, the task of career leaders should be to engage in the psychological guidance of the student's professional self-realization որոշ self-determination [17].
  In this regard, the purpose of the professional orientation system is to provide a model of professional orientation for the implementation of the tasks, the key basis of which will be to provide effective career choice, change and career development opportunities for people in different age groups throughout life. characteristics, such as changing labor market demand.
  At least 40% of the students expressed readiness to continue their education in higher education institutions in the future.
 And this is a wonderful signal to find new ways of cooperation in the field of university-VET.
Summarizing the results of the survey, let us mention the following features: • The organization of theoretical-practical lessons in colleges անցկաց Conducting internships is on a high level.
 One of the open points is the extracurricular practice, in the direction of which both employers and colleges should take steps.
It is not clear whether we can consider the combination of work during education as a disadvantage, as we are dealing with children aged 15-19 ում In Armenia today only in the last decade there is a growing tendency for children of this age to work.
 According to Figure 2, 2017 By this time, the number of employees had decreased.
Employed - by age groups, 15-19
Figure 2 ․ Employment of children aged 15-19 in the Republic of Armenia It is becoming clear that the graduates of secondary և primary vocational education institutions have been alienated from the labor market in recent years. 2014-2017 testifies to all this. indicators where there is a significant decline among those with a similar educational background (Figure 3).
Busy - by:
educational level -
the highest, 
Postgraduate
Busy - by:
educational level -
vocational
Busy - by:
educational level -
pre-professional
(craft)
Figure 3 ․ Employment by educational level After the independence of Armenia, the formation of labor relations is a possible problem.
  If before the client was the state, now the employer has assumed that role.
 The employer, in turn, has formed new demands և relationships.
  This means the formation of qualitatively new relations, as a result of which the concept of social partnership was implemented in the field of primary, secondary vocational education.
  Governing councils were formed within the framework of social partnership in the primary vocational schools and colleges of secondary vocational education.
 The composition of each governing council includes representatives of employers, trade unions, self-government bodies, the Ministry of Education, Science, students, and teaching staff.
 Involving employers is not an end in itself - it brings two burdens: education and labor market.
  After all, when we study the specialties of colleges, colleges, there are colleges where the specialties taught do not meet the demands of the labor market, the abilities and skills of graduates do not always meet the requirements of the employer և today's technological development of production.
  Thus, summarizing the foundations of social partnership in the field of VET և guidelines for possible development, the shortcomings in the field are obvious.
  However, taking into account the newness of the legislative regulation and the steps taken in that direction, we can expect new achievements in the long run.
 In this regard, we have the task of expanding cooperation in all spheres of public activity, providing a desirable environment for civic solidarity.
 In the case of social partnership, it is to make public life as stable as possible.
 In such a case, the economic development of the state և business progress is possible only within the framework of constructive և long-term cooperation between the 3 participants of the process, providing a clear mechanism for the operation of education և between the labor market.
LITERATURE [1] Hambardzumyan A. H., State regulation of labor relations, Yerevan 2014, pp. 13, 8.
[2] RA State Budget: RA Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Armenia for 2008, 2017, 2018, pp. 26, 30, 23, URL.
 http:
//www.minfin.am/ (The link was made on 25.06.2018).
[3] RA Law on Education, URL.
 http:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=68299 (The link was made on 17.06.2018).
[4] "Primary (Vocational) և Secondary Education և Teaching Strategy of the Republic of Armenia", URL.
  http:
//mkuzak.am/wp-content/uploads/razmavarutyun.pdf (Link made on 15.06.2018).
[5] RA Law on Primary Vocational and Secondary Vocational Education, Article 3, URL.
 http:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=90681 (Link made on 15.06.2018).
[6] "Concept of Development of Pre-Vocational and Secondary Vocational Education in the Republic of Armenia", URL.
  http:
//mkuzak.am/wp-content/uploads/hayecak.-1.pdf (Link made: 01.07.2018).
[7] “Vocational Education Reforms 2009-2011. event schedule և schedule ", URL.
 http:
//www.gov.am/files/meetings/2008/85.pdf (Link made on 12.06.2018).
[8] Vocational Education Scientific-Information Journal, No. 1-2 / 5, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 9, 6.
[9] Decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia on approving the Sustainable Development Program, item 38, URL.
  http:
//www.irtek.am/views/act.aspx?aid=47046 (Link made on 15.07.2018).
[10] Sustainable Development Goals, URL.
  http:
//un.am/en/p/sustainabledevelopment-goal-4 (Link made: 15.06.2018).
[11] International Conference on Population Development, Action Plan, page 108, URL.
    http:
//www.un.am/up/file/Cairo%20Delcaration_ARM_FINAL_10-11-09.pdf (Link made: 13.06.2018).
[12] Vocational Education Magazine, 3-4, 2014, p. 76.
[13] "Concept of social partnership in the field of primary vocational and secondary vocational education in Armenia", URL.
 http:
//www.irtek.am/views/act.aspx?aid=48414 (The link was made on 18.06.2018).
[14] Hambardzumyan A. G., Social partnership as a precondition for the development of education: examples of advanced countries, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 6, 7.
[15] "Vocational Education Scientific" Magazine, Tripartite Social Partnership, AGBU, 2010/1, page 13.
[16] Vocational education և teaching informational, methodological, analytical journal, Yerevan, N 1-2, 2013, page 6.
[17] Papoyan V., Galstyan A., Muradyan E., Sargsyan D., The psychological direction of professional self-determination in the educational system, Yerevan, 2015, p. 29.
[18] Career guidance issues and development trends, Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference, Yerevan, Zangak Publishing, 2014, p. 14.
[19] Employment by age group 15-19, URL.
 http:
//www.armstatbank.am/pxweb/en/ArmStatBank/ArmStatBank__2%20Populatieu-13-2017.px/table/tableViewLayout2/?rxid=4b152d04-cbc7-427c-9148-eae8c5a3bbef.
[20] Employment among those with primary / vocational "secondary vocational" higher education, URL.
http:
//armstatbank.am/pxweb/en/ArmStatBank/ArmStatBank__2%20Population%20a
(The link was made on 25.06.2018).
Nikoghosyan KristineSOCIAL PARTNERSHIP IN SECONDARY PROFESSION AND LABOR MARKET MANAGEMENT Keywords: partnerships, employers' unions, public-private partnership, employment, employment, secondary, employment
