IMPLICITE IN THE TEXTS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY The relationship between explicit and implicit is one of the questions that is of equal interest to "philosophers" and specialists in specific sciences.
  The distinction between explicit and implicit forms of thought is so important from the point of view of revealing their relation to nature that they require special examination.
 As it is known, language has two levels of expression: explicit և implicit.
  Explicit is the thought that has a complete մի direct verbal expression.
  Implicit is the thought that does not have its complete verbal expression, but is assumed to have an explicit verbal expression, that is, it is expressed through a mediated egg.
 When we say that the implicit does not have its verbal expression, we mean that it is either not clearly expressed by the means of the given natural language, it is not fixed within the framework of the observed logical system, but it is possible to derive, to descend from an obvious horse.
A typical example of implicit can be considered an endime.
The problem of implicit becomes obvious when we ask the following questions. What does a person say? What does he mean by that? What does he mean? What does he hide in what is said? What can be assumed from his words? What is his tendency? What is the context of his words? կարելի How can it be interpreted?
 In other words, when touching on the problem, the main questions arise as to why the thought is hidden in the depths of another thought.
 It can be said that implicit happens when something is said, but it is supposed to be something else, when it is possible to "reap" something else from what is said.
 That "something" is the elliptical.
The emergence of the non-obvious horse from the obvious horse of thought has its own special nature.
  Explicit forms of thought take precedence over non-explicit forms of thought.
 This is in the sense that the non-explicit eggs of the mind are descended from the obvious horse of thought.
 The derivation of the non-explicit horse from the obvious horse of thought can take place through the analysis and interpretation of the subtext or context of the explicit horse.
  "The number of horses of the contextual thought depends on the commentator, on what knowledge the explicit thought egg suggests to him, what substantive knowledge the commentator combines with the knowledge derived from the thought egg in question."
  Thus, it can be said that everyone, trying to define implicit from the explicit context, uses the scope of his own knowledge related to the given context.
 In other words, all additional knowledge 1 See Brutyan G., Logic Course, Yerevan, 1987, p. 399.
The corresponding component of the defined context is 1.
  From this we can deduce that different people interpret the same verbal expression differently, from which they will derive completely different derivations.
  Context revelation should not be seen as a final action.
  Our mind can constantly delve into the context, unfold in the context, discover new and deeper connections and mediations.
  Accordingly, we can discover new norms, non-explicit ones, both subtextual and contextual.
From such a pop-up description of the feature of explicit ության implicit difference և, the following conclusion can be drawn: By descending from the obvious forms of thought, the non-obvious forms of thought branch out, further expanding our knowledge of the subject matter.
  Being secondary from the point of view of their origin, the non-obvious forms of thought are secondary to everything from the point of view of their logical value.
 By discovering what is hidden within the explicit eggs, the non-explicit eggs not only give us additional knowledge, but sometimes refine the explicit egg of thought, giving us the opportunity to get an accurate idea of ​​the issue under discussion.
  Based on the research conducted on these principles, we will single out some basic examples of the discussion and solution of the problems of anti-epistemology, from which we will try to draw a complete picture of their non-obvious state.
 Before talking about those examples, let us turn to the epistemological problems of the ancient period.
It is commonly said that the mythological worldview was historically the most advanced among the ancient peoples, and then it was replaced by the religious worldview.
  Eventually, philosophy came along with the development of scientific knowledge.
  The main problems of epistemology were discussed in ancient philosophy.
 Ancient thinkers, inclined to give a certain, even the only image of the world, tried to take it out of the philosophical question "what is the world really like?"
  By mythologizing the logo, the ancient thinkers took the path of rationalization of world cognition.
 They were trying to build a true picture of the world.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the most important factor for the existence of science was the application of the laws of logic.
  Parmenides's teaching can serve as a source of information on the philosophical understanding of objectivity as the means of logical laws as a means of scientific-rational cognition, historically first formed.
 As is well known, Parmenides was the first to set the task of ontological search for reality, distinguishing it from the variety of sentimental objects, from physical reality.
  Parmenides was the first philosopher of the time to understand the meaning of rational cognition, its opposition to senses, to everyday knowledge.
  Thus, it can be said that one of the most important problems of ancient cognition is the problem of the relationship between thinking and feeling.
 Practicing natural philosophy, Greek thinkers tried to find the secrets of existence, considering it a true existence independent of themselves.
 They considered emotion to be a source of unreliable knowledge.
 This is where the problem of knowledge և non-knowledge, reliable knowledge և probable, knowledge ոլոր delusion relations arises.
  By presenting it in the examples of solving the above-mentioned anti-epistemological problems, the scope of this article will fully satisfy our requirements.
The first example is the manifestation of the requirement of rational knowledge, according to which philosophers try to explain nature by itself.
 We have already mentioned that the process of self-determination of science took place through the separation from the pre-scientific forms of mastering the world, in particular, from the mythological thinking.
  Of course, man, guided by a mythological worldview, also gave a unique "explanation" of natural phenomena.
 These "explanations" were made in a subjective way with the help of supernatural phenomena, mythological gods.
  The rationalist orientation of ancient theoretical thought, the proposition of the problem of existence as a true reality that exists in itself, regardless of man's cognitive relationship with it, led to the fact that the explanation of the existence of mythological gods was considered man-made.
  Overcoming this subjectivism was possible only by developing a new perspective, using new cognitive means based on it.
  Realizing that a natural phenomenon emerges from every natural phenomenon in the constant flow of phenomena in space, they defined a new form of cognition: nature must be explained by itself.
 This new egg of world recognition was opposed to religious-mythological thinking.
 This is the first historically formed cognitive means, which does not allow the reference to the existence of irrational, supernatural, "hidden" forces, including the reference to subjective, imaginary phenomena.
 The answer to the question "Why is that?" Presupposed not the explanation of the subject, but the explanation of another form of otherness.
  In other words, to explain nature by itself, the following non-obvious meaning can be defined from the judgment "not to go beyond the limits of nature". When explaining natural phenomena, to exclude the existence of supernatural beings, every cause of nature must be sought in nature, not outside it.
 This principle, as it is obvious, pushes the spirits, the gods, all the supernatural forces and phenomena out of the scientific explanation.
 It presupposes the expulsion of subjectivity, that is, the explanation of natural phenomena regardless of human will և desire, ensuring objectivity.
  Thus, "to explain nature by itself, without going beyond the bounds of nature" arose from the obvious reasoning "to explain nature as it is, regardless of the cognitive subjectivity և desire", which is included in the open judgment in a non-explicit way.
The second example is Parmenides' famous phrase: "color is thoughtable, insensitive."
 This formulation is related to the way of understanding the laws of logic as intrinsic conditions for ensuring the objectivity of knowledge.
In essence, logical-methodological analysis is a means of overcoming subjectivism in the cognitive process.
 However, before the discovery of the laws of logic, Parmenides, in fact, used them to "invent" a reality quite in tune with the spirit of his time, which can be described as a reality derived from or imitating the laws of thought.
  Identifying being and thinking, Parmenides believed that, regardless of the emotional diversity, thinking is the only way to find true existence.
  Of course, later with the discovery of the laws of logic, it became clear that Parmenides was explicitly using them as a means of scientific-rational recognition of objective reality2.
The third example is the atomistic theory of Democritus.
 According to this teaching, matter exists, which is the primary basis of the universe.
 According to him, everything arises and develops from atoms.
  Matter is made up of indivisible, invisible particles called atoms, so atoms form the basis of the universe, the beginning of formation. "The beginning of the universe is the atoms և emptiness.
  Everything else exists only in opinion… »3.
  This key principle of Democritus' atomic theory presupposes the provision of unreliable knowledge of human senses.
  What exists in opinion cannot be true.
  Democritus saw nature as a reality developed in an endless chain of causes and effects.
  According to his deterministic principle, all phenomena, both in human life and in nature, take place on the basis of the law of causality, of necessity, in other words, everything takes place by the law of causal necessity4.
 A parallel can be drawn between this deterministic principle and the unconditional universal acceptance of causal relations by science in the world.
  All the phenomena in nature have their reasons, the problem of science is the discovery of those reasons.
  And since science can not proceed from the opposite point of view, which denies causation, because it contradicts its spirit, makes scientific research meaningless, it can be said that the deterministic principle of Democritus is of great methodological and heuristic significance.
The fourth example is the interpretation of Aristotle's concept of truth.
 According to Aristotle, the content of the thought that corresponds to the objective reality is true.
  Aristotle's proposition assumes that there is an objective reality բովանդակ content of thought, the conformity of which is considered as a criterion of truth.
  It should be noted, however, that Aristotle's formulation implicitly pushes out the knowing subject, assuming the conformity of the objective reality և the content of the thought by his knowing subject.
  If the content of thought, as knowledge, arises from objective reality, then Aristotle, by matching knowledge with objective reality, applies the same correspondence as between objective reality, "knowledge expressed from objective reality."
A few words about the manifestation of implicit.
  In the practice of language function, it often happens when we consciously use the means of implicit expression.
  For example, implicit can be used as an artistic means or as a way to hide some information from others (because linguistics exists not only to express thoughts, but also to hide thoughts. 3 See Arakelyan A., History of Greek Literature, Yerevan, p. 179.
4 Ibid., P.
նի).
 In this regard, we consider it appropriate to present the following anecdote as an example.
 A man goes to Ki!
 Meeting one of his acquaintances, whom he does not like, he tries to hide the place of his departure.
  When an acquaintance asks him where he is going, the man who is leaving thinks: "If I tell him that I am going to Kharkov, he will realize that I am hiding the truth, it is better to tell him that I am going to Ki և, կ he will think that I am deceiving him, և he will not know that I am going to Ki։."
 That's how he answers. "I'm going to Ki!"
 But the interlocutor says. "Why are you cheating, aren't you really going to Ki?"
 It turns out that the truth can be hidden in the truth itself, that is, in itself.
Armen KhachatryanER (IMPLICITE) IN ANCIENT PHILOSOPHICAL TEXTS Keywords: science, genealogy, endimena, explicit, implicit, thinking, existence, rationalism, canonicalism, logic.
