RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT IN THE EDUCATION PROCESS Today, in the technological age, any sphere of life develops very quickly.
 In the cycle of these changes, risks have become an integral part of people's lives.
The process of education develops և changes very quickly.
 In order for it not to be damaged, moreover, to be able to develop effectively in the flow of these changes, it is necessary for the active subjects in the field of education to be able to correctly assess, manage the risks in the field.
  Sometimes they can be invisible, damaging the whole process of education.
 If the risk indicators are properly assessed in the education process և they are skillfully managed, then we will have a more stable,, at the same time, more developing education system.
At present, there are no extensive studies on the assessment of educational risks in the Republic of Armenia, but it is urgently needed, as years of experience show that many problems in the field of education are related to not taking those risks into account in time.
 Moreover, those risks are present both in the spheres of general education and higher education.
The purpose of this article is to highlight the specifics of risk assessment և management processes in the education system.
  In order to achieve the goal, it is necessary to study in the system of general education - to present the essence of risk, the peculiarities of educational risks, the means of assessment, as well as the means of risk prevention in the process of education.
Risk is a certain situation in which personal opportunities are limited due to the emotional field and unpredictable results.
  The term "risk" can be found in other expressions in other languages.
  In some languages ​​the word risk has expressions, for example in Italian "risco" or "rischio", which means risk or danger (earlier traces can be found in Italian "risco" ris "rischio"), in Greek - "rhizicon" in Persian "Rozi (k)".
 The Greek word rhizicon originally had the root meaning, which later changed its meaning վել to be associated with a rock.
  This change is connected with the development of shipbuilding and trade in the Middle Ages.
 Thus, the rocks were dangerous for the sailors because they could collide with them.
Thus, the word rhizicon has evolved into a mere risk.
 In many languages, this word has the original meaning.
 At present, for many, risk is associated with danger, only the approaches are different. If in the Middle Ages risks were associated only with the destiny of God, now by risk we sometimes mean the danger of possible loss, which depends on the phenomena of nature, the forms of human activity.
  At the same time, the danger is not yet a risk.
  It is not right for the danger to exist independently, to put an equal sign of risk "at a certain point".
Risk-taking is determined by one's own choice, consciously and purposefully.
 The entity takes risks by knowing the causes of the risk և sources, using security mechanisms, mitigation methods that do not preclude risk avoidance [1].
  But to what extent are risks և fears identified, և what are their differences?
 This question and answer was given by Niklas Luhmann, who emphasized the differences between the risks.
  According to him, "if the possible damage is considered as a consequence of the decision, then we are talking about the risk of making a decision, and if the causes of the damage are external, that is, we attribute it to the outside world, then we are talking about danger."
  In other words, risk is a human-conscious fact that exists independently of human will, with uncertainty about the outcome of future events.
In this case, the subject encounters various types of uncertainties.
 Their complex in its proportion constitutes the so-called critical uncertainty, in which case the risk element enters into action.
It is impossible to completely avoid risk in any sphere of human activity, as long as it is connected with many conditions և factors influencing the decision-making process of people.
  V. Kuzmin and A. Gobenko connect the uncertainty with the incompleteness or inaccuracy of the information about the conditions or consequences of the activity.
  And V. Tambovts և G. Kellner's uncertainty is conditioned by the factors that a person can not influence (objective uncertainty).
 This is due to the lack of knowledge of the subject about the external environment (subjectivity).
Thus, the risks are conditioned by our activity, they are the limitation of re-election in uncertain situations.
Pedagogical risk-taking is a relatively new field in pedagogy, which studies the behavioral aspects of the pedagogue both in professional activities and in socio-economic-psychological phenomena; it is the inevitable choice of the pedagogue in the pedagogical activity [3].
The social-pedagogical approach to studying the problem of risk is connected with the idea of ​​socialization of a person, that is, what is the risk in the educational process, which does not allow pedagogical activity to be effective, creative, innovative-cooperative.
 In case the process of education does not proceed as above, then it is necessary to understand what were the risks that the pedagogues did not take into account.
  Willingness to take risks E. R. Khababulin և L. Մ. Mitina is associated with teacher professional development.
 In other words, the pedagogue must always be ready to learn something new, to develop himself, otherwise the lack of sanctity is a risk in the process of education.
 The school itself is a developing system, which presupposes, first of all, the development of teachers.
  Some researchers, such as A. Derkach, V. Գ. Zalikin, M. Zukarmen attribute the teacher's risk-resistance not only to the teacher's knowledge գիտ readiness for self-development, but also to the personal և psychological։ և pedagogical experience of the person [5].
P. Describing risk as the uncertainty of a person in a given situation, Ilyin distinguishes between the following types of risks: • deliberate և undesirable, • objective և subjective, • real և imaginary, • justified և unjustified, • acceptable և unacceptable.
Ilyin considers as pedagogical risks the variability of educational programs, the lack of use of different methods by the teacher in the educational process to identify the child's abilities and tendencies.
 Abramova considers the lack of creativity in teachers' activities a pedagogical risk.
 Ն. D. Sukhovian pedagogical risk is conditioned by the attitude of teachers towards the school (university, college or other educational institution), pupils and students.
  The latter singled out several components of risk: • The first component determines the responsibility of teachers for their activities, • The second component defines pedagogical risk as the right choice of pedagogue in uncertain situations during pedagogical activities, • The third component is conditioned by the regulation of educational participants, • The fourth component The component reflects the coherence of the pedagogical activities of the teachers' team members.
  The Sukhovian school views a small society, largely linking the risks to the relationships between members of that society: teacher-teacher, teacher-student, teacher-governing entity, student-governing entity, student-teacher-governing entity.
 Raimen considers the lack of teacher resilience մեծ a great pedagogical risk, the lack of stress resilience, that is, the child may become stressed due to the teacher.
  This is due to the fact that today some educators are not stress-resistant, they can show abusive attitude towards the child.
 There is a high risk that the child will be disappointed with the teacher, he will be afraid of the approaching teacher.
 There is also the risk that the fear will be transferred to the subject being taught [7], that is, the teacher's desire to acquire knowledge in the field.
  There are a number of educational risks in the process of education, which can be neutralized only if the active subjects could use the existence of educational risks to solve them effectively through self-development and foresight.
Risk assessment is a necessity in the event that a risk has already been identified in the education process, we need to determine the extent of the negative impact of the risk on the education process.
 In this case, all possible consequences of that educational risk must be assessed.
It is known that only what can be valued can be effectively managed.
  In other words, we can manage not the risk, but the values ​​of the indicators - no more.
 Risk assessment methods define the methods of their management, so it is necessary to fully assess the risk management properly, because as we assess, so we control.
If we try to observe the educational risks in high schools, we will see that they are quite many, because they were not revealed in time, they were evaluated, and today they are expressed in the form of much bigger problems.
Let us single out the most obvious educational risks - the compliance of educational programs with the requirements of today's labor market.
 At present, the majority of people with higher education do not work in their profession, as the knowledge they receive either does not meet the requirements of today's labor market, or there is an overgrowth of professionals in this field.
 These problems could not have happened if the universities had conducted a risk assessment of the educational programs in advance, bringing the educational programs in line with the real requirements of the labor market.
Every year, higher education institutions produce a large number of specialists, few of whom meet the requirements of the employer, and those risks that are not registered by the universities create additional risks, which require more difficult methods of detection and solution today.
Therefore, risk assessment is a priority in the management process.
According to the American Institute for Project Management, the risk management process includes the following procedures ․1. risk management design, 2. risk determination, 3. Qualitative risk assessment, 4. Quantitative risk assessment 5. Design of impact on risk factors, 6. monitoring և control [1].
All these procedures are interconnected.
  Here we need to determine the risk, because if the risk is unknown to us, և we can not imagine the dangers, then we can not manage them.
Risk identification includes the following steps: • risk identification, • risk naming, • risk description [1].
During the risk determination, the list of alleged educational risks affecting the learning process and the reasons for their occurrence are compiled, the characteristics of the risks are described, etc.
Risk determination is the basis of risk management.
 It is necessary, but it is not enough.
  It is possible to assess how this educational risk can negatively affect the outcome of the learning process.
  As an example, consider the following ․ 2006-12 During the year, the strategic programs of creating a system of separate high schools with a three-year education system with the transition to a 12-year general education system were implemented in the Republic of Armenia, as a result of which a part of the secondary schools of the Republic of Armenia was reorganized into high schools.
 The establishment of separate high schools, which was originally intended to provide a variety of curricula and flows, and an expanded range of educational opportunities for students, was supposed to significantly improve the quality of education in high schools, [2] but the plan was not fully implemented.
 The imperfection of educational programs was a certain risk, but it was not taken into account to what extent that risk could affect the learning process and its end result.
A comprehensive approach is needed to any risk.
  This means that depending on the extent of the risk և urgency, the risk assessment method must be chosen.
 The following methods can be used: • Qualitative - risk factors are determined, • Quantitative - risk levels are determined, • Hybrid - a combination of qualitative - quantitative methods [1].
During the qualitative assessment, the risk factors are identified, the degree of risk is determined, and during the quantitative assessment, mathematical, statistical processing of statistical data, the quantitative expression of the risk is carried out [1].
Qualitative assessment
Quantitative assessment
Identification of risk factors
Development of statistical data by mathematical methods
Determining the degree of risk
Quantitative expression of the degree of risk
Figure 1. Qualitative-Quantitative Risk Assessment Qualitative risk assessment is a process of qualitative risk analysis that assesses the potential of certain risks for further analysis or direct mitigation.
 This method is simpler and more applicable.
  Qualitative risk assessment is carried out by standard methods և by means such as: • inductive approach (fact-gathering, systematization-generalization), • deductive approach (proposing hypotheses, which are then combined with facts), • positive approach (studying what is there); • normative approach (expresses subjective ideas about what can happen) [1].
Inductive approach
Normative approach
Deductive approach
Positive approach
Figure 2. Qualitative risk assessment When conducting a quality assessment, the risk levels are considered as low, moderate, high critical and inadmissible.
  This approach is subjective, but for some researchers this method is the most acceptable.
This is the method during which the probability of each risk is determined according to the scales of high (high), serious (medium), medium (medium), low (low).
• H = high risk - requires thorough research - management, • S = serious risk - requires a high level of clear management attention, • M = medium risk - requires clear management responsibility, • L = low risk - is overcome by the usual procedure.
In the application of this methodology, the whole system is evaluated based on individual risk assessments, and the risks are ranked according to their usefulness.
  This method allows for rapid qualitative risk assessment [1].
Risk also implies development, because any innovation introduced in the field of education, in the initial stage, contains certain risks, which are classified, solved according to urgency, priority.
Sometimes we can even equate risk և development հաս.
 Risk implies "success, achievement", loss.
Summing up and coordinating the article, we came to the following: There are a number of educational risks in the educational process, which can be neutralized only when the active actors in the process can understand the existence of educational risks by self-development, seeing farther, predicting and trying to effectively solve them.
  Moreover, the risks will be impossible to manage properly if we can not assess them correctly, because only the risks that are assessed correctly are managed, և the end result is somewhat visible to us.
All active actors in the education process should be fully involved in addressing educational risks.
LITERATURE [1] Grigoryan R. L., Risk Management, Yerevan 2010, pp. 7-8, 128-9, 131-2.
[2] "Armenia Association of Community Financiers" NGO, Comparative Analysis of Secondary School և High School Curricula, Yerevan 2018, p. 11.
[4] Antonova L. Н., Педагогическая рискология.
  теория и история, Проблемы [йлектронный ресурс], URL.
  http:
//www.superinf.ru/view_helpstud.php?id=2729 (датаобращения.
 13.01.2019). Anahit Terteryan RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT EDUCATION PROCESS Keywords: risk, educational risk, risk assessment, risk management, general education, risk determination, uncertain situation, probable risk.
