THE LOCATION OF THE CRIME TATARS IN THE YEARS OF THE PATRIOTIC WAR The multilingual, multiethnic peoples known as the Golden Horde invaded the Crimean peninsula in the 13th century.
 Before the return, the Turkic ethnic element did not leave a visible trace in Crimea, which, of course, does not exclude the invasion of individual Turks in Crimea.
Anthropologically, the Turks were predominant in the Golden Horde (of course, the Mongols were not asleep).
 As they moved to the Crimea, the Mongols mingled and even assimilated into the Turkic-speaking population of the Black Sea-speaking regions of the Black Sea region1.
These circumstances seemed insignificant to the contemporaries, so the new inhabitants were traditionally called Tatars, with a purely Mongolian ethnonym.
  In fact, the priority for the researchers was not the title, but the clarification of the thesis "The conquest of Crimea by the Tatars".
 According to many historical facts, the Golden Horde was at war not against the Crimean population, but against the Seljuk Turks, who had become a real plague on the local population.
 Ibn al-Asir, a contemporary, reports that the entry of the Tatars into the Crimea in 1223 met with little resistance, but in fairness, one of the main reasons for such an approach was the exhaustion of the local population after the Seljuk invasion of Hussein-ad-Din Choban last year.
In 1223 the Goldilocks established their ruler in Sudak, liberated from the Seljuks.
 This year is also considered to be the "beginning of the history of the Crimean Tatars" in ethnic history3.
Crimea is, indeed, one of the regions that stands out in all aspects of the policy of exile and repression in the USSR, from the beginning of its implementation to its inclusion.
1 Andreev A., History of Crimea.
 Short description of the former Crimean peninsula, M., 1997.3 Vozgrin V., note. work., page 127.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the so-called "planned-voluntary deportations and resettlements" were widely used in the USSR, along with "forced deportations" due to economic considerations.
  During the Great Patriotic War, Germany isolated Crimea.
 The occupation continues in 1941. from the end of October to 1944 April-May.
 During this time, the Germans killed about 92,000 people, or ten percent of the peninsula.
Most of the people of the peninsula, who belonged to different nationalities, took part in the guerrilla movement, but it was not very effective.
 From the beginning of 1944, 600 of the 3783 guerrillas were Crimean Tatars5.
1942 On November 18, the Bureau of the Crimean Regional Committee held a debate criticizing the opinion of the Crimean Tatars that they had a negative attitude towards the partisans, stating that the Tatars considered the German occupiers as enemies.
 There was a need to control the internal situation of the peninsula in order to avoid any anti-Soviet expulsion.
  These worries were not out of place.
  In one of his letters to the German ambassador, Turkish General Erkelet wrote: "Two people - writer, lawyer Fazil և The Kremlin will be with you.
 They have an assignment to help you in the Crimea, at the same time to be useful to the Crimean Turks ... Both are from the Crimea, they are quite reliable.
  Please send both of them to the Crimea և to use them from the position of common German-Turkish interests.
  They do not speak German, but speak Russian. ”
The national movements of the peoples of the USSR during the Second World War refer to the contradictory pages of their history.
  The struggle against the Stalinist regime ումը The aspiration for independence from Russia in every way led the nationalists to ally with Hitler's Germany.
  The Crimean Tatar national movement was no exception, whose cooperation with the Nazi military-political elite is a typical example of such an alliance.
The leaders of the Crimean Tatar Tatar national movement, due to various circumstances, linked their freedom with the fascists, but on this path to independence the Tatars saw not only Stalin and the Soviet guerrillas on the peninsula, but also the Hitlerites, whose plans often contradicted the Tatar list.
 The Third Reich aspired to the "Eastern policy" of monopoly.
 The German leadership had not yet developed a specific plan for the status of post-war Crimea.
 There were several options, which envisaged the annexation of the peninsula to "Vassal Ukraine" or to make it a part of Germany, which, however, would have the special status of "German Gibraltar".
  In the latter case, Crimea was to be completely cleansed of the local population, to be inhabited by the Germans of Tyrol and Palestine7.
After the expulsion of the Germans, which was called the "liberation of Crimea", the new government was established on April 13, 1944.
 The Tatar population of Crimea was quite excited, hoping to see positive changes.
 But their hopes were in vain.
 This is evidenced by the letter sent from Pyatigorsk on April 5, 1944 to the Commander of the Internal Troops of the North Caucasus Region, Major General Golovko, and the Commander of the 1st Rifle Division of the Internal Troops, Major General Vetrov.
A part of the latter's division was going to be sent to Crimea.
 The document was dedicated to the organization of Chekist-military operation, the elimination of banditry, the tactics of hostilities, and, in fact, was a step towards applying the experience gained in the North Caucasus in the mountainous Crimea8.
The repressions in Crimea resumed the very next day after the restoration of Soviet power.
  After the Germans left, they started hanging people without trial.
 They were accused of supporting the Germans.
  In Simferopol people were hung near the market, in Bakhchisarai on Lenin Street.
  The members of the Muslim councils were later arrested, but no specific charges were brought against them9.
In 1941, a so-called Muslim Committee was formed in Bakhchisarai, headed by Cemil Abdureshidov, a former member of the Crimean Tatar Milli Firka party.
  A few days later the committee moved to Simferopol.
The Nazis allowed such an organization to exist only because Tatar nationalists supported all German initiatives.
  The members of the committee were given the following tasks: • fight against robbery (the Germans called it the Soviet guerrilla movement), • formation of volunteer detachments, • support for volunteer families, • propaganda, • religion.
In January-March 1942, similar committees were set up in Alusht, Bakhchisarai, Evpatoria, Karasubazar, Ancient Crimea, Sudak and Yalta.
  The Simferopol Committee had ambitions for their organization to become dominant over the local committees10.
Espionage was widespread among the population, when people, based on their own interests, accused innocent people of collaborating with the German occupiers, which was the most serious accusation during this period.
 Even if it was not substantiated, it was enough to deprive a person of life.
 However, these natural clashes, naturally, yielded to state, highly organized terror.
  There were still battles in Crimea, and Beria and his deputy signed an order on April 13, 1944, "on clearing the Crimean USSR of anti-Soviet elements."
  Here, the Crimea was instructed to create a repressive network, the purpose of which was to arrest unfortunate elements.
  For the success of the operation, 3,000 NGJK agents and 20,000 soldiers were sent to Crimea11.
9 Crimean multinational. Questions and answers. Вып.1. / Сост. Н. Mr. Stepanova. Simferopol.
10 Romanko O., ref. work., page 2.
11 Crimean multinational. Questions and answers. Вып.1. / Сост. Н. Mr. Stepanova. Simferopol.
The first victims of terror were the low-ranking employees of the administrative system of the country during the occupation and their families.
  The wave of these arrests did not hit the Tatars, as it is a well-known fact that the Tatars were not entrusted with positions, the Germans handed over the positions, but soon began arrests of people working in state institutions in the peninsula during the occupation and in all kinds of enterprises.
 Even people who worked in the simplest fields, such as bakers, teachers, etc., were arrested.
Throughout the post-war period, no one could defend such innocent people.
  The economic pressure on the population began, or rather resumed.
 From the half-starved Tatar villagers they started taking cattle and poultry13.
The decision stated: "Clear the territory of the USSR of the Crimea of ​​German Crimean intelligence agents, traitors of the homeland, supporters of the German-Nazi occupiers, members of anti-Soviet organizations, bandits.
The territory of the Autonomous Republic was divided into seven sectors.
On April 10-27, 49 people were arrested on charges of anti-Soviet activities.
  At the end of April, 5,806 anti-Soviet elements were separated, and in mid-May, their number increased to 8,520 people.
Beria wrote in his letter to Stalin on May 10, 1944. "The NGJK bodies are carrying out works in Crimea to clear the peninsula of enemy spies, traitors to the homeland and other anti-Soviet elements.
As of May 7, 5381 similar people have been arrested.
  250 machine guns, 37 artillery pieces and other similar ammunition illegally kept by the population were confiscated.
 As of 1944, more than 20,000 Tatars, who are traitors to the homeland, left the Red Army units, served with the Germans, took up arms to fight against the Red Army.
12 Romanьko O., ref. work., page 101.
13 Crimean multinational. Questions and answers. Вып.1. / Сост. Н. Mr. Stepanova. Simferopol.
Taking into account the treacherous activities of the Crimean Tatars against the Soviet people due to their unwillingness to live in the border regions of the Soviet Union, the USSR Interior Ministry leaves to your discretion the draft decision of the State Security Committee on the deportation of Tatars from Crimea.
We consider it expedient to deport the Tatars to the USSR of Uzbekistan and involve them in various spheres of agriculture.
 The deportation issues have been agreed with the Secretary of the Supreme Council of Uzbekistan Yusupov15.
Serov և Kobulov soon developed a deportation plan, which was to be implemented on May 18-22.
  Never before has the interval between liberation and deportation been so short, just over a month16.
The culmination of all this was the decision to deport the Tatar population.
 Many letters were sent to Bulatov, the secretary of the Crimean regional committee, expressing their dissatisfaction with such an unjust move17.
On May 7, 1944, Beria received a report from the Crimea informing them of the organization of the operation to deport the Crimean Tatars.
  Everything was ready.
  On May 11, 1944, a decision was made to deport the Crimean Tatars18.
The first day of the deportation became May 18.
 Kobulov, Deputy Chairman of the People's Committee of the People's Democratic Party, and Serov, Deputy Chairman of the People's Committee of the National Liberation Army, wrote to Beria on May 18 about the deportation of Crimean Tatars.
  It was telegraphed. "According to your order, today, on May 18, the process of deportation of the Crimean Tatar population started early in the morning.
90,000 people were taken to stations for loading in vehicles within 20 hours.
  48,000 of them were sent to new places by 17 echelons.
 25 echelons are still loading.
No emergencies occurred during the operation.
  The process continues. ”19
33,775 families, 151,129 people, were deported to Uzbekistan, where they arrived from June 3 to 10.
 The most crowded camps were established Tash 16 Polyan P., mentioned. work., page 110.
17 Бугай Н., Депортация народов, М.
 Science, 2004, c. 86.18 Buga N., Deportation of the Crimean people.
 Documents. Facts. Comments. M., 2002, p. 119. in Kend (56,000 people), in Samarkand (32,000 people), in Andijan (19,000 people) և in Fergana (16,000 people).
  The others were stationed in the Urals (Molotov-Sverdlovsk regions, Udmurdyan USSR) ում in the European part of the USSR (Kostroma, Moscow-other regions).
It is noteworthy that Uzbekistan initially agreed to accept only 70,000 IDPs, but later had to change its plans to accept 150,000 people, for whom a special IDP unit was set up in the Uzbek Interior Ministry, which was to create 359 settlements and 97 camps.
The deportees worked in agriculture, oil industry, and fish industry.
 All of these were low-paying, non-professional education jobs that could not provide welfare for those displaced in their new residences20.
According to the data of the regional committee, as of May, the exiled Tatars were 194111.
 Bulgarians, Greeks and Armenians were exiled - 33349 people.
 The death rate in the first stage of deportation was 19.6%.
 16052 of them died in Uzbekistan, and in 1945 - 9.8%.
 As of 1945, there were 379,000 people left in Crimea, up from 875,000 before the war.
In total, 191014 Tatar 21 were deported from the Crimea.
The relocation of the population to exile was accompanied by inhuman violence.
 Due to the lack of transportation, people often had to spend the night in the open air.
But the most tragic moment for the displaced was the road from the doorstep to the wagon, when to prevent further resistance from the people. They separated the family members and transported them in different wagons.
 Even after the deportation, everything was done to prevent the reunification of families, people were settled in different villages.
The day before the deportation was Saturday.
  Many were not at home.
  The fate of these people was decided. They were exiled from where they were.
Hot food was to be stored in the carriages, and each group of deportees was to be accompanied by a doctor and two nurses.
  Of course, in reality there was no such condition.
  Wagons 20 Polyan P., ref. work., page 89.
21 Ibid., P. 90.
So many people were transported that all the sanitary norms were violated.
 The space was so small that most of the way was spent standing, and there was a queue to sit.
 Many wagons were previously used to transport prisoners of war.
  Many died of epidemics, heat, hunger, and fatigue.
  Many people died at the very beginning of the road.
  The only thing that helped was the fact that when they reached the stations, when the carriages stopped, they could lower the small children out of the windows to bring water with them.
Many children and old people were lost, and the accompanying soldiers did not care at all, they left the missing and left.
The soldiers often did not allow food to be cooked, finding it permissible arbitrariness, but the local Russians did not lag behind the soldiers accompanying the wagons.
 In Melitopol, the Slavic brothers threw stones at the wagons.
 These were unique cases էին accompanied the exiles starting from the Volga22.
The whole population, of course, was not evacuated within the timeframe for exile.
  Many of them fought on the battlefield during the deportation.
 But that did not save them.
 The soldiers completely shared the fate of their compatriots, albeit a little.
  For example, after the victory, the Crimean Tatars left in Hungary were exiled in August 1945.
 They were placed in camps, and after a sufficient number of people were gathered, they were transported by rail to Tashkent.
  There the soldiers were trying to find their relatives.
  The attitude towards the liberators of Vienna after the victory in Austria was more than humiliating.
  When the last shots were fired, the soldiers were stopped and ordered by the Tatars to take three steps forward.
  Abla-Zekeryan, who had fought in Austria, wrote about all this.
 He came forward with several other soldiers, and the commander declared them traitors and people sold.
 The soldiers were ordered to tear off their shoulder straps, take the documents and awards.
  The order was carried out.
 Tatar soldiers were severely beaten and then exiled to Poland, where they were kept surrounded by barbed wire.
 They were transferred to Uzbekistan a few months later.
The attitude towards the soldiers serving in the territory of Crimea was different.
  Hasan Huseynov, who served in the Marine Corps, wrote that they had not been trusted since May 18, they were pursuing.
 One day they order to take food supplies and mention that they are being transported.
 They gather 150-200 Tatars serving in that regiment, accompanied by armed soldiers and transport them to Simferopol by cars.
  Beria's deputy then approached them, informing them that their families were in Central Asia. He allowed the Tatar soldiers to go to Uzbekistan without a bodyguard to their relatives, who were in a very bad condition.
All this was very humiliating for the soldiers who fought on the front.
 They felt betrayed when they were completely devoted to the defense of the homeland and received insults from it23.
On October 20, 1944, the decision was made by the Crimean Regional Committee, according to which the names of all the mountains, rivers, settlements that had Tatar or German names were renamed.
 On June 30, 1945, the Crimean SSR was reorganized into the RSFSR of the Crimean region24.
On December 14, the order of the presidency of the Supreme Council of the USSR was issued, in which it was mentioned about the renaming of the regions և regional centers.
 From August 21, 1945 to May 18, 1948, 327 62 1062 Tatar settlements were renamed, respectively.
 As a result, even Yalta was temporarily called Krasnoarmeisk, and Ai-Petri - Petrov Yurt Mountain25.
After the exile of the Crimean Tatars, it was the turn of the other peoples living on the Crimean peninsula.
 On May 29, 1944, People's Commissar of Internal Affairs L. Beria telegraphed to Stalin. "After the deportation of the Crimean Tatar population, the USSR NGGK is leveling the anti-Soviet elements and confiscating property on the peninsula.
 There were 12,075 Bulgarians, 14,300 Greeks and 9,919 Armenians living in Crimea at that time. " 1%) people 26.
23 National Policy of Russia.
 history and modernity. M.
 Русский мир. 1997, p. 318-320. THE MIGRATION OF THE CRIME TATARS TO THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WARARUS Hakobyan YEARS Keywords: deportation, Crimean Tatars, blockade, Hitler Germany, Muslim Council, echelon, desertion Summary.
