PREVALENCE OF FASCIOLOGY IN SOME REGIONS OF INTRODUCTION Introduction Zoonoses are infectious diseases, which include parasitic diseases transmitted from animals to humans.
  They cause great damage to human health.
  The effects of zoonoses are especially pronounced when humans are in direct contact with animal products.
  Infectious diseases are caused by pathogenic bacteria (viruses, bacteria) or parasites (worms, protozoa).
 They can be located in different parts of the body, depending on the type of infection.
  Many animals can carry certain parasites or parasites.
  This means that the parasite in their body does not cause disease for the animal.
 Some zoonoses do not cause symptoms of infection in animals.
 However, the host organism (intermediate host) can cause the parasite to spread (Leeflang, M. et al., 2008).
Zoonoses can be caused by helminths.
 They are also known as parasitic worms.
  Helminths are invertebrates, multicellular organisms that can be seen with the naked eye when mature.
  Unicellular, flat or round-bodied egg (Samuel B. et al., 1996).
 Helminths include flatworms (Plathyhelminthes) and roundworms (Nemathodes), which are types of parasitic worms (Samuel B. et al., 1996).
All members of the sucking worm class are parasitic.
 They have suckers և attachment organs, which are the result of a parasitic lifestyle.
  The final owner of sucking worms are vertebrates, which are parasitized in the body by an adult.
  Intermediate owners are mollusks.
  Some trematodes have a second intermediate owner.
 Sucking worms parasitize in different tissues, organs, digestive system, lungs, blood vessels of the abdomen (EM Yeghiazaryan, 2011).
 Two species belonging to this class: Liver lice ծ Giant liver lice cause fasciolosis, a zoonotic disease that has a huge impact on human health, mostly in highly endemic countries (Mas-Coma et al., 2009).
 Parasitism in sheep's cattle օրգ causes huge economic losses for hundreds of years.
 The amount of milk decreases, the liver of animals is damaged, the mortality rate increases և total production losses are observed (Charlier et al., 2014).
  Due to its huge impact on the economy, the liver has become the subject of scientific research and is one of the most studied of all types of trematodes.
 Intermittent hosts of the liver are mollusks living in cold climates (for example, Limnea tomentosa or Galbatruncatula) (Young ND et al., 2011).
 Liver sucking has a toxic effect on the body.
  It absorbs erythrocytes, leukocytes, epithelial cells, damages adjacent tissues.
 Cirrhosis of the liver can occur with a large number of parasites.
 The disease is diagnosed by detecting eggs in the patient's stool (EM Yeghiazaryan, 2011).
 In contrast to liver lice, the intermediate hosts of giant liver lice are mollusks living in warm climates (e.g., Radix natalensis or Radix rubiginosa) (Mas-Coma et al., 2009).
 The diagnosis is also made by detecting eggs in the patient's stool.
 Unlike liver suckers, in this case the disease has a more severe course, because the parasite has a larger size (EM Yeghiazaryan, 2011).
  Its interaction with the host organism և pathogenesis have not been studied.
  Fascioleosis is found in millions of people in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia (Young ND et al., 2011).
 In some countries the infection rate is 80-100%.
  The prevalence of giant liver lice often exceeds that of liver lice.
  These two species are so close genetically, anatomically and morphologically that it is very difficult to distinguish them (Itagaki T. et al., 2011).
 This is why molecular methods are needed for accurate diagnosis (Rokni MB. Et al., 2010).
 There are also "F. gigantica x F. hepatica "hybrid populations (Young ND et al., 2011), which are strongly expressed in" F.gigantica "և" F. hepatica ". Hepatica ”has a number of morphological, phylogenetic and biological features (Itagaki T. et al., 2009; Peng M et al., 2009; Le THet al., 2008).
As already mentioned, F. hepatica is the intermediate owner of mollusks living in cold climates, while in the case of F. gigantica, mollusks that are intermediate owners live in warm climates (Mas-Coma et al., 2009).
  This difference has its effect on the prevalence of parasites և "F. "gigantica" mostly causes fasciolosis in the tropics, and F.hepatica is more common in temperate zones.
  In subtropical zones, where both species can be found, fasciolosis is associated with "F. gigantica »և« F. hepatica ”species, և / or“ F.gigantica x F. hepatica ”hybrid populations (Spithill T. et al., 1999; Mas-Coma et al., 2009).
  Some studies have shown that the giant sucker of the liver is more easily adapted ուծ parasitic to animals և its stability is most evident in goats and sheep (Haroun ETM. Et al., 1986; Piedrafita D. et al., 2004; Roberts JA.et al ., 1997).
 In contrast, most sheep breeds are resistant to F. hepatica-induced fasciolosis (Haroun ETM et al., 1986).
 Current data (Spithill T. et al., 1999; HarounETM. Et al., 1986; Roberts JA. Et al., 1997; Periago MV. Et al., 2006) suggest F. gigantica և F. hepatica biology There are differences, as in the case of diseases caused by them, but our current knowledge of these animals, particularly males, is very limited (Marcos LA et al., 2008; MasComa S. et al., 2007).
The main goal of our work was to complete the literary data on the prevalence of fasciolosis in the regions of the Republic of Armenia, which was carried out through the collection and study of the existing literary data and the statistical elaboration of Chroshak.
During the work done, it turned out that the available literature could not give a complete picture of the disease in Armenia.
 However, as a result of the elaboration of the material for 2002-2003, it became possible to bring out the current situation in some regions.
  Despite the studies conducted, there is no clear information on the prevalence of different types of liver cancer in Armenia.
 Materials և methods.
 During the work, literary data on the prevalence of fasciolosis in the regions of the Republic of Armenia were collected.
 Despite the fact that systemic and complete studies of fasciolosis in the Republic of Armenia have been carried out since 1935, in our work we have mainly studied S. 2002-2003. M. Tokanyan's works.
  Materials were studied Statistical data processing.
Results և discussion. During the data collection and analysis, it turned out that the studies on the prevalence of fasciolosis in the regions of Armenia could not give a complete picture of the prevalence of the disease.
 However, during the analysis of the work already done, it was possible to single out և present the prevalence of the disease in some regions of the Republic of Armenia.
 According to these data, out of 7636 large cattle studied in 2002, 3675 were infected, which is 48.12%.
  The highest infection was observed in Etchmiadzin, where 861 out of 1840 animals were sick (46.8%), and the lowest infection was observed in Nubarashen, where 258 out of 655 animals were sick (39.4%).
 In 2003, 42.15% of 7402 animals were sick, again the highest rate was registered in Etchmiadzin - 41.8%, and the lowest in Nubarashen - 42.15% (Table 1).
Table 1. Prevalence of fasciolosis in RA marzes (Tonakanyan SM 2004) 2003 Infectious disease center Extension of regionsRegionsEchmiadzinArmavirMasisArtashatAraratStudies in height.
 The latter, in turn, is due to the prevalence of parasite intermediate hosts, mollusks, which are less common in cold, highlands.
Thus, making a full study of the literature, we can note that despite the great socio-economic and health impact of the disease, complete studies of fasciolosis were made as early as 1935.
  Prevalence studies were conducted in some regions of Armenia in 2002-2003, but they did not provide any information on the diversity of pathogens.
 Data on the disease have been missing for the last 15 years.
  During the last two years, our working group has conducted a study of the prevalence and diversity of liver cirrhosis in different regions of Armenia, which includes molecular genetic research to determine the genetic diversity of the disease, biogeography and geography of transmission.
 The results of the research և the obtained nucleotide sequences are under development և will be found in our future scientific articles.
Literature: leveling and elaboration of new metropolitan struggles against it.
  dis ... cand. Vet. science.
2. YeghiazaryanE. M., VardanyanL. K., "Parasitology.
  Educational manual "/ YSU.
 - S..
 YSU Publishing House, 2011.4. Haroun ETM, Hillyer GV (1986) Resistance to fascioliasis - A review. Vet Parasitol 20.
characterization based on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. Parasitol Int 58.
 81–85.hepatica and Fasciola gigantica ". Parasitology 138 (10).
 1278–1284.7. Leeflang, M. (2008). Zoonoses.
  diseases transmitted from animals to humans. Agromisa8. Marcos LA, Terashima A, Gotuzzo E (2008) Update on hepatobiliary flukes.
 fascioliasis, opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis. Curr Opin Infect Dis 21.
523–530.9. Mas-Coma S, Bargues MD, Valero MA (2007) Plant-Borne Tremotode Zoonoses.
Fascioliasis and Fasciolopsiasis. In.
 Murrell KD, Fried B, eds. World class parasites, vol 11Food-borne parasitic zoonoses.
  fish and plant-borne parasites.
  Springer, New York. ppAfrican bovines using a computer image analysis system (CIAS). Parasitol Res 99.
  368–
Rev Can Zool 82.
 233–250.Parasitol 68.
 69–78.using a simple PCR-restriction enzyme method ". Experimental Parasitology 124 (2).
  209–
16. Spithill T, Smooker PM, Copeman B (1999) Fasciola gigantica.
  Epidemiology, control, immunology and molecular biology. In.
  Dalton JP, ed. Fasciolosis. Oxon, UK.
  CABIand Biotechnological Implications ". PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 5 (2).
 e1004.Gohar Grigoryan, Hripsime Atoyan FACTION OF FASCIOLOGY IN SOME REGIONS OF RA Keywords: fasciolosis, Liver sucking, prevalence, ArmeniaSummary.
