SERVICE FUNCTIONS FEATURES The service is a system of services based on demand, satisfactory activities, and organization.
  Let's define service activity as a sphere of human relations, aimed at meeting the needs of certain social groups, the realization of individual goods.
On one side of this relationship are those with different needs who want to receive certain goods, and on the other side are those who provide certain services who have the opportunity to possess such goods1.
By service sector, service sector or population service sector we mean a certain sector of the economy.
  In other words, it is the sector of the economy that carries out service activities.
  It participates in economic relations. It obeys the general economic laws operating in the given society.
As already mentioned, service activity is the relationship between service providers, service providers and their users.
 This is a type of activity where only the service is provided, but its feedback, that is, customer satisfaction, satisfaction with the service provided.
 This can only be achieved when each customer is viewed as a separate individual with his or her own desires and needs. the normal life of the society), with character, temperament, why not with purchasing power. After all, in addition to the wishes and preferences of any customer, he must be able to buy any service for a sufficient amount of money.
Very often the services provided in the service activity are different - Material.
 The services that have a product nature ելի tangible result are material.
 This includes the production of clothes, shoes, construction of apartments, their layout, interior and exterior design, renovation, car maintenance, home appliances, report, program, etc.
Services of human activity, which have no material sustainability, are immaterial.
 That is, the main criteria for classifying this or that activity in the sphere of services are intangibility, invisibility1.
These services are the services of production masters, which include the services provided by suppliers, lawyers, consultants, doctors, psychologists, etc.
 In the provision of such services, production and demand coincide with time.
Most of the results in service activities are mixed products and services.
 It is considered through the material-non-material connection, ie the results in which the material aspect prevails (bread, sugar, butter, etc.),, the results in which the non-material aspect is dominant (education, professional service, etc.).
 The rest of the items can be found among them և.
Service vendors can use this scheme not only to classify their products, but also to establish relationships with other organizations with whom they can share these characteristics.
 This is the case, for example, with leisure activities, entertainment establishments, hotels, and other institutions that provide additional material services (food, hairdressing services, etc.) to people and their groups.
The purpose of the full range of services is to meet the individual needs of the population.
 Such services are hairdressing, make-up, etc.
The peculiarities of intangible services are: Intangibility, which has a non-material nature, in other words, the service can not be offered to the customer in a tangible way before the end of the service.
  Although services, as a rule, require material resources and equipment.
Insecurity cannot be maintained for future use.
 It is served and consumed at the same time.
 The consumer becomes a direct participant in the provision of the service.
Indivisibility from the source Most services production and consumption are inseparable, they can be consumed only at the time of delivery.
Quality instability services largely depend on the qualification, personality և character of the employee.
1 From all this it can be concluded that the service is considered material, which is aimed at satisfying the material-household needs of the consumer, service or customer, and, on the contrary, the purpose of social-cultural services is to satisfy the caring, intellectual needs and ensure normal consumer life.
  These ensure the maintenance and restoration of health, the care of the individual, the restoration of physical and intellectual strength, the development, the increase of professional skills.
 That is, the service is a system of services that satisfies the non-material requirements և satisfies the improvement of the material requirements.
The service sector or service performs two types of functions: economic, social and cultural.
Among the economic functions are: Maintenance of material goods production process: transport խորհրդ communication, legal advice, equipment maintenance և other services, Labor Աշխատ reproduction of economically active population through educational, medical, training, recreational և other services վրա On intellectual attributes, Creation of additional material goods.
 This happens in two ways. Either durable goods are produced or their former consumer properties, which have been lost or deteriorated over time, are restored.
 This function is performed by household service organizations.
They belong to social functions: Satisfaction of various needs of the population through the provision of appropriate services, Improvement of working conditions in households կրճատReduction of expenses due to the activity of housing-communal-household service organizations, Rational organization of the population և Use of cultural-entertainment միջոցով services.
  In other words, the structure and content of the working time of the economically active population is optimized.
Ensuring state security, normal activity 1.
In developed countries, more than half of the able-bodied population is employed in the service sector.
 Nevertheless, the service sector has a certain subordination to material production.
  The borders and opportunities for the development of the service sector are conditioned by the level of development of the latter.
 Material production creates material resources necessary for the operation of service sectors.
 On the other hand, the service sector has a significant impact on the development of material production, the quality of life հասարակ the level of society.
  At the same time, the higher the living standards of the population, the more developed the country is; consequently, the more developed is the socio-cultural sphere (service), which is called to meet the growing needs of the society.
 Due to this sphere, new jobs are constantly being created, due to which the employment structure of the population is changing.
 As experience has shown, the countries that have a developed service sector are rich countries.
 From this we can conclude that due to this sphere the problem of population poverty is being overcome.
Therefore, it can be stated that the service plays a significant role in public relations for the following reasons: Increases the efficiency of public, in particular, material production, creates conditions for optimization of the work process; 2. It is possible for the development of an economically active population, which is facilitated by specific types of activities: education, staff training, medicine.
  Contributes to the improvement of the physical condition of the employees, 3. Improves the quality of life and living standards, creates a system of needs, is able to meet them, 4. For economically inactive population և creates conditions for normal, normal life activities (children, the elderly, the disabled), affecting free time, health, intellect, 5. keeps in balance the incomes and expenses of the economically inactive population; 6. forms factors of material progress, such as knowledge, IT (information technologies); 7. It has a great impact on ensuring the national security of the state and society1.
Thus, we can say that the service has its impact on the structure of all spheres of public life (cultural, economic, social, political, social).
In a service economy, organizations are most likely to increase their utility impact by more fully meeting the specific needs of their customers.
  Utility is determined by the nature of use մակարդ the level of improvement of the so-called service product.
  Service products are stand-alone services or systems that combine material goods և relevant services.
  And if we want to maintain the high quality of their services, it is necessary to establish an interactive, constantly updated relationship with the consumer, which allows us to constantly study, get acquainted with the growing needs of the population, maximize opportunities to meet needs, basic technologies for services 2.
Thus, it can be said that in order to succeed in the service activity, a new value system, special abilities, organizational skills are needed.
  Leadership in this area should be distinguished by speed of decision-making, flexibility, network organization, sincerity, free movement.
  Consumer orientation is in the center of service activity.
  And the latter should try as much as possible to better understand what are its development tendencies.
 On the other hand, service activities can influence consumer behavior և the market.
Intangible features (comfort, attention, friendliness) play a big role here as sales promotion stimuli.
After all, the main factor ensuring the fundamental success of the service is the ability to maximally meet the needs of customers.
Thus, it can be stated that the service sector is present, it has its influence in all spheres of public life and production.
In conclusion, it can be said that the main goals of the service as a service to meet the needs of people are: a. Delivering material and non-material goods to consumers through the provision of services in accordance with their requirements and tastes, b. Organization of the process of consumption of the mentioned goods և service, c. Creation of optimal conditions for life, rest and leisure, d. Contribute to the increase of free time and its rational use.
And in order to achieve that, it is necessary to reveal the individual desires of the users of the services, to be served, to satisfy them as much as possible, to increase the quality of service.
  The delivery, in its turn, must stand out with its speed, flexibility and organization.
Mariam Sahakyan FUNCTIONAL FEATURES OF SERVICE ACTIVITIES Keywords: service, service activity, development of material-intangible slave life through service.
Summary.
