THE ESSENCE OF MANAGEMENT OF CULTURAL MASS EVENTS BY THE EXAMPLE OF "EREBUNI-YEREVAN" HOLIDAY An event is considered to be an event that turns into an exceptional event for the audience, the visitor [4: 10-12].
 Events are social phenomena, which are widely used in the spheres of current business activity, political life, social communications.
 Without them, it is impossible to imagine cultural life, cultural processes.
  Moreover, the sphere of culture and art itself is, from a certain point of view, a series of systematic, not so specially organized events.
  The latter, in fact, are the product that is offered to the listeners, the audience, the visitors of cultural institutions.
 Concert, performance, exhibition, holiday, all these are nothing but the largest specially organized event, which performs a number of social functions, from purely artistic-aesthetic to communication, even economic.
The concept of "mass cultural events" (CDM) has a very broad meaning - it includes holidays, festivities, festivals, concerts, sports games, etc.
 The number of participants in these events is quite large, which complicates their organization, efficient and safe conduct.
  Therefore, it is necessary to conduct preliminary studies on the organization, safe conduct and service of mass cultural events.
The mass cultural event is considered to be an unusually complex event in all its aspects, in all its diversity.
  During the last century, the methods and methods of effective organization of these events have changed many times.
At present, mass cultural events are held on many occasions and purposes, the results of which are not very satisfactory for both the clients and the organizers.
 There is a need to identify the issues that hinder the effective implementation of mass cultural events through comprehensive studies in this field.
 In a market economy, the whole set of organizational activities related to CDM presupposes a certain "very professionalism" by the organizers, determining the goals, determining the content of those events, attracting the necessary partners, executors, preparation, effective financial, material and technical resources, successful marketing. including advertising and other promotions.
 In other words, we are talking about a completely defined management.
At present, event management has emerged as a separate, independent area of ​​activity.
 The management of the events originated with the efforts of the employees of the socio-cultural sphere և work, who were engaged in կազմակերպ organizing mass holidays և.
  This effective tool, in the possession of a modern manager, has been completely integrated into the socio-cultural sphere, being used "as a goal" as a means for the development of the cultural sphere.
  The latter is quite logical, who, if not the manager of the socio-cultural sphere, should improve this powerful tool.
 The time has come not only to take into account the opinion of a potential or real audience, but also to put it at the core of the activities of current cultural institutions.
 Along with the development of market relations, cultural and entertainment activities have even approached marketing technologies, which are based on the task of identifying and meeting the needs of individual citizens or social groups.
The observation of communicative processes in the management of events is directly related to the problems of general humanization of social communication, increasing the competence of interpersonal, intergroup-practical communication of people [3, 5-8].
The development policy of the organization of the socio-cultural sphere should be based on a thorough analysis of the existing traditions, cultural values ​​and development perspectives in the society, assuming a comprehensive analysis of public communications.
If we describe the mass cultural events artistically, it is impossible to say that they combine sports and art, careful material culture, which makes the audience deeply understand the art of theater, cinema, pop, opera, ballet, circus actors, leads to the victory of actors. ացման Creating new ways to impress the audience.
Mass cultural events are multi-genre scenes that combine a large number of self-made և specialized և groups (singers-soloists, choirs, group classical ballet, national dance groups, circus actors) and musicians (both soloists and large and small orchestras) and singers. mastery.
The basis of modern CDM is the theatrical holiday with its special atmosphere, which is created through artistic staging.
 They are mass theatrical performances consisting of a number of thematically united artistic programs.
They are based on a script specially developed by the director են are usually associated with notable social events or important dates.
The script-directing work of the preparation and holding of the main holiday is quite well studied.
  At the same time, the work of coordinating the work of the whole team of organizers and participants carrying out the preparatory work requires careful study, because only in the case of effectively organized organizational work can the desired result be achieved - successful social cooperation.
Mass cultural events are a holiday for everyone.
 Its participants are really large.
  In order for everyone to be able to participate in these holidays, CDMs are usually held outside, mainly in stadiums, parks, squares, etc.
  Very often these holidays are limited to some significant events.
  They can be national holidays, memorable dates, concerts, competitions, festivals.
  Fun, dynamism, interesting content, bright emotions are all that such events should be filled with.
Depending on the goals և problems events [5]:, cultural, sports և entertainment - concerts, sports competitions, holiday performances,  advertising, trade - fairs, presentations, etc.,, meetings with partners and receptions - meetings of shareholders, as well as Meetings and receptions, accompanied by buffet dinners, buffets, միջոցառ other events, including weddings, dinners, anniversaries և celebrations.
The first two of these correspond to the content of mass cultural events.
 Accordingly, the following diagram can be presented with the CDM classification. CDMCultural EntertainmentSports Advertising Festivals Concerts Exhibitions ChampionshipsMarathons CompetitionsFairsExhibitionsExhibitions Figure 1. Branch structure of cultural mass events All of these mass events are different.
  The organization of them should correspond to a specific goal, and the results should satisfy the customer, the organizers and the participants.
The city holiday is a type of mass cultural event.
  This is a rather large-scale event, which is attended by the residents and guests of the city.
 Festive events are held throughout the city and can last for several days.
The holiday of "Erebuni-Yerevan" capital is celebrated with great pomp in Armenia.
  The series of celebrations is expanding year by year, including both cultural and social programs.
  The first official celebration of "Erebuni-Yerevan" was held in October 1968. The 2750th anniversary of the founding of our capital was celebrated.
 The jubilee celebrations lasted about a week.
 The events were many, varied and meaningful: new books presenting the history of Yerevan were published, new films reflecting the daily life of Yerevan were screened, exhibitions were opened, new songs about Yerevan were created, various jubilee souvenirs were released, which now remind of that magnificent celebration.
Beautiful events were the Flower Festival, the Song Festival, during which the 2750-member choir performed the anthem "Erebuni-Yerjan" for the first time.
One of the significant events of those days was the opening of the museum of the foundation of Yerevan at the foot of Arin-Berd hill.
 The street adjacent to the museum was renamed "Erebuni", the park with 2750 fountains was opened, a fountain-monument was placed in the Republic Square, the "Erebuni" carpet was designed, 2750 trees were planted at the foot of Arin-Berd և, finally the jubilee mass events ended
Concerts of art groups, song and joy festivals continued for several days on the stages prepared in the city squares, avenues, parks, alleys and streets.
This holiday, which has become traditional, became more diverse and more popular year by year.
 Along with the already traditional events of the festival, new ones came. Friendship Day, Newlyweds 'Day, Homecoming Day, Poetry Day, Labor Glory Day, Young People' s Day, masquerades, folk walks, national games, sports competitions, "Golden Autumn" annual festivals, etc. [2].
The official opening ceremony of the celebration takes place at the Yerevan Opera and Ballet Academic Theater, the closing ceremony takes place at Hrazdan Stadium.
 Exhibitions of paintings dedicated to Yerevan are organized within the framework of the holiday, big concerts are organized in the Republic և big and small squares, parks, a theatrical performance with the "participation" of King Argishti, the founder of Erebuni fortress, near the Erebuni Museum.
 The first day ends in the Republic Square with a big festive fireworks.
  The celebration is attended by the majority of the population of Yerevan - thousands of people from different regions of the Republic, as well as delegations invited from abroad, sister cities of Yerevan (from Moscow and other Russian cities, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Georgia, Iran, Moldova).
For the "Erebuni-Yerevan" celebration in 1968. The song "Erebuni-Yerevan" was specially written (lyrics by Paruyr Szak, music by Edgar Hovhannisyan), which later became the anthem of the city.
  This song was performed for the first time by a choir consisting of 2750 people led by Tatul Altunyan.
The city holiday is usually celebrated on October 10-11.
 In recent years, "Sharm Holding" company has been engaged in organizing this tonic, which has a great resonance.
In order to organize the CDMs, including the "Erebuni-Yerevan" holiday, it is necessary to use all the functions of event management: planning, organization, control, implementation.
 First of all, it is necessary to define the mission, goal, role of the Strategy to make the event a reality.
Below are the steps that can be taken during the planning phase.
։ Assemble a strong team of leaders who can work on the project for a long time, who are ready to solve each task to achieve the goal without losing interest.
Ստեղծել Create a large picture (poster) for the event, which will express the main idea, the goal that needs to be emphasized.
 Those big pictures created for the "Erebuni-Yerevan" holiday mainly include the age of the city, the orthography of the city, etc.
 create a schedule և sequence of steps to get the final image.
Եցնել Clarify the role and work of each in the planning phase so that everyone is in their proper places during the event.
Հետո The next step after planning is to organize the CDM.
 This includes coordinating procedural tactics to prepare for the event.
The following basic steps are required for organization.
Բերել Obtain funding to make the event a reality.
  «Erebuni-
The whole amount necessary for the "Yerevan" event is provided by the Yerevan Municipality from the community budget.
  2014 180 million drams were spent for "Erebuni-Yerevan 2796", last year - 200 million drams.
 Work with staff, calculate all equipment and furniture, as well as the amount needed to purchase or rent them.
  The problems related to the equipment are various, especially during outdoor events.
  For example, the stage weight for the main concert of "Erebuni-Yerevan" holiday is 5-6 tons, it is brought from Georgia, Ukraine, etc.
Համագործակց Cooperation with suppliers of materials and equipment և Contract signing must be completed at least 2 weeks before the event.
 Pay attention to safety, as the likelihood of crime collisions during CDM increases.
  As the holiday of our city lasts for 2 days, the security officers and the police control the places of separate events throughout the city.
The final stage of organizing CDMs is the actual implementation of the event.
 It is the day of the event, when the whole staff should be in its place.
  In order to ensure the effective process of the events, it is necessary for the organizers and those in charge to be at the event site 1 hour or 30 minutes before the start.
  There are events that take even a few hours to signal.
 decorate և furnish all the areas where the events will take place.
Վել Make sure the event participants are in their seats.
In case of these basic steps, the CDMs will proceed as planned.
 In summary, it can be said that a large amount of financial, material-technical, human resources are needed for the organization of mass cultural events, particularly the celebration of the city իհարկե, of course, for a long time.
  In order to achieve the desired result in organizing such complex cultural events, all the problems and issues must be taken into account.
Thus, we can conclude that:  a mass cultural event in all its aspects, in all its diversity, is considered an unusually complex phenomenon.
Պայմանավորված Due to the peculiarities of CDM, organizing events is quite a difficult process, ում The sound and organizational quality of "Erebuni-Yerevan" holiday in Armenia is growing year by year, համար Introduce foreign positive experience to develop CDM organization culture, վել Prepare for CDM events for a long time.
Literature 1. Large school encyclopedia, Book II, "Erebuni Happy Holiday", http.
//www.encyclopedia.am/pages.php?bId=2&hId=1166.
2. The official website of Yerevan Municipality, http.
//www.yerevan.am/am/erebuni-yerevan/.
5. Shumovich A., Large meropriyat.
 Technologies and Practice event management, Moscow, 2007.8. Richards G., Palmer R., Eventful cities.
 Cultural Management and Urban Revitalization, USA, 2010.Serine Sardaryan THE ESSENCE OF CULTURAL EVENT MANAGEMENT EXAMPLE OF "EREBUNI-YEREVAN" HOLIDAY
