EXPERIENCE OF DIGITALIZATION OF WARRIORS SUBJECT TO ARGISHTI A. The Armenian Highlands In the IX century a qualitatively new stage of historical development entered.
 This was the period when the Pan-Armenian Kingdom of Van (Biaynili, Urartu, Ararat) was established in the Armenian Highlands on the basis of the Nairyan Confederation.
 Urartu became one of the most powerful states of the Old East, whose political influence spread to both neighboring and distant countries.
The kingdom of Van (Biaynili, Urartu, Ararat) reached its peak of power during the reign of Argishti I (786-764 BC) [9, 5] 1.
Figure 1. In Argishti I (786-764 BC) From the very beginning of his reign, Argishti took steps to expand the kingdom, launching invasions in different directions of the country within a year.
  Eventually, he succeeded in creating a powerful secularism, which became a great threat to the powerful superpowers of the time.
Due to the policy of Argishti I, the borders of the kingdom stretched to the north to the Chorokh basin, the north-western shores of Lake Sana, the areas north of Lake Childer, to the south, 1 Menua had two sons, Argishtin-Unushpu (Inushpu).
 Argishti continued to rule the country, and as for his brother Inushpua, many inscriptions have been preserved about him, one of which is in the "Kurshu-Jam" mosque in Van.
  Most likely, to follow the religious path like his uncle Sardur։ To become the chief priest of Musasir.
in the west the upper and middle reaches of the Euphrates; in the south to Assyria; in the east to the north-eastern shores of Lake Urmia.
Argishti's achievements are based on the King's "Chronicle of Chronicles" [11] 2.
Figure 2 և 3. "Deep Chronicle" The Chronicle mentions a number of countries over which the king established sovereignty և the latter were forced to pay the tax set by the tax office.
 The latter from time to time tried to get out of the 3 domination of the Urartians, but it is obvious that they re-subjugated Argishti and brought a large number of prisoners of war to the central regions of the country.
In one raid alone, the king brought more than a thousand prisoners of war to the land.
 And the fact that during his reign the king created a superpower, conquered a large number of countries, gives grounds to claim that the number of prisoners of war was really large.
Let us try to present the number of prisoners of war subjugated by Argishti I only on the basis of the information preserved in the "Khorkhorian Chronicle".
The information presented in "Khorkhorian Chronicle" about the directions of Argishti I's invasions թվ the number of prisoners of war brought to the kingdom.
 Based on the "Deep Chronicle", let us try to present the general picture to find out from which area in 1827 the French Asian company sent to Van the archaeologist F. E. Schultz, who copied some 40 inscriptions, laying the foundation for the study of the Urartian language.
The latter discovered the "Khorkhorian Chronicle" in 1828, which is the largest known Urartian inscription to date.
 The first seven of the eight columns of "Khorkhoryan" contain descriptions of the invasions undertaken by Argishti I, and the last, eighth column, contains the king's curse on those who will try to damage the inscription.
3 The terms "Urartu" և "Urartian" are used in the work not in the ethnic, but in the contemporary sense.
The king brought a slave with him.
The protocol begins with the phrase "I recruited soldiers for the third time in the same year."
 It is obvious that the king undertook two raids.
  Unfortunately, the first column of the inscription is badly damaged; we do not know in what direction the king marched, how many prisoners of war he brought with him to the territory of the kingdom.
  Then Argishti mentions Diaukh (the country), which after subjugation conquers the land of Sheriaz, reaches the city of Buti, invades Zabakha, reaching Mount Sirimutara, ".. I invaded Diaukh (tribe) ... King Diaukh (tribe)? , I conquered Sheriaz (the land), I burned the cities, I destroyed the castles.
 Cut Eiminch - Buti (city).
  I separated (?) The whole (?) Of Bian ()) Khushan (countries) (?) From Tarion (from the country).
  I invaded Zabakha (country), captured the province of Zabakha (country) (?).
 I was cutting it up to Uzinabitarna (the city), up to Mount Sirimutara.
 I separated the whole (?) City of Macaltun from Iyan (the country) (?).
  I went to the land of Jericho, and I went to Abun (the land).
  I captured the city of Ureinik, the royal Viterukh (country) "[4, 6].
Summing up the invasions of that period, Argishtin mentions how many prisoners of war he took with him: "Nineteen thousand two hundred and fifty-five young men (I drove), ten thousand one hundred and forty young soldiers, twenty-three thousand two hundred eighty-six slaves (?), Only five hundred and two thousand." seventy-five people (one) a year.
 I killed some, I took some alive "[4, 6].
In the above-mentioned part of the protocol, Argishti mentions how many thousands of prisoners of war he took.
 Probably, it refers to Q.A. about 785.
Summarizing the above section, we have the following picture: 19,255 teenagers, 10,140 soldiers, 23,280 slaves (a total of 52,675 prisoners of war).
Q.A. In about 784, the king conquered Abelianikh, Anishterga, Kuarzan, Ultuzain, Etiun և a number of other countries: The land of the Ultuzain (tribe), laid them before Argishti!
 ... Argishti says: - I captured Etiun (the country).
 I was cutting to [...] (the country), to Udure Etiukhi (the country).
 Man, I cried "[4, 6].
Continuing, the king writes: "In the same year I invaded Umelun (?) (Land), captured Uria (land), Tertub (?) (Land), conquered Muruzu (tribe) (land).
 The "Mare" rock (?), (That) was fortified, I captured it in battle, I drove a man, a woman.
  I captured the royal city of Ubarugild [...].
  I was cutting to Kurupera (the country), to Tar (e) ra (the country) [...].
  I marched, I returned with power to Kowan (earth) (...) "[4, 6].
At the end of the text, the king mentions the number of prisoners of war he brought with him: "Only twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-nine people (one) year.
I killed some, I took some alive "[4, 6].
The next invasion was undertaken by Argishti in BC. about 783.
Argishti writes: "Khaldi invaded, subdued Khati (the country) with his own weapon (?), Subdued Khilaruada, and laid siege to Argishti."
  ... On the same day (time) I raided Khatinil (country), captured the plain of Niriba (...), Khurma (?) (The city), (which) was fortified, captured the battle ... I raided Khatinil (country) the size of Khaldyan ) on.
  I separated the whole (?) Country of Tuatech from (?) The original (?) Melitia.
  I cut as far as Peteira (city), as far as the Great (?) Meliayanget, Marmua (և) Kalaya (countries) ”[4, 6].
"Two thousand five hundred and thirty-nine young men (I drove), eight thousand six hundred ninety-eight young men (?), Eighteen thousand forty-seven women, only sixteen thousand two hundred eighty-four men (in one year)" (2539 young men, 8698 young men, 18047 women, 29,284 prisoners of war) [4]
Q.A. about 782 Argishti continues his military invasions, expanding his once powerful secularism.
 The king begins the invasion by conquering the land of Etiun.
"Khaldi invaded, subdued his own weapon (?), Subdued the country of Kekhuni (city), laid siege to Argishti" [4: 6].
(country), During this period Argishti built the city of Erebuni, where 6600 people live.
"I settled six thousand six hundred people there militarily from Khatiyan Ghupa" [4: 6].
"In the same year I raided Uburda (country).
  I conquered the land of Ish (..) luburaark (և) Uburda-alkh.
 I captured the city of Erdua and subjugated Vishushe (country).
 Man, I took a woman out of there.
 I marched on Khakhia (earth) "[4, 6].
During the above-mentioned invasions, King է brought a large number of prisoners of war to the kingdom.
"Eight thousand six hundred and forty-eight young men (I drove), two thousand six hundred and fifty-five young men, eight thousand four hundred and ninety-seven slaves, a total of nineteen thousand seven hundred and ninety people (one) year" [4: 6].
Q.A. Argishti writes about the invasion of 781: "Khaldi invaded, subdued the Assyrian army with his own weapon (?), subdued the land of Arsita (tribe), laid siege to them before Argishti" [4: 6].
Continuing the invasion, the king wrote, "I sank the Khaldyan-sized piece of land in front of (?) Dade in front of Kulashlera."
 (...) I drove eleven (?) one thousand four hundred and thirty-nine young people from there (?).
  I drove out the Assyrians, killed them, and drove them out of my land.
  It was in that same year that I raided Menabshu (city), Dukkama (city).
  (...) I occupied a political (և) country.
  (...) Shaara-Raa (city) Pashto (country).
 I marched on the land of Babilo (ini) (city), (...) on Baruata (land), on Parshua (land) ”[4, 6].
"Five (?) Thousand (?) Forty people (in one) year" [4, 6].
The cuneiform text is damaged in the above-mentioned part, which is clearly visible in the beginning part of the text, about 5040 prisoners of war.
  BC about 780 King Pashtun, Tariun և You brought several thousand prisoners of war from other countries and cities to the territory of the kingdom itself.
"Khaldi marched, subdued the Assyrian army with his own weapons (?), Subdued Pushtu (the country), Tarion (the country), laid them before Argishti" [4: 6].
The king continues his conquests և successfully conquers the cities of Arha (KURAr-ha), Pashto (KURBu-uš-tú), Aburzan (URUA-bur-za-ni), Kadukani (URUQa-du-qa-ni-ú) 4 .
4 In addition to the above countries, several other countries and cities are mentioned.
  This part of the cuneiform text in the protocol is damaged, which makes it difficult to interpret the protocol clearly.
"Eighteen thousand eight hundred twenty-seven people (one) year (I drove).
  I killed some, I took some alive ”(total of 18,827 prisoners of war) [4, 6].
BC Regarding the invasion of about 779, the king writes: "Khaldi invaded, subjugated the country of Iyan with his own weapon (?), subjugated Mana (the country), Pashto (the country), encamped them in front of Argishti" [4: 6].
In the same year the king conquered the city of Erateli (URUE-ra-ţè- [li-e) ևThe other city of Eratelle ([URU] E-ra-ţè-li-e ú-li ha-ú-b [i]).
 Conquering a number of cities and countries, Argishti extended the borders of the kingdom to the city of Vikhik 5.
"Eighteen thousand two hundred forty-three people (one) year (I was expelled).
I killed some and took some alive ”(a total of 18,243 prisoners of war) [4, 6].
Argishti I next year, BC In about 778, the expansion of world domination continued.
 Six thousand four hundred and seventy-one people (one) year (I drove) ”(a total of 6471 prisoners of war) [4, 6].
BC In about 777 the king moved to Mana, Pushtu և other countries: "I invaded Pushtu (land) in the size of Khaldyan, conquered the Arkaiaidasht Shatira-Raza (from the country).
 I separated the whole (?) Uyshte (country) (?) From the (?) Uvshe (country).
I was cutting it up to Mount Alatye ”[4, 6].
"Seven thousand one hundred and seventy-three people (one) year (I drove).
  I killed some, I took some alive ”(total of 7073 (7873) prisoners of war) [4, 6].
6Q.a. 776 Argishti again invades the southeastern regions of Lake Urmia: 5 The city of Vihika was one of the cities of the country of Pashto.
6 The number varies from source to source (7073 or 7873).
"Argishti says. "(....) in the army, in front of the regiment, I invaded (և) Sira (the city) and besieged Mana (country)" [4, 6].
"Three thousand two hundred and seventy people (one) year (I drove)" (a total of 3270 prisoners of war) [4, 6].
Next year, BC Around 775, Argishti continued his conquests: "Khaldi invaded, subjugated his own weapon (?) to the Tuareg plain to Kurku (mountain), subdued the Mana (country) army, encamped them in front of Argishti և" [4].
After the above-mentioned invasion, the king brought only 13,979 prisoners of war to the territory of the kingdom.
BC about 774 The king continued to strengthen his kingdom by conquering a number of lands.
Argishti writes. "Khaldi invaded, subdued Manaerkir with his own weapon (?), Subdued Etiun (the country), encamped them in front of Argishti" [4].
After the conquest of the land of Etiun, the king continued his invasion, conquering the country of Jericho (tribe), the country of Katarzayan (tribe), reaching as far as Ishkiguluerkir.
  During the invasion, he captured the city of Amiduk in the country of Viterukhi.
The inscription in the above-mentioned part is damaged, it is impossible to understand how many thousands of prisoners of war the king subjugated.
  However, taking into account the number of prisoners of war brought after the previous invasions, it is obvious that during this invasion the king brought a large number of prisoners of war.
Next year, K.A. Around 773, Argishti conquered the land of Tariu, 11 castles, etc.
 In the same year the king conquered the land of Ishkigulu.
 In the cuneiform text this part is damaged հստակ no exact number of prisoners of war has been preserved.
Q.A. about 772 Concerning the raid, the king wrote: “I burned the cities and took a man and a woman to Biaելne · el.
 A total of twenty (?) Four thousand eight hundred and thirteen people (one) year (I drove) "(a total of 24,813 prisoners of war).
 The last column of the chronicle gives us an informative report.
Table 1. The number of prisoners of war in cuneiform texts by Harutyunyan, Salvini և Melikishvili.
Harutyunyan
YearQ.a. about 785 BC about 784 BC about 783 BC about 782 BC about 781 22,439 / 5.40 = 27,479:
BC about 780 BC about 779 BC about 778 BC about 777 BC about 776 BC about 775 BC about 774 BC about 773 BC circa 772 - Total Salvin
Melikishvili
From Table 1 it can be assumed that during their military invasions the Urartians 785-772 About 300,000 prisoners of war were deported during that period (the number was written taking into account that the data for 774 BC ոտ around 773 BC are missing).
 However, in "Khorkhorian Chronicle" Argishti, together with the number of prisoners of war brought to the kingdom, mentions that he killed the wall.
  Next to almost all the year records, the king writes the phrase "I killed some, I took some alive", from which it is obvious that the king killed some of the prisoners of war.
 The king probably executed some 300,000 prisoners of war, but only about half of the 150,000 were taken from the kingdom.
The number of prisoners of war brought to the territory of the kingdom was very large.
 The question arises why the king needed such a large number of prisoners of war, if the king brought more than a thousand prisoners of war to the capital by marching in only one direction.
The main functions performed by prisoners of war in the kingdom.
  The main hard work in the kingdom was done by slaves.
  The latter built cities, castles, roads, special purpose buildings for defense.
Some slaves were involved in economic activities.
  Let us try to present in which spheres the prisoners of war were doing what work.
Military:
Of necessity
In that case, they joined the army.
Economic:
Royal economy
They served in the court.
Other Urban Development
The main labor in the kingdom was done by slaves.
 They built cities, fortresses, temples, etc.
Participated in the Temple economy
The King of the Kingdom took part in a series of military campaigns.
gives to temples.
construction of canals, irrigation systems, etc.
Private economy
In return for the good service of some of the soldiers, the king resolutely sent slaves, who became the soldiers in question.
They were engaged in cattle breeding.
They were engaged in gardening.
They were engaged in viticulture.
The question arises as to how many slaves were involved in which sphere.
In order to clarify the number, it is necessary to pay attention to the number of the army աս to understand approximately how many slaves took part in the military invasions.
The kings of the kingdom of Van were taking steps to expand the kingdom, so the replenishment of the army was a very important issue.
This was especially true when the kings carried out military invasions in different directions for a year.
  For example, during the invasion of Witterukh, Lusha, and Cathars, the Urartian army consisted of 15,000 cavalry, several thousand 460 cavalry, and 66 chariots.
  During another raid, the army consisted of 9,174 cavalry, 2,704 infantry, and 106 chariots.
Some of the prisoners of war are believed to have joined the army.
But, of course, the number of prisoners of war was small, as during the invasions there would be a danger of rebellion by the latter.
The exploitation of slaves in both Urartu and Assyria has probably reached great proportions.
  It is not accidental that K.A. In the 7th century, Urartian and Assyrian refugees moved to Arme-Shupria (Sassoon), where conditions were quite mild [7, 3].
Already in BC In the 7th century the escape of the exploited elements of Urartu և Assyria had reached great proportions.
 A vivid proof of this is the fact that the Assyrian king Asachaddon (681-669 BC) In 673 he was forced to launch a military campaign against Arme-Shupria to return the refugees who had taken refuge there [1, 8, 3].
With the king's consent, some of the prisoners of war were given to the soldiers.
 It can be assumed that although not all soldiers had a private economy, using prisoners of war as labor force.
During the invasions, when the king left the conquered country, the soldiers probably brought prisoners of war as well.
Private farms were based on the exploitation of slave prisoners of war, which they acquired through trade [4, 10, 3] 8.
7 In the Sardurian chronicle, 350,000 cavalry were mentioned.
 This is quite a force for time.
8 The main source of slavery in the Kingdom of Van was regular wars.
  During each invasion, Urartian kings brought hundreds of prisoners of war, sometimes in the thousands.
 According to the texts of the "Khorkhorian Chronicle", Argishti I transferred 150-200 thousand people to the kingdom of Van.
 The records state that the prisoner of war was killed and the other was taken alive.
 Given the importance of thousands of prisoners of war in the Kingdom of Van, they did heavy construction work.
 Some prisoners of war were enslaved and used in temple, administrative, and military elite farms.
 The rest were included in rural communities.
The slaves participated in the construction of cities, castles, artificial lakes, irrigation systems, canals.
  However, no information has been preserved about the role of slaves in the Temple of Tsarist farms.
In conclusion, it should be noted that during the reign of Argishti I [9, 5] the number of slaves enslaved by the Urartians reached 300,000.
 In just one invasion, the king brought thousands of slaves into the kingdom.
  BC 785-772 During that time, the Urartians took about 300,000 prisoners of war.
 About 150,000 prisoners of war were brought to the kingdom after killing some of them (the number was written taking into account that the data about 774 BC մոտ about 773 BC are missing).
In the "Khorkhorian Chronicle" Argishti, together with the number of prisoners of war brought to the territory of the kingdom, mentions that he killed a part of them.
 Therefore, it can be assumed that the king subjugated about 300 thousand, but took only a part of the kingdom.
LITERATURE [1] Adonts N., History of Armenia, Yerevan, 1972, pp. 137-8.
[2] Grekyan E., "Biaynili-Urartu. State և Society (Historical-Archaeological Research) ”doctoral dissertation, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 209-11.
[3] Harutyunyan N. V., The formation of the state of Urartu, "Armenian People's History", Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, volume A, Yerevan, 1971, pp. 342-8.
[4] Textbook of the History of the Armenian People, Volume A, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 161-73.
[5] Ghapantsyan G., The History of Urartu, Yerevan, 1940, p. 156.
[8] Пиотровский Б. B., Vanskoe empire (Urartu), sc. 85-6.
The prisoners of war for the Urartian economy can be assumed to have killed the self-employed.
 It is possible that other people were killed, frightening the other slaves into what would happen to them if they did not obey.
 Prisoners of war were resettled.
 We learn from the protocols that Argishti A. 782 Relocated 6600 prisoners of war (from Khati ևupan countries) to Erebuni.
[10] Zimansky P., Ecology and Empire.
 The Structure of the Urartian State. Studies in [11] Salvini M., Corpus dei testi urartei, vol. I. The descriptions of pietra and roccia.
 I Testi, Roma, Baghumyan SIRANUSHARGISHTI A. ATTEMPT OF DIGITATION OF CERTAINS SUBJECTED
