THE EXISTENCE OF POSTMODERNISTIC ELEMENTS IN THE "FREE ZONE" TALK SHOW OF THE PUBLIC TELEVISION "In the information age, the first place is occupied by" video-audio culture "as a pillar of mass media.
 Under the influence of cinema, first of all, the so-called "screen generation" begins to take shape1.
Everything that is displayed on the color screen tends to shape this or that behavior in the viewer.
 In many cases, they are modeled on the knowledge and ideas of the local viewer, adapted from Western values.
 The lifestyles offered by television can be said to be false styles that, in opposition to reality, try to create a "quasi-reality".
  This reality, which is wrapped around the neck of the viewer by the media, is a characteristic feature of the postmodern.
 According to some Western researchers, "Modern television is an archetypal postmodernist form."
 The postmodern style of television is determined not only by the presentation of audio-visual materials, but also by the culture of speech.
 It is television that dictates moral, aesthetic values ​​and norms of behavior to the audience today.
  In modern media, spontaneity is not so much reflected as constructed (or, conversely, deconstructed) through the connection of various facts and images, thus forming a fragmentary, collage consciousness in the viewer ”2.
As one of the strong features of postmodernism is the playful nature of culture - performance (theatricality), it can be said that in practice this or that event acquires a bright "effective staging or show" on television3.
"In a staged society", according to Guy Debord, a political show, a legal show, etc. are brought to the fore.
 The main thing is the participation in the show, the audience և the performer are merged, not individualized. The current carnival atmosphere turns into a permanent horse of life ”4.
  In the case of television, particularly in debates and talk show genres, the viewer is pleased that one of the debating parties eventually finds himself in the status of a "loser."
Umberto Eco states: "The TV viewers are not interested in the essence of the conversation, just what the guests invited to the program say, they only like the insults, the clashes between the guests.
 The reality is that the talk show audience enjoys it only when the participants are arguing with each other, and the topic of the dispute is not so important.
 They like angry faces, shouts, the words "let me finish, I did not interrupt you". All this is already embedded in the script of the program ”5.
If any idea has already been fixed through a TV script, then the opinions expressed by experts in various fields are nothing but a simulation (falsification) to solve a pressing problem, which is typical of postmodernism.
  In the modern sense, "simulation" is defined as a true copy, the original of which never existed (F. Jameson), or as some representation (representation), which does not really exist (J. Baudrillard), a sign that Father 1 Kirillova N. , Media Culture.
 from modern to postmodern, Moscow, 2006, p. 306. 2 Poznan. V., "Screen culture" in the world of postmodernism, (available at http: // www.
//russkayarech.ru/files/issues/2008/2/07-poznin.pdf link).
3 See Нарижный Ю., Философия постмодернизма (available at http: // www.
//postmodern.in.ua/?p=1695 link).
5 Уко У., Talk show - just screams and staged disputes (available at http: // www.
//inosmi.ru/world/20130617/210126257.html link).
He calls you "the original," the copy (J. Deleuze), as he puts it, "a mold, a substitute for reality, a true resemblance, an empty egg."
If we look at the simulation in the case of television, especially in the case of a talk show, we can say unequivocally that any topic that takes place in a talk show is the presentation of urgent issues of the society, mainly with an inflated egg.
  Simulation is a characteristic of postmodernism, modern media products are not devoid of them, on the contrary, they are built on them, trying to copy the situation by staging it.
 "The show is a unique staging, a theatrical scene, which accompanies the events of public and cultural life.
  Thus, the transformation of television scenes into a subject of daily entertainment for the viewer is considered by some researchers to be a unique nature բն problem of modern television.
 By combining different genres and methods of influencing the audience in its structure, it seeks to gain the audience's attention.
  In order to enjoy the popularity among the viewers, the creators of talk shows buy any trick, undermine the foundations of the society, or, on the contrary, remove long-forgotten traditions from the depths of memory, violate ethical norms.
Of course, neither the creators nor the TV viewers hide that what happened on the screen within the framework of that show is nothing but a game. ”2
 Talk shows appeared in the Armenian media culture in 2005, and according to some experts, the first talk show is the "Open Project" program of the Public Television.
 In order to comment on the economic, social, cultural and other issues of importance in the society, let us consider the talk show "Free Zone" broadcast on Public Television from the point of view of exposing such elements of postmodernity as performance և falsification (simulation).
First of all, let's start with how the authors of the talk show describe "Free Zone": "Free Zone" talk show is a free platform where all social issues are discussed, which are in the center of public attention, are urgent և need a solution.
 The classic dimension of a talk show is the following: participants for and against, with their arguments and counter-arguments.
  In the pavilion, public, political figures and state officials each look at the issue from their own point of view, and the journalistic investigation shows what is the reality, who has failed, who is responsible.
The topic under discussion is also viewed from the point of view of international experience.
  The video shows how the developed countries solve the given problem, or in case of not solving the catastrophic consequences ”3.
At first glance, when we read the description, it seems that the authors of this program really think about the issues that concern the society, and the journalistic investigation shows "real cases".
  The reference of the international experience to the given topic of the talk show, which took place in the description of the program, reminds us that the issues to be discussed are solved on a global level, it remains only through this program or will it be solved with the help of the Armenian reality.
  The description allows us to think for a moment that if there are many such programs, the existing problems in the society will be solved quickly due to the skilled arguments and analysis of the invited guests-experts.
 But that is just a moment before we notice the phrase "talk show".
In this program, let's look at the postmodern performance.
  A performance is a short performance performed by one or more participants.
 Unlike in the theater, in the case of a performance, the performer performs real actions, no special preparations are supposed.
  It can be conventionally called a theater of visual arts4.
 In the "Free Zone" talk show, the performance is presented in the following way: the free platform is the stage, the pros and cons are the participants in the theatricalization, the "fake" hero is the presentation of reality, the journalistic investigation is the reflection of international experience, the re-presentation of that reality.
1 Гусева Е., Театрализация жизни, как фотографитация симулякров, 2011, (available at http.
//9emaya.com/index.php?topic=14531.msg1037083#msg1037083).
3 See http for more details.
//www.1tv.am/en/program/Azat-goti/29#sthash.0o0X83Nb.dpuf link.
4 See http for more details.
with reference to //studopedia.org/1-81861.html.
Thus, the "Free Zone" talk show on 04.12.14. The issue discussed issues of public importance, such as divorce.
 The authors of the program titled "Virtual Divorce" the break-up of a family, one of the most important social institutions.
  The use of the word virtual tends to be directly related to the TV-accessible Internet.
 Accordingly, before entering into the actual discussion, it can be assumed that the reason for the divorce is somehow connected to the Internet.
 The first step, providing the viewer with the title, is done.
 The viewer "digested" the title of the program.
  This game title allows him to "train the brain" a little տալ to give possible explanations.
 Thus, the start of the game is given, the turn is to pass to the actual "theatricalization".
It can be said that the TV talk show, on the one hand, acts as a unique lock, through which the dissatisfaction accumulated in the society is expressed, on the other hand, with artificially swollen passions, it distracts the viewer from reality, performing one of the main functions of mass culture.
As in the case of staging, when everyone plays their part, this principle works in this talk show. Marriage registration specialist, journalist, publicist, sociologist, psychologist, police officer are invited.
 The roles are distributed, որոշ postmodern theatricality is combined with simulation.
Here the showman mentions. "Today the hero is present in our pavilion, whose name and, of course, we will not publish his name for understandable reasons.
  But he is here, will he tell the story? ”
  Thus, the simulation in the talk show is in the image of an unknown hero, whom the viewer does not see, but what he says is supposed to be perceived as reality.
 There is no guarantee that this hero is real, and what he told is an episode taken from his personal life.
  Teres speaks here of "postmodern aesthetics, which has had a significant impact on the peculiarity of television.
  Television broadcasts are beginning to be perceived as reality, and public life as a television mirror ”2.
During the first twelve minutes of the program, experts provide information on world experience, mechanisms for the legal regulation of cybercrime, the results of some sociological research.
  Postmodern theatricalization is confirmed by the presentation of an episode of the "fake" hero, a victim of the Internet dating acquaintance, which the viewer did not see, but only listened to.
 The "fake" hero, thus, can be said to be the representation of reality.
The talk show is interrupted by the presentation of a journalistic investigation.
  If we consider the presence of "fake" heroism as a representation of reality, then the journalistic investigation անդր the reference to the international experience within the framework of this talk show, we can say, is the representation of reality.
Apart from the fact that the participants of the theatrical performance, like all those gathered, must perform a certain artistic action, there may also be a mass reaction, which is expressed especially through applause.
 The viewer thus shows his consent or vice versa3.
  In case of the "Virtual Divorce" program of the "Free Zone" talk show, we can consider the writer-publicist from the invited guests as a "loser", who with his emotional expressions provides the entertainment typical of the talk show.
The same principle և with similar accents, the reality is built in the other issues of this talk show as well.
 Despite the fact that the reality built in this media production is somewhat conditional, its significant impact on the audience cannot be ruled out.
 Postmodernist simulation և theatricality, it can be said, fully fits into the concept of the "Free Zone" talk show, creating a "quasi-reality" for the viewer, ensuring the realization of an entertaining function typical of mass culture.
1 See Gmyzina,, TV talk show as a model of global mass culture.
3 Pedagogical regulation method of theatricalization in the creative process of art-publicist programs (available at http: // www.
//www.irbis.vegu.ru/repos/12560/Html/13.htm) Alina Nahapetyan THE POSSIBILITY OF POSTMODERNIST ELEMENTS PUBLIC TELEVISION
