THE PRESENCE OF THE PAST AND THE SELF-PROBLEM OF FORMER SLAVES IN TONY MORRISSON'S NOVEL «" Even though the past is not a straitjacket to oppress and restrain, but it should not be forgotten.
Man must criticize it, test it, resist it, understand it in order to acquire true, mature wisdom. ”
          Tony Morrison The above lines, perhaps, best represent the essence of African-American literature, a literature that became internationally criticized especially in the 1970s, particularly because of Tony Morrison's literary work.
 The main goal of this literature is to establish one's own identity in the present due to overcoming the past.
 Such an issue is raised in Morrison's novel "The Beloved", in which all the slaughtered heroes, the representatives of the society of love, have become the victims of their own, as if they can not get rid of it.
 Eliot Butler-Evans notes that the raw material for Morrison's novels is "the past reality of blacks."
 In his work, Morrison combines the traditions of American literature, postmodernist tendencies and the peculiarities of African-American essence.
  Her trilogy ("The Beloved" - 1987, "Love" - ​​2003, "Pity" - 2008) presents "love, slavery, its destructive effect on a woman's nature and motherly feelings through the eyes of a woman writer" [2].
"The Beloved" is based on the true story of Margaret Garner, a runaway slave who kills one of her children by stabbing him in the throat so that the child can escape the fate of a slave.
 Throughout the novel we get acquainted with the memories left over from the terrible stories of slavery.
  At the center is Seth's story, which parallels the life of other former slaves in Cincinnati, Ohio during the Reconstruction Era (1873).
  All this is presented by a postmodernist trick, that is, the violation of time boundaries, the flow of consciousness of the characters in some places.
  We have before us slaves whose past does not give them rest: Seth, Paul Dee, Baby Sagz Jurisch, as well as their already free generation, which on an unconscious level still bears the traces of slavery - Denver.
 This is proved by the following words with Seth. "I used to think it was my memory.
 You know, some you forget, but some you never.
 But it was not.
 The place, the places are still there.
 If a house burns down, there is no other, but the place, its image remains, not only in my memory, but there in the world.
 What I remember is a picture floating out of my head.
  I mean, even if I do not think, even if I die, the image of what I did or knew or saw will remain.
  "Exactly where it happened."
Seth և 18-year-old Denver lives in house 124 with the permanent companion of Seth's dead daughter.
  Seth is in a constant struggle to get rid of the past until Paul Dean, her friend from the "Sweet House" who casts out the ghost, appears.
  Morrison points out that "the dead are perceived as living, the living are living in the same world."
 This is evidenced by the following episode from the novel, when Paul Dean hears the grievances and cries of the dead as he passes by the cemetery. … The heavenly graveyard full of the riots of the dead in Miami, who are no longer satisfied with resting under the mounds that cover them.
 […] They were indignant [վրա] shouting on the banks of the Liking River, sighing in the trees of Catherine Street, winding down on the pigs' herds. "[3]
Another "proof" of the presence of the dead in everyday life is the post-passage, in which we see the conviction of the dead that the dead still continue to take an active part in their lives. "A house inhabited by the activity of the living…" [3].
People with such consciousness can not get rid of their past, even if the memory of that past only oppresses and disrupts the normal course of their lives.
He left Seth alone (cid.
0) he can look to the future. After ousting his daughter Paul Di's Ghost, it seems that the past is already with Hanover.
 But soon a 20-year-old girl called herself "Beloved" appeared in their life, who remembered nothing but her name.
 The book regularly hints at the fact that Bell is Seth's murdered child, who has returned in the form of an adult girl.
  At once, a deep bond arises between Seth's "Belle", a strange love, about which Paul Dinhet expresses himself in the following way: "It's dangerous," thought Paul Dean.
  It is dangerous for an ex-slave to love something so much, especially when her children are the object of that love.
 The best thing to do is to just love a little more, so that when they break your back in a bag of confusion, there is still a little bit of love left to give to the other. ”[3]
Bell realized his own existence only through Seth. "It makes me smile, it makes my face smile" [3].
 "You are my face, I am you.
 Why do you leave me because I am you? ”[3]
Sold to the Garner family at the age of thirteen, becoming a member of their "Sweet Home", Seth then goes through severe trials.
 The "Sweet House" of the Garner was a kind of mild slavery.
  The name is chosen in an ironic tone. The house is called "sweet" for the slaves from the moment the Garners become its owner.
However, the relative freedom of slaves demanded heavy compensation here.
  Seth thought of the Sweet House this way. "He was depicted in front of her with shameless beauty.
 It had never been so terrifying, so it made him wonder if hell was a beautiful place either. ”[3]
Mr. Garner had mild rules for slaves. they had the right to express their opinion.
  That's why the house was considered sweet for them.
 But while reading the novel, we understand that the name "Sweet House" actually has a double ironic meaning.
 That place could not be considered their home, because there they were not valued in terms of humanity. Only their work was appreciated.
We see this, at least, in the example of Baby Garner, who was released from prison by Mr. Garner, on the condition that Halle serve him forever, as did his children, who would later become his employees.
After Garner's death, Mr. Teacher, nicknamed Mrs. Garner, made slave life so unbearable that they decided to flee.
 Those who fail, Paul Dean և Sixon, receive their punishment. Paul Dean was physically tortured and Sixon was killed.
 Whites do not allow blacks to forget their past, start a new life, become full-fledged members of society.
 As Seth puts it, "there is no greater misfortune in the world than white men" for blacks.
  This is evidenced by the enumeration of many facts in the book, especially the fact that Paul Dean was always afraid when he saw any black faces in the newspaper. After all, they would not have printed the picture of the skin just like that. Only when the news about them could interest the people of Cincinnati bring them pleasure and satisfaction.
By losing their freedom, blacks also lose their identity.
This is evidenced by the fact that Seth no longer remembered her mother tongue.
"The loss of language represents the cultural disruption experienced by slaves.
  The colonizers' policies led to the oblivion of slaughtered slaves, the indigenous African language և traditional culture. ”[6]
In our opinion, the most influential example of losing one's identity is when Seth kills her child to free herself from the clutches of slaveholders.
 When he justifies his move, Paul Dean responds as follows: "You have two legs, Seth, not four."
Either Seth claims that she took this step out of motherly love, but we understand from Paul Dee's words that she acted like an animal, moving instinctively.
 And what should be expected from a person who was treated like an animal, not allowed to realize that he is a human being?
  Paul Dean feels like that in such an animal condition.
 He is disturbed by the memory of looking at the roosters roaming free in the yard, while the piece of iron in his mouth was punished for trying to escape.
After that incident, Paul Dean did not consider himself a valuable person, nor did he feel it.
Ex-slaves who consider themselves unworthy of being called human beings are encouraged to love themselves during the Sagittarius Sermons, thus coming out against the idea of ​​slavery that slaves are inferior to human beings.
 Such is the call of Paul Dee at the end of the story, addressed to the dying Seth. "You's your best thing, Seth!"
 It's you. ”[3]
And the whites thought so about the blacks. "White people believed that regardless of their behavior, every skin is hidden under the skin.
 Rapidly navigable waters, swaying and screaming monkeys, sleeping snakes, red resins ready for their sweet white blood.
Slaves cut off from their homeland, alienated from their language and culture, deprived of their freedom, lose their sense of time, mixed with the past and the present, and there is no talk of the future at all.
The past is looked back on from the moment Paul Dean appears.
 The latter could be a hope for the future, change Seth's life, but the past is stronger. He is also a prisoner of the past և finds himself in Cincinnati after seven years of wandering.
The consciousness of the past is so strong in the characters of the novel that Morrioson even comes up with a new term to describe the situation when the past and the present in the human consciousness come together: "rememory."… You sink into the memory that belongs to someone else If you go and stand in the same place, it will happen again. It will be there for you, waiting for you.
 […] It will be there waiting for you forever. ”[3]
Rememory is not memory or forgetfulness, but recurring memory (fear of repetition). it is neither a noun nor a verb, but it is a combination of the two.
 Rememory is Morrison's attempt to reconsider the memory of slavery, to find a way to recall, to present in a different way what an entire culture has so far tried to suppress.
For them, there is the possibility of the present, immersed in the past, there is no possibility of any other alternative stage. "Everything is now, always is now, there will never be a time when I do not bow down and see people bowing down." [248]
"But his brain was not interested in the future.
 Filled with the past, striving for more, it left no room for imagination, let alone to compile the next diary. "[3]
There may be no salvation for Seth and Paul Dee, they may not be able to see the future.
 But Morrison has a heroine, whose salvation we can doubt. That's Denver.
 He is the only acting character who has not lost hope և Faith in the future, endlessly waiting for his father to return.
 After the brothers left, the girl, who had an isolated childhood, was cut off from society.
  However, the upbringing of her grandmother, Bebi Sagz, allowed her to remain human.
 Loving his mother, he consciously tries to stay away from her so that she does not become his victim like his mother.
  When Bell appears in Seth's life, Denver is pushed into the background, continuing to love both his mother and his sister, who has returned in the form of Bell.
  For the sake of her mother's recovery, she is ready to do work appropriate for her age.
 He is the first to realize that Belvat has an impact on his mother, consuming her health and life.
Following the advice of Baby Sagz, Denver manages to save himself. He leaves 124 houses, which had the stigma of the past on him.
Thus, in The Beloved, Morrison introduces us to two generations, those who have lost the meaning of their own lives and are suffering from the effects of slavery, Seth և Paul Dee, պատրաստ those who are ready to get rid of slavery և Looking to the future, Դ Denver.
  If in the case of the former the past has become their essence, horror-memories oppress them, they are not able to realize their own identity, then the second generation, Denver, is ready to accept its identity, the past connected with it, before moving.
 That's Morrison's message to accept yourself միայն only to develop that way.
LITERATURE [1] Elliott BE, Race, Gender, and Desire.
 Narrative Strategies in the Fiction of Toni CadeBambara, Toni Morrison, and Alice Walker, Philadelphia.
 Temple UP, 1989, p. 59. [2] Карасик О. B., "Sadness" Tony Morrison.
 Ideological Art [3] Morrison T., Beloved. Croydon.
 Vintage, 2005, pp. 51, 182, 35, 75, 254, 256, 7, 194, [7] Hirsch M., Maternity and Rememory.
  Toni Morrison's Beloved, Representations of Markosyan ArmineANZYAL PRESENCE AND THE PROBLEM OF FORMER SLAVES TONY MORRISON'S "NOVEL" NOVEL Keywords: African American
