SERVITUTY IN RA CIVIL LAWServitut has its own place in the system of legal rights.
It was known in ancient Roman law.
 "Servitus" literally means "slavery of property" 1.
 Easements were defined as independent, permanent rights, in the presence of which the owner of the property assumed unconditional passive, gratuitous obligations, in particular, he could not forbid the holder of the easement right to use his right, could not use the property as before defining the servitude.
  In Roman law, there were two types of servitude: land (servitus praediorum) and personal (servitus personarum) 2.
 By virtue of the land servitude, the owner of the land plot was given the right to demand from the owner of the neighboring land plot to grant the right of limited use of that land plot.
 The land allotted for the use of material facilities was called praedium serviens, and the land in favor of which servitude was established was called praedium dominas 3.
The study and teaching of Roman law նպաստ subjects would contribute to the formation of a system of limited property law.
  In parallel with property rights, there were special property rights in Roman law, the holders of which were in direct contact with the property.
  Jura in re aliena implied restrictions on property rights, which were established by agreement of the parties or by other means not prohibited by law, ով by which persons who were not property owners were entitled to a right 1 See Воронова Е. А., Тедорадзе И. A., Analysis of Legislation by Restricted Benefits // Effective Anti-Crisis Management. URL:
http:
//info.ecm.ru/magazine/64/eau_64_64.htm (13.04.2015).
2 See Avetisyan V D ․, Roman Private Law, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House 2013, 2013, page 61.
3 See Avetisyan V D ․, in the same place, pp. 61-63.
to use that property in full or in part, either in person or by inheritance, by transferring that right to another person.
 Holders of such rights could protect it not only from third parties but also from encroachments by the owner.
  In ancient Rome, restrictions on private property included servitutes, emphiteusis, superficies, and pignus 4.
According to Justinian, the servitudes are of two types: property-personal (D.8.1.1) 5.
 The most common types of personal servitude were ususfructus (D.7.1.1), usus (D.7.8.1), habitatio (D.7.8.2), and the right to use another slave or animal (operae). servorum vel animalium (D.7.7.1)) 6.
The usufruct was the full, gratuitous use of someone else's property, the right to dispose of the fruits obtained from it, which could be transferred to the usufructor to a third party.
 There was a variety of usufruct, the subject of which could be consumables.
 It is called quasi usufructus.
  Uzus was the right to free use of another և fruit և obtained from it for life.
  In this case, the person could use it as much as he needed to meet the needs of his family members.
 He could not transfer this right to the usufructor to a third party (D.7.8.2.1).
According to Article 210 of the RA Civil Code (hereinafter the Code), the rights of limited use of another's property are: 1) property servitude, 2) limited personal servitude, 3) full-fledged personal servitude (usufruct), 4) the right to use living space.
A common, clear classification of servitudes still does not exist.
 Different theorists offer many bases և criteria for their classification.
  Foreign countries have rich experience in this field, so we consider it appropriate to start the study of servitude types from the study of foreign legislation.
  The summary of the rich foreign experience will give us an opportunity to suggest ways to improve the Armenian legislation, to enrich it with foreign experience.
4 See Avetisyan V D ․, in the same place, pp. 60-61.
5 See Monuments of Roman Rights ․ Laws 12 tables ․ Institutions GA я Digesti нистиниана, М ․, «Зерцало», 1997, էջ 301.
6 See Roman Partial Law.
  Textbook / row ․ И․ В․ Новицкого, И․ Everything Перетерского, М ․, «Юристъ», 2004, p. 448.
Thus, the classical basis for the classification of an easement is the circumstance of its belonging, that is, it belongs to the land or to a specific person, which allows it to be divided into property-personal.
  For example, Article 7 1131 of the Latvian Civil Code explicitly states that if the servitude is defined as a utility or a legal entity, it is considered private, and if it is defined in favor of a certain real estate, then it is an easement.
 Մ. Գ. Garrido finds that the division of the servitude gives rise to property և some personal controversy 9 even disputes9.
The concept of "personal servitude" is given in the civil codes of Austria, Switzerland, Latvia, Ukraine, Georgia.
 The concept of "personal servitude" in the Austrian city. According to Article 1190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it includes the right to use someone else's property, if necessary, to receive fruits and income from it, as well as the right of residence.
  In the Civil Code of Georgia, the concept of "personal servitude" means the right to self-residence.
  German city. The term "personal limited servitude" is used in Code 10, which combines both the features of a land servitude and the usufruct 11.
Referring to the classical concept of servitude, it should be noted that in different legislations it is called differently: predial, legal, real, property, land, property.
  The literature does not pay attention to the similar terminological difference, as it has no fundamental significance12.
 In countries where the concepts of personal servitudes are not separated in the legislation, the legislator is limited to the general concept of "servitude". 7 In the Latvian Civil Code, Chapter 4 refers to servitude, Articles 1130-1259.
8 Latvian Civil CodeAvailable http: // www.
//unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UNTC/UNPAN018388.pdf(04.05.2017).
9 See Garrido M. G., Roman partial law, M., 2005, p. 376.
10 German Civil Code Available at http: // www.
//www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bgb (04. 05.2017).
11 See Василевская Л. ,., Вещные сделки по германскому праву
  methodology of civil engineering, 2004, p. 363.
12 See Comments on the Country Code of the Russian Federation (post) / S.A. Bo– 2-ed, ed. and more. - M.
 Циcicinform, 2002. - 592 p .; Ахметьянова З.А. Exercise right.
textbook, M., Statute, 2011, page 360.
թյամբ.
 An exception may be, for example, the Italian Civil Code, where the servitude is called predial, but here the concept of "personal servitude" is missing.
 And Panama City? In the example, 13 equal signs are placed before the "ordinary servitudes".
 In turn, the city of Louisiana, USA. Article 533 of the Code of Criminal Procedure distinguishes two types of servitudes: pre-personal 14.
The "land" variety of servitude is very common.
 In fairness, the term "predial" is often translated as earthly, or the word "predial" comes from the Latin word "praedium", which means "property".
 It is not appropriate to put a sign of final equality between these concepts. "
 This issue is beyond the scope of legal research. it is a subject of linguistic study.
The servitude is called land in the civil codes of Germany, Austria and Ukraine.
  The notion of "true servitude", for example, in the Estonian Law on Real Rights15, which explicitly states that a real servitude is equated with a pre-servitude.
  The above-mentioned names probably come from the English word "real", which can be translated as "immovable", "real" միայն used only in this և not in the original sense, as real, objectively existing.
Ս. P. Grisha thinks that "material servitude is defined for an indefinite circle of persons" 16.
 While I. V. Athanasius denies this view, noting that "the above is not applicable to the principled notion of servitude, as in such a situation there can be no question of a person's subjective substantive rights at all."
 We believe that material servitude cannot be defined for a single circle of persons.
13 Panama Civil Code Available at https.
//archive.org/stream/civilcodeofrepub00partrich/civilcodeofrepub00partrich_djvu.txt(04.05.2017).
14 Louisiana Civil Code Available at https.
//www.legis.la.gov/legis/Laws_Toc.aspx?folder=67&level=Parent (04.05.2017).
15 Estonian law on property rights Available at https.
//www.juristaitab.ee/sites/www.juristaitab.ee/files/elfinder/ruseadused/ЗАКОН%20О%20ВЕЩНОМ%20ПРАВЕ.pdf (04.05.2017).
16 See Grishaev S. P., Easement.
 Prepared for the system "ConsultantPlus" / S.P. Grishaev, 2006, page 2.
17 See Афанасьев И․ В․, Service in the system of limited weights, М․, 2015, p. 102.
There are many ways to classify an easement.
 According to Article 474 of the Austrian Civil Code, if the predominant land is intended for agricultural use, then the servitude is called field.
 If the dominant plot is intended for other uses, the servitude is called home.
 According to the French city. According to Article 687 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, ether servitudes are defined for the use of buildings;
  A. Գ. Ostapenko considers that "the division of servitudes has no practical significance between rural and urban" 19.
 In our opinion, we cannot completely agree with this point of view.
 For example, such servitudes may differ in their place of definition, time, significance, volume of servitude, and other circumstances.
  It is clear that different conditions for the implementation of servitudes are needed for the passage of animals in the villages where ordinary people pass through the city.
According to Article 211, Part 5 of the Code, property servitude can be voluntary-compulsory, and according to Article 213, voluntary servitude is defined with the written consent of the person requesting the servitude, the owner of the service property.
  In case of disagreement on the establishment of a voluntary property servitude, the court shall establish a compulsory property servitude at the request of the person requesting the servitude.
 It turns out that the legislator has established the written consent of the parties or the court decision as the basis for the emergence of servitude.
 We consider it necessary to address the issue of the possibility of establishing an easement by virtue of the fact of use for a certain period of time.
 It has some similarities with the institute of antiquity.
  Article 187 of the Code considers it possible to acquire ownership of property by virtue of the statute of limitations.
  Since the right of ownership is more weighty than the right of servitude, it consists of 3 powers of possession, use and disposal, and servitude presupposes only the possibility of limited use of property, so we consider that it would be appropriate for the emergence of servitude. 18 See M., Infotropic Media, 2011, pp. 3-261.
19 See Ostapenko A. G., Law and regulation of relations between neighbors, names and borders, mediated by services. Dis. … Канд. юрид. science, Krasnodar.
 Cuban State Agrarian University, 2012, page 98.
to establish as an independent basis the fact of conscientious, open և continuous use of real estate for 5 years.
  The emergence of a servitude by virtue of the statute of limitations for acquisition is not possible, as that institution is applicable to property recognized as ownerless, and for a certain period of time there is no need to declare the property ownerless for the emergence of a servitude.
In the RA Civil Code, the property considered to be an object of servitude is not divided into "superior" or "employee".
 That is, the land or other real estate can be in the role of both a servant and a priority property.
 The use of the general term "other real estate" in the Code does not allow defining the list of servitude objects.
 We think that it would be appropriate to clearly separate the servitude objects according to the service-priority items.
 The need for such separation arises when we discuss the issue of the possibility of overloading the subsoil with servitude.
 According to Part 1 of Article 11 of the RA Code on Subsoil, the subsoil of the Republic of Armenia is the exclusive property of the state.
 If we follow the general logic of the RA Code, it is proved that for the sake of satisfying certain needs of a person, an easement can be established for the subsoil, because the subsoil enters under the notion of "immovable self".
 And as it was mentioned, the entrails are the exclusive property of the Republic of Armenia, which can be provided for use only for geological studies and extraction of minerals.
 The Code envisages only two types of subsoil use, among which, however, there is no mention of limited subsoil use.
 There is a contradiction between the RA Civil Code and the Subsoil Codes.
 Meanwhile, we consider the opposite situation possible, when the entrails are in the status of a dominant object.
 Thus, the separation of servitude objects according to the servant's priority becomes a vital necessity.
RA city. Pursuant to Article 217 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the property servitude may be terminated if the grounds for establishing it have ceased, in case of overlap of the owners of the superior service property, in cases when the real estate is not encumbered due to property servitude, or the owner of the priority property After the expiration of the payment term defined by the contract, he did not pay the regular payment for the servitude more than twice.
  In the latter two cases, the owner of the serving property has the right to request in court to terminate the servitude.
The same grounds for termination of servitude are defined by the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (Article 276) and Belarus (Article 270).
 City of Latvia. Article 1237 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to define the numerous grounds for termination of servitude ․ they are terminated by concentrating the servitude rights's obligations in the hands of one person, the destruction of the dominant or serving real estate, the expiration of the term set for the servitude, the fulfillment of the condition, the ransom, the statute of limitations or the renunciation of the servitude.
 According to the city of Afghanistan. Article 2362 of the Code of Criminal Procedure terminates the servitude upon reaching or eliminating the term set for it.
 According to the next article, the servitude can be terminated in case of not using it for 15 years.
 Article 20 262 of the Civil Code of Azerbaijan enshrines four grounds for termination of servitude: 1) if the grounds for its establishment have been abolished, 2) in case of complete destruction of the serving real estate, 3) when the land belonging to a natural or legal person cannot be used for its purpose. accordingly, 4) if the owner of the priority property becomes the owner of the serving property21.
The issue of 22 possibilities of delirium remains open in our legislation.
  It is enshrined in the civil codes of a number of foreign countries, including Spain (Article 546), Quebec (Article 1191), Latvia (Article 1237), the Philippines (Article 631), and other countries.
  The essence of delirium is that in the case of a servitude relationship, the right holder, that is, the person in whose favor the servitude is established, gets the opportunity to waive his right, as a result of which the servitude ceases.
  According to Article 280, Part 1 of the Code, a citizen or a legal entity may renounce the right of ownership of the property belonging to it by declaring it in writing or by taking actions that clearly indicate its isolation from possession, use or disposal of the property without reserving any right to that property. of intent.
  As already mentioned, 20 Civil Code of Azerbaijan of Property is available at http.
//www.azpromo.az/uploads/legislation/Civil_code_eng_51b1e34e863c1.pdf(04-05-2017).
21 In this case, the owner has the right to terminate the servitude.
22 Dereliction is the renunciation of a right.
The right is more weighty. it consists of three powers, and the servitude is only the right of limited use of the property.
  So the question arises ․ If the legislature reserved the right of the property owner to relinquish his right to property over it, then why not give such an opportunity to the holder of the limited right to use the property?
  Therefore, we offer the RA city. To envisage naturalization as a separate basis for the cessation of servitude.
The grounds for termination of the servitude should include the destruction of the "property" serving it.
  This is logical, as the servitude viability is conditioned by the existence of superior service property.
 In the absence of one of them, the servitude can not exist.
  In other words, if there is no other property in favor of which an easement has been established, or which has been encumbered with an easement, then there can be no question of the further existence of the easement.
  Therefore, it becomes vital to envisage it as a basis for compulsory termination of the servitude, to fix it in the Code.
Examination of the legislation of foreign countries shows that the termination of the servitude as a result of not using it for a certain period of time is quite common.
Each country has shown a different approach to the issue of time.
 In Ukraine (Article 406) անում In Kazakhstan (Article 74) it is 3 years, in Latvia (Article 1250) և in Moldova (Article 440) - 10, in Afghanistan (Article 2363) - 15, in Spain (Article 546) - 20, in France (Article 706) ) և In Indonesia (Article 707) - 30 years և etc.
If the plot is overloaded with servitude but it is not used, it means that there is no need for servitude, so it should be stopped.
  We consider it expedient to set a three-year term for its termination as a result of servitude use.
Therefore, we propose to add the following to the list of grounds for termination of servitude in the Code: "The servitude terminates in case of continuous use for 3 years.
  The calculation of the term starts from the day after the state registration of the servitude or the entry into legal force of the court decision. ”
Article 214 of the Code stipulates that compulsory property servitude may be established to pass, travel ... or meet other needs of the owner of the priority property, which cannot be provided without establishing a servitude, or whose provision is associated with disproportionately significant costs. .
 The legislator does not reveal how much that "disproportionately significant expense" is.
  In other words, considering the cost disproportionately significant is left to the law enforcement agency, and the latter can qualify the disproportionately significant costs as a result, as a result of which the owner's rights and legal interests are illegally violated.
  It will not be appropriate to set a monetary amount.
  Therefore, we suggest to consider 30% of a person's monthly income as "disproportionately significant expenses".
 And in that income should be calculated the sums received for salary, honoraria or other works.
 Income, benefits, pensions, disability payments այլ other similar payments can not be calculated.
RA city. Article 214 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that compulsory servitude is defined by a court at the request of a person requesting servitude in case of disagreement on the establishment of voluntary servitude.
It turns out that it is optional, as a servitude can not be established in court, as long as the person requesting the servitude has not applied to the property owner.
 Such regulation provides additional guarantees to the rights of the owner.
  There are different points of view in the legal practice related to this issue in the legal literature.
 The Moscow Regional Arbitration Court dismissed the claim for servitude without examination, arguing that the plaintiff had not provided sufficient evidence that he had tried to obtain an agreement on the definition of servitude with the defendant before going to court23.
 The Code does not regulate the issues of regulating these relations by pre-trial procedure.
  For example, how should the plaintiff prove in court that he offered the defendant to agree on the definition of servitude, but the latter refused.
  Because if it was done orally, it would be quite difficult to prove it.
 Therefore, we propose to establish a norm, according to which the disagreement of the property owner regarding the establishment of an easement must be expressed in writing.
 This will be a special guarantee of protection of the owner's rights, as it will exclude the situations when the plaintiff immediately seeks the court without the prior consent of the respondent, when it is possible that he, the owner, agrees or 23 See Resolution of the Arbitration Court of Moscow from 19.04.2011 part № A4134308 / 10 // SPS "Consultant Plus".
how to establish a servitude, otherwise there would be no need for court intervention.
  In other words, why should the owner stand before the court when the dispute can be resolved through peaceful means?
 Besides, with such a regulation it will be possible to exclude the excessive burden of the courts.
  It turns out that the owner's written disagreement with the definition of servitude will completely rule out the above situation.
 The best proof of what is said is the civil case No. ESHD / 1028/02/12 of the Court of General Jurisdiction of Shengavit Administrative District of Yerevan, 2012. The court rejected the claim for compulsory servitude on December 4, 2012, arguing that although the respondent did not object to the establishment of a voluntary servitude, the plaintiff did not make such a claim and did not prove otherwise.
In the light of the legislation of foreign countries, presenting the specifics of the servitude, highlighting the existing shortcomings related to this institution, proposing possible solutions, we think it will be possible to avoid the above-mentioned problems related to legislative gaps to some extent.
Ani Khurshudyan SERVITUTE IN RA CIVIL LAW Keywords: Limited property right, personal servitude, usufruct, superior և serving property, delirium, voluntary և compulsory servitude Summary.
