INTERNATIONAL MILITARY COOPERATION AS A COMPONENT OF MILITARY SECURITY Military security has traditionally been one of the primary components of national security of states.
  It acts as an opportunity to protect the territory of the state, the population from external military threats and dangers1.
  Due to the processes of globalization, the deepening of the interconnectedness of the world, the growing proportional security threats, the states today consider international military cooperation as a key element of their military security.
  In the strategic documents regulating the defense sphere, more and more importance is given to military diplomacy.
 Moreover, this phenomenon is typical of states that differ significantly in geopolitical position, political, military and economic capabilities.
Thus, the development of allied-friendly cooperation is of key importance in the US defense strategy2.
2010 Among the main issues in the Russian military doctrine adopted in 2010 are the deepening of cooperation within the framework of international security organizations, the building of mutually beneficial cooperation with different states3.
 Expansion of bilateral և multilateral military և military-technical cooperation will play a key role in ensuring Kazakhstan's military security4.
  Developing processes within NATO և Developing ties with its allies is one of the two directions of Estonia's defense policy5.
 Among the tasks set by the Georgian Armed Forces is the fulfillment of international obligations, participation in international military cooperation6.
1 See Shahgeldyan M., National Security. The concept, the essence, the formation, the priorities, Yerevan, 2002, page 13.
2 See National Defense Strategy of the United States, Department of Defense, http.
//www.defense.gov/news/2008%20national%20defense%20strategy.pdf, p. 15.
3 See “Doctrine of War of the Russian Federation”, 2010, http: // www.
//news.kremlin.ru/ref_notes/461, chapter 3, point 28.
4 See “On the Establishment of Military Doctrines of the Republic of Kazakhstan”, http: // www.
//www.unesco.kz/cgi-bin/library?e=d5 See National Defense Strategy of Estonia, 2011, http: // www.
//www.kaitseministeerium.ee/files/kmin/img/files/KM_riigikaitse_strateegia_eng(2).pdf, p.
6 “The National Military Strategy of Georgia”, Ministry of Defense of Georgia, 2014, http.
//www.mod.gov.ge/docu Thus, depending on the priorities of their foreign and security policy, states can define international military cooperation in different ways, but its key place in the defense policy agenda of modern states is indisputable.
  This does not mean that defense diplomacy to replace military diplomacy to ensure military security, especially in a region with a difficult military-political environment such as the South Caucasus.
  Military diplomacy is the key component of military security, the system of guarantees created by which completes and completes the provision of military security of the state.
From the very beginning of gaining independence, international military cooperation has been perceived as a possible factor by the developers and implementers of Armenia's foreign security policy.
  Involvement in international organizations operating in the field of security is considered one of the means of ensuring the security of the Republic of Armenia1.
  In particular, the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) is considered a real guarantee of Armenia's security2.
The place and role of international military cooperation in the military security system of the Republic of Armenia was further defined by the adoption of basic documents regulating the spheres of national security and defense, such as the 2007 The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia adopted on February 7, the Military Doctrine of the Republic of Armenia adopted on December 25 of the same year.
The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia is a document defining the main directions of ensuring the national security of the Republic of Armenia3.
 According to the priorities set by the National Security Strategy, Armenia, being an interested participant in the development of a new international security system, first of all its European-regional sectors, seeks to implement the external security strategy on the principles of multi-vector integration4.
  The Republic of Armenia contributes to ensuring peace and security in the region and the world by participating in the international fight against transnational crimes, including international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and seeks to increase its involvement in international peace and security efforts through peacekeeping operations.
 "Realizing the limited capabilities of one state in the face of current challenges, the Republic of Armenia uses an active military force. 1 See Levon Ter-Petrosyan's speech in the United States, 1994, http.
//www.ilur.am/news/view/29128.html.
2 See the speech of President Serzh Sargsyan at the enlarged sitting held at the RA Ministry of Defense, 15.01.2013, http.
//www.president.am/en/statements-and-messages/item/2013/01/15/PresidentSerzh-Sargsyan-speech-session-Ministry-of-Defense/.
3 See "RA National Security Strategy", http.
//www.mil.am/1298095835.
4 See H. Kotanjyan, Perspectives of Ensuring the National Interests of the Republic of Armenia in the Context of Modernization of the General Security System, RA Ministry of Defense D. Kanayanian ARHI "Armenian Army" military science journal, 4 (62), 2009, page 46.
5 See "National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia" (approved by the National Security Council under the President of the Republic of Armenia on January 26, 2007), http.
//www.mfa.am/u_files/file/doctrine/Doctrinearm.pdf.
Political cooperation with both regional and extra-regional states.
  The Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia take part in international peace and security operations ... The cooperation in the military sphere of Armenia with individual countries, as well as membership in international and regional security organizations, participation in international programs implemented within their framework are aimed at ensuring national security.
As for the different directions of Armenia's international military cooperation, the Strategy includes membership in the CSTO among the components of Armenia's security, which is ensured by multilateral ties between member states, given that the military component of the Treaty provides preferential terms for military-technical supplies to member states. which is of primary importance for Armenia2.
  Among the pillars of Armenia's security system are cooperation with Russia within the CSTO, agreements on "Friendship, Cooperation" and "Mutual Assistance" signed between the two countries, "On Allied Cooperation between the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation for the 21st Century", close defense cooperation, and Russia's military The presence in the Caucasus is a possible factor in ensuring the security of the Republic of Armenia in the region 3 military-political balance3.
The partnership with NATO is also emphasized, emphasizing that the effective implementation of the Armenia-NATO Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) will contribute to the improvement and modernization of the defense system, increase its efficiency, and ensure compatibility with the defense systems of developed countries, including: with the Armed Forces ”4.
The Military Doctrine of the Republic of Armenia is a set of official concepts including the military-political, military-strategic, military-economic and military-technical bases of ensuring the military security of the Republic of Armenia5.
According to the doctrine, Armenia ensures the deepening of comprehensive international cooperation in the field of military security, the acquisition of international leading experience in favor of military-political and military strengthening of the Republic of Armenia, considering factors reducing military security threats as favorable conditions for military cooperation. International integration processes 6.
 According to the Doctrine, the development of multilateral-bilateral balanced military cooperation of the RA independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of borders, RA և NKR 1 See "National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia".
2 See in the same place!
3 See in the same place!
4 See in the same place!
5 See http!
//www.mil.am/1298096344.
6 See "RA Military Doctrine", section 1, chapter 2, point 9, http.
//www.mil.am/files/mil-doctrine-arm.pdf.
One of the military goals of providing the defense forces necessary for the physical security of the population is 1.
The Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia will pursue international guarantees of military security, which include the establishment and continued development of allied-partnership relations within the framework of collective security systems, as well as the assumption of international military security, so the main functions of the Armed Forces are fulfillment of obligations under international treaties. Participation in international humanitarian "rescue, peacekeeping" stabilization operations2.
  According to the doctrine, military involvement in order to ensure international security is the expansion of the participation of various security structures ների in the operations of international forces, the aim of which is the full assumption of the RA share in international security ներգր involvement of international security systems3.
International military cooperation is referred to in the Public Awareness Document on the Results of the Strategic Defense Review of the Republic of Armenia. "Will Armenia remain a stable supporter of international security?"
  It will be implemented within the framework of the OSCE, CSTO, NATO և other missions and multinational forces authorized by the UN Security Council ”4.
The study of the above-mentioned documents allows concluding that the international military cooperation affects the military security of the Republic of Armenia in several directions.1. Military diplomacy contributes to the increase of the efficiency of the Armed Forces, the main guarantor of the security of the Republic of Armenia, to the development of the defense system.
Touching upon the role of the Republic of Armenia in the CSTO NATO programs, the Minister of Defense of the Republic of Armenia Seyran Ohanyan emphasizes that in this way not only the international prestige of the Armenian Army increases, but also the Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia get acquainted with the advanced experience in modern armies.
 Membership in the CSTO is not only a important component of Armenia's security, but also provides preferential conditions for military-technical supplies, increasing the army's combat effectiveness through annual joint military exercises6.
 Cooperation with NATO contributes to the modernization of the defense sector through reforms based on international experience7.
  Bilateral military cooperation with the Russian Federation, the United States, Greece and about two dozen other countries is also needed to increase the combat effectiveness of the RA Armed Forces.
2. International guarantees of military security are ensured through the implementation of military diplomacy.
1 See "RA Military Doctrine", section 2, chapter 4, point 16.
2 See in the same place!
3 See ibid., Section 1, chapter 4, point 20.
4 See "Public Awareness Document on the Results of the Strategic Defense Review of the Republic of Armenia," p.
5 See S. Ohanyan, The 20-Year Chronicle of the Armenian Army, Yerevan, 2012, p. 208.
6 See E. Minasyan, History of the Third Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2014, p. 535.
7 See ibid., P. 535.
In the modern world, it is impossible to ensure the military security of the country only with the power of its own armed forces.
  H. Kotanjyan says: "When talking about strengthening the military security of modern states (considering its external side) it is natural to conclude that strengthening their defense and military-political situation is possible not by increasing military power, the destructiveness of which is almost doubtful, but international, regional and the establishment of bilateral security systems. ”1
3. Through military diplomacy, Armenia assumes its share of international security, which allows it to have a definite impact on the development of the security environment.
The result of the collapse of the Cold War-era world order was the elimination of the simple demarcation between internal and external security2.
  New threats to the military security of the states (terrorism, increase in the number of other transnational crimes, etc.) became imperative for the effective fight against the deepening of bilateral "multilateral cooperation."
  The Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia are trying to intensify their involvement in the joint efforts of the international community against these threats.
 In this way, the international component of the RA military security is completed, just as Armenia assumes its share in ensuring international security.
 RA Minister of Defense S. Ohanyan notes. "We do not have the right to be just a passive seeker in the field of security; we are obliged to participate in the processes of ensuring international security to the best of our ability.
  The deepening of all that, the deepening of international cooperation, makes the security of our country more invulnerable ”3.
The above-mentioned three directions are mainly intertwined in the dimensions of international military cooperation implemented by the Republic of Armenia in bilateral and multilateral spheres.
  The Armenian-Russian allied partnership, in addition to solving the military-military-technical needs of the RA Armed Forces, also contributes to maintaining the military-political balance in the region, creating international guarantees of military security for Armenia.
  In its turn, actively participating in the CSTO processes, trying to contribute to the organization's efficiency, Armenia constantly makes efforts, first of all, to fulfill the obligations of the member states under Article 4 of the Treaty in case of a threat of possible aggression against Armenia.
  Active involvement in the NATO peacekeeping missions carried out by NATO in recent years not only allows our country to play a role in ensuring international security, but also promotes the new 1 Kotanjyan H., Ethnopolitics of the conflict by the RA Armed Forces.
  Fundamentals of Armenia's military policy և national security, Yerevan, 2010, p. 552.
2 See Abrahamyan S., Some aspects of security and defense issues, "Armenian Army", 2008. 2-3, page 59.
3 See S. Ohanyan, p. 263.
4 See http!
//mfa.am/en/international-organisations/CSTO/.
The acquisition of skills, particularly in the field of peacekeeping operations, the role of which, we believe, can not be underestimated for the development of the Armed Forces' ability to respond quickly and effectively to modern security threats.
Andranik Grigoryan INTERNATIONAL MILITARY COOPERATION AS A COMPONENT OF RA MILITARY SECURITY Keywords: national security, military security, international military cooperation, military / defense diplomacy.
