The need to develop small and medium-sized enterprises in the modern world is one of the main imperatives for the reconstruction and development of national economies.
  It is the main guarantee of the establishment of market relations and economic progress.
  The SME sector covers a fairly large sector of the economy, including manufacturing, processing enterprises, crafts, retail, wholesale, services, and so on.
  It is the main driving force for the development of the SME economy.
 It promotes private property, entrepreneurial skills, is flexible in a changing market economy, diversifies economic activity, can make a significant contribution to international trade, export promotion, and, of course, job creation.
 As a result, a stable middle class of the economy is formed.
  Developments in the high-tech market in recent years show that corporations operating in this field have a strong potential for large-scale SME cooperation and even competition by adopting a revised management policy to implement innovative innovation policies.
  According to the information databases of the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Armenia, in 2014, 74,365 SME entities operated in the entire territory of the Republic of Armenia, of which 68,117 were ultra-small, 5,109 were small, and 1139 were medium.
 The total volume of turnover of the above-mentioned economic entities made 1565934 mln. However, in the current conditions, the taxes paid by SMEs are 237710 mln. AMD.
  In 2015, 75,956 SMEs operated, of which 6,9939 were ultra-small, 4,905 were small and 1,112 were medium.
The total turnover of the above-mentioned economic entities made 1. 610. 772.1 mln. AMD, and the taxes paid by the latter - 275529.5 mln. AMD.
  The development of SME activity in the Republic of Armenia is influenced by a number of issues.
One of the main problems is the unstable legal situation.
  The unstable legal situation forces us to constantly make changes in the activities of small enterprises.
  For example, in all tax laws, instructions for their application are constantly changed, entrepreneurs must always independently follow them and any changes in their activities.
  In other words, businessmen today should not be informed to the necessary level about the legal acts related to business, the changes that have taken place in them, և it is necessary to intensify the work among businessmen in order to raise the level of awareness about the laws.
  According to the RA tax legislation, SME entities are divided into two parts: in the field of turnover tax, which have an annual turnover of up to 58.35 million AMD, to the taxpayers operating in the general tax field.
 Frequent changes in legislation, incompleteness of the system և systematization, the presence of taxpayers, unclear tax legislation, short և flexible tax payment deadlines, high costs of tax advice are the main reasons for the obstacles to high tax system costs for SMEs.
The formation of a favorable legal field is on a slow but stable basis in the Republic of Armenia.
 Positive trends have become more visible in recent years.
  This is substantiated by the reports of "DoingBusiness".
  As a result of the assessment made on the basis of the indicators of the above-mentioned reports, Armenia has any tax situation in the Ministry. However, we have to live with this much, that is, we must continue to do so. Of course, in 2017 it ranks 38th among 190 countries in terms of freedom of doing business. compared to the 9th place.
It is not limited to the fact that the economies of the world are competing to improve their position in the Doing Business rankings, and this is noticeable in the fact that sometimes, by falling behind in high rankings, the weakening of the positional index does not prevent reforms.
Focus on progress on other lower-ranking issues, but here's need to take a different approach, take into account the 11 main sets of indicators for doing business, prioritize, and begin to address them.
      Ensuring access to finance, particularly borrowing, is a prerequisite for SME development.
Banks avoid SME lending due to the lack of guarantees.
Sectoral lending is of great importance for the development of the economy.
  Banks consider this group of borrowers to be relatively high-risk, inefficient, and provide mainly short-term loans with high interest rates, provided that collateral is available.
  That is why SME lending is done mostly through international programs.
  The complexity of getting loans բարձր High collateral requirements make the lending process impossible, especially for start-ups, micro-enterprises and small organizations.
The SME DNC is authorized to provide state support to SME support infrastructures in the Republic of Armenia.
  Regional PHCs (Chamber of Commerce and Industry), business associations and other supporting organizations were excluded.
In our opinion, the main problems for the development of SMEs are exchange rate fluctuations, high electricity, gas and water tariffs, the competition of those who want to engage in SMEs, but business competition Insufficiency of information, finding basic customers, consumers, high prices of raw materials, lack of production profitability, lack of profitability of market investments, imperfection, distrust of foreign partners, negative attitude, difficulties in entering foreign markets or presenting one's own products.
Enterprises using high-tech, innovative investments and information technologies are considered priorities for the Armenian economy.
However, for some small enterprises, such activities are almost inaccessible.
  Necessary incubators, technoparks, venture funds for the development of the enterprise, to use these very powerful opportunities.
  Business incubators are mainly companies with effective and timely experience in the field, which can provide the emerging SMEs with the necessary production factors for joint use (raw materials, components, consulting, marketing services).
 Business incubators are usually set up, government-sponsored, financed by grants or low-interest loans.
Government assistance is often provided free of charge for unused land, which is attractive and feasible for the region.
 Incubators are of great importance for regional development.
The issue of creating business incubators in Armenia should be based on the experience of developed countries.
 The goal of the latter is to create new jobs, to activate business on the basis of small business.
  It should be noted that the support of entrepreneurship, as well as the ability of state authorities (machinery, առadministrative-business zones, due to the policy of entry, external expansion, markets and technological improvement of enterprises for the development of quality, market opportunities.
It is a problem of care, it should be a problem of care of the regional-community authorities.
The technopark is one of the SME technological և innovative support.
  It is a group of start-ups united around the scientific center, which offers up-to-date high-quality consulting և information on development, how to carry out research and studies, in the current stage of entrepreneurship development in Armenia.
   Of course, there is no single solution for all SME problems.
  Many countries have succeeded; others, especially decentralized SMEs, have been able to boost the competitiveness of SMEs through a more centralized approach.
Based on all this, let's try to briefly present the possible solution guidelines that can enable SMEs to be more viable in times of crisis.
 It is necessary to develop possible approaches to increase the access to information of SMEs to a higher level, as well as to develop the level of Government-SME relations.
Strengthen the capacity of SMEs, which should be expressed as a result of strengthening management skills, expanding knowledge in the field of financial management, etc.
Banks ուժեղ Strengthening the connection of SMEs ում Introduction of an effective credit system with interest-free loans and soft loans.
  The creation of a partial subsidy of the interest rate on loans to SMEs can be quite a serious initiative, such as the implementation of a business plan for small and medium-sized SMEs in Armenia, as the cost of each subsidy will increase.
It is necessary to develop and implement state programs for the development of the personnel potential of SMEs, as the formation of a knowledge-based economy requires innovative-minded, developed entrepreneurs who, together with their staff, must be competitive and able to compete fiercely.
The development of appropriate support infrastructures should be considered as a priority, as without clear mechanisms, this infrastructure will always function on the air, on the other hand, SMEs, without feeling support, will have development difficulties. They will look for more favorable economic conditions to continue their business activities.
  In this respect, we have a serious competitor next to us, in the person of Georgia, which can create serious problems with the outflow of capital from Armenia, the transfer of the active business mass to Georgia.
 For the development of SMEs, it is also possible to promote local products, to create local brands, here even groups of SMEs need to implement ideas for a single brand, ie to coordinate the process of merging issuing enterprises.
 It is necessary to review the programs to support the export of products produced by SMEs, as well as to study foreign markets, to guide where they can really increase the role of the SME DNC, as well as the level of trust in SMEs.
Legislative initiatives can be used only to organize the support and further development of SMEs on a non-standard level.
The same type of product issues - the above mentioned software, other serious legislative services - ASPCs.
Of course, if these solutions are implemented, they can create opportunities for SMEs to operate, but the difficulties are so great that even a number of companies are forced out of the market in case of preferential state support, because we are dealing with a global competitive market. dictated by the strongest enterprises.
 And in order for SMEs to be able to withstand crises, competitors must be able to withstand external crises and have an advantage over competitors.
SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT ISSUES IN RA Keywords - business, lending, tax legislation, development issues.
