FUNDAMENTALS OF APPROVAL AGREEMENT JUDICIAL PROCEDURE Conciliation proceedings are an institution used in international practice, the essence of which is to conduct an expedited trial in the absence of a dispute over the guilt of the accused.
The content of the above-mentioned institute is reflected in the chapter "Accelerated Judicial Procedure" of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
  The current Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that the accused may file a motion for expedited proceedings against him.
  The mediation will be satisfied in case of existence of grounds and conditions defined by law.
  Both the current Criminal Procedure Code and the draft Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) set out the following conditions of legality: • The accused must have a lawyer (Article 453, Part 2, Clause 1, Article 375.1 of the CCP) Part 2, point 3), • Before submitting the motion, the accused must consult with the defense counsel (Article 453, Part 2, Introduction, Article 375.1, Part 2, Clause 3 of the CCP) , • the accused must be aware of the substance of his or her action և the consequences (Article 457 3 3, Article 375,1 of the CCP); • in the presence of several defendants, the consent of all of them is required (Article 453 2- 2 of the Draft Part 2, point 2, Article 375.1, part 5 of the CCP).
Life is a dynamic, evolving reality, համապատասխան in accordance with these developments and changes, there is a need to offer new solutions in the legal system.
 Due to that, the Draft envisages approaches differentiated from the current Code.
 This is especially evident when studying the provisions on the procedure for examining mediation.
  After satisfying the motion submitted by the accused, the court provides a maximum period of two weeks for the parties to reach an agreement.
We consider this innovation to be a positive part of the criminal procedure legislation, as the Constitutional Court in its decision of SDO-931 of December 28, 2010 expressed a legal position that the precondition for an expedited or, in fact, simplified procedure is the acceptance of the accusation against the accused or the accused. which is typical of a "plea bargain" or a "conciliation procedure" under the criminal law of a number of countries.
  In each case, the agreement is made between the prosecutor and the "accused".
  The protocol signed as a result of the negotiation negotiations is essential for the further outcome of the case.
While studying the transactions on admission of guilt, Y. Մ. Lotman came to the conclusion that this institution is considered the birthplace of the normal development of Anglo-American society1.
  This idea gives some reason to think whether these deals will be used effectively in the Armenian society.
Plea bargaining is very common in foreign countries, particularly in the United States2.
 One of the main problems of this institute is to avoid long public court proceedings.
 This is beneficial both for the prosecution and the defense.
 In this case, the prosecutor finds himself in a favorable position, as he successfully performs his main function - to defend the accusation.
The "interest" of the defense is to receive a mild punishment.
 U.S. law provides for a more lenient sentence by a defendant in the event of a guilty plea than for a given offense under substantive law3.
  In the Anglo-Saxon system, the prevailing practice in law is based on the approach that criminal proceedings are instituted in connection with the fact that a crime has been committed in connection with a person's guilt, if one of the parties to the dispute (the accused) pleads guilty. Continuing the argument becomes meaningless in itself.
 In this case, the accused himself 2 http.
//kalinovsky-k.narod.ru/b/kuvaldina_2011/2-1.html. Protestant testimonies acquire a special character, which in some cases reminds of the status of "queen of evidence" specific to the evidence system still in force during the Inquisition.
  In addition, the defendant admits his guilt in committing a crime in a simplified manner, which is known in the legal literature as a "guilty plea."
  The Estonian Criminal Procedure Code has shown an interesting approach to defining a simplified procedure, where both "Agreed" and "Accelerated" proceedings are clearly separated.
  In the case of an agreed proceeding, an agreement is reached between the accused or his defense counsel ինչպես on the qualification of the act committed, the amount of damage caused, and the type of punishment (Article 244 2 2 of the Estonian Criminal Procedure Code).
 While the expedited proceedings are applied by the court through the mediation of the prosecutor, if the person is suspected of a second-degree crime, the subject of the crime is clear, բոլոր all the necessary evidence has been obtained.
  An application for an expedited trial shall be submitted to the court within 48 hours after the arrest or interrogation of the suspect (Article 256.1 of the Estonian Criminal Code).
 We are more inclined to the institution of expedited trial, because in this case the court is endowed with maximum jurisdiction, which will have a positive impact on the outcome of the case.
  We fully agree with the view that the analysis of Articles 375.1 և 7277 of the CCP assumes that the initiator of the expedited trial is not actually the accused, but the prosecutor, who should not object to the expedited procedure when sending the case to court with an indictment.
 In fact, contrary to the rules of logic, "negotiations" on the issue of expedited trial begin on the initiative of the prosecution, before sending the case to court, which puts the defendant in an unfavorable position in terms of avoiding or defending himself from possible abuse4.
 One of the main positive arguments is the easing of the workload of the courts.
  Taking into account the workload of the courts պահանջ the need to resolve cases as quickly and without delay, we believe that this institution is an effective tool for resolving this issue.
  The next 4 h. Ghukasyan, D. Melkonyan, Differentiated Judicial Form և Its Peculiarities, "State և Law", № 2 (64), 2014, pp. 235-247.
There is a circumstance of personalization ացնելու mitigation of punishment.
We believe that this provision is justified in the context of the current Criminal Procedure Code, as Article 375.3 սահման 5 stipulates that the court does not conduct a general examination of the evidence obtained in the criminal case during an expedited trial, but examines the defendant's identity. Responsibility ևThe circumstances mitigating and aggravating the punishment (emphasis is ours. L. Khachatryan).
 That is, even in the absence of a thorough examination of the evidence, the court in any case takes into account not only the positive fact that the accused admits his guilt, but also a number of possible circumstances in the given situation to individualize the sentence.
  It should be noted that the draft partially regulates this issue.
 This is explained by the fact that the Draft presupposes that the court does not examine the evidence, but does this mean that the court should not take into account the data characterizing the accused, the responsibility, the mitigating and aggravating circumstances, as stated in the current CCP?
  The draft has moved in another direction; the main burden of resolving the court proceedings seems to have been put on the negotiations between the parties and the protocol of the agreement to be signed as a result.
 This is not a very correct approach, as the court is the only body that decides the outcome of the case through conciliation proceedings, և the legislation should regulate all the actions taken by the latter.
 In this case, the court taking into account the characterization of the accused, the responsibility պատասխանատվ mitigating and aggravating circumstances of the sentence is essential for a fair trial of the case by conciliation.
 As stated in the OSCE / ODIHR Final Report of the Trial Monitoring Program in the Republic of Armenia, if conciliation proceedings are used, the admission of guilt must be accompanied by a number of substantial safeguards. "It must be carried out in court, in an open court session, in response to the accusation presented to him, the criminal (accused) must give a positive answer. Եւ Before proceeding to the" guilty plea "procedure, the judge must have the opportunity to do two things. to the parties ”5.
  That is, the court should not only approve 5 http.
//www.osce.org/en/odihr/119327?download=true or reject the agreement of the prosecutor և the accused and his defense counsel, but must listen to both parties, study some circumstances provided by law, and resolve the case at its discretion.
  It is really important in this case when the court does not accept the record of the agreement; generally continues the preliminary hearings if: The legal assessment given clearly does not correspond to the factual circumstances of the accusation (Article 456 2 2 of the Draft).
However, we believe that this jurisdiction is sufficiently guaranteed, so we propose to include in the Draft 37 Article 375.3 5 5 of the CCP “The court does not conduct a general examination of the evidence obtained in a criminal case during an expedited trial.
 However, it examines the data characterizing the personality of the defendant, the responsibility և the circumstances mitigating and aggravating the sentence ”.
 Plea bargains shorten the time limit for filing an indictment ընդունthe sentencing verdict և.
  This is a possible guarantee for the rehabilitation of the convict6.
One of the main shortcomings of this institution is the possibility for the accused to avoid legal liability defined by the substantive legislation.
 We agree with this point of view in part, because it follows from the essence of justice that the accused should be legally liable, but at the same time we should take into account that the imposition of a lenient sentence presupposes a "reward" for the accused to confess and admit his crime.
  Therefore, we are more inclined to view the imposition of a lenient sentence in a more positive light7.
In applying conciliation proceedings, the court may encounter a problem related to the amendment of the law.
  In practice, there are cases when the legislation (for example, the responsibility is tightened) is changed to the detriment of the accused.
 And in these cases, the court must be guided in an unfavorable way for the accused, deviating from one of the positions of the European Court of Human Rights, deviating from the principle of inadmissibility of retroactive procedural norms aggravating the sentence8.
  In the case of "Scopolan v. Italy" in 2009 In its judgment of 17 September 2006 the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights found that there had been a violation of Article 7 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Liability under the law) as a result of a change in the applicant's expedited procedure. Because of this, his "punishment" in the autonomous sense was toughened 9.
One of the main preconditions for expedited proceedings in the CCP is the will of the accuser և defendant և The position of the victim is ignored.
 This issue was also addressed by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in its Recommendation NR (85) 11 adopted in 1985 on the role of the victim in criminal law and litigation.
  The preamble to the directive states that this document was adopted due to the fact that the goals of criminal justice have traditionally been formulated in the sphere of relations between the state and the offender, as a result of which the system often complicates the problems and does not contribute to their solution.
 Meanwhile, the main function of criminal justice should be the victim 8 Khachaturyan D., Cooperation proceedings. Legal-philosophical bases, bases and order of application, guarantees of efficiency և development perspectives, State և law № 2 (64), 2014, pp. 68-89.
9 Scopola was convicted of murder combined with another crime punishable by life imprisonment.
 According to another norm that hinders the commission of an act, the criminal case on life imprisonment was replaced by 30 years of imprisonment as a result of the expedited investigation of the criminal case.
 Scopola pleaded guilty, but the law amended the law on the 30-year sentence to life imprisonment, stipulating that life imprisonment should be replaced by life imprisonment in the case of an expedited sentence.
  Based on this change, the prosecution appealed the verdict in terms of toughening the sentence, և the superior courts, finding that the legislative changes were of a procedural nature, and the proceedings in the current cases are regulated by this, that is, by the current legislation, reviewed the verdict, see http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/ sites / eng / Pages / search.aspx # {"docname".
["ScoppolavItaly"], "documentcollectionid2".
["GRANDCHAMBER", "CHAMBER"], "itemid".
["001-94135"]}.
meeting the requirements defending the interests 10.
 This document obliges states to review domestic criminal justice legislation and bring it in line with the above criteria.
  The Court of Cassation expressed its position on this issue in one of its precedent decisions.
  The examination of his case "observing all the requirements of justice" (inter alia) for the victim, assumes that a. When resolving the issue of whether or not to object to an expedited trial, the prosecutor (accuser) should take into account the position of the victim as a subject of the prosecution (Article 21, Clause 21 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code), b. The court may not pass an expedited procedure without clarifying the position of the victim on that issue, c. The court may reject the defendant's motion to apply an expedited trial if the victim objects.
In that case, the court makes a separate decision, in which it justifies the fact that the legal interests of the victim are endangered as a result of the expedited trial11.
 The draft addresses this issue in several norms, in particular Article 455, noting that in cases where the damage caused by the crime is not compensated, but the victim has not objected to the conciliation proceedings, the prosecutor shall involve him in the negotiations with the consent of the victim.
  The victim participates only in negotiations on the nature and extent of the damage caused by the crime.
  That is, the Draft regulates the victim's participation in the process of applying the agreed proceedings exclusively in terms of the damage caused exclusively by the crime, and in general the possibility of expressing his position or opposing the use of the agreed proceedings remains unregulated.
 It is true that the draft is one step ahead of the current CPC regulations, but we think it would be more expedient to include provisions in the draft that would clearly regulate the above-mentioned issues.
In the context of this work, we consider it necessary to make expedited Recommendation NR (85) 11 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, adopted in 1985, in the context of expedited proceedings against minors.
11 of the RA Court of Cassation, T. In the case of Kamalyan on March 26, 2010 Decision No. ESHD / 0097/01/09.
the problem of applying proceedings.
 Both the current Criminal Procedure Code and the Draft do not address or propose a solution to the above-mentioned case of juvenile delinquency.
  And this issue is very urgent and has a practical significance.
  Considering the importance of juvenile justice and its specifics, the UN General Assembly in 1985 Approved by UN Resolution 40/33 of November 29, 2006 in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (Beijing Rules).
  According to Rule 2.3 of the Beijing Rules, each Member State is delegated to make efforts in the domestic legal system to adopt laws, rules, and provisions that apply specifically to juvenile offenders, juvenile justice institutions, and juvenile offenders. While protecting their fundamental rights, • to meet the demands of society, • to live by these rules of և impartiality.
According to the same rules, the juvenile justice system must especially ensure the welfare of the juvenile, ensuring that any measure applied to the juvenile offender is always commensurate with both the specifics of the offender and the circumstances of the offense (Rule 5.1).
  We consider that the Criminal Procedure Code does not define any provision in the draft on whether or not to apply expedited proceedings (juvenile proceedings) against juveniles to some extent contradicts the requirement to "satisfy the various needs of juvenile offenders while protecting their fundamental rights."
 European Courts of Human Rights 1999 In its judgment in the case of Vi, the United Kingdom stated that it was important that the treatment of a child accused of a crime should be based on his or her age, level of maturity, and mental and emotional abilities, including steps that would encourage him or her to understand the trial. the ability to participate in the trial.
  This position of the European Court of Human Rights is applicable in this case as well, as the application of the expedited (conciliation) procedure does not follow from the essence of this provision.
 The special rules for the conduct of juvenile proceedings in general provide additional guarantees for a comprehensive, full and objective investigation of the circumstances of the case, the identification of causes and conditions conducive to the commission of the crime, the exercise of his / her procedural rights, the fair trial of juveniles as juveniles. An extended scope of the subject matter of the evidence is envisaged, and the application of a special procedure to them will lead to the violation of these guarantees.
  In the Criminal Procedure Code դրական It would be a positive step in the draft to add a provision prohibiting the re-application of expedited (conciliation) proceedings.
 This position has been expressed by the Court of Cassation in several of its precedent decisions.
 Sh. Amirkhanyan և G. In Farmanyan's case, the Court of Cassation, in addition to the conditions provided for in Article 375.1 of the Criminal Procedure Code, provides additional conditions, only in the presence of which an expedited procedure (agreement procedure) can be applied.
 The Court of Cassation has set the following additional conditions: • the court has clarified the position of the victim regarding the application of the expedited procedure;
It is clear from the statement of additional conditions (in particular point 2) that expedited proceedings cannot be applied to minors.
A. In the case of Arustamyan, the Court of Cassation developed its previous point of view, stating that the RA Criminal Procedure Code defines the peculiarities of proceedings in cases involving minors, which refer to the general court hearings.
  The analysis of the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code shows that the legal basis for the application of the expedited procedure for juvenile court proceedings is not provided by the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 Based on the above, the Court of Cassation records that the current criminal procedure legislation of the Republic of Armenia does not define juveniles. Amirkhanyan և G. In the case of Farmanyan on 24.02.2011 No. EKD / ​​0209/01/10.
The Code does not provide for specific rules for the application of the expedited procedure for juvenile cases, but the Code does not provide special rules for the application of the expedited procedure for juvenile cases.
 The special rules of juvenile proceedings provide additional guarantees for a comprehensive, full and objective investigation of the circumstances of the case, the discovery of the reasons and conditions conducive to the commission of the crime, the exercise of his / her procedural rights, the fair trial of juveniles as juveniles Extended scope of the subject matter.
  That is, in parallel with the general circumstances subject to proof provided for in Article 107 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the information concerning the juvenile must be the subject of discussion.
Based on the above, the Court of Cassation finds that an expedited procedure for juvenile cases should not be applied13.
The Court of Cassation has also examined the fact that juvenile criminal law provides for a wider range of evidence, and by applying expedited (conciliation) proceedings, it will not be possible to comply with this requirement.
  Therefore, we propose to fix in the draft Criminal Procedure Code the provision that conciliation proceedings may not be applied to juveniles.
Summing up the above, we can mention that a number of amendments have been made to the draft Criminal Procedure Code in an expedited manner or on conciliation proceedings, which can generally be considered positive.
  However, no law is perfect. In the framework of this work, referring to the given institutional aspects, an attempt was made to reveal the observed shortcomings, proposing their solutions.
Lilit Khachatryan FUNDAMENTALS OF APPLICATION OF AGREEMENT ԱԿԱՆ LEGAL PROCEDURE Keywords: conciliation proceedings, expedited procedure, judicial examination, administration of justice, precedent decision Summary.
