MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF THE PERSON USING THE HASTATUTYUNUMTEGHAVORELU and pre-trial detention MIJOTSMIAZHAMANAK FORMED IRAVAKIRARPRAKTIKAYI IRAVACHAPUTYUNEPordzaknnelu person to a medical facility of the fundamental legal yerashkhikneriapahovumn khndirneritse pursued legal practice from the restrictions of the right to freedom of placement.
 However, the lack of clear legal regulations, the abundance of problematic issues in the established law practice in practice create difficulties for law enforcement, which in some cases inevitably leads to disproportionate restrictions on individual rights and freedoms.
  Moreover, it should be noted that the European Court of Human Rights' lack of decisions restricting a person's right to liberty for forensic examination, the lack of precedent decisions of the RA Court of Cassation, and the lack of practical and practical research on the comprehensive study of the topic in the domestic professional literature. on the legality of decisions made by law enforcement officers in a short period of time during the placement of a person in a medical institution.
 Therefore, the discussion of some problematic issues in the framework of the scientific work presented below, we believe, can be essential for the improvement of the judicial process for placement in a separate medical institution for examination.
In criminal proceedings, procedural measures applied against the will of a person or without taking into account his / her will are considered as coercive measures, the existence of which is conditioned by the principle of publicity inherent in criminal proceedings [1].
 The 5th section of the RA Criminal Procedure Code is dedicated to the means of judicial coercion, which consists of chapters devoted to arrest, pre-trial detention and other means of judicial coercion.
 Moreover, other measures of judicial coercion include only the temporary cessation of office and arrest, but in that way other means of judicial coercion cannot be considered exhaustive.
Thus, for example, the procedural measure of seizure of property is included in the RA Criminal Procedure Code among the investigative actions carried out during the pre-trial proceedings in a criminal case (Section 8), but in fact it lacks the characteristic of obtaining evidence typical of an investigative action. not considered an investigative action [2].
According to the theoretical literature, similar measures of judicial coercion include search, seizure, personal search, sampling for examination, and other coercive measures that are not exhaustive.
 This includes the procedural means of placing a person in a medical institution for forensic psychiatric, forensic psychiatric or forensic medical examination [3, 4].
Judicial coercive measures are classified by their nature as physical-psychological coercive means [5].
  The first group includes the measures of judicial coercion restricting the physical freedom of a person - detention, house arrest, as well as placement of a person in a medical institution for examination, taking into account that in this case, the physical freedom of the person is restricted [6].
 As for the second group, it includes all other means of judicial coercion, which restrict a person's freedom as a result of psychological influence.
  For example, the signature not to leave is based on a person's written promise to appear dutifully, by which he is psychologically constrained not to change his place of residence, and in case of change, to immediately inform the body conducting the criminal proceedings.
The study of the legal practice based on the current criminal procedure regulations shows that the coercive measures restricting the physical freedom of a person to be placed in a medical institution for the purpose of detention or examination are widely used at the same time.
 In other words, the body conducting the criminal proceedings submits to the court both motions for placement of the person in a medical institution for the purpose of expertise and for the application of detention as a measure of restraint during the same period, which, as a rule, satisfies the courts, referring to .
For example, the study of the materials of the case of application of compulsory medical measures No. GD1 / 0058/01/16 testifies to the following chronology of the execution of judicial actions.1. 2016 On September 9, 2016, the investigator filed a motion to use detention as a measure of restraint against the court. On September 19, the investigator made a decision on the inpatient forensic psychiatric examination of the person. 2016 On October 11, 2016, the investigator submitted a motion to the court to extend the period of detention of the person, stating that an inpatient examination had been appointed. It was necessary to ensure the presence of the examinee in Nubarashen Psychiatric Center CJSC, which was considered by the court. .
4. 2016 On October 20, 2016, the investigator submitted a motion to the court. on placement in a psychiatric institution for inpatient examination from October 21.
It follows from the above-mentioned sequence of judicial actions that both the coercive measures of placement in a medical institution for the purpose of examination and the coercive procedural coercion expressed in the form of detention were applied to the person at the same time.
 Moreover, it is noteworthy that the motion to detain as a precautionary measure did not mention the presumed existence of grounds for detention under Article 135 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, but for the appointed examination it is necessary to ensure the presence of the person in the relevant medical institution.
 In other words, it turns out that the examination of the motion to extend the period of detention has de facto turned into an examination of the motion to place the person in a medical institution for examination, thus submitting another motion subject to judicial control under the motion to extend the period of detention.
Such an approach is inadmissible, at least it leads to legal uncertainty of the grounds for restricting a person's right to liberty.
 However, even if the body conducting the criminal proceedings justified the motion to extend the detention period by citing one or more of the grounds provided for in Article 135 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, it is the same as re-applying restrictive legal measures (ie inpatient examination). the application of the judicial compulsion to place a person in a medical institution together with detention) could not ensure the legal certainty of the grounds for restriction of the right to liberty (res judicata).
In general, it should be noted that the possibility of lawful re-application of coercive measures restricting the right to liberty of a person is not excluded in cases when it comes to the use of physical and psychological coercive measures pursuing an autonomous goal.
 For example, when a measure restricting a person's physical liberty is applied, detention is a measure of judicial coercion restricting a person's liberty through psychological influence, a search with a coercive measure (theoretical literature classifies search as a measure of coercive coercion) [7].
However, the simultaneous application of more than one measure of judicial coercion restricting a person's physical liberty is inadmissible, because when it is possible to achieve the pursued goal by any means of judicial coercion, the use of other coercive measures aimed at the implementation of the same goal becomes meaningless.
 In other words, the simultaneous application of several coercive measures restricting a person's physical liberty cannot be justified, when each of the applied coercive measures provides an equal opportunity to neutralize the possibility of exposing a person to possible unlawful conduct during the entire period of application of that measure.
The above-mentioned approach is based on the legal position expressed by the decision of the RA Court of Cassation on Hrachik Aghekyan that a person deprived of legal grounds can not be "deprived of liberty" again on suspicion of committing a crime or a new crime. on the grounds of preventing escape.
Based on this position, the RA Court of Cassation, by the same decision, referring to the lawfulness of using detention as a precautionary measure against a person serving a custodial sentence (ie, re-applying legal measures restricting a person's physical freedom), found that "a prisoner serving a prison sentence" If a person is isolated from society, certain of his / her rights are limited, which makes it possible to prevent his / her inappropriate behavior during the criminal investigation.
 In this case, the defendant's risks of not appearing in court, obstructing the administration of justice, and committing further offenses are reduced.
In other words, if a person is serving a prison sentence, unlike a person in prison, his or her ability to evade trial, obstruct the proper conduct of the case, or to pursue criminal activity is limited to the maximum extent possible.
 Therefore, the motion to detain the person serving the sentence of imprisonment is meaningless, as the requested amount of restraint already exists. ”
We believe that the approach presented in the above-mentioned legal position is also applicable to the detention of a person placed in a medical institution for the purpose of examination, when the physical freedom of a person is restricted by the repeated application of coercive measures.
 Thus, in the case of both placement of a person in a medical institution and detention as a precautionary measure, a person's right to physical liberty is effectively restricted when the risks of possible illegal behavior under Article 135 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code are minimized.
 In other words, both the placement of a person in a medical institution and the use of detention as a measure of restraint provide an equal opportunity to neutralize the possibility of revealing possible unlawful conduct during the entire period of application of each of these measures.
  Therefore, considering that the use of a coercive measure to place a person in a medical institution can achieve the goal of neutralizing the manifestation of a possible illegal misconduct of the person, the use of a coercive measure of detention to achieve the same purpose becomes meaningless.
It should be noted that according to our inquiries, after the examination of a person, the law enforcement practice on detention as a precautionary measure is justified by the fact that Article 27 of the RA Constitution ՀՀ Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights only allows deprivation of liberty. After the fact is confirmed, the restriction of the right to liberty by placing him in a medical institution for inpatient examination to confirm that fact is inadmissible.
  Therefore, the restriction of the right to liberty during that period is carried out by applying detention through restraint.
However, in our opinion, it is not lawful to justify the legal practice based on such a substantiation, as it does not reflect the proper legal basis for restricting the right to liberty by placing a person in a medical institution for examination.
 In particular, the point is that in case of placement of a person in a medical institution for examination, the law enforcement officer should not proceed with the purpose of preventing the escape from a mental illness or crime in accordance with Article 27 1 1 of the RA Constitution սահմանափ Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights. from the relevant grounds provided for in part 1 of Article 1, but from the grounds permitting the restriction of the right to liberty to disobey a lawful court order enshrined in those articles.
Thus, the European Court of Human Rights has stated in a number of judgments that Article 5 1 1 (b) of the European Convention on Human Rights [9], which contains two grounds for restricting a person's right to liberty, applies to the restriction of a person's right to liberty for the purpose of examination. disobeying a legal order և 2) ensuring the fulfillment of any obligation provided by law.
 Only in 2016 made Trutko v. In its judgment in Russia, the European Court of Human Rights, having examined the question of the lawfulness of the restriction of a person's right to liberty during a statutory examination in a particular criminal case, found that it was subject to consideration under the first of the above two grounds. ].
Thus, it should be noted that the restriction of the right to liberty when placing a person in a medical institution for the purpose of examination should not be disguised by the use of pre-trial detention.
Otherwise, there may be an arbitrary risk of restriction of a person's right to liberty as stated by the European Court of Human Rights.
 Thus, according to the legal positions expressed by the court, the restriction of the right to liberty within the meaning of Article 5 of the European Convention may become arbitrary when the decision on the restriction of the right to liberty's implementation does not meet the objectives pursued by the restriction of the right to liberty.
  In the case of the issue under discussion, that risk arises when there is a decision to use detention as a measure of restraint against a person, and during the period of its validity the measure of compulsory placement in a medical institution for the purpose of examination is carried out.
Therefore, in cases where it is necessary to place a detainee in a medical institution for the purpose of examination, the detention chosen as a measure of restraint shall be lifted before the person is actually placed in a medical institution.
 That is, detention as a measure of restraint may continue to operate until the execution of the court decision on placement in a medical institution.
 Otherwise, when the detention is lifted before the court examines the request for placement of a person in a medical institution, the legal status of the person forcibly taken to court will be uncertain, and if the petition is rejected, it will be problematic to re-arrest the person in the same factual circumstances.
Under the proposed approach, when a detainee is still in court for examination for placement in a medical facility for examination, it would be preferable for the courts to reconsider the motion to dismiss the placement as a matter of course. to the question.
  In particular, if the person was in custody at the time of the examination of the motion, the execution of the decision would be conditioned by the courts with the abolition of the detention chosen as a measure of restraint by the prosecutor supervising the legality of the proceedings.
 Otherwise, in the final part of the decision, it would be stated that it is subject to execution after the detention chosen as a measure of restraint is lifted.
As for the possible concern arising in the case of the proposed approach, when the appointed expertise reveals that the person is sane, then how should the investigator apply to the court again with the request to use detention as a measure of restraint in the same circumstances? In case of a relevant conclusion, it is not problematic at all, it is subject to solution within the framework of the legal regulation of Article 142, Part 4 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
  In particular, according to the latter, a person released from detention may not be re-arrested on the same charge unless new material circumstances have been discovered which were not known to the body conducting the proceedings at the time of the release of the accused from custody.
  As can be seen from the content of this article, the legislator, not ruling out the possibility of re-arresting a person on the same charge, conditioned it with the existence of necessary new circumstances, ie circumstances which are not known to the law enforcement body in resolving the issue of release.
  In the event that the conclusion after the examination reveals that the person is insane, then this circumstance is in itself a new (because before that the body conducting the criminal proceedings was not known to be insane) և breakthrough (because the trial in the criminal proceedings in case of possible insanity) would undergo a radical review, which would exclude the possibility of using detention).
 Therefore, we consider that in case the examination reveals that the person is sane, in the context of the above-mentioned legal positions, Part 4 of Article 142 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code can not be interpreted as a motion to detain a person as a measure of restraint. to present again.
At the same time, in the context of this work, referring to the international experience on the issue raised, we consider it necessary to note that in addition to placing a person in a medical facility for examination, it is problematic to use detention as a precautionary measure in other foreign countries.
 Thus, in general, the study of the criminal procedure codes of a number of CIS countries shows that either there are no clear regulations in this regard, or the existing regulations indicate that detention is applied in conjunction with placement in a single medical institution, or with various regulations given artificially. An attempt is made to solve the raised issue, which endangers the protection of a person's right to liberty.
For example, following the provisions of the Moldovan Criminal Procedure Code, it is acceptable to place a detainee in a medical facility for examination.
In particular, Article 152 մասը 8 of the Code provides that "in the event that the suspect (accused) is in custody, the transfer to a medical facility for examination shall be carried out with the court's permission, on the mediation of the prosecutor", as a measure of restraint. The selected detention is not eliminated, and the court resolves the function of arranging the transfer to the appropriate medical institution.
 Even Article 247 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan stipulates that the extension of a person's detention or house arrest for medical examination may be carried out without his / her participation.
For example, according to the legal regulations of the new Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Russia, which enters into force in Russia or even in 2019, it is not only acceptable to place a detainee in a medical institution for examination, but also in the absence of judicial control.
  Thus, according to Article 29, Part 2, Clause 3 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation, the court allows the placement of a non-detainee in a medical institution providing medical or psychological assistance for the purpose of individual forensic or forensic psychological examination.
  The point 4 of Article 31, Part 1 of the new Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh has the same content.
That is, it follows from the above-mentioned regulation that in cases when a person is in custody, placement in a medical institution is carried out without the permission of the court, when an artificial attempt is made to bypass the issue raised in this work.
 However, in this case, not only two coercive measures restricting a person's physical liberty are applied at the same time, but one of them is carried out without the court's permission, when the approach applied does not contradict the principle of the European Court of Human Rights' arbitrary restriction of liberty. թ. According to the 20th principle of Resolution No. 46/119 of December 17, 2006 "On the protection of the mentally ill and the improvement of psychiatric care"
  According to the latter, the persons who may have a mental disorder are placed in a medical institution by the decision of another relevant body.
 Moreover, the "relevant other body" can not be identified with the pre-investigation body, as it presupposes an institutionally independent body, which is not limited by departmental interests, can exclude the abuse of the pre-investigation body's right to place a person in a medical institution for examination.
Thus, summarizing the above, we must state that the practice of placing a person in a medical facility for examination for the purpose of applying detention at the same time as a measure of restraint can not be considered lawful, it must be reviewed, as a result of which detention chosen as a measure of restraint will be calibrated before examination. actually being placed in a medical facility.
LITERATURE [2] Vardanyan A., The issues of seizure of property in criminal proceedings, State և Law, No. 1 (75), 2017, p. 130.
[8] Decision of the RA Court of Cassation of 11.05.2011 on Hrachik Aghekyan in case No. EKD / ​​0744/06/10, item 15.
[9] X v. Decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Germany of 10.12.1975, complaint No. 6659/75, Petukhova v. Judgment of the ECHR in the case of Russia of 02.05.2013, complaint No. 28796 / points 07, 46-47, etc.
[10] Trutko v. Judgment of the ECHR in the case of Russia of 06.12.2016, complaint No. 40979/04, item 34.
[11] Mutatis Mutandis James, Wells and Lee v. Judgment of the ECHR in the case of the United Kingdom of 18.09.2012, appeals No. 25119/09, 57715/09 և 57877/09, points 191195. Saadi v. Judgment of the ECHR in the case of the United Kingdom [GC] of 28.02.2008, complaint No. 37201/06, paragraphs 68-74.
Vardanyan ArnoldPORDZAKNNUTYAN OF PERSON AND MEDICAL HASTATUTYUNUMTEGHAVORELU pre-trial detention MIJOTSMIAZHAMANAK IRAVAKIRARPRAKTIKAYI FORMED ON USING legitimacy Keywords: testing, medical facility, detention, court enforcement measure.
