2015 AS THE ALARM OF THE "THIRD WORLD WAR".
 CONTENTS ANALYSIS OF SPEECHES BY POLITICAL LEADERSPolitical analysis, conclusions կան There are a number of methods proposed by the theoretical literature to make predictions և methodologies.
 If we are talking about its involvement in the sociological-psychological aspects in the analysis of political cycles, then we should be careful in choosing the method.
  The method of content analysis itself is of particular interest from the point of view of its measurements, the specific method of implementation հստակ the exact measurability of the results obtained1.
2015 was rich in political, economic and social transformations, which predicted a change in the political situation in the world.
 For the analysis of last year's political situation, we have chosen the method of content analysis of the speeches of political leaders.
We have chosen for the topic the speeches of the presidents of the countries that meet the same criteria today, which reveal the foreign policy of the state for the past year, and also predetermine the future perspectives in the international arena, foreign policy and participation in international relations2.
After the Second World War, a number of structures were established in the world to ensure and maintain international security.
 These structures ensured the cooperation of states in the protection of human rights, collective security, and the maintenance of world peace.
  International organizations were the guarantors of international collective security, but this period seems to be over for the development of world history3.
The flag bearer of all international structures can be considered the "United Nations".
  The UN, created after the Second World War, became a center for recruiting almost all the countries of the world. It was within the framework of the UN that the states cooperated to fight against the traditional challenges and new difficulties.
The United Nations, with its structural bodies, global involvement, conventions, and a number of actions, has honorably maintained its role as the flag bearer of security in the world4.
In the second decade of the 21st century, a number of questions were raised regarding the accuracy of the described world security.
 Questions were raised by the economic crises, the inefficiency of social systems, the imperfection of a number of global collective systems, migration flows, the growing and uncontrollable volume of the drug business, and the main challenge of the period, terrorism5.
If we try to describe very briefly the global changes that have taken place in the world, we must start with the financial crisis, a number of economic sanctions and multilateral sanctions, to reach the current war situation in the Middle East, in Eastern Europe.
The unleashing of the war in Ukraine seems to have been the biggest alarm since August 2014, as here we can prove the fact of the clash of two poles - the US-Russia.
  Arelyan The Russian troops that have invaded Ukraine, Ukraine's reliance on European support, the open statements of the United States about its support for Ukraine, then the annexation of Crimea, the economic problems facing Ukraine today are clear evidence that global security is at stake.
  On the other hand, the focus should be on the Middle East, the bloodshed from Egypt, through Syria and Iraq, the creation of the "Islamic State" terrorist unit, with which the world superpowers had to take into account, this region is even considered the stage of the Third World.
The international situation depends more on the foreign policies of individual states than on the decisions and actions of international organizations.
 And the same UN has turned into a club of leaders' speeches, opinions and discussions of conflicting policies.
For our study, we have taken the speeches of the four presidents (Russia, USA, China, Iran) at the 70th UN General Assembly in September 2015.
  The logical basis for such a choice is that the UN today is the only platform in the world where the heads of state really stand for equality, the countries that preside over them act as a full-fledged subject of jazz law not only in terms of legal status but also of foreign policy ambitions. , in terms of participating in world events with other countries.
 Leaders, as political leaders, express the state opinion of their state1.
With the methodology of content analysis, we have separated word units, so that from measuring the use of these words in the speeches of the presidents of the four countries, we can understand: regions, ուցե perhaps unleashing in new regions of interest to superpowers.
• Try to find out from the speeches of the presidents how much they are ready for cooperation, cooperation in the control of world events within the framework of international organizations.
Third, through the group of "most used" words, we tried to find out whether last year's priorities were the same for all states, or whether the regional superpowers were equally involved in conflict resolution today.
Below we will present the word groups we have separated by subdivisions. Words that describe anxiety in international relations Intense interstate struggle. is http.
//www.un.org/en/qa/ Available on 24.04.2016, 22.
23.
Lexical MiavorMijazgayinZhoghovrdavarutyunAnkakhutyunHamagortsaktsutyunPokhgortsaktsutyunAnvtang / anvtangutyunHavakakanOgnutyunDivanagitutyunHamarzhekMiavor words that are most used last year mijazgayiniradardzutyunneri bnoroshumnerum.Barayin MiavorHamarzhekAhabekchutyunSanktsianerIrakUkrainaIslamPutin C TsinpinBarakObamaPaterazmRazmakanNerkhuzhumVtangKonfliktTshnamiChgnazhamMijazgayinZhoghovrdavarutyunAnkakhutyunHamagortsaktsutyunPokhgortsaktsutyunAnvtangAnvtangutyunHavakakanOgnutyunAhabekumAhabekchutyunSanktsianerIrakUkrainaIslamNakhagahneri speeches on selected groups of lexical units of measurement clearly shows foreign Irada VladimirHasan Rohan checked the involvement of any State,the existence of such goals, the existence of a monopoly in this or that field, or the preference for cooperation.
 In their open text, the leaders state that it is time to make changes in the structure of international relations. be it the work style of international organizations, the principles of regional units, or concepts of global security or human rights.
Coming to the concrete presentation of the results of our study, it should be noted that: • All states talk almost equally about the existence of a "war", this makes us take into account the existence of a state of war, its possible escalating nature.
All four superpowers equally consider war a threat to their foreign policy, they emphasize in their speeches.
  War is not a separate, private action in general.
 This is what affects the economic situation, leads to crises, promotes a number of sociological and humanitarian anomalies.
The President of the People's Republic of China speaks the least about military power, which is why he does not allow China to be considered a geopolitical burden, despite its great economic potential.
  Talking about military force, albeit a little, by other presidents, makes us assume that we cannot rule out the use of military force in today's international relations.
In his speech, the US President emphasizes the existence of a dangerous conflict.
 We must prove that these statements do not refer to the existence of a danger for the United States or prove the existence of a conflict there.
  This is the policy of American qualifications, to justify its actions under that guise.
 In addition, by describing the conflict as a solution, he assumes that the US President's stress that the United States feels responsible լինելու will be involved in global conflicts.
As we can see from the data in the table, none of the leaders mentions the word "enemy".
  This, first of all, would be inadmissible for a speech at the UN General Assembly, besides, this very negative qualification must have an addressee.
  So, here we come to two conclusions: 1. the states see each other as enemies, 2. the states take direct responsibility with the qualification of the enemy, recognizing the threat coming from that enemy.
  Thus, we do not consider the absence of the word "enemy" as a fact of the absence of the enemy.
Despite the growing economic crisis, the heads of state do not address this issue very strongly. We think that the basis is that the economic situation directly depends on the unstable political situation in the world.
As for the words of the second group, it should be noted that the heads of state use the word "world" many times. Let us clarify that it is used in two contexts: 1. the existence of global danger, global problems, 2. the global potential of those same problems.
  In this way, the states emphasize that the period of zero-sum games is over, վտանգ the danger threatening one state in the current interconnected global world causes immediate problems for the others as well.
The words "democracy" և "independence" are mainly used in the speech of the US President.
  These are American values ​​imposed on the whole world; this is the reason why the terms "democracy" and "liberty", as we see, continued to remain in the American system of values; actions.
It seems that the terms "cooperation" and "collaboration" have different meanings.
Cooperation presupposes the circumstance of acting by joint forces, this is not used at all by the presidents of the states.
  This means that the arms race is obvious. The states are investing huge economic resources to increase their military potential, in fact, they are against cooperation.
  Instead, the presidents of the states often emphasize cooperation. The circumstance of speaking under the auspices of the UN plays a role here, on the other hand it is a political gesture.
  However, we do not rule out the positive tendency of states to act together against common challenges.
The words "safe" և "security" are quite practical in the speeches of the presidents of the states.
  "Security" is about a more global secure situation, and "safe" is about the fact that there is no more private threat.
  The paradox of the complete absence of the word "enemy" - the fact that security is so much discussed - that the presidents state that there is an irregular situation, "we must fight against it, because the struggle of the peoples has always been aimed at maintaining security."
The US President speaks the most about the collective force, the Russian President mentions at once, the other two presidents do not use it at all.
 The United States has always been a "supporter" of the collective struggle, but has reserved the role of coordinator in that matter.
Again, Obama mentions the help the most, but the other presidents also mention: It seems that the word "help" gives a clearer idea of ​​the mutual help of the collective struggle today.
The use of the terms "terror" and "terrorism" is especially interesting.
  We can not but prove that terrorism is the biggest threat to global security today, the most uncontrollable.
  In his speeches, Obama and Putin emphasize the existence of a global challenge to terrorism, expressing a willingness and a realistic attitude that it is possible to fight this catastrophe only collectively.
 The President of the Islamic Republic of Iran speaks a lot about terrorism.
 This is another Islamic observation.
  As we see terrorism is a threat to the Islamic world.
  Again, we do not find the most voiced term in the speech of the President of the People's Republic of China.
  This again proves that China does not claim the status of a superpower, a geopolitical burden.
All the presidents are talking about sanctions again, except for the President of the People's Republic of China. This is already interesting, because it directly refers to the world economy, in fact it is directly related to China.
 Let us try to assume that China is in favor of the policy of bilateral relations. We can make a similar assumption, taking into account the general lyrical nature of the president's speech.
Obama և Putin talk about Iraq equally. This could also have been predicted, taking into account the completely opposite attitudes of the two countries' involvement in the Middle East ած the political line pursued.
  However, the two countries have their interests և interests in the region, և in their speeches the presidents stated that it will be continued.
 He also speaks about this, Rohani, this is conditioned by Iran's role in the region, due to its involvement in recent events.
Only the United States and Russia talk about Ukraine again. Ukraine became the spark from which they started talking about the Third World War.
 Ukraine was the clash between Russia and the United States.
 In this sense, being the leading leaders of the two states was a guideline for their constant conflict of interests and foreign policy priorities.
  The Ukrainian issue, we think, can not be considered closed yet, նոր New political clashes in that part of Eastern Europe can really be a serious basis for a wider range of actions.
 The main players in this aspect will be America և America.
Russian President Putin talks about the Islamic-Islamic factor the most.
  This should be considered an expression of the political style of giving clear formulations of Russian foreign policy interests.
This word is again completely absent from the speech of the President of the People's Republic of China. China can not claim a global role without being next to global issues.
By presenting the results of our study in detail, we can draw conclusions based on them և try to make some predictions.
2015 is considered the alarm of the Third World War.
We examined the speeches of the presidents of the four countries considered regional superpowers in the UN General Assembly in September 2015.
 We chose the content analysis from the examination methods և carried out an analysis according to all the principles of methodology.
 From the analysis of the speeches, we can conclude that: Perception of relative security Resilience among the population.
Information flows, economic and political stability will have a continuous destructive effect on the socio-psychological atmosphere.
We can come to predictions that 2016 will be less rich with hot, "bloody" news, new volumes of growing migration, and terrorism based on it will get new volumes.
 The states will start a state policy, կհ the period will lead to a sharp increase in the number of nation states.
 International structures will lose their role, interstate relations will return to the traditional level.
Sona Parsyan2015 AS AN ALARM OF THE "THIRD WORLD WAR".
CONTENT ANALYSIS OF SPEECHES BY POLITICAL LEADERS Keywords: international situation, politics, UN, state leaders, content analysis, war, international threatsSummary.
