PROCEDURE TO CHANGE THE ACCUSATION PROCEDURE ACCORDING TO THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS CODE AND THE DRAFT CODE OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 The clearest possible regulation of the institution of changing the accusation during the trial is important from the point of view of guaranteeing the real equality of the parties in the criminal proceedings, ensuring the right to defense of the accused, as well as the administration of justice by an independent court.
In the framework of this scientific article, an attempt has been made to study the practical issues arising in connection with the application of both theoretical and existing legislative regulations related to this judicial institution.
 For that purpose, separate domestic and foreign sources on the institution of changing the accusation during the trial were studied, such as the judicial acts of the European Court of Human Rights, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia and the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia.
Without delving into the essence of the institute, in this part of the article we will briefly present the problems that are planned to be studied.
  In our opinion, one of the most important issues when changing the accusation by the court is to ensure the right of the accused to defend himself.
  It may not be violated if the charge does not include factual circumstances which were not the basis of the indictment նրան charged by the prosecutor; և when changing the legal assessment of the charge և when that.
 Taking into account the fact that the court is a body administering justice, կիրառ applying the right material norm is an obligation for the judge, then, in our opinion, in the RA criminal proceedings it is necessary to define the authority of the court of first instance to change the legal assessment of the act attributed to the accused. However, the same legal mechanism provides for the accused to be able to anticipate the possibility of a change of charge by the court, to have sufficient time, opportunity, rights to defend himself, on the other hand, the court has a range of powers to remain independent, impartial and not become auxiliary body to the accuser.
It seems that a number of other issues have been resolved to some extent in the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, but we think that there are still unresolved issues, the failure to resolve which may lead to legal, why not moral issues.
 The issues of change of accusation by both the prosecutor and the court are equally important, but in the framework of this work we will limit ourselves to making the issues of change of accusation by the prosecutor a subject of discussion.
According to Article 309.1 of the current RA Criminal Procedure Code, if during the trial in the court of first instance the accuser finds that the accusation is subject to supplementation or modification in terms of aggravation or mitigation, as circumstances which were not known appeared, they could not be known before the trial. և if the factual circumstances of the case do not allow the charge to be supplemented or changed without delaying the trial, he / she submits to the court a motion to adjourn or amend the charge փոփոխ to postpone the trial.
  The accuser may change the accusation, including in terms of aggravation, when the evidence examined during the trial irrefutably proves that the accused has committed a crime other than the one he is accused of.
Moreover, by not exercising his right to change the accusation in the court of first instance, the accuser is deprived of the opportunity to come up with such an initiative during the further investigation of the criminal case1.
1 See the 23rd point of the decision No. EED / 0044/01/11 of December 22, 2011 in the case of Armen Jivani Babayan են Suren Razmik Tumanyan.
According to the analysis of the mentioned norms, the Criminal Procedure Code envisages the following options for the prosecutor to change the accusation during the trial: • Changing the accusation on the initiative of the prosecutor without the regime of conducting investigative actions (Part 3 of Article 309.1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code).
Until 2010, Section 5 of the same article provided that the court could adjourn the hearing for up to 10 days, proposing that the Prosecutor General or his deputy reaffirm the indictment.
  This legal provision, however, was ruled by the RA Constitutional Court in 2010. By the decision N 872 of April 2, 2005 the RA budget was legally recognized. և Invalid ակաս Contradict Article 19 of the Constitution.
  And before that on 24.07.2007 By the decision N 710, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia recognized as invalid several articles envisaging the institution of sending the case for additional preliminary investigation, which contradict the Constitution.
In fact, the regime of the investigator carrying out other investigative actions to change the accusation on the initiative of the prosecutor is a few steps ahead of the institute of additional preliminary investigation, but in principle it does not meet the standards of the rule of law.
 In case of application of this regime, the criminal case is still in court, the investigator does not make a decision on accepting it, but in fact it returns to the investigator, who can freely carry out other investigative and judicial actions provided by the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
  It turns out that the de facto criminal case is out of judicial control, even if it is completed for a limited period of time, or the criminal case continues to remain in court2.
Taking into account the mentioned shortcomings of the legislative regulation, the concept of the new Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Concept) strengthened the idea that the change of the accusation was not 2 See H. Sargsyan, The issues of changing the accusation by the prosecutor according to the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code // Collection of scientific articles dedicated to the issues of the draft RA Criminal Procedure Code, Yerevan, 2014, p. 307.
whether it should be a basis or reason for conducting a new investigative or other judicial action, but should be the result of a comprehensive analysis of other evidence in the case, as changing the charge after a new investigative or judicial action means restoring / restoring the institution of additional investigation. disguise under another name.
 This is the reason why the Concept considers it acceptable to carry out only actions to change the accusation, which can be used from the judicial means available during the trial of the case, such as summoning witnesses, appointing experts, etc.
 The performance of these actions will not go beyond the jurisdiction of the court3.
The draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code developed on the basis of the concept did not fix an approach different from the Concept on this specific issue.
 Thus, the only mode of change of charge envisaged by the draft Criminal Procedure Code is a hybrid of the two existing regimes4.
  In particular, it follows from the provisions of Article 283 of the Draft that the prosecution has no legislative possibility to carry out new investigative actions in a criminal case pending before a court.
 Thus, in case of new circumstances, the possibility of returning the criminal case under consideration to the investigator was excluded.
 We think that this is an attempt to implement the idea of ​​a court-centered criminal trial, in addition, it is the result of the positions expressed in the RA Constitutional Court decisions N 710 և N 934, according to which, if a criminal case is accepted for court proceedings, it should be resolved in court. at the sitting.
 On the other hand, the CC noted that in the case of the current legal regulation, the prosecution has the opportunity to change the already failed accusation outside the scope of the public trial by making factual corrections, which significantly violates the principle of equality underlying the trial.
 Prohibition of investigative actions to change the accusation at the trial stage also ensures the public course of the case և possible 3 See point 8.13 of the draft concept of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code.
4 See G. Baghdasaryan, The limits of changing the accusation in court and the judicial control over it, // State և law, Yerevan, 2015, p. 21.
enables the court to keep the process of changing the charge within its control.
With regard to the legal provisions under discussion, it should be clarified that according to the Draft, the accusation of factual circumstances during the trial can be changed in case of simultaneous existence of the following two conditions: 1. Evidence examined during the hearings established factual circumstances that were not known կարող could not be known in the pre-trial proceedings; 2. These factual circumstances themselves or together with other factual circumstances make it necessary to bring a new charge against the accused.
In each particular case, the court must consider whether the factual circumstances affecting the length of the charge were known in the pre-trial proceedings or whether they could have been known when supplementing or modifying the charge brought by the prosecutor to file a new charge.
 We believe that the phrase "factual circumstances which were not known, could not have been known in the pre-trial proceedings" itself implies that those who conducted the proceedings were not known objectively, but not subjectively, for reasons, for example, they might have known if they had Proper diligence in finding out.
 In addition, we believe that both under the current Code and the Draft, the wording "complete the charge" means a change in the charge by expanding its scope, that is, it is just a kind of change of charge.
  This is evidenced by the fact that the regime of supplementing the accusation has not been specifically regulated, in other words, both the amendment and the addition of the accusation are carried out. Հստակ It is clear from the draft that they should be implemented through the same legal mechanisms. It does not solve any problem by itself, it can be concluded that its fixing by law has no normative need5.
With regard to Article 284 of the draft, it should be noted that the answer to the question that in case of change of the accusation the prosecutor is obliged to make a decision on filing an accusation was given unequivocally. Sargsyan, Theoretical and practical issues of changing the accusation during the trial, Yerevan, 2015, p. 169.
or not.
 The dispute over this issue is still going on in the legal practice, as the RA Court of Cassation and Constitutional Courts have reached conflicting conclusions independently of each other.
Thus, the RA Court of Cassation in criminal case No. HYKRD2 / 0144/01 / 09S. In the decision made on Nalbandyan, he stated that when changing the accusation in court, the accuser must make a decision on supplementing or changing the accusation, as well as a new indictment.
 And the RA Constitutional Court by decision N 872 has determined that a new indictment cannot be drawn up, as the norms of the current RA Criminal Procedure Code do not provide for such legal regulation.
  The draft considered the position of the Court of Cassation more acceptable, which is unequivocally justified, as the indictment is the document that determines the boundaries of the trial, enables the accused to effectively organize his defense.
In the light of what has been said, it is necessary to refer to the one-sided formulation of the Project.
 It is about the provision in Article 284, Part 4, "the decision to file a new accusation is given to the court, the participants in the court proceedings."
  We think that the wording "given" is not justified.
  In order for a newly filed charge to be more accessible to the parties and more accessible to the public, it must not only be actually submitted to the court, to the participants in the proceedings, but must be properly presented in court, just as the original charge is.
 And according to Part 2 of Article 330 of the Draft, the public prosecutor in the opening speech presents the factual basis of the accusation, as well as the legal assessment of the act attributed to the accused.
  That is, the accusation is presented orally during the court session.
Referring to the legal provisions for changing the charge in the context of guaranteeing the right to protection, evidence should be considered from the point of view of ensuring the minimum rights set forth in Article 6 3 3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
  Thus, sub-clause "b" of clause 3 states that the accused must have "sufficient time and opportunity to prepare his defense."
 This provision is logically connected with sub-item "a" of the same article, which refers to being aware of the accusation - receiving legal representation.
  In this regard, the ECtHR concluded that all the circumstances of the case, the complexity of the case, as well as the stage of the investigation should be taken into account when determining sufficient time for defense.
 In addition, the ECtHR also noted that in any case where the accused's lawyer claims that they have not been provided with the necessary means to exercise their right to a defense, the court must remember that the accused's right to communicate freely with the ombudsman is considered fair. a central element of the concept of trial.
  Therefore, in order to get acquainted with the new accusation, the right of the accused to have a lawyer's consultation with him / her should be ensured within the time limit provided by the court6.
We think that in the framework of the legal regulation, which is considered a subject, the issue of protection of the interests of both the accused and the victim deserves special attention.
  The panel of judges believes that the prosecutor's handling of the accusation does not in any way violate the rights of the victim, as the responsibility to prove the accusation and refute the arguments in favor of the defendant rests entirely with the accuser.
 The other part considers that in case the accuser rejects the accusation or changes the accusation, it is necessary to take into account the position of the victim, as otherwise the victim is deprived of the right of access to justice, և the victim should be entitled to continue defending the accusation in this case7.
 It should be noted that the second of the above-mentioned opinions is more acceptable for us.
It is not accidental that the Concept still outlined ideas aimed at introducing the institution of a subsidiary prosecutor.
 In particular, Clause 8.27 of the Concept provided that in the event of a milder change in the original charge by the prosecutor, the subsidiary prosecutor, the victim, could continue to defend the original charge, which could be a basis for the court to issue a preliminary indictment.
 At the same time, in case the victim assumes the accusation, in order to organize its defense more professionally, the Concept considers it necessary to involve the victim's representative.
6 See G. Ս. Ghazinyan և Others, Application of European Standards for the Protection of Human Rights և Fundamental Freedoms in RA Criminal Proceedings, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 227-238.
7 See H. Sargsyan, Theoretical and practical issues of changing the accusation during the trial, Yerevan, 2015, p. 103.
It turns out that if the victim actually exercises this right within the framework of such a legal regulation, the accused will have to defend himself against two accusations, in which case he significantly limits the possibility of dividing the latter, ընթացքում during the trial the balance of equality obviously leans in favor of the accusation8.
  Although these visions did not find a place in the project, however, they are partially acceptable to us.
 We think that in all cases it is unacceptable not to take into account the victim's opinion within the framework of the accusation.
The Prosecutor General's Office of the Republic of Armenia rightly objected to the introduction of the institution of subsidiary prosecutor, reasoning that according to the Constitution, the protection of the accusation is the exclusive authority of the prosecutor9.
 We are in favor of the objection presented by the Prosecutor General's Office, but we think that such mechanisms can be envisaged so that, on the one hand, the victim does not become a subject defending the accusation, on the other hand, his point of view is not ignored.
 More specifically, we think that when the prosecutor submits a motion to mitigate the accusation to the court, the victim should have the opportunity to object to that motion with a certain reason.
 That the victim's objection will not hinder the court in considering the motion, but after the new accusation is filed, within a reasonable period of time given by the court, the victim և his representative will have the opportunity to get acquainted with the new accusation և to express his position again.
 Moreover, the position approved by the victim և his / her representative on the new accusation must be submitted in writing to the court before the resumption of the court proceedings.
For example, it can be envisaged that the victim will present his / her position to the court at least 10 days before the expiration of the given period for the new accusation.
 Based on this position, the court will have the right to reject the accusation և to continue the proceedings with the initial accusation.
  And if the court nevertheless accepts the new accusation, it will be obliged to refer to the position of the victim in the final judicial act.
In order to substantiate the previous position, we think that it is necessary to draw parallels with the accusation provided by the accuser provided for in parts 6 և 7 of Article 284 of the draft law.
9 See point 8.13 of the draft concept of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code.
with partial or partial waiver of regulations.
  Particular attention was paid to the regulation that in this case the Draft clearly stipulates the duty of the court to hear the opinion of other participants in the proceedings, including the victim, while in case of change of accusation such an opportunity is not given directly to the victim.
  In this regard, it should be noted that Article 50 of the Draft reserves the right to the victim to express an opinion on the motions and statements of other participants in the court session, but we believe that this is a more abstract norm;
We think that we will not be wrong if we prove that the legitimate interests of the victim are significantly limited not only in case the accuser rejects the accusation, but also in case of its change.
  Therefore, it is not acceptable not to give the victim the opportunity to express his position in this process.
Taking into account the position of the victim in court when resolving the issue of changing the accusation will first guarantee the victim to ensure an investigation of his case "in compliance with all requirements of justice"; on the other hand, the accuser will be constrained in any case to hear the position of the victim.
Summarizing the above, we propose the following additions and changes in the Project.1. Remove the wording "complete the charge" from the draft, as it is nothing but a kind of change of charge by expanding its scope.
2. In Part 4 of Article 284 of the Draft, in the definition of "the decision to file a new charge is given to the court մասն to the participants in the court proceedings", replace the phrase "given" with the phrase "submitted".
3. To supplement Part 1 of Article 284 of the Draft with the following new sentence: "The court gives the victim an opportunity to express its position on the submitted motion", to supplement the 4th part with the following sentence: "At least 10 days before the expiration of the deadline for the victim to get acquainted with the accusation. submits a reasoned written consent or disagreement, approved by the victim or his / her representative. "
4. To supplement the same article after part 5 with the following content in part 5.1: "The court is obliged to consider the written position presented by the victim regarding the changed accusation in the final court act".
Anna Hakobyan PROCEDURE FOR CHANGING THE CHARGE ACCORDING TO THE PROSECUTOR ACCORDING TO THE CODE OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA և DRAFT NEW CODE
