HUMAN-PERPETRATOR TRANSFORMATION VAHE KACHA'S "PREVIOUS PARTY" STORY
  After all, the great influence of cultural and civilization could not but be reflected.
  Therefore, the creative language of many Armenian writers in the Diaspora is not Armenian, it is foreign.
 And no matter how painful this phenomenon may be for our language, nevertheless, we can not but prove that alienation on the other hand has become the destiny of the Armenian people, one of the means of expressing the image of the Armenian people (Michael Arlen Jr. "Direction to Ararat"). Antonina Arslan "The Lark Farm" William Saroyan "My name is Aram", Peter Balakyan "The Dog of Destiny" և others).
And it is not accidental that William Saroyan once said. "I write in English, I am a native American, but I consider myself an Armenian writer.
 The language in which I write is English, the environment I describe is American, and the spirit that drives me to write is Armenian. ”
1 Vahe Kacha (Vahe Khachatryan) was not left out of the fate of the Armenian people.
 In his novel "Midashu in this Garden" (1981), he referred to the reality of Western Armenia, depicting the life of the Armenians of Istanbul from the Hamidian massacres to the Great Genocide.
 Below we will try to refer to one of Vahe Kacha's cases, putting it under a specific question.
In general, in Vahe Kacha's works ("Eye to Eye", "Wand", etc.) the heroes constantly find themselves in breakthrough situations.
 Even in those sharp, tense situations, the personality of the heroes is revealed.
 In this regard, we have singled out Vahe Kacha's novel "The Feast of Predators".
 On the one hand, we have tried to interpret it from the point of view of today's artistic standards, on the other hand, we have examined it by asking a specific question, how the human-predatory transformation takes place.
It is interesting how the author shows that transition in actions, from human to human-predatory.
  Let's pay attention to what the heroes are like before the blockade and after that.
  At first glance, the beginning is very ordinary. They are going to celebrate an anniversary են they are receiving guests.
  And it is emphasized that it is a war, but it does not seem to concern them. "Life flowed without clashes. One film a week, a few books, records, friends… ”2.
 Here the attitude towards the enemy is emphasized.
 There seems to be no obvious hatred (at least before the blockade). They talk, discuss, but at the same time the war seems very far from them.
 But that is only at the beginning.
 However, it can be said that the author opens the "playing cards" line by line, either "unnoticed".
 If we pay attention, at first glance the heroes are even very human, but the writer prepares the reader to discover who the given hero will be.
 Here is what Brigitte says about the war. “I Hate War” (p. 63).
 These words are immediately followed by the writer's "reaction". "He especially hated the rumors about the war.
 Endless fountains, from which sleep carried on և yawned ”(p. 63).
  The impression is that the author "interferes" with the events, before the turning point of the events, introduces the reader to the latter.
  Kacha, as we have already mentioned, does not forget to emphasize the human in them.
 Of course, this is not accidental.
 Finally, by emphasizing that human, the essential thing must be emphasized: when does a person stop being human, moreover, along with the development of events, it seems that the human was not even among them.
  If before the blockade Wilker was watching 1 Davtyan V., The Good Giant, Yerevan, 1979, page 3.
2 Kacha V., The Feast of Predators, Yerevan, 1976, page 61 (the pages of the other passages quoted from this book will be mentioned on the spot).
Pierre and pity him. "Fortunately, parents are well-off people" (p. 65), - then Pierre, appreciating his own life, must become hated.
  And the loss of humanity becomes the price needed to maintain physical existence.
  And even the doctor must lose his professional delicacy և throw in Pierre's face. "You are doomed to be blind all your life ... Understand me" (p. 110).
Let us first refer to the beginning.
 When the heroes learn that they have to choose two hostages from their own in exchange for the two killed Germans, they first try to maintain balance in the current situation.
 But gradually the situation gets out of control, the nerves give way, և no one is responsible for his actions anymore.
 The human-predator transition is emphasized step by step, which, apparently, shows everyone in a new light.
  The situation is so aggravated that even Victor, as a husband, is obviously angry and jealous, but there is no obstacle for the woman to go to a German officer.
Consider how disagreements arise and how relatives' attitudes toward one another change.
  The author often emphasizes that they are "friendly", but in that, in fact, he emphasizes the tension of the situation, the fact that the latter are not friendly.
 In this respect, the heroes not only start recognizing their supposed relatives from another point of view, who become strangers. "Are these people around him real friends or not?"
  It seemed to him that this was the first time he had seen such people.
  He did not hate them, but he was astonished by the unexpected discovery ”(p. 98), - they are the heroes, one might say, revealing themselves.
 And the examination of the inner world of the latter by them is already out of the context of recognizing the environment in a new way, reaching self-knowledge.
  Therefore, the doctor must think for himself. "He was surprised to find so much hatred in himself.
 He lived for years without the slightest sign of anger. ”- p. 111.
 In this situation, everyone "forgets" that they are surrounded by their relatives.
 In this case, the relatives become enemies, who are an obstacle to save their own lives.
If we take the characters separately, we should note that Wilker tries to control the situation in every possible way, who takes every step to save his own life (remember how he tries to bribe François with a check, persuades Brigitte to go to Germany, hides in a closet, etc. ).
 Despite his outstanding steps, it would be wrong to say that it is a letter. They all take extreme measures to save their own lives.
  Steps go not only beyond the limits of human imagination, but also reach a point where people lose their self-love and experience a moral decline.
  For a moment it even seems that the latter have lost the ability to judge soberly.
 Their steps are not guided by reason, but by the instinct to preserve physical existence in every way, under the influence of which the human-predatory transformation of the heroes takes place even unconsciously.
 Their level of consciousness seems to perceive only one thing: to save their property.
 Thus, it can be said that unconscious selfishness reaches its peak.
 Not accepting his own selfishness, only one thing becomes a priority for each of the heroes - his right to live.
 And it "turns out" that everyone's right to life is conditioned by justified "reasons".
 Moreover, they begin to explain their livelihood from a human point of view.
  Wilker tells how he helped his friend (pledging his belongings, etc.).
 The obsession with looking human becomes so strong that the hero plays the role of a narrow person. "When I got married, my wife was pregnant, not from me, but from someone else" (p. 130).
 The other heroes also have reasons to live. Brigitte is pregnant, Victor will become a father, the doctor considers himself useful for the society, and Pierre has already taken part in the war.
 That's why Pierre even seems to consider himself a hero. After all, he fought and lost his sight, he even received a medal.
  Here the author raises a possible question: who is fighting on the battlefield, is participating in the war already a heroism?
 It is true that Pierre is a participant in the war. He lost his sight and received an order, but, nevertheless, he is not considered a hero, in other words, participating in the war does not mean being a hero.
The characters of Timakov և François stand out.
 Timakov և François, unlike the others, in fact, do not lose their face.
  They remain as they are, or, to be more precise, a human-predatory transformation does not work in their case.
 And if we analyze Timakov, we should notice that he leaves the impression of a bystander rather than a person participating in the actual actions.
 The current situation seems to him to be somewhat funny. he is kind of playing.
  Or he does not agree to take hostage at once, but at the same time he is ready for that step.
 It is also noteworthy that when the heroes present their "good deeds", Timakov even mocks. "Now it is my turn to show kindness" (page 125).
 He enumerates actions that are not exemplary at all.
 But this, in contrast to the others, emphasizes Timakov in his human aspect, that he does not try to present himself better than he really is.
  It should be noted that it is not at all surprising for Timakov to know his "friends" from another point of view.
  The impression is that he did not need such a situation to get to know the people around him.
  And it is not accidental that from the very beginning he has an obvious positive attitude towards François.
 And who was François?
 In the novel, the image of François is not brought to the fore in the actions, but nevertheless, his image is of key importance.
 He, like Timakov, not only does not change from a human point of view, but, like him, is ready to face death or to become a hostage with his immediate consent.
  Moreover, François can be said to be the only one who looks at the current situation from a human point of view.
  Let's remember how he, when Pierre tries to save the life of himself, Brigitte և Victor, not only takes them out of the closed living room, but with that step emphasizes the most essential thing. "We have every right to live" (p. 135), he said, saying that no one has the right to demand the sacrifice of his life for his own life when he does not take that step.
No less important for the human-predatory transition is the causality of the situation - the war - the perception of the so-called war by the heroes.
  As we mentioned at the beginning, war seemed to be a far-fetched event for the heroes, but only at first glance.
 The author, whether directly or indirectly, raises an essential question: the inhuman manifestation of war, the exterior of which, in fact, everyone bears the consequences.
 But at the same time, not everyone perceives war, or, to be more precise, feels it on their own skin (War is hated by Pierre because he lost his sight, Wilker, Brigitte, Victor in the sense that they are not emotional, as before և etc.).
 François's perception of the so-called war is essential here.
  She, as we have already mentioned, is not brought to the forefront by her actions in the novel, but her, somewhere "silent" image speaks for itself, as someone who feels the war on her own skin, who does not just grieve for her lost husband, but she perceives it. the whole inhumanity of the so-called war.
  Moreover, he goes deeper into the so-called war, realizing the devastating consequences of the war even after it is over. "We will finally come to terms with all this.
 Flags will be waved, there will be music.
 We will dance on the dead.
 Have you ever thought about that bitter kingdom that echoes under our feet?
 It is the kingdom where the dead are placed on the two reconciled lands.
 I hear their groans.
 And I am ashamed ”(p. 139).
It is not by chance that the novel mentions the year 1942, that is, the period of a specific war, the fact that the Germans are the opponents, but nevertheless, the war is not seen as a struggle for the welfare of the homeland.
 Here the author goes out of the context of the war, "the struggle for the homeland", emphasizes the most important thing: the war is not really justified.
  And it is not in vain that his heroes, with their inhuman face, are emphasized right after becoming the bearer of the war situation, they are transformed from humans into predators.
  This is one of the inhuman manifestations of war.
In other words, if there is a war, regardless of whether you are on the battlefield or not, you have lost a loved one, although, as an individual, you become the bearer of the so-called war.
 A carrier where the most important thing can be lost - the human face.
The structural feature of the novel is essential.
  There are no separate chapters in the short story, but let us pay attention to the fact that if, roughly speaking, we remove the actual actions from the story, the party scene of the last part becomes the "continuation" of the first.
 Or in the first part the party fails, but in the second part - at the end, which, as we have already mentioned, becomes the continuation of the first part of the work, the heroes try to restore the balance after the situation (they say toasts, they even blow up the holiday car) , but they are no longer sitting at the table with each other as friends, տվյալ the party in this case even seems fake.
 This is no longer a feast of friends, but a feast of predators who know each other.
  Predators, with whose characters, in fact, the author generalizes the human species. "We are all predators, small, beautiful, well-trained predators, we need a chain.
  Our chain is called order ”(p. 144).
  This ending of the novel ends with no less important emphasis on Timakov's thoughts.
 This, of course, is not accidental.
 It is not accidental that the writer does not take the thoughts of the hero in quotation marks կարելի, one can say, the author և the hero is the same, he said that with that Kacha emphasizes his ideological hero, Timakov.
Very often, in order to emphasize the human in a person, it is enough to just mention that he is a human being.
The so-called "man" in this case becomes the definition of a human being, a definition that at the same time distinguishes a person from people, that is to say, by saying "man" in people one cannot understand everyone.
 But there is also a clear definition between the so-called "human" and the so-called "non-human".
 In this case, we can give different names to the so-called "non-human" or, so to speak, to the definition "not human".
  Examining this novel by Kacha, by asking the specific question of how man transforms into a predator, we can say that the basis of the work does not emphasize the possibility of what the so-called "man" should be, nor vice versa.
  And how modern is Evipak?
 It is relevant because the questions raised by the writer, what is the person really like, moreover, does he know himself, what is the phenomenon called war, are not the concerns of a specific period.
 In this respect, although there is a date in the novel, 1942, but it can be "1978", "2009" ... Vahe Kacha, putting a person in a certain situation, tries to show, that man crosses the line of his calling to be "human."
 In this case, the person is no longer the same person.
 But the author does not comment on that only in a certain situation.
 In this case, the situation becomes a "tool" that should play a major role in human-predatory transformation.
  A transformation that itself becomes a surprise for the heroes themselves.
Through their characters, the author first of all generalizes the person, without defining "being human" or "not being human".
  And in reality there is no specific definition of a person-individual.
Even in this case, when a human-predatory transformation takes place, it is not a characteristic of a human being, but a human-specific transformation.
 After all, the heroes, it seems, did not know that they were like that, a predator.
Thus, Kacha's heroes are not portrayed as a directly "formed" human species, but at the same time, their individuality is revealed as a predator hidden under order.
  But on the other hand, the author emphasizes the causal significance of this transformation, which in this case becomes a war.
  And in this context, too, the writer raises a significant issue: war as a phenomenon that has no justification.
Arpine VardanyanHUMAN-PREVENTIVE TRANSFORMATION VAHE KACHAYI'S "STRUGGLE OF THE PREVENTORS" STORY Keywords: person-individual, friend, party, tense situation, war, get to know each other anew, hidden predator.
