CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN TOURISM Corporate social responsibility is a self-regulatory process that helps the enterprise to be socially responsible, as it relates to stakeholders և society.
    As part of the organization's strategy, CSR provides the possibility of self-regulation, helping to control the conduct of business activities in accordance with the norms of ethics and international standards.
  In order to better understand the essence of CSR, it is necessary to study several terms in detail.
  These are: corporate responsibility, corporate social performance, corporate charity, etc. [1].
To understand the concept of corporate citizenship, one can simply think in parallel about an individual և company.
  An individual citizen has rights and obligations.
  Respect for the law and fulfillment of legal obligations is one of the minimum but mandatory components of being a citizen, not an excellent manifestation of citizenship.
  A businessman also cannot consider himself a good corporate citizen if he obeys the law or pays taxes.
  An individual will be considered an excellent citizen if he / she contributes to the development of his / her community or country, is active in public life, does not tolerate injustice, etc.
 The same applies to a good corporate citizen.
  Public activism can be manifested through charity or CSR, the fight against corruption, discrimination, other illegal, immoral phenomena, and so on.
Some experts believe that the term corporate responsibility has two components: corporate social responsibility and corporate environmental responsibility.
 The first includes social issues, such as anti-corruption initiatives related to education, etc., while the latter addresses purely environmental issues [2, p. 375].
The concept of corporate social performance describes the impact of the company's work in the public and environmental spheres.
  That is, when using this term, the company's work is divided into two parts: financial performance (profit-making function), corporate social performance (work done for the society, environment) [2, p. 376].
The idea of ​​sustainable business or corporate sustainability is based on the economical use of resources, the protection of the environment, and the prevention of future problems by taking reasonable steps now.
The main goal of corporate charity is to benefit the society, which can be achieved through certain measures.
  For example, a company may state in its strategy that it wants to help the development of the healthcare sector by supporting, sponsoring, and supporting medical institutions through donations and other initiatives.
Usually, this charity is not closely connected with the company's field of activity. For example, a company that helps healthcare facilities may be an IT company, a mobile operator, or a mining company.
  The goal of charity is to have some positive impact on society in a short period of time, albeit to a small extent.
  The main benefit that a company can get in such cases is a good reputation արը the image of a "good company".
  However, as a rule, the actions are not included in the whole model of the company's activity, which is why in crisis situations, when it is necessary to reduce costs, often the charity suffers first [2, p. 377].
According to the theory of corporate social responsibility, business organizers և businessmen take into account the interests of the society և their impact on customers, suppliers, shareholders առ beneficiaries, as well as the environment.
  Each enterprise, by carrying out certain activities within the framework of CSR programs, expands the enterprise-environment connection և contributes to the elimination of negative impacts.
CSR is a broad concept that can take many forms, depending on the enterprise, industry or country.
  Many companies carry out charitable and volunteer activities within the framework of CSR programs.
  They are aimed at the society, at the same time they start raising the level of their own activity.
  That is why CSR is important for both the society and the enterprise.
CSR activities contribute to the establishment of a strong "corporate" connection between employees, which is aimed at the moral and psychological support of the enterprise և employees to be as connected as possible with the environment.
Thus, CSR is basically a strategy of large, medium-sized enterprises, according to which the more visibly successful the enterprise, the more responsible it is for the ethical standards of ethics, competition, and industry as a whole.
Enterprise CSR in community development includes activities such as [3]: • Collaborating with locals, the local community.
• Socially responsible investment, better known as sustainable social consciousness, "green" or ethical, moral and psychological responsibility.
• Improve և improve աշխատակից employee։ customer relationships.
• Carry out environmental activities և ensure stability.
CSR is a broad concept that can be constantly changed depending on the activities of the enterprise և other external, internal factors.
 In such enterprises, donations are frequent, և volunteer work is carried out, which does not pursue profit.
 It contributes to the establishment of a moral and psychological atmosphere in the workplace, as well as to the establishment of a harmonious relationship between the environment and the enterprise.
CSR aims to ensure the moral and psychological part of the enterprise.
 It pays great attention to human rights.
The task of CSR is to ensure the protection of the environment, the improvement of the living standard of the society both now and in the future.
The concept of CSR enterprises can no longer act as isolated economic entities in society, that is, they can not be isolated from society.
It should be noted that CSR has a number of social, environmental, business and other features [4].
Social features are: • charitable investments, • opportunity to attract volunteers, • raising the level of education of the society within the framework of corporate activities, ensuring employment, • ensuring quality security.
Environmental features include: • Ability to recycle a wide range of materials • Length of production և Ensuring functionality effectively; • Utilization of renewable resources։ Use; • Integration of environmental government tools into business plans.
Business features include: • Improving financial results; • Minimizing operating costs; etc.
There are many definitions of CSR, the most common of which is the definition given by the European Commission, according to which CSR is defined as an accompanying or guiding business policy, according to which the enterprise integrates social and environmental concerns into its business. how their relationship between stakeholders is strengthened on a voluntary basis.
CSR allows to increase the profit of the enterprise, ժամանակ, at the same time, solves many environmental և social problems.
According to Friedman, the socially responsible company is aimed at increasing the profit of the shareholders of the given company within the framework of legal and moral norms.
According to Friedman theory, the beneficiaries are the groups and individuals who are the key components of the organization's external environment և can have a positive or negative impact on the enterprise և, vice versa.
1991 Carroll proposed the CSR pyramid model, which consists of 4 main categories [5, p. 42]. Economic responsibility.
 This is considered a fundamental part of the categories.
  For the assessment of economic responsibility, the respondents take the results of the company's annual report as a basis.
Legal responsibility.
  It presupposes obedience to the adopted laws.
  The company's lawsuits and fines serve as a basis for the assessment of legal liability.
Moral responsibility.
  It presupposes to be moral, to avoid harms, to commit to do what is just and right.
  The assessment of moral responsibility is carried out on the basis of surveys conducted among consumers.
Discretionary responsibility.
  It means to be an effective corporate responsible, to invest the necessary resources, to improve the quality of life.
  Discretionary liability is formed on a charitable basis at the expense of the company.
Thus, it becomes clear that the evaluation of the company's CSR effectiveness consists of three main stages: in the first stage, the evaluations given to the company are collected during expert surveys.
In the second stage, through information entropy, the weight of each of the above four components is determined.
The scores recalculated with the weights obtained in the 3rd stage are introduced into the "VIKOR" (multi-factor decision making method) model.
The obtained results give an opportunity to classify the companies according to the level of CSR (points 1-4 of the CSR pyramid model).
Corporate social responsibility applies not only to large medium-sized enterprises, but also to the tourism sector, which harmoniously combines the ideology of sustainable decoration with sustainable tourism.
According to the United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), tourism accounts for 7-8% of world GDP.
  One in 16 of the world's population is involved in tourism.
Thus, it becomes clear that tourism is a complex of services, which provides for transportation for a period of 1 day to 6 months for leisure, health and other purposes.
It should be noted that the current world tourism is making a transition from mass to stable, և 1950. Then many experts ևScientists suggested soft "green" or green tourism "greentourism", which already in 1992. turned into sustainable tourism.
  1992 The phrase "sustainable tourism" was first used in the concept of sustainable development called "XXI Century Agenda".
The UNWTO accepted the statement that "sustainable tourism development meets the needs of current tourists և hosting areas, պահ at the same time, preserves և strengthens future opportunities" [7].
It should be noted that due to these changes, the CSR sector appeared in stable tourism in order to implement effective management.
  It included 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
 It should be noted that in the field of tourism CSR was launched in 2015-2016, and CSR as a separate part in the 1990s. [8]
Now, even in the field of tourism, the concepts of "Greenfield" and "Brownfield" are clearly separated.
  Greenfield presupposes a process that takes place in a new "green" area, that is, it is based on obtaining new results through the introduction of new resources.
Brownfield uses existing resources և conditions to create air.
  It is very often observed in the sphere of tourism, in the hotel industry.
  For example, using the existing infrastructure in the RA Square, the "Marriott Armenia" hotel was opened.
CSR in tourism is defined as a guided business policy, through which tourism companies include social and environmental issues in their business mission.
As enterprises are a part of society, the beneficiaries include in their activities the provision of a legitimate financial obligation of the society in the long run.
 In this case, medium-term or short-term activity is almost excluded.
  For each activity, including tourism, an effective CSR strategy is developed.
 Environmental protection, the creation of honest working conditions, as well as the improvement of the living standard and welfare of the society are the issues of the strategy of international tourism enterprises.
  There are many frameworks և guidelines for CSR integration in the enterprise strategy, which are conditioned by the specifics of the enterprise և their perception of social responsibility.
CSR today is perceived as a comprehensive approach, through which stakeholders are not only considered "recipients" but also "partners" for the implementation of CSR strategies.
As tourism is a rapidly and dynamically developing field, it is necessary to pay attention to its positive and negative effects.
  As a result, in the 2000s. UNWTO և UNEP (UNEnvironmental program), in cooperation with the UN Environment Program, proposed the goals of sustainable tourism development.
 The goals are based on ensuring economic growth, social equality, ensuring favorable working conditions, improving the quality of work, raising the living standards of the society, preserving and valuing cultural and national values.
2004 The Tourism Sustainable Group, established by the EU Commission, identified eight key challenges [9, pp. 8-17]: • Reduce the seasonality of demand.
• Identify the problems caused by the tourism transport system.
• Improve the quality of tourism activities.
• Improve արդյունքում improve the welfare of society և the quality of life as a result of positive changes.
• Reduction of resource use և waste production.
• Preserve և value natural և cultural heritage.
• Make tourism accessible to all.
Use tourism as a powerful tool in Global Sustainable Development (GST).
According to the World Travel and Tourism Council in 2013. According to the report, the tourism sector is considered to be the largest ամ dynamically developing sector [10, p. 14].
  Before that, it should be noted that the tourism sector can have both positive and negative impact on the economic, social and environmental spheres.
  As a result, in 2005 The UNWTO jointly proposed the Sustainable Tourism Development Goals with the UNEP (Environment Program) [11, p. 42].
These goals are based on economic viability, social equality, improvement of working conditions, increase of biodiversity society, provision, preservation and evaluation of cultural values, as well as environmental protection.
standard of living There are a number of documents of international importance that can serve as a guide for tourism activities and at the same time integrate CSR programs in their work.
 One such document is the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism.
 It was established in 1999. By UNWTO, which includes Tourism Responsible Sustainable Development Guidelines.
Declaration of Davos.
  It contains adaptation and mitigation strategic programs for tourism, which will be aimed at global climate change and the solution of other problems.
"Initiatives of tour operators for the development of sustainable tourism."
  It was founded in 2000 as a network of tour operators, which implements a marketing strategy for the development of tourism on a sustainable basis.
  Expects to invest in natural, cultural, economic և spheres.
  Such investments in the hospitality and tourism sector will contribute to large profits, while not compromising the living conditions of local communities.
There are a number of voluntary tools that support businesses to implement CSR activities.
  The simplest but most replaceable measure is the CSR obligation as a guiding principle for management և beneficiaries.
Code of Conduct և The company's CSR programs are one of the most common ways to implement a CSR strategy.
 Back in the 1990s, several international hotel companies implemented CSR Strategic programs.
 Examples include Marriott hotel chains, Intercontinental Hotels, Hilton Hotel corporation, Club Mediterranean, Starwood GuestProgram, and others.
CSR programs in enterprises are implemented with the support of a number of volunteer tools, such as Starwood, which is aimed at environmentally and socially responsible tourism activities.
To promote the tourism business, CSR carries out environmentally responsible and socially responsible tourism activities or events, such as the Tourism Award (Future Award for Tomorrow), which is organized by the Tourism Board.
Tourism The most formalized tools are CSR management systems based on a number of international standards, such as the International Environmental Management Standard (ISO-14.000), the Social Responsibility Standard (ISO-26.000) or the Eco-Management Scheme (EMAS, English). . eco-managemnet audit scheme)։ etc.
It should be noted that ISO or EMAS standards do not always correspond to small or medium-sized travel companies.
In general, it is customary to distinguish two types of certification schemes: 1. Dynamic. These are process-based schemes that aim to streamline the process in ongoing CSR enterprises.
2. Static. these are result-based schemes that measure the achievement of a predetermined index [13, p. 41].
Today, in many certification schemes, a set of two approaches is observed.
In 2010, the Sustainabletourism stewardship council (STSC) was established, acting globally as the eco-labeling accreditation body (GSTC). [14] Globalsustainable tourism triteria.
Global Sustainable Tourism Standards set requirements for hotels and tour operators that they must operate sustainably.
The hospitality industry plays a big role in the world tourism industry.
  In the current hospitality industry, the development of CSR strategy և practice is considered a necessity.
  This is where project planning comes into play.
  In general, project planning includes site selection, architectural structures, external facilities, electricity, water supply, communication facilities, and more.
According to the Council of European Hoteliers, 85% of hoteliers claim to have been involved in such environmental activities.
  The main emphasis was on the targeted use of electricity, water resources, waste reduction.
The process of sustainable hospitality management includes the management of electricity, water resources, restrictions on the use of chemicals, the provision of biodiversity, community development, as well as the creation of fair and favorable working conditions.
  Here a lot of attention is paid to the social aspect.
 Such enterprises issue training programs that promote the development of local labor resources.
  Through CSR activities, enterprises provide social support to improve the living standards of the society.
In the last few years, travel agents և պեր operators have started to actively carry out CSR activities, which is conditioned by the increase of customers' awareness և sensitivity towards environmental և social issues.
  To create a travel package, tour operators use such travel components as transport, overnight services, sightseeing, etc.
  In this case, the tour operators evaluate the CSR means not only in the value chain of the company, but also outside them, that is, they take into account the external-internal values.
In order to maintain the elements and resources that are potential for e-tourism, the process must be managed in accordance with the principles of sustainability.
  In this case, the production of sustainable products is encouraged, which is aimed at both environmental protection and community development.
CSR can make significant investments in the development process to ensure stability.
  At present, smart or smart-sustainable growth is part of the CSR "Europe 2020" strategy.
CSR funds of tourism enterprises are perceived as responsible use of natural and cultural resources.
  They include processes of pollution, waste reduction, biodiversity, as well as the protection of cultural and national heritage, fair and responsible treatment of employees.
CSR has become a central component in the strategy of tourism activities, which are mainly aimed at solving environmental, social and economic problems.
  These have a significant impact on socio-economic development internationally, regionally.
Thus, corporate social responsibility can be considered as one of the features of mature business, ըստ, apparently, both in tourism and other business sectors, it has become one of the most important components of the enterprise strategy.
  In order for tourism enterprises to achieve significant success, it is necessary to continuously implement CSR activities, ել to include it in the business strategy.
  It became clear that CSR is interpreted as a matter of moral choice of the organization և management, which is based on human rights, community development, implementation of environmental measures, as well as review of internal organizational issues, such as mutual trust of businesses, business responsibility, business responsibility. honesty, etc.
 Prior to that, CSR was defined as a guided business policy in tourism, through which tourism companies incorporate social and environmental issues into their business mission, which in turn effectively paves the way for sustainable tourism.
LITERATURE [1] URL.
 https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corp-social-responsibility.asp (Link made: 17.04.2019).
[2] MODERN CHALLENGES OF DEVELOPMENT, ASUE 24TH CONFERENCE. page 375377.
[3] URL.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/profile/Maimunah_Ismail/publication/40426284_CORPORATE_SOCI
ROLE-IN-COMMUNITY-DEVELOPMENT-AN-INTERNATIONAL-PERSPECTIVE.pdf (Link made: 17.04.2019).
[4] URL.
 https:
//www.iisd.org/topics/responsible-business (Link made: 17.04.2019).
[6] URL.
 https:
//www.unwto.org/EU-guidebook-on-sustainable-tourism-fordevelopment#.
~.
text = Expressed% 20simply% 2C% 20sustainable% 20tourism% 20can, environment% 2C% 20
(The link was made on 17.04.2019).
[7] URL.
 https:
//www.unwto.org/archive/europe/event/international-conference-universal-values-and (Linked: 17.04.2019).
[8] URL.
 https:
//www.europeancitiesmarketing.com/corporate-social-responsibility-and (Linked: 17.04.2019).
[9] URL.
 file:
/// C:
/Users/User/Downloads/tsg_final_report_237%20(2).pdf (Link made: 17.04.2019).
[10] URL.
 https:
//www.e-unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/9789284416110 (Link made: 17.04.2019).
URL.
 http:
//ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/3683/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/pdf (Link made: 17.04.2019).
[12] URL.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/240259792_Corporate_social_responsibility_What_are_t
(The link was made on 17.04.2019).
[14] URL.
 https:
//www.gstcouncil.org/partnership-for-global-sustainable-tourism-criteria-and-sustainable (Linked: 17.04.2019).
Marik MelikyanCORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN TOURISM Keywords: corporate social responsibility, corporate
policy, corporate social-executive, sustainable business
or corporate stability, corporate charity
.
