STUDENT ASSESSMENT SYSTEMS IN THE BOLOGANIC SYSTEMS (EXAMPLE OF YSU) On May 20, 2005, the conference of European Ministers of Education in Bergen was a turning point for the Armenian education system.
 At the same conference, the Republic of Armenia officially joined the Bologna Process.
The regular conference focused on the field of scientific research.
  By enabling its development, stimulating the development of scientific activity within the universities, increasing the capacity, the system tried to strengthen the connection between the research centers և structures երկրների of the countries, thus integrating the European research area into the highest European area1.
  In this connection, a three-level system of education was proposed, which supplied the addition of a bachelor's and master's degree with a doctorate.
  Moreover, the participants of the third stage were considered as students, whose workload should have been 3-4 years.
 And the education given in that period had to correspond to the qualifications of the European area.
Thus, by joining the Bologna process, the higher education system of the Republic of Armenia faced not only the system of higher professional education, but also the necessary changes to be made in the field of scientific research.
  However, joining the Bologna system was not an obligation for Armenia, but a far-sighted strategic policy, from which great expectations were expected.
 It was intended to: • deepen և expand the level of internal and external cooperation of Armenian universities և promote the mobility of teaching staff պրոֆես students, 1 RA MES, COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF EDUCATION IN EUROPE http:
//edu.am/index.php?id=-1521&topMenu=17&menu1=-1&menu2=17&arch=0.
• Improve the quality of education by bringing it in line with international standards as much as possible, which is strictly followed by regular international audit groups.
Universities will not only undertake the process of preparing students, but will also pursue an active policy to enliven the research life at the university, thus presenting themselves in the labor market not only with trained staff, but also by presenting their research results to the market2.
Student knowledge control և assessment processes are crucial in organizing the educational process.
  Nowadays, when globalization has reached even the field of education, many universities have begun to review their assessment systems. To offer new methods.
  The main purpose of the evaluation և reforms of the educational system is to increase the qualitative efficiency of the provision of education and training of specialists.
  Because assessment is a feedback mechanism for the lecturer to understand and focus on the gaps that have arisen during the student-centered course3.
  Evaluation is considered to be one of the most important tools in the educational process, although the evaluation system of various researches is still far from the ideal type.
  One of the consequences of non-objective assessment is when a student who has received a high grade in reality begins to exaggerate the level of knowledge he / she has while teaching other subjects.
  This process is explained within the framework of "causal" theories of social comparison, according to which such behavior is natural, but it also contains dangers for the future life of the individual, for those around him.
  In addition, non-objective assessment causes great damage to the university, to the reputation of the lecturer, at the same time devaluing the diploma provided by the university.
 The competent use of the evaluation system is considered to be one of the main factors in raising the university's rating, in addition, in this way the university trains specialists, who also increase its reputation in public circles, on which the construction of the university's reputation is based.
 Let's take the example of Harvard.
 The employer highly values ​​the diploma there, as it realizes that the specialists in the field teach there, giving the best knowledge և experience.
2 AUF Board, General Provisions of the Bologna Education System, March 6,2015, available on 05.04.2016. http:
//civilngo.com/bolonyan-hamakargi-yndhanur/.
Looking at the diploma there, it becomes clear what skills and knowledge the student has.
  That is, if a subject is written "excellent", it means that, without any exaggeration, the student is fully proficient in the subject, just as he should make a clear distinction that a "sufficient" grade does not mean a passing grade as a result of pity. , but clearly expresses the student's abilities and knowledge in the given subject areas.
Thus, we can conclude that we can consider objective the assessment of knowledge, which actually reflects the level of knowledge ուսան readiness of the student in the context of a specific topic.
Provisions that impede the objective assessment of a student's knowledge are: • Unclearly formulated test questions that allow the lecturer to interpret the question arbitrarily; • Unclear separation of points given in the test question.
  That is, if the exam question is evaluated with a maximum of 4 points, there should be a clear scheme of how those 4 points are formed.
  Such problems arise especially during the courses with a scale of 9 - 9, when 2 questions are submitted to the written exam, each with 4.5 points each.
And it becomes almost impossible to maintain objectivity in the process of giving or not giving the most points, • the lecturer's aspiration to compare the works of different students, distinguishing between the best and worst works.
 The lecturer should carry out the assessment on the basis of pre-defined criteria, not deviate from them, reasoning that "the others wrote worse".
  Such an assessment rate reduces the demands on students, which jeopardizes the university's reputation as a non-objective assessment is carried out;
 Many attendance questions can be encountered, especially in test assignments, where the student does not have the opportunity to present the answer in another way.
  This can lead to a situation where students try to memorize certain episodes without even trying to fully understand the essence of the material.
 And in such a case they can not prove that the perfect work speaks of the student's complete mastery of the subject, • the prejudices of the lecturer.
  In many cases, the perception of the student, not attending classes, his appearance, even gender - other factors prevent the lecturer from conducting an objective assessment.
  Meanwhile, the lecturers are more friendly towards the students who are present in all the classes, sitting in the first row, taking notes during the course and asking a lot of questions.
 Moreover, many may not even realize it.
How can the evaluation be continued while maintaining objectivity?
 Many people see the solution to this problem by using tests.
 Indeed, the evaluation of test answers eliminates the factor of subjectivity.
  However, it should be noted that the test questionnaires do not allow the lecturer to assess the extent to which the student masters the subject.
 Subjective details or details may have been forgotten over time, but the main meaning may always remain in the memory.
Oral examinations, on the contrary, can lead to biased assessment.
 Because here again the subjective factors can influence the lecturer.
  During the oral exam, the student can gently bypass the topics that he / she is not very good at.
Besides, it is quite difficult for a lecturer to evaluate based on pre-defined criteria, especially when he does not have the opportunity to hear it all over again.
 As in the case of appealing a problematic appraisal when clarity is lost.
But from the opposite point of view, in case of showing a high level of self-government of the lecturer, the oral examination can also stand out with high efficiency.
  That is, during the oral exam, the lecturer has the opportunity to reveal the student's knowledge, trying to reveal the level of his / her real awareness, which the student is not able to do independently.
One of the golden mean options is the combination of written and oral exams.
  In this case, if keeping the students' names confidential during the written exams becomes solvable, it becomes quite an effective way.
  The level of perceptions of the assessment system is one of the most serious problems of the modern educational system.
  In the framework of this topic, we conducted a research.
 We made an attempt to find out the perceptions of YSU students and lecturers about the assessment system.
The assessment of students by lecturers is carried out on the basis of pre-defined scales (4-4-2-10; 9-9-2).
 The speakers fully master the mechanisms and procedures of the new evaluation system.
 But it can be noted that not everything is so clear, because in this case he has a factor of subjectivity in his role.
 In many cases, the lecturers have preferred students who are treated with special care, և the course is organized mainly around them.
  Or quite a lot of attention is paid to the students who have been active during the whole semester, participated in the courses, answered the seminars.
  And here informal assessment is used, that is, many professors put students + to answer seminars, which are taken into account during the final exam.
  Either they are simply considered an advantage, or in some cases they are even converted into specific points (for example, getting 1 or 2 points for +).
 As for assessment, there are a number of stereotypes that lecturers are often guided by.
 The most common of these is the written exam to evaluate by volume.
  In many cases, the lecturers evaluate the students on the basis of the results obtained from the subject already taught in the course, ie the student who had a liquidation during the previous subject can not claim a high grade here, or in many cases the lecturers want to look at the grades obtained from other subjects.
  That is, what happens? The lecturer, not being sure about the grade assigned by him, tries to evaluate the student with average data, that is, based on the grades of other lecturers, which causes a problem of competence.
In addition, the question here is more ethical than one lecturer seeing the other's assessment in the test book.
You can see similar differences even in the case of freebies.
  In some faculties, the rotation system seems to be traditional, as lecturers treat free students as inviolable degrees.
  Even in practice we come across such classifications, according to which the lecturer separates a group of tuition fees.
 From time to time these distinctions get abnormal expressions when the teacher divides the group, conducting the course only with girls or only with boys.
Thus, we can conclude that there are no objective evaluation criteria, ները assessment methods are directly related to teaching methods.
  You have had an assessment method for every teaching method, but in our education system it is still an unconscious phenomenon, which proves that the modernization of teaching methods is a myth, and the defined educational outcomes (which are achieved through teaching methods) are simply a guaranteed vocabulary of the international community. to point out the urgency of our curriculum.
  Thus, one of the complex measures necessary to increase the objectivity of students is the thorough preparation of exam questions, during which the student will be able to show logic, analysis and reasoning around the question, and not just memorized texts.
Aram Arakelyan STUDENTS 'ASSESSMENT SYSTEM FEATURES WITHIN THE BOLOGNA SYSTEM (EXAMPLE OF YSU) Keywords: Bologna system, objective assessment, credit transfer system, credit transfer system
