THE TERRITORIAL EXPANSION OF THE ARMENIAN KINGDOM A number of events that took place during the reign of Smbat I Bagratuni մբ During the reign of Bagratuni ինչպես, throughout the kingdom.
 This circumstance has a very negative effect on the assessment of Smbat A's activity.
  It is not by chance that he was given the "Honorary Name of Martyr" 1, which, being a result of the above-mentioned reality, has nothing to do with the real military-political merit of Smbat I.
 Let us turn to the territorial achievements of Smbat I and a number of related questions, which are decisive in overcoming the image of this king's martyr.
890 The death of Ashot I Bagratuni was followed by a serious internal political crisis.
  Although the political tradition inherited from the Arshakunyats period 2 provided for the transfer of the paternal throne to the eldest son, nevertheless the royal rights of Smbat I were disputed by his uncle Abas Sparapet.
  In the end, the latter gives in, և Smbat, taking the first victory of his reign, was confirmed on his father's throne3.
890s The first half was less favorable for Smbat I in terms of foreign policy.
 The control of the Arab caliphate was not completely abolished, and the Avshin Amshin of Atrpatakan was given the right to collect taxes from Armenia.
 In these conditions, the Armenian king registered an impressive achievement in 893. dominating Dvin.
  Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi mentions in Dvin as "chief policeman, commander of the city" the brothers of Mahmet մ Uma4, who, according to A. According to Ter-Ghondyan, they settled in the city during the last years of the reign of Ashot I or at the beginning of the reign of Smbat I. 5.
 They revolted against the Armenian king, refusing to continue fulfilling their vassal duties, paying taxes and providing troops.
  Only due to the siege that lasted for about 2 years was it possible to break the resistance of the rebels.
 On the way to escape 1 Ormanyan M., Azgapatum, h. A, S. Etchmiadzin, 2001, p. 1203.
2 The substantiation of the successive connection with the Arshakunyats kingdom was so essential that it became the key point of the historical concept of Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi.
 See Darbinyan-Melikyan M., The historical concept of Hovhannes Draskhanakerttsi, "PBH", 1983. 3, pp. 119-125.
3 History of the Armenian Catholicos of Draskhanakert, Armenian, exam. original: M. Emini, Yerevan, 1996, pp. 146-150.
4 Ibid., P. 164.
5 Ter-Ghondyan A., The chronology of the city of Dvin in the 9th-10th centuries, "Bulletin" (academic science), 1957, 10, page 13.
The Arab brothers were arrested and sent "to the emperor Leo the iron chain" 1.
  Thus, in the very first years of his reign, Smbat I achieved serious success by connecting Dvin with the adjacent regions to the royal domains.
  In addition to being a major military victory, it also opened wide opportunities for trade and economic development for the Armenian Kingdom2.
893 The conquest of Dvin was followed by the annexation of the vicinity of Karin to the royal domains of the Bagratuni.
  As it is known, Smbat I had signed a trade treaty with Byzantium3.
  Taking a neutral position between the warring Arab caliphate "Byzantine Empire", Bagratuni Armenia acquires the role of a potential transit country in the field of international trade4.
 After the signing of the agreement, the Dvin-Trabzon highway was reopened, the security of which necessarily led to new territorial achievements.
 Thus, the highway passed through the provinces of Basenu Karin, in which Arab colonies were established.
 On the one hand, the testimony of the Anonymous Conversation about the capture of the Basin by Smbat I5, on the other hand, the report of Constantine the Apricot about the raids on the Basin and the Carinthians6A. Yeghiazaryan was pushed to assume that the joint Armenian-Byzantine forces, having undertaken to ensure the security of the above-mentioned highway, had captured Basen and the vicinity of Karin7.
  The empire tried twice (895, 902) to capture the fortress of Carno, but failed8.
  Thus, the information provided by the sources makes it possible to consider the annexation of the Karin District to the royal domains to be highly probable.
It is interesting that several Arab historians report that Trabzon belonged to the Armenian Empire9.
  Nevertheless, we must admit that the absence of such information in the Armenian and Byzantine sources does not allow to consider the belonging of the mentioned port to the Armenian Kingdom quite acceptable.
The next episode of the struggle waged by Smbat I Bagratuni is connected with Taroniha.
  Ahmad of the Shayban dynasty settled in Mesopotamia, ending the existence of the Arzni Emirate, annexed the territory of Aghdznik province to his domains.
  Then the amira made ambitions to take over Taron.
Taking advantage of the internal disagreements of the Vaspurakan princes, Ahmad Shayban sided with "Gagik Abumrvan" and those who were dissatisfied with the latter's actions10.
 Smbat I, who for political reasons had undertaken the task of sponsoring Gagik Abumrvan, lost the support of the subordinate princes 1 Hovhannes Draskhanakerttsi, p. 164.
2 For details on the conquest of Dvin, see Ter-Ghondyan A., The Arab Emirates in Bagratuni Armenia, Yerevan, 1965, pp. 112-116.
 Yeghiazaryan A., The Empire of the Armenian Bagratuni (885-908), Yerevan, 2011, pp. 236-238.
3 Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi, pp. 160-162.
5 History of Anonymous Chat. supposed Shapuh Bagratuni, Yerevan, 1971, p. 159.
6 Kostandin Tsiranatsin, "Foreign sources about Armenia and Armenians", vol. 6, translated by H. Bartikyan, Yerevan, 1970, pp. 14-15.
7 Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 248, 88, note. 3.
8 Constantine the Apricot, pp. 14-15.
9 For a translation of the testimonies of Arab historians, see Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 54-55.
10 Vardanyan V., The Artsrunyats Kingdom of Vaspurakan, Yerevan, 1969, pp. 140-147.
In the struggle against the Amira of Shayban.
  Finally, in 896 In the battle near the village of Tughkh, due to the betrayal of Gagik Abumrvan, the Armenian army was defeated, giving 5000 killed 1.
 Two years after Amira's death, Taron's government was liberated from Arab domination2.
  After that, Prince Grigor of Taron, according to the ruling view, was completely independent3 or almost did not obey Smbat I. 4.
 Meanwhile, according to the testimony of Anonymous, the princes of Taron, Grigor and Gagik, took part in the Abkhazian invasion of Smbat I5.
  Considering this circumstance as a fulfillment of a vassal duty, one of the scholars expressed the opinion that Taron's government continued to be part of the Armenian Empire6, therefore, having no directness on the southern borders of Smbat I's empire7, we are more inclined to think that the Bagratuni kingdom in 898 then he included Taron in the south.
Of particular importance is the question of the relations between the Arab emirates established in the country of Smbat I.
  If during the reign of Ashot I the latter accepted the supremacy of the Armenian king, the situation changed with the enthronement of the next king Bagratuni.
 On the one hand, the emirates, trying to take advantage of the conflict between Smbat I and the Sajyan emirates, supported Atrpatakan, and on the other hand, the Armenians were determined to fight against the Arab emirates, in some cases even pursuing the goal of eliminating them.
  The victory of Smbat I was perfect especially in the struggle against the emirates of Dvin and Karin.
As for the emirates of the emperors and the octopuses, Smbat was guided in this matter by weakening the latter as much as possible.
  In this respect, the testimony of the Anonymous Conversation is remarkable: "And because there was a Tachik, whose name was Apuhechr, (Smbat I - S. B.) was the fortress of Berkro.
 And he gave the city to Archesh Tachk, who had come from the city of Darband, to the province of Yevzaghkot, to another Tachk ”8.
  At first glance, the change of owners of the mentioned regions is not significant, because in both cases the rulers are Arabs.
 In reality, however, Smbat I with his step solves two important problems at once.
  First, by handing over the territories belonging to the emperors on his own initiative to other Arab figures, the Armenian king subjected this emirate to his unconditional and absolute sovereignty.
  And secondly, Smbat I was provoking a serious conflict between the Arab formations. "
  For example, handing over Archesh to the Arabs settled in Derbent and its environs, who belonged to the southern tribe of Arabs. They were enemies of the Arabs of the northern tribe, including the Kaysiks, 1 Hovhannes Draskhanakerttsi, pp. 176-178.
  Tovma Artsruni և Anonymous, History of the House of Artsruni, original: V. Vardanyan, Yerevan, 1985, pp. 366-368.
2 For details on the struggle for Taron, see Ter-Gondyan A., The Arab Emirates…, pp. 116-120.
 Grigoryan G., The feudal rule of the Bagratuni of Taron in the 9th-10th centuries, Yerevan, 1983, pp. 124-125.
3 "History of the Armenian people", vol. 3, Yerevan, 1976, page 84.
4 Grigoryan G., page 125.
5 Anonymous Chat, page 189.
6 Yeghiazaryan A., page 106.
7 Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi describes the western, northern and eastern borders of the Armenian Empire, without saying anything about the south.
 See Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi, p. 164.
8 Anonymous Chat, page 161.
than, thus, creating a serious counterbalance against the Arab colonies of Lake Van.
  For the same purpose, Smbat I handed over Berkeley to the Ottomans, escalating tensions and animosity between the latter and the emperors.
It is worth mentioning the suppression of the revolt of the emperors by the Armenian king with the decisive support of the Artsrunis2.
  As H. rightly noted. According to Margaryan, Smbat I "both acted as a unifier and unifier of all the Armenian forces, as well as exercised the rights of the supreme suzerain towards foreign rulers" 3.
  Both this and the fate of Nakhichevan in 902-904. The inaction of Amira Yusuf of Atrpatakan during the events testifies to the sharp rise of the military and political power of the Armenian king.
 In fact, Smbat I dealt a significant blow to the Arab emirates, which were part of his empire, by eliminating or significantly weakening them.
In terms of clarifying the territorial achievements of Smbat I, another program of Anonymous Talk is worth mentioning. "The world of Simpat Ղ Latay և built its own fortress" 4.
 It turns out that the Armenian king ruled over Khlat, with the intention of making his presence more stable and influential, building a fortress there, probably leaving him as a garrison.
  Among the territories conquered by Smbat I, the Anonymous Conversation mentions Hark and Apahunik5.
 Kostandin Tsiranatsin6 testifies to the capture of Hark by the Armenian king, so there should be no doubt that he joined at least a part of Hark and Apahunik to the royal domains of the Bagratuni.
The Abkhazian invasion is one of the key events of the reign of Smbat I.
  Since 7 has already been written about it in detail, there is no need to refer to it here.
  Let us just mention that the invasion that took place around 906, which is reported by Hovhannes Draskhanakerttsi8, Anonymous Anonymous 9 and Georgian Book10, led to the acceptance of the sovereignty of the Armenian Empire by the Abkhazian kingdom11.
  Thus, during the reign of Smbat I, the sphere of influence of the Armenian Empire expanded to the north, including the Abkhazian kingdom on the eastern shore of the Black Sea.
  Continuing the clarification of the northern borders, let us mention that, according to A. Melkonyan, Gugark was annexed to the Armenian Bagratuni Empire during the reign of Smbat I12.
Among the territorial achievements of Smbat I is the Amyuk fortress.
  According to an anonymous report, Amyuk seizes Amyuk from the throne of Vaspurakan's prince Gagik Artsruninutmaniks, which is followed by the capture of the castle by King 1 Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 240-243.
2 Tovma Artsruni և Anonymous, pp. 380-382.
 For details, see Ter-Ghondyan A., The Arab Emirates…, pp. 120-124.
3 Margaryan H., The title "Cosmic" of the Bagratuni kings, "Issues of Armenian history", vol. 6, Yerevan, 2005, p. 105.
4 Anonymous Chat, page 171.
5 Ibid., P.
6 Constantine the Apricot, page 11.
7 See Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 55-61.
8 Hovhannes Draskhanakertsi, pp. 202-204.
9 Anonymous Chat, pp. 189-193.
11 Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 55-61.
12 Melkonyan A., Javakhk in the 19th Century առաջին In the First Quarter of the 20th Century, Yerevan, 2003, pp. 48-49.
There are troops.
 Demonstrating his military-political power, Amyuk sells it to Gagik Artsruni, who captured it1.
Note that the list of Smbat A's territorial achievements can be supplemented by other testimonies from Anonymous Talk, except that they should be examined in depth, avoiding their unconditional acceptance.
 Some information on this issue can be provided by St. Mush. A manuscript of Aghberik monastery 2, the data of which և need detailed research.
In fact, obtaining a complete picture of the achievements of Smbat I can only be the result of a more in-depth study.
Thus, the study of the territorial achievements of Smbat I Bagratuni reveals the real military-political merit of the Armenian king, which has nothing to do with the nickname Martyr.
  In this context, it becomes quite clear that he was the first of the kings of Bagratuni to hold the title of Cosmic 3, occupying a worthy place among the Armenian rulers.
Sargis Baldaryan TERRITORIAL EXPANSION OF THE ARMENIAN KINGDOM IMBAT A. BAGRATUNI TIME Keywords: Supposed "Martyr", successive achievements, territorial expansion, Armenian-Byzantine cooperation.
