"THE WORSHIP OF THE MAGES" IN THE ARMENIAN "GOD OF CHILDHOOD" LITERATURE GOSPELS The story of the conversation with the Jewish teachers in the temple (Luke 2).
41-52)).
 This circumstance has been the cause of many paradoxical (apocryphal 1) gospels of "Childhood", which have been in circulation since the end of the 2nd century and have spread widely.
A whole series of ancient writings about the characters and episodes of the Nortkakaran was woven in the Armenian environment as well2.
 The most interesting among scholars is the Old Testament gospel known as "Childhood of the Lord" or "Writing of Christ the Boy" 3.
  The book was brought to Armenia from Mesopotamia at the end of the 6th century by Nestorian Assyrians and was re-edited by Armenian authors.
 Carrying the seal of the "Prevangelical Church of James" 4 ("Protevangelium Iacobi"), the "History of Tovma" ("Narratio Thomae"), as well as the Assyrian, Persian and Arabic traditions, the Armenian Gospel of "Childhood" with its rich content ազանց exceeds the essentials.
Especially in the last century, the growing interest in the Armenian "Gospel of Childhood" is conditioned by a number of circumstances.
  First of all, it is connected with the fact that the Gospel is mentioned in all the lists of forbidden books of the Middle Ages, of which the chronicles of Samuel Anetsi 5 (c. 1100 / 05-1185 / 90) and Mkhitar Ayrivanetsi 6 (1222-1307) stand out7.
  However, this circumstance did not prevent the parakanon from becoming one of the so-called "folk" holy books for the Armenians.
 The Gospel of "Gir Tghayutyan" penetrated the Armenian environment, acquired unique Armenian features and continued to be imitated until the end of the 19th century8.
 The term "son-in-law", "the gospel of childhood" or "the letter of Jesus' sonhood" in 9 ancient copies 1 The term "apocryphal" (Greek: "αποκρυφος" - "secret") was first used by the Bishop of Lyons Irineos Lugdonatsi (140-around 202). For a description of the Gnostic invalid and false books, see Sventsitsky I., The Secret Writings of the First Christians, Moscow, 1980, p.
 The title "Apocrypha" was the Gnostic song "Acts of John", to which Irenaeus was probably familiar.
2 Avdalbekyan M., The Origin of Armenian Fiction, (V century), Yerevan, 1971, p. 184.
3 The "Childhood Gospels" preserved in the manuscripts N 1432, 3062, 3164 և 3364 of the Matenadaran of the Hagopian Monastery in Jerusalem were published by Rev. Sipan. Mkhsyan - "Zion", № 46, 1972, pp. 122-131, 235-239.
 Of these four Gospels, only the time and place of the writing of No. 3062 are known, of which we learn from the Memorial.
The earliest dating of the 4 Gospels of "Childhood" is the pre-Gospel of James, at the end of the 2nd century.
 The book was written by an early Christian author who was well acquainted with the Midrash tradition, see Brown R., The Birth of the Messiah, New York.
 Doubleday, 1976, p. 559.
5 Matosyan K., Samuel Anetsi et al., Chronology, From Adam to 1776, Yerevan, 2014, p. 144.
6 See Mkhitar Ayrivanetsi's famous "Charentir" written in 1272-1287. During the period of Yerevan Mashtots. Matenadaran (hereinafter referred to as CU), No. 1500, page 369b.
7 Anasyan H., Armenian Bibliography, 5th-17th centuries, Irregular books, Yerevan, 1959, page 906.
8 See, for example, N. Bogharian. Bishop, Mother List in Armenian handwritten by St. Hagopian, vol. XI, New York 1897, No. 3860, Gospel of Childhood.
9 Zarbhanalyan G., Matenadaran Ancestors of Armenian Translations, Venice, 1889, pp. 192-194.
 The manuscript collection containing this gospel is now kept in the Matenadaran under number 7574.
  It was published in English with translation and extensive introduction by A. Teryan, see Terian A., The Armenian Gospel of the Infancy, Oxford, New York, 2008.
reached us in 1239 The God-given pen (Sebastia) 1 «is entitled" The Lord of the Blessed Jacob's brother said to Joachim և Anna ".
  This is one of the most comprehensive versions of the Boyhood Gospel.
As we have already mentioned, the gospel of "Gir Tghayutyan" was brought to Armenia by the Nestorians, and, being originally written by the heretics, was rejected and banned.
  Later, however, it gained much popularity and popularity among the public as the best way to get an idea of ​​Jesus Christ.
We do not have certain information about the time of the Armenian translation of "Gir Tgayutyan", but in the 12th century it already mentions Sarkis Shnorhali in his commentary on "Katoghike Harter" 2.
A comparison of the lists of Armenian canon books of the Bible compiled at different times shows that the understanding of canonical, secret or canonical books has not always been the same among Armenians. Some of the books that were once considered unacceptable later became canonical books;
  This could have caused the imitating pen not to know the rule of the day - to copy books rejected by the church.
 There were instructions that ecclesiastical books should be copied by people who were devoted to the orthodox Armenian Church, who had accurate bibliographic knowledge of the canon, but there were not many such pens in medieval Armenian monasteries.
  In many cases, Armenian writers copied church books without discrimination, without distinguishing between what was accepted and what was rejected.
 However, ignorance could play a very small role in copying the so-called hidden and false books in Armenia.
 Noteworthy are Ssi 1243. The rules adopted by the church, where the copyist of the church books is required not only knowledge, long-term experience but also the integrity of the religion5.
 This means that the reason for copying antiquated books in Armenia was also the religious, ideological tendencies of the copyists, that is, books that are considered to be somewhat hidden and false can be intentionally multiplied.
  So the pens could know that the book was rejected by the official church.
 Letter to the Boys' Parish 1239 In the later memoir of the copied manuscript (1591) the pen adds: "If you do not want to read or copy, do not spare a woman with a crown on her arm, this year I have lost a hand, whoever wants God's blessing will reach the place, whoever keeps it will be cursed" 6.
 These words clearly indicate that the author was not only aware of what he was copying, but also warned that whoever hid it would be cursed.
  So, there are provisions in these books that did not contradict the creed of the Armenian Church, which was the reason why their imitation continued later.
  In the following centuries, the Armenian Church observed some freedom in classifying the canonical books as canonical literature.
 This is evident from the manuscripts of the Bible from that period, which include The Third Epistle to Corinth, The Revelation of John and The Rest, The Will of the Twelve Patriarchs, The Story of Asanet, etc. (for example, in 1263 և 12 BCE The Bible Manuscripts in Erzincan, manuscript № 4243 № № 1925, Jerusalem).
 Many of our eminent monks used forbidden books in their works, so it must be assumed that many irregular books written in early Christianity either did not become canonical but ceased to be banned and were widely used by Armenian theologians.
  This fact can probably be explained by the fact that the sects of the early Christian period were no longer widespread or were no longer dangerous.
1 Matosyan A., Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts, 13th Century, Yerevan, 1984, p. 20.
 Garegin I, Manuscript Memoirs, vol. A, Antelias, 1951, pp. 939-940.
2 Sarkis Shnorhali, Commentary on the Seven Papers of the Catholicos, Jerusalem, 1998, p. 399.
3 See, for example, Ter-Movsisyan M., History of the Translation of Bibles into Armenian Language, St. Petersburg, 1902, pp. 213-223, 224266.
4 Ishkhanyan R., History of Armenian Bibliography, V-XVIII centuries, Yerevan, 1964, page 29.
5 Paljian Al., History of the Catholic Doctrine of the Armenians and Their Union with the Roman Church at the Florentine Synod, Vienna, 1878, p. 269.
6 See Shahaziz Yer., The Manuscripts of New Nakhichevan, Lumay, 1902, №3, May-June, Tbilissi (Georgia), p. 241.
  The addition of this memoir in the 16th century points to the fact that already in that era the attitude towards non-canonical books was much more tolerant.
The idea of ​​a unique Christ-Adam relationship originated in the epistle of the Apostle Paul.
 The book "Boyhood" is a unique bridge between creation մեկի one of the most important tenets of Christianity - salvation փրկ 2.
 The ancient myths about creation have found a place in the so-called "Adamic literature" 3.
 It goes without saying that only the Gospel of Adam and the Gospel of Christ's Gospel have been preserved and copied from the forbidden books on bibliographic lists.
Salvation is already realized through the birth of Jesus.
 The appearance of Eva, who plays the role of a midwife, is symbolic. "I am the firstborn of all Eve, I came to see with my own eyes my salvation, which worked for me, my soul grew, my hope in God my Savior rejoiced" 4 (Luke 2: 2).
30).
 Moreover, Eva does not see a newborn, but a child who is already walking on her own.
  "And the mother-in-law came to the father, and took the child in her arms, and embraced him, and kissed him, and blessed God, because the child was made beautiful and very beautiful."
 This detailed account of Jesus 'appearance in this episode points to an attempt to emphasize Jesus' human nature, as evidenced by the encounter between Eve and Jesus.
  Although Eve did not participate in the birth of Mary, she nevertheless gave birth to Jesus, which is attributed to Mary in the New Testament Gospels.
  Theodoros the Magistrate (350-428 CE), a well-known commentator on the Church of the SubGenius, preached that Eve, who received her human nature from a single human being only by the absolute will of God, is a prototype of Jesus.
 The symbolic relationship between Eva and Mariam is obvious in the ancient literature.
 In the "Death of Adam" quintessential parochial conversation, the vision of Adam և Eve is presented. "In the middle of the night they saw Adam and Eve in the dark house mourning.
 And behold, a beautiful woman (Mary), having a baby (Christ) in her arms, came in to Eve, and she came to him, and suddenly a bright light shone from all over the house.
The episode of the worship of magicians deserves special attention in the Armenian Gospel of "Childhood", which has different titles in Armenian manuscripts8.
 Gospel references to general practitioners are, to put it mildly, narrow.
 The only evidence for them is found in Matthew 2.
Verses 1-12 speak of some "wizards of the east" (Greek: μάγος) who, following the sudden appearance of the star, came to the land of Judah to worship and present gifts (gold, frankincense, and myrrh) to the newborn king of the Jews.
 It is not clear exactly from which country of the East they came, how many and, finally, who they were.
 The word “magician” used by the evangelist had a rather broad meaning in ancient Greek.
  "Magicians" were called Persian caretakers, witnesses of the faith, people with the highest knowledge, magicians.
 It is not specified which of the above the evangelical reference referred to.
 In Assyrian this word is translated as "mgush", which is attributed to the followers of the Zoroastrian religion, moreover, it refers not only to the clergy, but also to the secular ones.
For centuries, these mysterious evangelical figures have aroused the curiosity of Christians, creating rich paranoid traditions in many languages.
The Assyrian inscription "The Revelation of the Magi" has the earliest dating among the mentioned rules.
  It is the longest and most comprehensive legend about magicians, which has been preserved 2 Dorfman-Lazarev I., Return to the birthday song.
 The memory of the first human beings in the Armenian Scriptures о3 The famous Armenian scholar M. has made a huge contribution in the field of studying the ancient literature about Adam and Eve. Stone, see Stone M., The History of the Forefathers, Adam and His Sons and Grandsons, JSAS 1, 1984, pp. 79-91, ibid. Armenian Apocrypha Relating to Adam and Eve, Leiden.
 Brill, 1996, pp. 180-200, the same The Death of Adam - An ArmenianAdam Book, Harvard Theological Review 59, 1966, p. 288.
4 Tayetsi Es., Museum of Old and New Ancestors, B. Irregular book New Testament (museum), Venice, 1898, pp. 38-39.
Jesus' crucifixion frees us from Adam's curse, and his birth from Eve's "The Cursed Curse of Eve", see Stone M., Thebones of Adam and Eve, in Argall R., Bow B., Werline R., For a later generation.
  the transformation of tradition in Israel, early Judaism and early Christianity, Harrisburg 2000, pp. 241-244.
5 We have referred in detail to the story of the birth of Mary և Jesus in our previous article, see Mamyan M., The Preface of James, "Armenian Theologian", E, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 21-37.
7 Kyoseyan H., Episodes of the Theology of Armenian Medieval Art, Etchmiadzin, 1995, page 12.
8 Tayetsi Yes.
From ancient times, it had its influence in the 5th century. written on the interpretation of the false Arian Matthew ("Opus Imperfectum in Matthaeum").
 Here the "Land of the East" is called Shir, which is often identified with China1.
 The number of magicians in the "revelation of the magicians" reaches twelve.
The magicians' connection with Persia has mostly ancient roots.
  The author of another ancient invalid work about the Mogherimas, The Treasures of the Cave (6th-7th centuries) was well acquainted with Iranian culture.
 This canon was written in the part of Northern Mesopotamia that bordered on Sasanian Persia.
 It is a unique blend of Old and New Testament stories that begins with Creation and ends with Pentecost.
  Chapters XLV-XLVI of the work are related to the Persian magicians, whose appearance in the star depicted "the crowned Virgin with the child in her arms" 2.
 As those who possess divine knowledge, the Divine plan appears for them: the coming of Christ and his birth in the land of Judah.
  According to legend, they took Adam's treasure from heaven, gold, frankincense, and myrrh from the cave of Mount Nod, and headed for Israel.
The Church Father Epiphanes of Cyprus (315-403) in his "Trees" refers to the 6 sons born to Abraham's maidservant Ketura (Emran, Eksan, Madan, Modon, Esbok, Sovin), their wives and their descendants3.
  "He gave gifts to his concubines, and sent them away from Isaac his son to the east" (Gen. 25).
1-6).
  Based on this part of Hinktakaran, the famous Armenian scholar B. Sargsyan mentions. "And Abraham's wife died after Sarah, because of her children, who were of the nations, and of the heathen, and of the heathen, were scattered, and spread the faith of her truth in all her coasts.
  He sent them away to preach the faith of the truth to their Father. ”4
  Accordingly, the idea of ​​the Messiah was specific not only to the righteous descendants of Abraham and the 12 tribes of Israel but also to the descendants of Keturah, who retained the knowledge they had received from Abraham.
  In his speeches, Epiphanes the Cypriot considers Armenians to be partisans.
  Both Armenian and Assyrian (Theodore Bar Konay, Mikael Assyrian) sources (both "Frequent Speech", Movses Khorenatsi, Sebeos, Vardan Arceltsi, Samuel Anetsi) were aware of these legends6.
The above-mentioned "Trees" clearly express the idea that the Persian, Parthians and Armenians, the founder of the Achaemenid dynasty (550-529 BC) and his descendants, the Parthians, the Armenian Arshakuns, should have descended from the ethnicity of those 6 sons born in Ketura. .
 This is evidenced by the words of praise addressed to Cyrus in the books of Deuteronomy, Ezra, and Daniel, particularly in the prophecy of Isaiah.
1-10.2.
4, 9.
6, 13, 14, 21, 45.
1-4).
  Ս. The canonical books of the book allude to the Messianic circumstance of Cyrus 8, who, according to the commentary tradition, is the forerunner of Christ's counsel, in line with the genealogical legend brought by Epiphanes of Cyprus.
 Such a description of Cyrus' genealogy automatically implies his genealogical connection with the Jewish nation.
The name Mag-Gog or Mog-Gov is associated with the original settlement of the Magi.
Considering the route of the 12 Magi described in Epiphanes the Cypriot (crossing northeast of Gog և the Magi come to their homeland, Haran, reach Edesia or Urha, where they meet King Abgar, by which they cross the Euphrates, enter Palestine). "When the Magi came from Persia, to the Armenians of Parthia, they cut off that road (with their little princes), that there must have been Mag-Govga on those borders, or 3 Epipans of Cyprus, Tsarq (work: Kyoseyan H.), Etchmiadzin, 2013, page 8.
4 Sarkisyan B., The Conversation of the Three King Magi in Armenian Bibliography և Its Importance, "Bazmavep", 1910, p. 68.
5 Matosyan K., Manuscripts of Samvel Anetsi's chronology և newly discovered additions, Yerevan, 2009, p. 125.
6 Epiphanes of Cyprus, page 6.
For a tradition of presenting Parthians and Armenians as descendants of Abraham and Keturah, see Terian A., Patriotism and piety in Armenian Christianity.
 the early panegyrics on Saint Gregory, New York, 2005, pp. 104-105.
8 For this see Yeghiayan B., Examination History in Scriptural Times, vol. AG, Antelias, 1972, pp. 581-589.
9 Hovsepios Plavios does not mention the descent of Armenians and Parthians from Ketura, which suggests that the Armenian translator of Epiphanes the Cypriot added and woven a national tradition to show the biblical origin of the Armenians, see Epiphany. .
also Mogai ով Govgay ”, that is, the ancient settlement of Abraham's four-legged sons, from where they spread and mixed with the Jabet or Aryan nations 1.
 And indeed, in the Middle Armenian region of Persia, in the Media, is the province of Mog or Mag, which mentions Herodotus2.
 Within this border is the Great Armenian Mokk և Special Moksgavar, which borders the Chaldeans, which is also mentioned in the testimony of the Apostle Bartholomew as "the nation from the earth" 3.
 Maghakia Ormanyan also writes about the legend of the Magi being from Mokats province. "Many of them have called their homeland from the world of Magi since ancient times, and our authors have taken the opportunity to know the world of Mokats and Mokats ministers or at least a Mokats minister think of magicians or one of the magicians, and even one of the magicians, S. To show Gaspar's grave in Akndashtay monastery near Moksavan ”4.
According to legend, the magician Balaam preached about the coming of Jacob and the Messiah for thirty-five years.
  Based on this circumstance, listening to the call of the prophets, the Persians, Armenians and Parthians united around Cyrus, the "magician of the Christian king", to take revenge on Babylon.
  The powerful class of Persians and Armenians was formed from these times, as Agatangeghos and Zenob Glak testify.
 The Persian "Armenian Parth-Arshakunyars" have traditionally been engaged in magic and astrology.
  According to historical evidence, the last king of Parthian wealth, Artavan V, used his magical knowledge to predict his sad end.
Thus, the magicians who came to worship at the birth of Christ were from those three worlds, which were ruled by "Parthian kings or caterpillars, whom the false Epiphanes also called" kings Goga and Moga "6.
In the legend brought by Epiphanes of Cyprus, among the names of the twelve magicians, "Zahtun", "Ashtav" and "Arev" are described as "relatives" or "brothers", which in itself indicates a close kinship between them.
 For this same reason, their predecessors (Arshak Mets և Vagharshak) and descendants (Artavan V և Metsn Khosrov) are again called brothers.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that in Assyrian historiography the mentality prevailed that "Parthians or Persians, Parthians and Assyrians, Parthians and Armenians are the same."
  In other words, one of the "Frequent Reasons" speaks about the influence of the non-Epiphany conversation without the Epiphany, where we read: "For in Armenia there is nothing greater than in Persia than the Arshakunyatsazg and the dynasty that descended from Abraham."
 Such a record of facts allows us to assume that they are the remnants of the historical reality that testifies to the close Armenian-Parthian relations.
In the Armenian ancient tradition, Persia is also given priority 8.
  Immediately after the Annunciation, the same angel travels to Persia. 1 Jesus Gog ագ Magog (Mag և Govg) in the story of Sebeos (op. Cit. Abgaryan G., Yerevan, 1979, p. 142) is identified with the fourth beast described in Daniel, which he presents as the new destructive force - the "Ismaili kingdom", which is identified with the Arab caliphate (Thomson R., Armenian ideology and the Persians-Atti dei Convegni lincei, 201, Conegno internazionale "La Persia e Bisanzio", Roma, 2004, p. 381).
 Epiphanes' speech mentions the kingdom of Gog and Magog (which originated in Gen. 10).
2, Ezek. 38, 39, see Dictionary of the Holy Scriptures, K. Constantinople, 1881, p. 121) The conversation of Daniel's vision (7).
2-7) with the difference that in Epiphanes' speech the three sides of the beasts that appear in Daniel's vision are identified with the military-political power of the Persians, the Medes and the Parthians, from which the salvation of the peoples was expected.
 See ibid., P.
2 See Gerodot, History in the Ninth Books (Persian and English: G. A. Stratanovenko), Leningrad, 1972, Herodotus mentions the Magi in the Medes (I. 101).
3 Epiphanes of Cyprus, page 10.
4 Ormanian M., Azgapatum, h. A, Etchmiadzin, 2001, page 4.
 See about this in the 13th century historian Vardan Arcelzu in Worldview. "Mokats province is a princely state, where there are many Vanoras.
  First, Amenaprkich, where there is the tomb of the magician Gaspara, and St. Vardan, and the monastery of St. Kanan, which is why the Holy Cross was mentioned by Catholicos Anania of Mokatsi ", Perperyan A., Geography of Vardan Vardapet, Paris, 1960, p. 41.
5 The semantic explanation of this mission of Balaam was used in the ecclesiastical works of Stepanos Syunetsi and Hovhan Odznetsi.
  See Amatuni S. Rev., "Extensive and concise chronological commentary by Bishop Stepanos of Syunik and his" Tree of the Holy Church of the Foundation ", Etchmiadzin, 1917, pp. 13-16," Bibliography of John the Baptist ", Venice, 1833, p. 81.
6 Sargisyan B., page 100.
7 Frequent speech, B Matenagirq Hayots, Antelias, 2003, p. 124 (164).
8 Mar Nik., From the summer trip to Armenia, remarks and excerpts from Armenian manuscripts, translated by Anopian O., Vienna, 1892, p. 43.
 According to the author, this ancient gospel is of Persian origin, which is mainly due to the prominent role that belongs to the Persian magician-king, the Persian people in general.
 The borrowed words, such as "dukan", "chogan" speak in favor of the Persian origin of this authenticity.
 In general, this memoir is written in the language of later centuries, which is specific to Armenian fables and fables closely related to Persian-Arabic literature.
to announce the birth of the Magi kings of Persia (Melkon), India (Gaspar), Arabia (Baghdasar) (who were his brothers), and to lead them to Bethlehem.
 They come to the land of Judah with their twelve generals and twelve thousand.
 A special role in the childhood gospel is played by the Persian magician Melkon, who was destined to bring the "Covenant" of God given to Adam: "After Adam came out of paradise, Cain killed his brother Abel, and mourned for Adam over his son." God sent Adam the son of Adam to translate the son of consolation.
 Because Adam wanted to become a god և God humbled himself to become human because of his most merciful humility.
 I will give the covenant of the covenant with the patriarch, in the seal of the covenant, that I may send the only begotten Son, the Word of God, which is to be incarnate of your seed, to be the son of my son, who is set up before you.
 Then I will be united as one to know good and evil. "
 There are various multilingual evidences that Seth received a "will" from Adam, but only in the Armenian tradition it is said that it was a "writing", a "sealed letter to God".
 Before reaching Abraham, this "Covenant" or "Scripture" had passed into the hands of the patriarchs of Hintakaran, but Abraham surprisingly bequeathed it not to one of his sons but to Melchizedek (in this respect the book of Jubilees, where God's blessing is passed from Abraham to Jacob) 16, 16-18; 17, 6; 19, 16-29; 22, 10-13) 3. And he took it from his father, and his sons, and his sons, and his people, and commanded them to keep the epistle diligently till Noah.
  And Noah returned unto Shem his son, and his sons after him. to the king of Israel, the son of the king.
In the Gospel of "Childhood" Melchizedek's name is associated not so much with Canaan as with Archelichus, through whom the "Covenant" of God reached Cyrus, after whom it was kept for many years, the "question" reached the magicians.
  This chain shows that the magicians in the Armenian tradition act not as pagans, but as Abraham's heirs.
The "Covenant" brought to the infant Jesus by the Magi has its prehistory in the Armenian "History of Adam's ascension from Paradise" five-story parable.
  According to this, Adam, who had never seen darkness before, agrees to make a covenant (manuscript) with "the devil" 5 Satan, to serve him "with all birth", "Before the child is born, death dies, we all are our servants" 6 .
  But Adam realizes that he has been deceived by Satan and weeps for seven (in some manuscripts, five) days, asking God for forgiveness.
  This time, however, God forgives Adam. "Seven days later the angel of God will be sent, he will not give a manuscript to Adam, he will comfort him with the following words: "Fear not, lest Adam deceive thee. for he said unto thee, Before the child be born, I am the child, whom no man should give birth to. my immortal deity who has no immortality. Because he took the manuscript from you so deceitfully, that you should remain a captive in the hands of the devil, because you are my image….
 And in the sixth century I will send you to the light of my deity, my beloved son, who came to be born of your seed, a holy virgin, for he will be your son, and my son will erase your handwriting, and deliver you from your bondage. give you the first glory ”7.
 The magician Melkon addresses the newborn Jesus. "Here is a written letter, which you sealed and sealed and put us in the warehouse, read my letter and confirm what you wrote.
 And the writing was written, sealed, and kept, which the magicians did not dare to open the door to give to any of the priests or the people to read. for they ought not to be worthy of the kingdom of the Son, because they were apostles and crucifixes to the Savior.
  The "book" is opened and read for the first time by its author, the Human Creator, thus making the "covenant" contained therein a reality.
1 In medieval Christian imagery, magicians were usually accompanied by angels.
2 Tayeti Es., P. 278.
3 Klijn A., Seth in Jewish, Christian and Gnostic Literature, Leiden, 1977, pp. 48-60.
4 MM No. 5599, 76-78.
5 Hovsepyan S., Museum of Old and New Ancestors, A. Irregular book of the Old Testament (museum), Venice, 1896, page 312.
 In the Armenian tradition, Adam himself offers to serve the devil. "Once we see the light, we will be your servants, all our birth."
7 Sarkisyan B., Study on the Invalid Book of the Old Testament, Venice, 1898, pp. 39-40.
Arriving at the entrance of the cave, the magician kings bow before the newborn baby, after which they enter the cave one by one and offer their gifts.
 Later, the three magicians, comparing what they saw, came to the conclusion that each of them was Jesus in different forms1.
 Their testimonies confirm Christological points, according to which: a) the newborn is the true God, to whom the heavenly powers bow; "King Gaspar said. When I had brought the censer before him, I saw him glorified in the body of the glorious throne of the Son of God, who was ministering to him in the flesh. "B) He is of the descendants of David, born in his own city." And when I entered, I saw him sitting on a throne from a height, I saw him as the son of a man in the flesh, before his multitude, who worshiped him in the land of the fallen. " takes what completely excludes the threefold origin of the book. "Melkon said. I saw him in the flesh, in the torment of the dead, and in the resurrection, and alive.
 The various figures of Jesus appearing to the magicians foreshadow his sufferings and death.
 And so the newborn man, who appeared to Eve and the magicians, is the incarnate God, who has the power to change his image by revealing the variety of ipostasis.
  This provision is fully in line with the Armenian Church's belief in the indivisibility of Jesus, according to which the body of Jesus is the body of Adam before sin.
  This points to the fact that the Gospel of "Childhood" that has reached us cannot be identified with the canon brought by the Nestorians, who were trying to spread the doctrine of dualism in Armenia4.
The rich pictorial theme of "Worship of the Magi" is mainly taken from the ancient Gospels of "Childhood".
Marie Mamyan "THE WORSHIP OF THE MAGICIANS" IN THE ARMENIAN "GOD OF CHILDHOOD" IN THE ORDINARY GOSPEL Keywords: "Gospel of the Childhood", parakanon, magician-king, "Covenant", redemption, humanity, revelation, creation, m.
