NH2 / NH2 EXTREME GROUPS OF ANILINE TRIMERIZATION AND SOME TRANSFORMATION RESISTANCE Polymers are high molecular weight compounds consisting of repeating structural units.
  The discovery of their practical possibilities is rightly considered the revolution of the 20th century.
 Organic polymers have long been considered to be good insulators, and because of this property, they have been widely used in many fields.
 And, unfortunately, there was one area where polymers were inferior to metals, and that was electrical conductivity.
 However, this was challenged when a class of new polymers emerged that were able to conduct electricity, revolutionizing science and technology.
 These are conductive polymers (the latter are called synthetic metals [1]) whose electrical conductivity increased as a result of their interaction with certain materials.
  Such a process is called doping.
  Note that conducting polymers can come in two different forms: non-conducting polymer (non-doped polymer) and conductive polymer (doped polymer).
 In addition, transmitting organic polymers are insulators or semiconductors in unbonded state [1].
Of the conducting polymers, polyaniline (PANI) is the most promising, which is the most promising due to its easy synthesis, low monomer cost, manageable properties, air oxygen and environmental stability [2,3].
  PANIs are probably the earliest synthetic polymers to be discovered.
  It was first discovered in 1835, obtained by oxidation of aniline, used as a dye known as "aniline".
  Interest in PANI has grown over the last decade due to the fact that they have been classified as conductive polymers, which has further expanded the scope of PANI applications.
The structure of PANI in general can be described as follows: It has been found that PANI can exist depending on the degree of oxidation of three different eggs [3,6].
1. Leukomeraldine (y = 1) - is a fully restored PANI egg. 2. Pernigroaniline base (y = 0) - is a completely oxidized egg of PANI. 3. Emeraldine base (y = 0,5) - is the average oxidized egg of PANI. , in many biological fields և requires the synthesis of polymers with a certain structure.
  It is known that the properties of a polymer depend on its microstructure, which is a stimulus for the synthesis of polymers with a chemical structure similar to PANI.
 It has been found that polymers with such a structure can be synthesized by oxidation of p-phenylenediamine by condensation.
  In particular, Cataldo [7] found that the polymer obtained by oxidizing PFDA in a hydrochloric medium was similar in its spectral data to the oxidized horse PANI, but he presented the following structure.
For the first time, as a result of the research carried out in the laboratory of YSU Faculty of Pharmacology and Chemistry, it became clear that the oxidation of p-phenylenediamine in potassium persulfate in hydrochloric acid proceeds with the release of ammonia, but did not have the structure suggested by Cataldo.
  At the same time, it was found that hydrochloric acid undergoes adverse reactions, the structural units of which affect the properties of the polymer.
  To reduce the likelihood of these reactions occurring, condensation was performed by oxidation of aromatic amines in an organic medium.
  Aniline oligomers are important in that they are not only model compounds for one of the most promising conductive polymers, polyaniline, but they can also exhibit interesting properties.
  Since the reaction is polycondensation, by changing the molar ratio of the oxidizer to the starting material, it is possible to obtain both polymers and oligomers.
 In particular, we used this method to obtain N, N`-bis (4-aminophenyl) -1,4-benzoquinonodiimine (aniline trimmers with NH2 / NH2 end groups), hereinafter referred to as erythrocytes.
 Condensation by oxidation of p-phenylenediamine was performed in acetic acid medium, PFDA / K2S2O8 1.
At a ratio of 0.25 molar.
The structure of the obtained compound was confirmed by MRI 1H, EC Մ UM spectroscopic methods.
 According to the literature, sodium thiosulfate և hydrazine hydrate is used as a reducing agent for polyaniline.
  The interaction of the model trimmer with the above-mentioned reagents was studied from the side.
  However, our studies have shown that as a result of this interaction, not 1. recovery, but a reaction of hydrazine hydrate-thiosulfate 1.4-connection takes place.
In particular, it appears from the UV spectrum that, as a result of the interaction of sodium thiosulfate with hydrazine, the quinonodiimin group is converted to phenylenemine.
Fig.1. WHO spectrum? Dependence of D on λ (nm) As the oligomers mentioned, they իրենքs can show interesting properties.
 That is why we doped the obtained trimmers with iodine tetrachloride carbon solution.
  It was shown that at a depth of 2.76 doping, the electrical conductivity of the trimmer increased to 5.97 × 10-7 C / cm.
 The resulting electrical conductivity is at least 4 orders of magnitude higher than in the case of unpaired trimmers.
Literature 7. Cataldo F., On the polymerization of p-phenylendiamine. Euro Polym J..1996; 32 (1).
43.NH2 / NH2 end groups and some of its receipt aniline TRIMERI POJemma Haroyan, Nagharsh Mirakyan Narine DurgaryanBanali words, Mr. fenilendiamin, N, N`- bis (4-aminofenil) -1,4-benzokhinonodiimin, KHARKUMNERI USUMNASIRUTYUNEdopatsum, elektrahaghordakanutyunAmpopum.
