INTERNATIONAL LEGAL ISSUES OF GENERAL LEGAL REGULATION OF AIR COMMUNICATIONS 1944 Basic Law on the Universal Legal Regulation of International Air Communications The International Civil Aviation Convention (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), signed in Chicago on December 7, 2006 ICAO, moreover, the Convention is the ICAO Charter 1.
The subject of this work is the international legal issues of ensuring the vital interests of states, legal entities and individuals, which are primarily related to the use of airspace for aviation and air transport activities.
The political and economic changes taking place in the individual countries around the world, the peculiarities of the development of the aviation sector (including from the international legal point of view) prove that some norms of the Chicago Convention have partially or completely ceased to correspond to the modern reality.
This scientific article systematically examines the experience of applying other treaties in the field of international aviation law 194 national legislation, 1944. Theoretical and practical issues of the effectiveness of the application of the provisions of the Chicago Convention from the point of view of possible amendment, supplementation, abolition or partial revision of the Convention.
Thus, Article 1 of the Chicago Convention stipulates the norm on the upper limit of airspace 2.
  In the current conditions, in fact, a norm of customary international law has been formed, according to which the air border is located at an altitude of 100110 km above the sea level, which coincides with the border of space.
  Therefore, the task of the states is to fix that norm by an international treaty, that is, to make an addition to the 1944 agreement. At the Chicago Convention.
  It is also expedient to enshrine in the Convention the legal regime of certain parts of the airspace, 1982. In the light of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which introduced concepts unknown at the time of the adoption of the Chicago Convention, such as the legal regime of the archipelago3.
In addition, the definition of "Contracting State territory" in Article 2 of the Chicago Convention, "For the purposes of this Convention, the territory of a State shall be the land territories under its sovereignty, sovereignty, protectorate or adjacent waters".
First, it does not define airspace as space.
  Second, it uses concepts such as "sovereignty", "protectorate or mandate" that have survived from colonial times, while today there are no colonial wills4.
1 See International Civil Aviation Convention 1944. ICAO Doc. 7300/6 (1980/93). 6th edition. Pereizdana vnobre 1993.
2 See Haanappel P., The transformation of sovereignty in the air. / P. Haanappel. // Air and Space Law, 1995, Vol. XX, №6, page 311317.
3 See Maleev G., International Air Law.
 вопросы теории и прасти, 1986, pp. 179-185.
4 See Bordunov V., Air development in the CIS.
 modern trends. / VD Bordunov // Annals of Air and Space Law. 1994, Vol. XIX-II, pp. 223-228.
Regional trends in the regulation of commercial rights (air freedoms) stipulate that the Chicago Convention should enshrine the right of states to establish a common regional aviation market based on the principle of liberalization for member states.
 This should be done by amending Articles 5, 6 և 7 of the Chicago Convention.
It is necessary to address the elimination of cabotage in the context of commercial rights (air rights) 1.
We consider that Article 7 of the Chicago Convention states: "Each Contracting State shall have the right not to permit the carriage of passengers, cargo or mail intended for the transportation of aircraft of other Contracting States from its territory to its destination."
 Each Contracting State undertakes not to enter into any agreement which, on exceptional grounds, grants such privilege to an airline of any other State or of any other State, to receive any such exclusive privilege from any other State. competition իրավունք rights arising from the sovereignty of states.
We consider it necessary to study 1944. ICAO Dispute Settlement Mechanisms under the Chicago Convention տալ show ways to improve those mechanisms.
The best solution is to strengthen the supranational element in the Chicago Convention, which should be implemented with the possibility of enforcing most of the ICAO resolutions.
 The ICAO Assembly or Council should be given the right to adopt standards that are mandatory for Member States in matters relating to aviation, air certification, escort licensing and flight safety2.
In the case of a review of existing mechanisms for the settlement of aviation disputes within ICAO, the emphasis should be on establishing acceptable mechanisms of binding procedures as the final stage in the settlement of unresolved disputes.
  Thus, it is necessary to compile a list of arbitrators within the ICAO framework, which would include the most authoritative experts in the field of international aviation law nominated by the member states, who would be provided with certain guarantees of independence in carrying out their functions3.
 The procedure for conducting such an arbitration needs to be regulated in detail, taking into account the fact that its decisions are binding on the parties to the dispute.
In the aviation dispute settlement mechanism, it is advisable to regulate dispute settlement mechanisms, such as inter-party consultations (bilateral or multilateral), in which the ICAO Secretary General, the President or other ICAO bodies will act as mediators.
  It will correspond to the positive practice of the Council in that field4.
We believe that the possibility և the need to strengthen the ICAO governing institutional mechanism (ICAO Assembly և ICAO Council) is justified.
The Chicago Convention should designate one (instead of two) senior ICAO official.
It is necessary to make an appropriate amendment to the Chicago Convention, which will allow as many countries as possible to participate actively in the work of the Council, without increasing the number of its members.
 It is expedient to provide in the Chicago Convention a provision that would prohibit member states from being elected three times in a row5.
It is necessary to adopt an amendment to the Chicago Convention, which will provide for the existence of one senior official, as is the case in other international organizations.
1 See Sheehan WM, Air Cabotage and the Chicago Convention. / WM Sheehan // Harvard Law Review, 1950, pp. 415-417.
2 See Dempsey PS, The Role of International Civil Aviation Organization on Deregulation, Discrimination, and Dispute Resolution. / PS Dempsey // Journal of Air Law and Commerce, 1987, Vol. 52, №2, pp. 530-583.3 See Kotaite A., Is there a lessening of state sovereignity or a real will to cooperate globally? / A. Kotaite. // Air and Space Law, 1995, №6, pp. 288-293 4 See Vereщagin A., (monograph "International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)", 1969, pp. 79-88.
5 See Kopilov M., "Legal Mechanism of Activities of International Aviation Organizations", 1989, pp. 228-231.
Regardless of the title of such a position (for example, the Director General), the incumbent is required to perform the role of Chairman of the Board արի Secretary General1.
Under Article 62 of the Chicago Convention, the Assembly has the right to limit the voting rights of any Member State in the Assembly և the Council if that member does not fulfill its financial obligations to the Organization within a reasonable time.
A mandatory mechanism for influencing states should be provided, which would affect states with arrears (for example, deprivation of the right to vote in the Assembly և in the Council).
  The model adopted by the UN, the Food and Agriculture Organization and the International Maritime Organization may be a precondition for such a measure2.
Amendments to the Chicago Convention on Organizational Matters shall enter into force on an erga omnes basis.
  Otherwise, in the current situation, different changes are ratified by different states, միաս the unity of the settlement is not ensured.
In general, the study suggests that the practice of international aviation և international air communication, as well as normative and theoretical literature, are sufficient grounds to assume that the 1944 International Civil Aviation Convention. The revision of the Chicago Convention is a matter of time.
  However, this does not imply the adoption of a completely new convention.
 Over the years, most of the provisions of the 1944 Chicago Convention have proven their effectiveness.
As for the additions and amendments, the inclusion of which is evident in the Convention, they are conditioned by objective reasons, which reflect the patterns of economic and political development of the states, regions and the aviation sector.
  One of such objective reasons is 2003. The convening of the world conference on "Air Transport Liberalization".
Ani Khlghatyan INTERNATIONAL LEGAL ISSUES OF GENERAL LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF AIR COMMUNICATIONS Keywords: International Air Communication, 1944 Chicago Convention, ICAO, cabotage, "air freedoms".
