FORMATION AND EXPANSION OF ARMENIAN COMMUNITIES IN THE NORTH CAUCASUS REGION The Armenian population began to settle on the north-eastern shore of the North Sea relatively later than in the northern part of the North Caucasus.
 If the Armenians settled in the north of the main Caucasus mountain range and lived among the local tribes already in the Middle Ages, then real conditions for Armenians to live in the area between the western part of the Caucasus and the coast were created only after the region was annexed to Russia.
  The Black Sea coast of the Caucasus passed to Russia in 1828-1829. as a result of the Russian-Turkish war.
  Due to the war events against the Caucasian mountaineers, the military operations continued here until 1864.
1762 Empress Catherine II, who ascended the throne, adopted the principles of the policy of Peter the Great, which was implemented at the beginning of the century, and began to implement them consistently.
  During his reign in the second half of the 18th century, Russia achieved great success both on the Baltic coast and in gaining a dominant position in the Caspian Sea, annexing the western frontier regions to the empire.
  The successes were most evident in expanding the southern borders, going out to sea, and achieving the long-cherished goals of the empire.
 But for that it was necessary to inhabit the vast steppes of the south, Novorossia, to master economically.
 To that end, the government issued special decrees granting privileges to foreigners living in the south.
  Due to the wide opportunities provided by the state, Jews, Greeks, Armenians, large and small masses of other nationalities migrated and settled in the south.
1768-1774 Due to the victorious end of the Russian-Turkish war, Russia managed to strengthen its position in the coastal regions of the Black Sea.
 The government is making great efforts to populate the territory.
  In order to populate the almost uninhabited steppes of the south, as well as to annex the Tavrik Peninsula to the empire, the migration of the Armenian-Greek population of Crimea is organized.
 The migration of Christians living in the Crimea is organized through the encouragement of privileges, persuasion, bribery, in some cases, coercion and intimidation.
  The majority of 12.6 thousand Armenians deported from Crimea in 1779. St. Near Dmitry Rostovsky Fortress, on the banks of the Don River, he founded Nor Nakhichevan (Don Nakhichevan), and in its vicinity, the Armenian villages of Chaltr, Topti, Mets Sala, Sultan Sala և Nesvita.
Like other Russian-Armenian colonies, New Nakhichevan "lived a unique social-political" cultural life, but in the 1930s. During the mass repressions, the local intelligentsia suffered, many historical and architectural monuments were destroyed, the number of Armenian educational institutions was reduced, the Armenian theater ceased to function, and the city began to lose the important role of its Armenian cultural center in the region.
1830s The construction of the port cities of Anapa-Novorossiysk began on the initiative of Lazar Serebryakov (Ghazar Artsatagortsyan), an Armenian admiral of the Russian navy.
 Together with the first Russian settlers, builders-specialists, Armenians also settled in those cities.
 The number of the Armenian community in Novorossiysk was so significant that already 11 years after the founding of the city, in 1849. The local Armenians raised the issue of sending an Armenian priest to them.
 The community of Novorossiysk consists mainly of Circassian Armenians.
  The Armenian community had a great contribution to the development of the city.
 At different times, Armenians held high positions here, provided financial and material assistance to the city, promoted business activities, etc.
 There are three Armenian organizations in the city: "Luys", "Dar" (Russian-Armenian Society) մասն Branch of the Union of Armenians of Russia 1.
  "Luys" magazine is published, there are youth groups.
Anapan is mentioned as a city in 1846.
 Armenians appeared in Anapa at the beginning of the 18th century, and in 1862. The first group of Western Armenian immigrants was established.
  1864 Several Armenian families settled on the banks of the Shapsugho River, establishing the first Armenian settlement in the Sea Province, the village of Armyanskaya.
 1877-78 After the victory of the Russian-Turkish war, the Hamshen Armenians began to migrate to the southern coastal regions of Russia, including the city of Anapa and the surrounding villages.
 1989 The region had 12486 Armenian inhabitants.
 Several Armenian villages in Anapayumka, the largest of which is Haykadzor.
  1915 -1916.
  Dozens of Armenian families from Trabzon are settled here2.
 They are engaged in agriculture and gardening in the region.
The first Armenian emigrants appeared in the Sochi region in 1882. They were emigrants from Turkey.
  Later there were new flows, especially in 1905. շրջանում During the First World War.
  Mostly Hamshen Armenians live in Adler.
  There are 3 Armenian schools in the region.
 St. operates here. Sarkis Armenian Church.
 Armenians preserve the national religion and language, traditions and customs.
  One of the factors influencing migration was 1988. The devastating earthquake in Spitak.
 The number of Armenians in the city was growing.
1895 In connection with the massacres of Armenians in Turkey, the influx of Armenians to the coastal regions of the Caucasus resumes.
  1897 According to the census, 3857 Armenians lived in Sochi district, which was 28.5% of the population3.
  1926 According to the census, 42-9% of the villagers in Sochi region were Armenians4.
 There are 5 Armenian schools in the region.
 About 80% of Armenians speak their mother tongue.
The Armenians came to Tuapse from the regions of Trabzon-Samsun.
 The first Armenians who migrated here settled in the 11th century, and already in the 15th century. A large Armenian colony is formed with its administrative system.
  The Armenians in Tuapse were mainly engaged in agriculture, there were artisans and merchants.
  The local Armenians preserve the national religion and language.
 Here, 80% of Armenians speak their mother tongue.
19th century In the second half of the 19th century, Russia finally established its dominance on the shores of the Caucasus.
  The Russian government was interested in attracting an active population to the coastal areas, which was familiar with the local economic and geographical conditions.
 Due to the Caucasus War, a significant part of the mountainous population of the Western Caucasus - Circassians, Adyghes, Abkhazians, Abazins, others - left their native lands and relocated to Turkey.
 The northeastern coast of the Black Sea, from Anapa to Adler, was especially depopulated.
 The tsarist government tried to populate these areas with Cossacks or peasants who had migrated from the middle zone of Russia.
 1862 The decision to populate the western foothills of the Caucasus Mountains with Cuban Cossacks and other elements was published.
  However, settlers unfamiliar with the local economic system, the agricultural crops typical of the region, and the climatic conditions are able to master those areas.
  Considering it necessary to immediately settle on the shores of the Black Sea, the government recruits the Armenians and Greeks of Turkey5.
1970s It is attributed mainly to the resettlement of Hamshen Armenians on the Caucasus-Sea coast, where in the 19th century. 80s The last number was about 10 thousand.
  In 1877, the first group of Armenians, 20 families, reached the mountainous regions from Turkey.
 At first, Armenians migrated in small groups, creating their own villages in the mountains (Goytgh, Perevalnoye, Gunayskoye, etc.).
  The emigrants were still the subjects of Turkey, they had not yet accepted the Russian government.
 They were not given plots of land, but were allowed to rent the premises where they lived.
 1878 The Armenian population in the coastal region was 2-239 people.
 Every year the population of the surrounding areas of the Gulf increased.
1 See http.
//shkolazhizni.ru/archive/0/n-65855/.
2 See http.
//dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/ruwiki/226478.
1894-1895 Due to the intensification of the persecution of Armenians in Turkey, the number of emigrants increased mainly in the direction of Tuapse, Sochi, Adler, Anapa, Novorossiysk, Maykop.
  40 families lived in Uch-Dere, near Sochi, and in 1901. The population of Okrugiha was 5-140 people1.
  The lands occupied by the Armenians were not only uninhabited, but also economically abandoned.
  The Hamshen Armenians played a great role in the geopolitical development2.
  The resettlement of Armenians was facilitated by the support of Russian businessmen, as they were well aware of the fact that Hamshen Armenians were specialists in the field of tobacco growing3.
  1903 Residents of 68 villages in the Black Sea region were engaged in tobacco cultivation, with 675 (about 84%) of the 925 plantations in Sochi district being cultivated by Armenians4.
 They were skilled gardeners.
More favorable conditions were created for Armenians and other settlers in the Caucasus coastal regions of the Black Sea after the establishment of a peaceful situation in the region.
The main reason for the emigration of Armenians from the Ottoman Empire was the further intensification of national, social and religious oppression against them5, as happened in 1894-1896, 1909, 1915. և In the next few years.
 The main part of the Armenian population on the shores of the Caucasus were the emigrants from the historical Armenian province of Hamshen in the northeast of the Asia Minor peninsula.
Due to the Armenian Genocide, Armenian refugees from the Ottoman Empire resettled all along the shores of the Black Sea, in the regions of the North Caucasus.
  1918 Their flow is increasing from Transcaucasia.
 1920 The number of Armenians in the Kuban շրջան Sea region was 45.3 և 13 thousand people, of which 65.1% և 41.8% were urban dwellers.
 They were engaged in trade and crafts.
 Armenians lived more densely in Maykop, Yekaterinodar (16.7 thousand people), as well as in Sochi and Tuapse (8.5 thousand people).
Fearing a stronger influx of refugees to the Caucasus coast, an increase in their share of the total population of the Caucasus, the tsarist regime began to create many obstacles against them.
 As a condition of granting citizenship, it was proposed to relocate to remote regions of Russia, restrictions were imposed on economic and social activities.
 The same was true of immigrants who had accepted Russian citizenship.
 They were allotted land plots that were inconvenient to cultivate.
  These governmental measures did not have a noticeable impact on the immigration of the colonists, but had a negative impact on the economic life of the region.
  Authorities were forced to ignore the fact that many settlers refused to leave the area or returned shortly thereafter.
  The Armenian population of the region continued to grow.
  The region, which was given a new lease of life, was becoming more and more attractive to the Russian population.
 1889 It was announced that the coastal part of Kuban was given to the Cossack army as property for military purposes.
1891 He revoked the decree of the commander of the civilian part of the Caucasus vicarage on the expulsion of "Turkish exiles" abroad.
In Russia in 1905-1907. Revolutionary events forced the abolition of national schools and restrictions on the establishment of non-governmental organizations in the region, which also encouraged the immigration of refugees.
 Moscow researcher N. According to Volkova, in 1886-1890. The number of the Armenian population in the Black Sea district did not exceed 2 thousand, and in 1911. it even dropped to և1․400.
 Moreover, the urban Armenian population (Sochi, Tuapse, Novorossiysk) was supposedly only 328 people.
 Meanwhile, the actual number of Armenians was several times more.
  If in 1891 The number of Armenians in the whole Black Sea region was about 2․250, then in 1895 it was 3․784.
 Most of the Armenian migrants lived in rural areas, in the villages of Uch-Dere, Polkovnichye, Verin Defanovka, Tenginka and other villages.
 In 1908, there were 8222 Armenians living in the Sea State, and in 1913, there were already 15-427 Armenians6.
 First World 1 Antonyan A., From the History of the Hamshen Armenians, Banber of the Archives of Armenia, 1979, № 3, p. 118.
5 Mikaelyan V., History of the Armenian Diaspora (from the Middle Ages to 1920), vol. 1, Yerevan, 2003, p. 491.
On the eve of the First World War, the Armenian population of Anapa was 2,100, and Novorossiysk was 1,600.
1897 According to the first all-Russian census, the Armenian population in the North Caucasus was 42,636, including 14,793 in the Kuban region, 14,544 in the Terek region, 6,283 in the Black Sea province, 5,364 in the Stavropol region, and 1,7521 in the Dagestan region.
 The urban population of Armenians was 33-676 or 79.1% 2.
 In the Gulf state, in contrast to other regions, the urban population was a small percentage (less than 8%).
1913-1916 The Armenian population in the Kuban region և in the Black Sea province was 40,366 people.
  1914-1918 A mass migration from the Ottoman Empire to Russia took place.
 The reason for the migration was the First World War, the Great Genocide.
 Thousands of Armenian families were subjected to repressions, forced to leave their historic homeland, and relocated.
  About 350,000 Armenians found refuge in Russia.
 Already in 1920 The number of Armenians in this region reached about 58 thousand.
  1919-1920 The Black Sea region was the focus of the ongoing civil war in Russia, from which the Armenians also suffered.
1926 According to the All-Union census, there were 27,729 Armenians living in the Black Sea region3.
 Many Armenians were concentrated in the Sochi region.
 More than 70% of Armenian economies were concentrated in the Sochi region.
  The Armenian population of the Black Sea region was in the 4th place in terms of the number of economies, yielding only to the Russian, Ukrainian and Greek economies.
 The political activity and cultural level of the Armenian population of the region is increasing.
The coastal part of the Caucasus is one of the few regions of Russia where the Armenian population has been preserved and has not decreased during the entire Soviet period.
 1980s Recently, the Armenian population on the shores of the Krasnodar Territory has increased again due to the resettlement of migrants from Azerbaijan and other regions of Armenia, who suffered from the earthquake and the atrocities committed against Armenians in Azerbaijan.
 Armenian schools are reopened there, newspapers are published, non-governmental organizations are launched.
The recent influx of Armenians to the south of Russia began in parallel with the collapse of the USSR, on the one hand, the intensification of anti-Armenian sentiments in Azerbaijan, which led to the massacres of the Armenian population in Sumgait, Baku, Kirovabad, Khanlar, on the other, inter-ethnic conflicts in Transcaucasia. Natural disasters (earthquake in Armenia), elimination of production and economic ties led to an increase in the rate of labor migration.
Anahit Chobanyan THE FORMATION AND EXPANSION OF ARMENIAN COMMUNITIES IN THE NORTH CAUCASUS AND THE SEA REGIONS Keywords: Armenian community, coastal region, Armenian settlement.
