COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF GOVERNMENT GOVERNMENTS OF ITALY AND ARMENIA There are two main forms of state governance: monarchy և republic1.
  The republic is a form of public administration in which the highest state power belongs to the bodies elected by the people for a certain period of time, which are accountable to the voters.
  In the new era of history, parliamentary-presidential republics emerged.
The parliamentary republic with "pure" eggs is less widespread than the presidential republic.
 Austria, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, etc. have such governance.
  In a parliamentary republic, the president is usually elected in such a way that he does not receive his mandate directly from the people, he is not able to oppose the parliament, the deputies, who are directly elected by the citizens.
  Different forms of presidential election are used. He is elected either in the parliament (Turkey, Greece) or in a special board.
 For example, in Germany, the board consists of all the deputies from the lower house, as well as the same number of deputies elected by the representative bodies of the lands. That board is called the Federal Assembly.
 In Italy, the board consists of members of both chambers and deputies of the regional council.
The presidential election is not a key criterion for distinguishing between parliamentary, presidential or semi-presidential republics.
 The important thing is the order of government appointment and foreign policy responsibility.
  They differ from each other. 1 The form of state governance shows the way of organizing the supreme state power, the order of formation of state bodies, their interaction with each other, the degree of population participation in the formation of state bodies (see Vagharshyan A. , YSU Press, Author's edition, 2016).
by which of the highest bodies of state power forms the government and directs its activities, the parliament or the president, "before them" is the responsible government?
 If the government in the republic is formed by the party that won the elections or is elected by the parliament and is accountable to it (the parliament can vote no confidence in the government), then it is a parliamentary republic.
 Such was, for example, the first republic of Armenia.
 Modern Italy and Austria have such a government.
In parliamentary republics, as in the presidency, the government is appointed by the president.
 But unlike the presidential republic, that appointment is a deed.
  In a parliamentary republic, the head of state is not considered the head of the government; he is not free to question the election of the prime minister, who then decides on the composition of the government; he submits it to the parliament for approval.
  The president appoints the head of government who enjoys the confidence of the parliament, otherwise the government will not be approved by the parliament.
 That is why the leader or the candidate of the majority party nominated by the united parties holds the post of the Prime Minister in the multi-parliamentary republic.
 Thus, the government is formed from the parties that won the parliamentary elections.
In the parliamentary republic, according to the constitution, the president is not endowed with wide powers.
  It is customary to say that he does not rule in a similar republic.
  But the president solves some issues of state importance on his own (in Italy he appoints some officials).
 In cases where the situation in parliament changes in such a way that the ruling party loses its majority (for example, the transfer of MPs to other parties), the president can show independence in forming a new government (in India).
 Each act adopted by the President enters into force only after the relevant signature.
  Only the signature of the president is enough for the act to acquire legal force.
 These acts must be documented.
 The ratification is carried out by the Prime Minister or the relevant ministry, if the act refers to the administration of the territory or the relevant ministry.
  The chairman is the head of the executive power.
 He participates in the appointment of ministers, but the decision on the composition of the government depends on the president.
  In Italy, for example, the president appoints ministers after consultation with parliament.
  The president accepts the resignation of the government.
  But this does not mean that he negatively assesses the ministers, involves them in political responsibility.
 For example, in the Italian parliament, if there is a split in the coalition, then a new ruling faction will be formed, which will lead to the appointment of new ministers.
The President's participation in the legislature is also important.
  The president does not have the right to postpone the decision of the parliament, and if it is fixed, he does not use it.
 For example, such a case was registered in the Czech Republic2.
In a parliamentary republic, the government is accountable to the parliament. "
 If the parliament expresses a vote of no confidence in the government, the latter is dissolved.
 In such a system, the government is completely dependent on the parliament and bears political responsibility.
  All bodies in the central state system either depend on the parliament or maintain political neutrality.
 In this system, the parliament takes precedence.
During the existence of the Italian state, three periods alternated: a constitutional monarchy, then the fascist regime, and finally a parliamentary republic, established in 1947.
 The Constitution fixed the parliamentary republic almost in its classical way.
 2015 Following the constitutional reforms, the parliamentary republic was established as the governing body of the Republic of Armenia.
 Let's try to compare the powers of Italy և the presidents of Armenia, the parliaments, as well as the governments, making investigations.
The role of the president ությունները powers in Italy և in Armenia.
In Italy և In Armenia the President of the Republic is the head of state.
 Elected by the parliament for a term of seven years.
 The president must be non-partisan, neutral and impartial.
  Both in Italy and in Armenia, the President can address the parliament with a message, 2 See Siklova,, Listing how the Czech is able to check welfare / Constitutional law.
 Eastern European Survival, 1996, № 2 (15), p. 28. In cases provided by law, to make appointments to state positions, to represent the republic in international relations, to carry out the general management of foreign and domestic policy, to grant pardons to convicts, to publish laws by the parliament.
  In addition, there are a number of other similarities.
One of the most important powers of the president is that he can dissolve the parliament.
  In Italy, for example, the president can dissolve the chambers of parliament when it operates without government ratification.
 In Armenia, although the dissolution of the parliament is an authority vested in the state, the grounds for the dissolution of the National Assembly are defined with such clarity that it makes no sense to grant that authority to any body.
  The National Assembly is dissolved automatically by force of law.
In Italy, one of the most important powers of the President is the appointment of the President of the Council of Ministers.
  In Armenia, the president of the republic appoints the prime minister, but this appointment is more formal, as the president appoints the prime minister to the representative represented by the majority in parliament.
In both Italy and Armenia, the president is the commander of the armed forces, presiding over various councils.
  With the 2015 constitutional amendments in Armenia, the President, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, in cases defined by law, appoints and dismisses the highest command staff of the Armed Forces, other Chiefs of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, and grants the highest diplomatic and military ranks.
In Italy, the president himself signs international agreements, but in Armenia the president signs international agreements at the suggestion of the RPA government.
  In Italy, the president himself appoints, recalls and receives diplomatic representatives, and in Armenia this process takes place at the suggestion of the prime minister.
Thus, it can be concluded that in Italy, in contrast to Armenia, the role of the president is more emphasized, the president is relatively more free here than in Armenia.
 The basis of such a conclusion is Armenia's 2015 following the constitutional amendments.
  The Constitution stipulates that the President will exercise a number of powers at the suggestion of the Government, and some powers may be exercised in cases prescribed by law.
The role and powers of the parliament in Italy and Armenia.
 Of all the state bodies, the parliament is most closely connected with democracy.
  The parliament is the only state body elected by the people, which, due to the proportional electoral system, includes the representatives of all essential political currents.
The National Assembly in Armenia և The bicameral parliament is the representative body of the people in Italy, which exercises legislative power.
 These bodies exercise control over the executive branch, adopt the state budget, report on expenditures, play a role in the formation of state bodies (especially the Government), and perform other functions defined by the Constitution.
The peculiarity of the Italian Parliament is that the Constitution determines the time of convening the session of the chambers (the first non-holiday working day of February-October), but does not confirm the term of the work of that body.
 In this sense, it resembles a "permanent parliament", which is like a permanent body.
And the parliamentarian himself decides the time of his work.
And the regular sessions of our National Assembly are convened twice a year, from the third Monday of January to the third Thursday of June, from the second Monday of September to the third Thursday of December.
  The Italian Parliament has one feature: the possibility of passing laws by a committee of the chamber3.
One of the most important functions of the parliament is the control over the government.
  In Armenia, the right to express a vote of confidence in the Prime Minister occupies a prominent place in parliamentary oversight, but this right is rarely used.
  For each year, the Government is obliged to submit a report on the results of the implementation of its program to the National Assembly.
3 Standing Committees are formed on a proportional basis by representatives of political parties in the House.
  The political composition of these committees corresponds to the political composition of the chamber / see the Constitution of Italy (plenipotentiary), p. 254. The role and powers of the government in Italy and Armenia.
 The government is the body to which, first of all, the exercise of executive power is reserved.
  In both Italy and Armenia, "the government is responsible to the parliament."
  This body operates on the principle of collegiality, has a number of typical functions, such as participating in the legislative process, adopting by-laws, conducting foreign and domestic policy, etc.
  Both in Italy and in Armenia, after the appointment of the Prime Minister or the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the government is formed.
  The latter nominate the candidates for ministers to the president, after which the president makes the appointments.
The government, as a collegial body, makes decisions that take precedence over the prime minister.
  Otherwise, Part 2 of Article 146 of the Constitution will be violated.
 Of course, the Prime Minister, depending on the balance of power in the parliament և in the Government, can influence the decision-making process by the Government, especially through changes in the composition of the Government.
The government has a wide range of functions in Italy, exercising its powers on a larger scale than in other parliamentary republics.
  In case of weakening the power of the president, the government implements the "political security of the president" and assumes a number of responsibilities assigned to the president.
  From all this we can conclude that in each state the parliament functions in a different way, of course, preserving its characteristic functions.
  The parliament has a very important role in the system of public administration of the Republic of Armenia.
Emma Ohanyan COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF GOVERNMENT OF ITALY AND ARMENIA Keywords: governing body, parliamentary republic, parliament, president, government Summary.
