JOURNALISTIC ETHICS AND CIVIL MOVEMENTSJournalism is a profession that has its principles, rules, written and unwritten laws.
  One of the possible principles of journalism is objectivity, accuracy, efficiency, etc.
  The following is one of the basic principles. The journalist cannot be a participant in the coverage of the event at the same time և because in this case a conflict of interest may arise, ըստ accordingly, it will not be possible to maintain the impartiality of the material.
  In other words, the main mission of a journalist, which is to provide objective information to the audience, cannot serve its purpose.
In recent years, we can often see journalists next to Armenian activists who actively participate in the actions, and then cover the same actions.
  This contradicts one of the basic principles of journalism.
  The journalist must be able to clearly distinguish journalism from civic activism and politics.
It is interesting that in our media sphere there are almost always different views on this issue. Not everyone considers this phenomenon a violation of journalistic ethics.
The participation of journalists in various actions has been noticed many times, but let's consider only 2013. The reactions to the action organized by the journalists during the voting on the ratification of the three gas agreements with Russia on December 23 in the National Assembly.
  As part of the action, journalists representing various media outlets, "We are against", "We are the ones who decide", "Do not sell Armenia" - expressed their protest with posters with such inscriptions, trying to prevent ratification.
The action was covered by almost all Armenian online media.
The assessments and positions of our media field experts on this issue are different.
 Some of them expected only professional activities from journalists, did not accept their behavior, and others, understanding the "motives" of journalists' behavior, did not consider their step as a violation of the principles of journalistic ethics.
Considering the contradictory opinions and arguments about this phenomenon, let us try to find out what gave rise to the contradictory positions, if according to international theorists և textbook truths, this phenomenon is considered a violation of journalistic ethics.
 And if the arguments are substantiated, can there be a case when the journalist can bypass this principle?
Below we present excerpts from the contradictory positions of the theorists published on this topic in the online press.
Civilnet.am journalist Tatul Hakobyan, in his article titled "Journalist's Alphabet", referring to one of the basic principles of journalism, noted. "The journalist has no right to raise a poster with political content in the National Assembly, to cover the work of the parliament.
  What happened in the National Assembly on December 23, when four journalists greeted the parliamentarians with posters and more than ten journalists hit the windows, thus expressing their protest against the ratification of the Armenian-Russian agreements, had nothing to do with journalism.
  It is inadmissible to carry out political-civil activity under the name of a journalist.
  As for those who consider journalism not a profession, but only a means to the realization of political-civic goals, I can not get involved in the debate on that issue.
  I will support quality journalism. ”1
Mediamax Editor-in-Chief Davit Alaverdyan, speaking about this, noted. "Here we are witnessing a clear violation of journalistic ethics, because according to both international experience and any textbook of journalistic ethics, a journalist cannot be an active party to an event, especially when he covers that event.
  I do not agree with the opinion that journalists are first and foremost citizens.
 The journalists did not go to the National Assembly as citizens, they went as journalists.
 If the journalist wants to express his opinion on this or that event, has a certain political position, then there can be two solutions. The first is that he temporarily renounces his journalistic status, joins the protesting masses, and the second is that he refuses to be a journalist at all, engages in political or public activities.
  There are many international precedents when journalists lost their jobs because they started sympathizing or collaborating with the events they write about.
  It was considered a gross violation of journalistic ethics. ”2
This is the position of Astghik Gorgyan, President of the Union of Journalists.
 Published by Tert.am news site "Keep the rules of ethics. The chairman of the Union of Journalists stated in the article titled "On the protest action of journalists in the National Assembly." "Definitely, journalists should not be involved in politics, their first duty is to disseminate information accurately, operatively, they should first disseminate the information that came from the discussion in the National Assembly.
 And regardless of how acceptable the positions of those five issues of the National Assembly are, the journalist must give accurate information to the people.
  In the end, he is accredited as a journalist covering the activities of the National Assembly. ”3
Gegham Vardanyan also published an article on this topic in Media.am entitled "Journalist or Freedom Fighter?"
 In his article, referring to the violation of journalists' ethics, he wrote: "The journalist, who has political views, should have decided in advance whether he finds out political posters that day or is engaged in journalism.
 Is he a journalist or a freedom fighter? 1 See http.
//civilnet.am/voices-tatul-hakboyan-journalists-ethics.
2 See http.
//media.am/Journalists-protest-at-the-Parliament-opinions.
3 See http.
//www.tert.am/en/news/2013/12/24/astghik-gevorgyan/.
fighter.
  Yes, a journalist can have political views.
  Yes, a journalist can take part in political actions.
  At the same time, the journalist, who is in a given place as a journalist (and there can be no journalist in the parliament for non-professional purposes, journalists are accredited there), should not interfere in political processes, should not become a party.
 "I would prefer to see better quality journalism, journalistic investigations on the same gas agreements instead of political posters."
Ashot Melikyan, Chairman of the Committee to Protect Freedom of Expression2, Anna Israelyan, Editor of the Aravot Online Daily, and Melanya Barseghyan, Journalist of Aravot.am 4 in terms of its approaches, coverage impartiality or balance.
As we have already mentioned, experts next to specialists with such a position, who examine the issue from another angle, do not qualify the behavior of journalists as a violation of ethics.
The president of Yerjan Press Club Boris Navasardyan said. "The situation that we had, I think, the journalist in that situation, for whom what is happening in the parliament is unacceptable as a citizen, maybe he has the right to forget why he is in the background, to express his opinion as a citizen, many say that the journalist You are harming the reader, the audience, the public that expects coverage, not the expression of a civic stance.
 But it seems to me that nothing prevents those same journalists from covering what is happening in the parliament, especially since there was not much news there. ”5
Hrayr Tamrazyan, director of the Armenian service of "Liberty" radio station, noted in his speech. "I think the journalists in this case protested as if they were citizens.
 After all, they, too, are citizens, when they considered that their rights, in this case, the constitutional right to sovereignty, had been violated, laid down their pens, loudspeakers, recorders and cameras, and began to protest.
 At that moment, they are not journalists, but citizens, but good citizens.
 It is important that at the moment of the protest the journalist makes it clear that he is a citizen at that moment.
  When he returns to the editorial office, as a journalist, he should be able to give a place to the other party's point of view, but as a citizen, he cannot be indifferent to that deal.
  It is the same if the tech parliament decides, for example, to ban the coverage of the sittings or the entrance of journalists to the parliament.
  The journalist cannot but express his opinion.
  In issues with great public resonance, the journalist cannot be satisfied only with "He said this, and this is this."
 In this case, a very good analysis is needed.
There must be content, contextual explanatory journalism ”6.
1 See http.
//media.am/Ratification-of-Armenian-Russian-gas-agreements-journalists-protest.
2 See http.
//www.1in.am/arm/armenia_politics_240669.html.
3 See ibid.
4 See http.
//www.aravot.am/2013/12/24/417653/.
5 See http.
//www.1in.am/arm/armenia_politics_240669.html.
6 See http.
//media.am/Journalists-protest-at-the-Parliament-opinions.
The opinion of media expert Shushan Doydoyan is the following. "In my opinion, there is no violation of journalistic ethics here.
  Journalists do their job and express their position.
 They can express a certain position on such important social issues, objectivism should not be viewed so much, in some cases it is possible.
 And in this case, I think that there was no violation. "
Positive positions on the behavior of journalists will be expressed by Asparez.am news website journalist Leon Barseghyan 2, Parliamentmonitoring.am website journalist Armen Vardanyan 3 and others.
As we have noticed, the RA media experts analyze the problem from different angles, և a question arises. After all, is the participation of journalists in civil actions, both as a journalist and as a citizen, a violation of ethics or not?
We find that, yes, acting as a journalist քաղաքացի as a citizen in a civil action is a violation of journalistic ethics, as a result of which the audience suffers by not receiving comprehensively substantiated information.
 We believe that the journalist, participating in the action as a citizen, will never be able to provide a completely objective material to the audience, which is his main mission.
  Any event that the journalist has to cover presupposes attention, accurate collection of facts, և the journalist has no right to forget about this.
If the journalists thought that the gas agreements were "evil" for the Republic of Armenia, in this case they could have raised the issue not by "shouting" and raising posters, but by preparing investigative or other materials, which would prove the wrong, unprofitable sides, which we think Would be more audible.
  The genres of journalism are diverse, թույլ allowing them to take a more in-depth and comprehensive approach to the problem.
  Finally, we must remember that it is not the journalists who are carrying out a revolution, but the citizens.
 It is another question what role the journalist chooses to act in this case.
 It is wrong to play two roles at the same time.
It is interesting that in the opinion of some specialists who do not consider such behavior of journalists as a violation of ethics, the issue of choosing a journalist-citizen is considered in the case when it comes to accredited journalists.
After all, the journalists have already made their choice in advance.
 Accredited entry into the National Assembly presupposed a professional approach, observance of journalistic principles.
We think that the theorists justifying the behavior of journalists have viewed the issue from a non-professional point of view, as their arguments contradict the rules of ethics.
 We think that no matter what political or civil situation is created, the one who has chosen the role of a journalist should not forget about the mission and professional principles.
1 See http.
//media.am/Journalists-protest-at-the-Parliament-opinions.
2 See http.
//www.asparez.am/news-hy/armenia-citizen-journalists/#more-39378.
3 See http.
//www.parliamentmonitoring.am/news/216.html#.U0WyeKh_vec.
Knar Misakyan JOURNALISTIC ETHICS AND CIVIL MOVEMENTS Keywords: journalistic ethics, civil movement, journalistic principle, media expert, industry leader, point of view, basic principle.
