THE ROLE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF ADVERTISING IN THE DAILY OF ADULT Every day thousands of advertisements of advertising nature penetrate our consciousness.
 Their number is growing day by day. We meet advertisements everywhere: at home, on the street, in the car, at work, on the Internet, elsewhere, that is, it is impossible to avoid it.
It remains the most effective means of promoting and disseminating the product.
 It should be noted that advertising itself, as a social phenomenon, can not be considered outside the borders of culture. As a component, it is part of a broader social phenomenon, which we call culture.
 And since culture, in turn, is a level of reinterpretation of social reality, advertising becomes a layer of that reality.
Children are considered one of the most vulnerable groups in society, which means that the perception of children by adolescents is significantly different from the perception of adults.
One of the main psychological features is that teenagers and children are more gullible, more persuasive, so even the weakest advertising can have a big impact on them.
  It has a great impact on the psychology of children, because like adults they are not able to effectively manage the side effects, the temptation to give in to views, to moral standards.
  This means that the commercials intended for them must be built with more care, taking into account any psychological preconditions.
Various psychological tricks are used to create an advertisement, such as product recognition as a brand, color tactics, turnover frequency, target group selection, use of the right և appropriate slogan, etc. In the case of advertisements for iske children, these requirements increase dramatically.
Children pay attention not to the advertised product, but to the structural features such as music, humor, absorbing plot.
The development of children is accompanied by incredible nuances, յուրաքանչյուր at each stage of childhood is typical of the world around the age-specific sensitivity.
 In one stage the child pays great attention to one side of the story, in the next stages to another, which had not been of any interest to him before.
 One of the age peculiarities is that, for example, in the second or third year of life the child learns the language easily and quickly because at that age he is more sensitive to linguistic phenomena, and the preschoolers are more sensitive to the sound relatives of speech.
It should be taken into account that there are children of the right, left, mixed type of hemisphere mentality.
  There are significant differences in perception between these three groups, as they differ in color, image perception, as well as memory, imagination, and way of thinking.
  Advertising for children is mainly built without taking into account their age and individual differences, while incorrect advertising can have serious consequences for their psychological and physical health, which can be manifested by depression, neurosis, aggression, etc.
All this implies that over time, advertising enters more and more public life, thus governing a person on both conscious and unconscious levels.
 In addition, it is within the scope of economic interest և subject the consumer to appropriate standards.
Ս. Գ. Kara-Murza mentions that one of the most important aspects of TV advertising is that it provides perception in passive conditions.
  In his opinion, the combination of text, image and music combined with the atmosphere of the house, brings peace, tranquility, reduces the mental activity of perceiving information և criticism 1.
1 See Lebedev-Lyubimov A., Psychology of Advertising, St. Petersburg, 2002, p. 368.
Some authors pay attention to the ethical side of advertising.
 E. Յ. Malish notes that the advertising of expensive goods, food, luxury items, which are inaccessible to the general public, leads to a negative emotional impact.
  In modern advertising, we often come across elements that, according to the rules of ethics, should not be mentioned.
 And the frequent circulation of such plots in front of the viewer can lead to a tiring state.
  The general psychological picture of television creates self-balance in public relations, influences people's health problems.
 Therefore, it would be appropriate to emphasize that by omitting people's emotional mechanisms, advertising, in fact, shapes modern man.
  Research shows that preschoolers believe in advertising the most, and the factor of believing significantly decreases with age.
  Advertisements for food, beverages and toys are considered to be the most influential among children.
Every day we come across various advertisements, some of which attract our attention.
 It is connected not only with the design-design, but also with the psycho-physiological-psychological features of the consumer, so the advertisement attracts attention only when it combines the interests of the consumer, the motivational features ևthe requirements.
 The above-mentioned qualities of the consumer should be taken into account when building an advertisement.
 It helps to understand how different products and services meet the consumer's goals.
 In addition, the previous experience is very important for the consumer, because he first singles out the familiar material in the advertisement, which is mainly repeated in all the advertisements of the given product, so a few shots are enough for the person to understand what the advertisement is about. .
 This method works for both adults and children.
There are usually several types of TV commercials: sponsorship of programs, placement of the logo on the screen, running line, etc., but the most influential is the ego commercial, as it is endowed with high emotion.
  Emotions are always subjective. When watching a commercial, we not only see the commercial information, but, regardless of our will, we pass the information through us, emotionally reliving what is happening on the screen 1.
Emotions are different: love, joy, happiness, surprise, sadness, suffering, fear, anger, disgust, contempt, etc., which are expressed differently due to individual characteristics of a person.
 For example, the feeling of fear is expressed differently by two different people.
 There is a concept of "emotional memory", which, compared to other types of memory, has a stronger influence on decision-making, in this case, on the behavior of buying a product or using a service.
 Experts believe that a positive attitude towards a product depends on the attitude towards advertising, that is, if the attitude towards advertising is positive, it will be positive towards the product.
  A person does not try to remember the information that causes negative emotions.
  If advertising causes a feeling of fear, discomfort, it stops the income of the product; on the contrary, if it allows to get rid of unpleasant feelings, it begins to enjoy demand 2.
Children, as a rule, perceive the best of all types of advertisements, TV commercials, which are distinguished by color, humor, participation of characters, attractive plots, etc.
 Ads for children differ from other ads by a number of unique features.
 Especially in the first years, children have poor concentration and are not able to do anything for a long time.
  The commercials with their short plot of 20-30 seconds fully meet these requirements, in addition, they are bright, influential, which definitely attracts the child's attention.
  According to many young parents, their children, who do not even know how to speak, often turn their attention to advertisements, while remaining indifferent to the programs3.
Although the advertisements for children are distinguished by their bright colors, while the presenters do not try to use special technologies, because, according to marketers, such manipulations do not make sense.
 Children who do not know how to speak cannot convince their parents to buy the product for themselves.
 The range of goods that children buy without asking the parent for money և at their own expense is quite narrow 1 See Bozhovich L., Personality and its formation in childhood, Moscow, 1968, p. 464.
2 See Mokshantsev R., Psychology of Advertising. Учебное пособие, Москва, 2009, էջ 44.
3 See Sergienko E., Lebedeva E., Prusakova O., Model of psychic in the ontogeny of man. Moscow, 2009, p. 415.
(chocolate, chewing gum, juice, ice cream, sweets, etc.) than products for children in general. Therefore, there is an advertising group, which is intended first for children and then for their parents.
According to a number of authors, children up to 5-6 years old have worse perceptual emotions than positive ones.
  And since positive emotions are more influential, most of the ads aimed at children are built with a positive emotional plot.
According to O. Parusakov և E. Lebed's only normally developing child at the age of six begins to fully distinguish between the positive and negative emotions of the characters on the television screen1.
In commercials for children, the characters of already familiar characters are often used, which evoke positive emotions և associations.
Advertising helps the child to stay on the same level with his peers, to talk about the same topic, to learn about new products, not to lag behind the games provided for them, etc.
  All this is necessary for the child to maintain a rating among his peers and to participate in general discussions.
 It is accepted that parents make the decision to buy or not to buy something for their children, but I think nowadays children not only decide for themselves what their parents should buy for themselves, but also have a certain influence on parents to buy especially advertised this or that product.
Although advertising also has a positive effect, as it develops the child's memory, helps the child to orient himself in the many products advertised, what he especially wants, the negative effects of advertising are more noticeable than the positive ones.
  Most of the advertised products are harmful to the child's body (chewing gum, carbonated drinks, fast food, etc.).
 Parents mostly buy them for their children, realizing their harmfulness.
 As a rule, parents mainly buy the products of the most famous companies, and children want to have what everyone has, what everyone talks about, because they do not want to be different from their peers.
  Adolescents, in contrast to the younger ones, begin to expand their range of interests by trying new products, albeit not so well-known ones, which they will make famous around them.
  In addition, advertisements can cause aggression if the child's favorite show or cartoon is interrupted or if they are not directly accessible to the child.
The older a child gets, the more critical he becomes of advertising.
  In addition, the child, like the adult, must understand the essence and meaning of the advertised product in order to develop an appropriate attitude.
 To understand advertising, one must have logic, analytical thinking, but in order to choose from the many products advertised, one must first be able to make a decision.
Ն. Talanova studied the perceptual dynamics of advertising of preschool children and came to the conclusion that the perception of advertising in children of different ages is significantly different.
 It is difficult for children under the age of three to understand the meaning of the plot of a TV commercial, even if it refers to children's products, because at that age the child is only able to single out individual episodes without understanding the general plot.
 At the age of four, he is already able to tell the plot, but, as a rule, he is not able to tell the actions of the characters, what is happening in the advertised video.
 Only at the age of five or six do children begin to understand the general meaning of advertising, to be able to distinguish the emotions of the characters, to explain their behavior.
  Already a child of preschool age is able to understand the full meaning of what he has seen, նույնիսկ even to express a critical opinion if necessary2.
A number of studies have shown that junior high school students are more familiar with various advertisements for beverages և food, toys և games, followed by sports advertisements, as well as advertisements for cartoons and children's films, in the order of animals.
  Moreover, there is no significant difference between girls։ boys ՝, except for the advertisement of household appliances, which is paid attention to mainly by boys.
Children 's confidence in advertising decreases with age.
 55% of preschoolers unconditionally believe in advertising.
  Among junior high school students who are more or less consciously և critical of advertising, 23-30% believe: 1 See Zazykin V., Psychology of Advertising. Moscow, 1992, page 64.
2 See Avdeeva N., Fominich N., Influence of television commercials on children and children, 2003, http.
//vivovoco.astronet.ru/VV/PAPERS/MEN/REKLAMA1.HTM link).
(Available and most do not strongly believe.
  The vast majority of teenagers do not believe in commercials.
  At the same time, the majority of the parents of the respondents (62.5%) state that there are cases when they can not refuse to buy this or that advertised product, of which they are aware of the harmfulness, only 37.5% are able to refuse the child. , only if it is a product or food threatening his health.
 In case of rejection, only 25% of the parents experience aggression by the child, the other 75% do not experience aggression.
In addition, the results of the research allow us to conclude that the more a child watches TV, the more often he / she encounters words advertised in his / her vocabulary1.
  It should be noted that television advertising, being an integral part of our lives, has both developmental and harmful effects, the most vulnerable target of which are children.
Thus, in conclusion, it should be added that any advertisement, whether intended for adults or children, has a great impact on the child's mental health.
  Children try to imitate what they see, hear in the advertisement, want to have from the same advertised product that their friend has.
 In this case, it should be taken into account that children's accessories should be available to at least a wide range of children, so that the financial capacity of the parent does not become a complication of the child.
  From an ethical point of view, the advertisement should be structured in such a way that it does not harm the mental health of the child, causing depression, aggression, complexation and other serious problems.
Satenik Grigoryan THE ROLE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF ADVERTISING IN THE DAILY OF ADOLESCENTS Keywords: children, adolescents, parents, TV commercials, advertising perception, emotional memory.
