CHINA'S SOFT POLITICS FEATURES The issue of soft power has been on the Chinese political agenda since the mid-2000s, but as such, various aspects of the notion of soft power have been entrenched in Belchin Chinese socio-political thought since ancient times.
 One of the thinkers referring to the event is a representative of Chinese political thought such as Sun Tzu.
 The latter, in his famous work "The Art of War", describing the preconditions for having a powerful state, speaks about two types of forces, directly and indirectly.
 If the power of the first type provides more achievement of goals in the short run, then the second is more useful for the achievement of long-term goals.
 The latter is directly related to the ability to achieve its own goals through non-military means, which is currently the basis of the concept of soft power.
As early as the late 1990s and early 2000s, the concept of soft power began to be discussed in Chinese scientific circles, outlining the potential impact of that concept.
  In the modern history of China, the conceptual discussion of soft power was initiated by the Chinese political scientist Wang Huning, who in his article "Culture as a national soft power" predicted the growth of the cultural factor and the need for China to work in this direction.
  V. Hunning's article sparked a decade-long debate in Chinese political science about the relevance of the content of the soft power concept.
 Soft power as a key component of its own arsenal was formally adopted in China in 2007, when Hu Jintao, chairman of the Communist Party of China (CPC), linked China's rise and growing influence in the region to soft power.
According to Hu Jintao, "culture has, over time, become one of the most powerful sources of universal power."
 According to him, China "should strengthen Chinese culture as a soft power, further strengthening the protection of human cultural rights and interests."
 In addition, the President spoke about the need to spread Chinese literature, art (including on the Internet), launch non-profit cultural programs, and other similar steps to increase China's worldwide recognition.
Thus, on the one hand, it was a demonstration of the importance of the concept of soft power already adopted by many countries for China, on the other hand, it was a proof of the awareness of the Chinese political elite to expand regional influence.
  It should be noted here that for China's more conservative political and scientific circles, soft power was seen as a mechanism for reciprocating the influence of the West, especially given the great influence of the United States in the region.
  In general, China's soft power policy is currently based on several key components.
 First of all, a key component of China's soft power policy is the reinterpretation and presentation of the rich history, culture and art to other societies in order to increase their attractiveness.
  Confucianism, which has become an integral part of Chinese society, is of key importance at this level.
  Art and music play no less important role.
  In general, at this level, an attempt is made to reinterpret and re-present the most positive aspects of China's historical past.
The next component of China's soft power policy is the integration of the above-mentioned historical values, the development of modern ideologies based on them, the presentation to other actors.
 Other examples of "peaceful empowerment" [4], "harmonious society" [5], "Chinese dream" [6], "one lane-one way" [7] such as China, in which China is actively circulating, can be pointed out. pursuing to increase the attractiveness of the country in the eyes of other societies.
  The latter, with unique concepts based on Chinese historical values, adapted to modern conditions, each of which pursues a specific political, economic or other goal.
In this context, it should be noted that China's economic model itself is already to some extent an object of attractiveness, taking into account the economic growth rates of the latter in the conditions of unprecedented population.
 In this sense, China is considered as a model, especially in Africa and Latin America, where the problem of poverty is quite acute in the absence of a large population and strong economic infrastructure.
  The third component of China's soft power policy is the creation of soft power projection mechanisms, which, unlike the previous components, are largely dependent on financial resources.
 In particular, in this case we are talking about the communication channels through which soft power begins to affect the target societies.
 And the number of such channels պայմաններում the potential of the current globalization և the rapid development of information technologies is huge.
 In recent years, China has invested several billion dollars in this area, as a result of which Confucius Institutes have been established in many countries around the world (including Armenia) (there are currently about 400 such institutions), which are actively involved in spreading Chinese-Chinese culture and funding local educational institutions.
 Examples include the popularization of Xinhua News Agency, China Daily, and a number of other media outlets and news channels.
 2016 In February, Xi Jinping visited the headquarters of Xinhua, China's central television station, and a number of other influential media outlets, urging them to "objectively and impartially present China's social and economic development to the world."
Thus, in order to implement its soft power policy in China, on the one hand, the content of that soft power (history, art, values, ideologies) is developed, which is the basis of attractiveness, on the other hand, work is done to transfer that content to other states and societies. is about pipes).
  Nevertheless, China's soft power policy is still problematic at the regional level.
  The main reason here is China's territorial problems several times at a time, for example, the dispute over the Paracel Islands with Vietnam, over having a privileged economic zone in the Archangel Sea. With Korea, around the Spratly Islands with several countries of Southeast Asia at once (Brunei, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam), etc.
 As a result, the growing influence of China's attractiveness in those countries is still problematic at this stage.
  Despite this, China is actively investing and cooperating with regional integration structures.
 In particular, China in 2015 It provided $ 50 billion to the Asian Infrastructure Development Bank, $ 41 billion to the New Development Bank, $ 40 billion to the Silk Road Economic Zone, and $ 25 billion to the Sea Silk Road Project.
  In addition, China is an active member of BRICS, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and has a free trade zone with JASIAN.
  Thus, China is trying to close the gap of problems with the countries of the region at the bilateral level.
On the other hand, relations with the United States and Europe are not ideal, which, given China's economic strength, actively cooperate with it, but are constantly criticized at the official level for authoritarian regimes, human rights violations, freedom of speech, and other similar issues.
 Such a situation creates favorable conditions for the spread of a positive image.
  In terms of soft power, China has so far achieved its most ineffective goals in Africa and Latin America.
  In these countries, China surpasses other major players in its economic presence.
 This is evidenced by a number of surveys conducted in recent years.
 It is noteworthy that even the headquarters of the African Union in Addis Ababa was built in 2012 exclusively with the financial support of China (approximately $ 200 million).
The same can be said with some reservations about the South Caucasus, where China, through its economic assistance programs, has been able to win the sympathy of the local political elites and the public.
 This is more relevant for Armenia, where a number of infrastructures have been upgraded due to Chinese investments.
 A key feature of China's economic assistance is that it is largely gratuitous without any conditions.
  Unlike the US and the EU, China does not set preconditions for its partners (for example, democratization, improving the human rights situation, etc.), as a result of which the number of partners willing to cooperate with it increases incomparably.
  It is interesting that with the help of economic investments, China solves many problems at once. In addition to the fact that as a result of this policy, China is increasing its attractiveness in those countries, both at the elite and at the public level, in the eyes of larger players, it also shows the effectiveness of China's economic model, which is known to be a source of soft power.
 Thus, in recent years, experts have consistently pointed to the phenomenon of China's sustainable economic development (9%) amid an unprecedented population.
In addition to unconditional economic assistance, China has increased its involvement in international peacekeeping and humanitarian operations, from sending earthquake-stricken Haiti and Chilean rescue teams to participating in the reconstruction of post-war Afghanistan.
  Investing in various peacekeeping missions in the eyes of other actors has a positive impact on the image of China as a reliable partner.
  Another feature of China's soft power is that the cultural component of soft power plays a more important role in this country, which is primarily due to the peculiarities of China's political system.
  Thus, the Confucius Institutes, which were created in the likeness of the "British Council" and the French "Alliance Française", are involved in the policy of Chinese soft power, and are engaged in the spread of Chinese culture and values.
  This testifies to another feature of China's soft power, which is largely state-coordinated, unlike, for example, some Western countries, where society is also the subject of soft power.
  Thus, in recent years, China, in the field of soft power, according to some experts, spends about $ 10 billion a year.
  In general, it can be stated that the concept of soft power in China and the political discourse on it are not as developed as in the West, however, this country has managed to expand the list of partners and create quite viable pipelines to strengthen its soft power in a short period of time.
  At the same time, a number of the above-mentioned objective factors do not allow China to realize its full potential of soft power.
LITERATURE https.
//thediplomat.com/2015/03/sun-tzu-and-the-art-of-soft-power(Accessed.
Jintao's report at 17th Party Congress, October 15, 2007, URL.
URL.
[2] Huning W., Culture as National Soft Power.
 Soft Power, Journal of Fudan University, http.
//www.china.org.cn/english/congress/229611.htm (Accessed.
 18.07.2017) .URL.
  https:
//www.cuhk.edu.hk/centre/ccss/publications/km_chan/CKM_14.pdf (Accessed.
URL.
  http:
//news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2012-11/29/c132008231.htmEconomic Belt with Central Asian Countries, MFA of China, 07 September, 2013, URL.
http:
//www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/topics_665678/xjpfwzysiesgjtfhshzzfh_665686/t10763
34.shtml (Accessed.
 21.08.2017). [9] Shambaugh D., China's Soft-Power Push.
 The Search for Respect, Foreign AffairsURL.
  https:
//www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2015-06-16/china-s-soft-power-push(Accessed.
 20.08.2017) .29-30, URL.
 http:
//www.pewglobal.org/files/2014/07/2014-07-14-Balance-of-Power.pdf 04.09.2017, 17.
57, URL.
  http:
//www.armradio.am/en/2017/09/04/china-to-provide-10'Azatutyun ', 11 May 2017, URL.
 https:
//www.azatutyun.am/a/28480995.html, Sanamyan (Accessed.
http:
//www.aniarc.am/2016/02/06/china-in-the-caucasus-for-armenia-azerbaijan(Accessed.
E., China in the Caucasus.
 For Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, China is an importantURL.
[13] Докучаев А., Китайская экономика.
  что дальше ?, 10.11.2016, 02.
04, URL.
http:
//www.finversia.ru/publication/economic/kitaiskaya-ekonomika-chto-dalshe-10759(да омращения.
 16.07.2017). [14] Yasuhiro M., China's UN Peacekeeping Operations Policy.
 Analysis of the FactorsJapan Digital Library, March 2016, pp. 52-56, URL.
http:
//www2.jiia.or.jp/en/pdf/digital_library/china/160331_Yasuhiro_Matsuda.pdf. Sargsyan HAYCHINISTAN'S SOFT POWER POLITICS FEATURES Keywords: China, soft power, culture, history, values,
peacekeeping, territorial issues.
