ISSUES RELATED TO THE JUDGE'S IMPARTIALITY AND APPEARANCE Still, on April 23, 2010, the RA General Assembly of Judges No. 01-N adopted the "Rule of Conduct on the Code of Conduct" "Justice must not only be administered, but also be visible, convincing, perceived as an affirmation of justice."
  The unique wording given in such a content, in fact, reflects the standard system of expression of justice as a social phenomenon.
  In particular, we believe that according to the ideology summarized in the above-mentioned wording, the administration of justice should not be of a formal nature, expressing itself by ensuring the normal course of the proceedings in accordance with the rules of the trial, but when the proceedings that the normal course of the criminal proceedings summarized by the judicial act has been ensured by an independent and impartial judge1.
A similar ideology is contained in the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct, adopted in 2002, which, according to paragraph 3.2, states: "Judicial conduct must reaffirm the people's belief in an honest (conscientious) judiciary, and justice must not only be done, but must will be implemented ”2.
  Such provisions are contained in a number of other international legal instruments relating to the conduct of judges.
1 See also the comments on the Code of Conduct for Judges of the Republic of Armenia, vol. Editor Manukyan, "Asoghik" publishing house, Yerevan, 2012, pages 5-7.
2 See The Bangalore principles of judicial conducthtp.
//www.unodc.org/pdf/crime/corruption/judicial_group/Bangalore_principles.pdf.
Referring to the domestic legal regulations of the Republic of Armenia, it should be noted that in the context of the presented ideology, special manifestations of the judge's conduct are regulated in the new rules of conduct of the judge, effective from April 11, 2016, but systemically it is not included in the rules as in the previous edition. found.
With regard to the provisions on the conduct of judges in the current CCP, it should be noted that Article 23 4 4 still preserves the ideology of Article 613 of the 1864 Charter of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, typical of the Soviet trial, that justice is administered (when the judge takes the necessary measures in a criminal case) in order to find out the truth.
Meanwhile, such an approach is in direct conflict with the provisions of the CCP in the current edition, the tools typical of the criminal procedure itself, and the trial regime.
 In particular, for example, sending the criminal case for additional preliminary investigation was declared invalid by the RA Constitutional Court by the decision SDO-710 of July 24, 2007, precisely because in the conditions of incomplete preliminary investigation, but due to the possibility of revealing the truth, the judge was impartial. within the framework of its role, carrying out actions incompatible with the function of justice3.
 Another example is the institute of application of the procedure of accelerated trial incorporated by the law HO-93-N on February 21, 2007 in the RA CC, when the substantive examination of the evidence is not carried out, therefore it is not a question of revealing the "truth".
In other words, it should be noted that the provision of appropriate behavior for the purpose of revealing the truth, left over from the Soviet years in the current CCP, should not be a criterion for determining whether justice has been done or not.
 While this standard system is part of international legal instruments, including the Judicial Advisory Council for Judges, Part 3 For example, there is no decision to admit a criminal case, but the materials of the criminal case show that there is a crime, on the ground that the crime was committed. by the person against whom the charge was made, so that omission was to be supplemented only by sending the case for further investigation.
According to paragraph 50 of the 3rd conclusion on impartiality, in particular ethics, incompatible behavior, impartiality, it must be expressed by ensuring the independence of the judge, to be impartial, and to exhibit conduct in accordance with the rules of ethics in private life4.
The second of these features was enshrined in law at the level of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) under the principle of publicity in Article 15, stipulating that "a judge must be impartial in administering justice or providing judicial guarantees."
 It should be noted that such a right is a serious judicial guarantee, in the absence of which the judge's extrajudicial conduct will lead to the recognition of the activity as illegal, as the judge's impartiality, as an autonomous phenomenon, is due to the judge being outside the courtroom. , the absence of interference with the activities of the judge in functional terms.
As a result of historical research, we must state that the concept of being impartial in itself was introduced in the former USSR member states, including Armenia, during the last two decades after the ratification of the European Convention.
 Thus, the USSR in 1924, 1936, 1977. Constitutions, 1961 A study of the Criminal Procedure Code shows that the requirement for adoptive parents was to be independent and to obey only the law.
  Such an approach, in our opinion, is conditioned by the fact that in the case of the USSR judicial regulations, the opportunities to "question impartiality" were excluded for at least the following three reasons.
 First, in the People's Courts of the USSR, in addition to the judge, the case was also attended by the people's judges, who were representatives of the society: workers, servants, peasants, etc. 6, ay 4 See Opinion no. 3 of the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE), 19 November 2002, Strasbourg; https:
//dispatch.coe.int/?home=wcd.coe.int&p&id=1046405&Site=C.
5 See Issues of Access to Justice in the Republic of Armenia, vol. ed. D. Avetisyan, Yerevan, "Asoghik" publishing house, 2013, page 67.
6 See Judiciary of the Republic of Armenia և Law Enforcement Bodies, vol. ed. Գ. Ghazinyan, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2009, page 92.
In other words, the "impartial observer" directly controlled the judge's behavior.
  Second, the internal conviction of evaluating evidence in the Soviet years was directly constrained by socialist legal consciousness, that is, it conditioned itself on the Marxist-Leninist dialectical method, based on the ideology of revealing the truth7.
  Third, the criminal policy of the Soviet state was of an inquisitorial nature8, that is, the public interest prevailed over the private one.
 Therefore, in the case of the horse typical of the Soviet trial, the fixing of the criterion of systematic impartiality of a judge was pointless.
Meanwhile, both in post-Soviet countries and in Armenia
New criminal procedure codes are being developed and adopted9, which are based on the European Court of Justice, which is a key provision of modern international law, such as the key provision on the impartiality of a judge.
Referring to the positions of the European Court on this provision, it should be noted that the court defines impartiality as a lack of prejudice or predisposition - distinguishing between subjective and objective approaches.
 In the case of a subjective approach, the judge's impartiality is determined on the basis of whether the judge had a certain interest in the case, and in the case of the objective, whether the necessary guarantees were provided for the judge, which would rule out all reasonable doubts10.
 In other words, in the case of an objective approach, the fact that a judge is impartial is predetermined by external factors, which ensure the establishment of a democratic society, first of all, the defendant's trust in the court.
 Moreover, even in the Middle Ages, the courts of the Republic of Armenia conducted the examination of the case collegially, by two judges of the judge (see the same place, page 92).
7 See Вышинский А. Я., Теория судебных опкатательств в соскоском κάνουν, изд. НКЮ СССР, М., 1941 г., էջ 106.
8 See S. Dilbandyan, Ensuring the Protection of Personal Rights և Legal Interests in the Pre-Trial Proceedings of the Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2011, p. 48.
9 In particular, see the Republic of Georgia 2009, Ukraine 2012, Kazakhstan 2015 criminal procedure codes.
10 See ECtHR Kyprianou v. Cyprus [GC]) judgment, § 118; Piersack v. Judgment in Belgium, § 30; Grieves v. the United Kingdom [GC] judgment, § 69.
A general review of the European Court's impartial rulings shows that the lack of impartiality in a judge's conduct should be determined by considering the factual circumstances of each case in their context, where (from a subjective point of view) attention should be paid to the judge's outspoken behavior. when responding to a judge, assessing the nature of a judge's previous legal relationship with them.
Moreover, the presented legal positions were reaffirmed by the European Court in the case "Nanushyan և Vardanyan v. Armenia" held on October 27, 2016, emphasizing that the judge should be careful to avoid speaking in such a way as to impress the participants in the trial (cause legitimate fear). ) that the forthcoming judicial act will have an unfavorable effect, thus questioning the judge's impartiality.
  On that basis, the European Court found a violation of Article 6 1 1 of the Convention.
As a result of the substantive study of the criterion of "impartiality" above, we must state that it is also in close interaction with the criterion of "independence" 11.
 The latter, in our opinion, is expressed in the following concept. The lack of independence of a judge leads to the exclusion of his (at least objectively) impartiality, but the absence of impartiality does not exclude the independence of a judge.
The existence of this concept is also confirmed by the position of the European Judicial Advisory Council, paragraph 11 of the CCJE (2001) OP N ° 1 opinion of 23 November 2001, that independence is a guarantee of impartiality12.
Therefore, the criterion of impartiality of a judge (at least in objective terms) should be considered under the criterion of independence, which is usually ensured by the legislator through a positive right 11 For this, see also ECtHR Findlay v. United Kingdom judgment, § 73.
12 See Opinion no. 1 (2001) of the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE), Strasbourg, 23November 2001, https.
//rm.coe.int/1680747830.
as a result of introducing appropriate structures.
 The aim is to exclude interference with the activities of the judge from an institutional point of view, both a) externally, outside the judiciary, and b) internally, within the judiciary, instances and "self-governing bodies".
For example, when before December 2, 2008, judges from specialized courts were sent to specialized courts at the discretion of the President of the RA Court of Cassation, the internal independence component of the judiciary was reasonably questioned, due to which the RA Constitutional Court No. SDO-782 The relevant provision was declared invalid հակ contrary to the RA Constitution.
However, it should be noted that similar legal regulations that reasonably question the internal independence of the judiciary are still in force in the legislation of the Republic of Armenia.
Thus, for example, Article 51 of the RA CCP, which allows the President of the RA Court of Cassation to resolve the dispute between the courts in criminal cases at his own discretion (in legal practice only in writing, without making a decision "to clarify the reasons" in case the trial is criminal. violates the ground of unconditional overturning of a judicial act.
 Or, when the Council of Court Chairmen of the Republic of Armenia, in accordance with Clause 9 of the Decision No. 25 of May 18, 2015, the signing of all complaints և motions submitted to the judges within the pre-trial proceedings is done by the President of the relevant court at his own discretion.
 Such a regulation by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe in accordance with paragraph 81 of the report CDLAD (2010) 004 of 16 March 2010 13 directly contradicts the principle of ensuring the automated distribution of cases and reasonably calls into question the internal independence of the judiciary.
A large number of similar issues are related to the institution of judge disciplinary responsibility.
 Leaving aside the issues of institutional independence of the Security Council, we should mention that it is inadmissible for a judge to be disciplined 13 See Report on the Independence of the Judicial System Part I.
  the Independence of Judgesadopted by the Venice Commission at its 82nd Plenary Session (Venice, 12-13 March 2010).
to prosecute on the ground of an obvious gross violation of the substantive or procedural law, thus artificially restricting his freedom of interpretation, and subsequently (not only against the lawyer, investigator or prosecutor, but only against the judge) an incomprehensibly new circumstance.
  Even on the basis of the comment given by the Security Council on the mentioned ground14, that mom turns into a superior instance checking the legality of the judicial act made by the judge.
Such an approach directly contradicts paragraph 25 of the Life Recommendations adopted on June 2325, 15.
For example, when an act prohibited by criminal law is decriminalized and the convict applies to the court with a request to release him from the sentence, can the decision to release him from the sentence by analogy in the absence of a norm in the RA legislation lead to judicial liability? Dozens of decisions on "release from punishment" can be found in legal practice) 16.
 There are many similar examples.
 Therefore, the legislative regulation of subjecting a judge to disciplinary liability on the disputed grounds calls into question the effectiveness of the entire judicial system17, guarantees the independence of the judge within the judiciary.
In general, the independence of the judge և in particular (at least in objective terms) the impartiality of the judge is in jeopardy 14 See the commentary given by the decision AK-7-A-18 of October 12, 2007, which is regularly referred to as a "precedent" in the decisions of the SC. has the following content: "Significant violations of the RA Constitution, the norms of the laws, which have led or may lead to the gross restriction of the rights guaranteed by the above-mentioned legal acts, deprivation of them, deprivation of them, comprehensive and thorough investigation of the circumstances of the case. or they could influence the correct legal decision in the case. ”
15 See The OSCE / ODIHR Kyiv Recommendations on Judicial Independence in Eastern Europe, South16 This refers to the decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia No. SDO-1348 of February 14, 2017, whether many uncertain issues remain in the legal practice on the same issue. .
17 See G. Ghazinyan, A. Hovhannisyan Bringing a judge to disciplinary liability on the basis of an obvious gross violation of the norm of a substantive or procedural law, its legal consequences, "Banber Yerjan University. Jurisprudence ", 2015 № 1 (16), pp. 13-25.
http:
//ysu.am/files/02G_Ghazinyan_A_Hovhannisyan.pdf.
The above-mentioned issues lead to an artificial limitation of the judge's impartiality with subjectivity.
The latter, in our opinion, is conditioned by the fact that the judge's ability to show his impartiality is limited by the gaps in the legal acts that predetermine the judge's behavior, guaranteeing independence, and the consequences arising from those gaps, the solution of which does not depend on the judge's will.
  As a result, even if the judge is physically (formally) impartial;
  We think that the problem is in fact of a deeper nature, the full description of which is not possible in this framework.
  Therefore, let us look at the issues of impartiality from the point of view of the current legal practice.
In particular, the following fundamental issue related to the impartiality of a judge is debatable: can a judge who has participated in the pre-trial proceedings (for example, in a detention motion) be signed for further substantive investigation?
  Prior to November 28, 2007, the current version of Article 90, Part 2 of the CCP, stipulated that a judge who had participated in the pre-trial proceedings, the Court of First Instance or the Court of Appeals could not participate in the further examination of the case.
  Trying to reveal the legal basis underlying this legal norm, it becomes clear that the purpose was not to constrain the judge during the substantive examination of the case with his position expressed during the pre-trial proceedings.
  Moreover, the wording of the mentioned legal norm in the Draft has been restored in the same way under Article 66.
The European Court's approaches to the issue raised are ambiguous և the conclusions of each case are, as a rule, based on a combination of existing facts18, and the rationale for the existence of the settlement under discussion in the scientific field is, in fact, the reasoning that the judge ultimately considers in the pre-trial proceedings. ս Ilijkov v. Bulgharia § 97, Hauschildt v. Denmark, § 52.
The circumstance of whether or not the accused commits the act he is accused of, regardless of what we call the latter, in the act of reasonable suspicion or guilt, which will further constrain him in the issue of impartiality19.
However, in our opinion, such a reasoning cannot be considered sufficient to justify the restoration of the rule of law discussed in Article 66 of the Draft, which, in our opinion, is mostly of a formal nature.
First, if the purpose of the wording is to ensure that the judge is able to be completely impartial without being constrained by the legal positions expressed in the judgment of the same person in the same case, The judge's participation in the pre-trial proceedings (for example, the detention of a person as a precautionary measure) excludes his / her participation in the further pre-trial proceedings (for example, in the examination of the motion to keep the same person in custody) 20.
  While the question raised is in fact important, in case of giving both negative and positive answers within the framework of the draft law, we believe that the restored rule in the draft will be of a figurative nature; the goal pursued by the content will not be effectively implemented, at least for example. To exclude the situation when in the presence of the same criminal case, literally the same motion (with a name-surname difference), literally the same materials attached to the motion, the judge examines the motion to use detention as a measure of restraint, as is often the case in practice.
Second, about the formal nature of the legal issue under discussion is the situation that is often encountered in law enforcement practice, 19 See G. Ghazinyan, R. Melikyan, an independent and impartial court established on the basis of the law. The case law of the Strasbourg court և The legal system of the Republic of Armenia, "Law of the State", No. 1-2 (39-40), 2008.
20 According to the current legal practice, the motion to extend the detention period is usually heard by the same judge who originally used detention as a measure of restraint against the accused.
when, for example, in the preparatory part of the court session, the defense counsel submits a motion to the court to lift the detention used as a precautionary measure or to replace it with another precautionary measure.
The mentioned situation is a "trap" for checking the judge's disposition in the case from the point of view of impartiality, because during the examination of the submitted motion the judge (in accordance with the RA Criminal Procedure Code and the legal positions of the RA Court of Cassation) has to make the factual data underlying the conclusion, making a relevant decision.
A review of case law shows that judges usually avoid the opportunity to evaluate the facts in order not to jeopardize their impartiality, depriving the reader of the opportunity to "chain" the reasoning of the judgment21 with just one sentence: "In one sentence, the court finds: that there is a reasonable doubt. "
However, in our opinion, such an approach can not be considered acceptable, because in that case the impartiality of this judge is jeopardized by subjectivity to the extent that by confirming the existence of reasonable doubt (relevance), the judge directly expresses his position on at least the lawfulness of the accusation.
As we can see, even if the participation of judges is limited in the post-trial stages, the obstacles to the judges' impartiality and aspiration to do so are not overcome, because, as we have already mentioned, the proposed solution is formal, while substantive solutions are needed.
Thus, we consider that in the above situation, the best solution not to jeopardize the impartiality of the judge should be to adopt the approach that the presumption of reasonable doubt should apply from the moment the case is scheduled for trial, as 21 See Opinion no. 11 (2008) of the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE), § 36.
The opposite has not been confirmed by the court verdict that has entered into force.
 As for the reasonable concern whether in such a case the person should remain in custody during an indefinite trial, then, naturally, no, we consider that in the present situation the issue of the defendant remaining in custody or being released from custody should be discussed, resolved exclusively in custody. by assessing his or her personality traits, thus determining whether the risks of possible misconduct are reduced if he or she is released.
  In such a case, we think that the possibility of ensuring the concept of a judge being impartial will be more protected, in the case of destructive legal practice.
Moreover, if the norm restored in the Draft is aimed at protecting the impartiality of the same judge conducting the pre-trial proceedings, who only decides on the existence of a reasonable doubt in the pre-trial proceedings, we rule out that the current legal practice is known even in situations where the judge is in danger. even with the participation of different judges in those trials.
Thus, for example, defense attorneys often build their defense tactics on the basis of filing an appeal in accordance with Article 290 of the RA CCP in order to "inadmissible" the evidence obtained during the preliminary investigation, during the examination of which it is reasonably possible to send the mother case to court with an approved indictment.
In our opinion, such a practice cannot be considered admissible. It is "extremely vicious" due to the following two circumstances: first, during the further examination of the case, the defense attorney is not deprived of the opportunity to file a motion to declare the evidence inadmissible 22, second, when the judge evaluates the specific evidence. artificially restrict the possibility of further assessing the evidence challenged by the judge examining the merits of the criminal case in accordance with his / her internal conviction, then he / she will be reasonably endangered. 22 On the criteria presented to the objects of judicial control over the pre-trial proceedings.
both the possibility of the judge examining the case being impartial and the possibility of showing his or her impartiality being limited by the position expressed by another judge on that evidence.
This assertion is also based on Recommendation R (94) 12 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, which states that "judges should have unlimited independence in order to resolve disputes in accordance with their conscience and their interpretation of the facts."
Therefore, we believe that the practice raised in connection with the issue raised should be reviewed by law enforcement, as the impartiality of the judge is jeopardized by raising the issue of such a grievance by the judge in general (question developed by the famous Sokurenko doctrine 23).
Thus, summarizing the issues discussed in this paragraph, we should note that the draft law stipulates the obligation of a judge to be impartial at the level of law (in accordance with the principle of legal certainty), of course, is a serious judicial guarantee, however, that both institutional and operational solutions to existing problems are needed.
Arnold Vardanyan ISSUES CONCERNED WITH JUDGE'S IMPARTIALITY AND APPEARANCE Keywords: court, judge, independence, impartiality, rules of judicial order, inadmissibility of evidence, detention.
