LAST OTTOMAN CALIPH ABDUL MAJID 2 ACTIVITIES IN THE CONTINENT OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE Abdul Mejid II was destined to be the last Ottoman caliph.
This article presents some important episodes of ՄAbdul Mejid's life, reveals the deep succession of relations between the founder of the Republic of Turkey Mustafa Kemal Atatürk,, then Caliph ՄAbdul Mejid Աբ ուլ Մ Մ Մ դի դի Մ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
  An article written by Abdul Mejid during the years of exile is presented, in which the caliph, a member of the Ottoman dynasty, talks about the Ottoman sultan-caliphs, the shameful steps of their activities, which do not bring the most disgraceful position to their position.
Abdul Majid II was born in 1868. Born on May 29 in Istanbul.
 He was the son of Sultan Abdulaziz (1861-1876) և Sultan Hayrandil1.
 Abdul Majid was seven years old when his father was killed.
 The future caliph was educated at the Shehzedan School of the Yildiz Palace under the auspices of the newly appointed Sultan Abdul Hamid.
Abdul Mejid was very interested in art.
  He studied literature, history, and great language skills.
 He was fluent in Arabic, Persian, French and German.
 Mejid has a unique place among Turkish artists.
 It was 1909. Honorary President of the Union of Ottoman Artists.
 He has presented his works both in various exhibitions organized inside the country and abroad.
Abdul Majid was very interested in music as well.
 He was fluent in violin, piano, cello, harpsichord 1 Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı (cid.
31) slam Encyclopedia, Istanbul, 1988, p. 263.
cord 2.
 Mejid had a rather rich library, which contained the books of prominent figures of Western literature.
Thus, it can be stated that Abdul Mejid II was a versatile, highly intelligent individual who was interested not only in Turkish but also in Western literature, music, fine arts, and studied history and literature.
It seemed that the opposition moods in the Ottoman Empire were completely suppressed by the terror and persecution of the "Zulu" era.
 But that was not the case3.
 The Young Turk "Union և Progress" party is organizing a coup d'etat.
  1909 The traditional fatwa of Sheikh-ul-Islam was read at the joint session of the Senate of the Chamber of Deputies on April 27, 1945, which contained the justification for dethroning Sultan Abdul Hamid and depriving him of the caliphate.
  The reluctant Sultan Mehmed V Reshad (1909-1918) ascended the throne4.
 After Yusuf Izzeddin, the heir to the throne, commits suicide under suspicious circumstances, Vahideddin, the son of Abdul Mejid I, becomes the heir to the throne.
 After the death of Mehmed Reshad, Mehmed VI Vahiddin, who was destined to be the last Ottoman sultan, ascended the throne.
 The heir to the throne becomes the future caliph Abdul Majid, the cousin of Sultan Wahid al-Din.
After the defeat in World War I, the Ottoman Empire found itself in a very difficult situation.
  The capital, Istanbul, was occupied by British troops, and the sultan became the puppet of the victorious states.
  Unlike the reluctant Sultan Mehmed VI, the heir to the throne Abdul Mejid tried to take the country out of the occupation and save it.
During this period, the Kemalist movement, which from the Turkish point of view was described as a "liberation war" but in reality had a nationalist character, was formed in the Ottoman Empire.
 Abdul Majid established contacts with the members of the movement, personally led by Mustafa Kemal, as a representative of the Ottoman dynasty, aspiring to lead the movement, to become a sultan.
 Kemal և Mejid's main goal was to free the country from the influence of foreign forces և to secure his 2 Eroğlu N., Bestekâr.
  Halife Abdülmecid, See http:
//sanatatak.com/view/Bestekr-Halife3 Bayburdyan V ,, History of the Ottoman Empire, Yerevan, 2011, p. 583.
4 Hasratyan M., Oreshkova S., Petrosyan Yu., Outlines of Turkish history, Yerevan, 1986, p. 211.
the independent process.
 However, if Mejid saw this in the context of restoring the former glory of the Ottoman dynasty by preserving the institution of the sultanate, then Kemal was following the path chosen by a number of countries after World War I: the abolition of the monarchy and the formation of a republic.
Mustafa Kemal met Mehmed VI several times in Istanbul, but not noticing that he was trying to save the homeland, he was immediately convinced that the sultan was merely an executor of the forces occupying the country.
  In this respect, the views of the sultan's heir to the throne, Abdul Majid, were quite different.
In the struggle against Damad Ferid Pasha և Sultan Mehmed VI, Mejid tried to use the Kemalist movement, and Kemal, in turn, sought to take advantage of the controversy of Damad Ferid Pasha առանգ heir to the throne Abdul Mejid.
Abdul Mejid tried several times to show the sultan's incompetence of Damad Feridpasha.
  For that purpose in 1919. On July 16, 1945, Mejid issued a memorandum stating that the government of Damad Ferid Pasha չեն could not take constructive action against the Anatolian Kuva-i Milliye (National Forces) movement, stating that the Kuva-yi Milliye movement was reminiscent of Celaddin. The bandits of the era, and Damad Ferid Pasha can not do anything.
 Criticizing the position of Damad Pasha in connection with the Paris Peace Conference, especially the memorandum submitted to the conference, he expressed an opinion that it contradicts the interests of the nation-state.
  At the end of the memorandum, he presented the main measures that needed to be taken with seven points.
 In the first point, he demanded that the caliphate և the sultanate be impartial towards the opinions of various political groups այստեղ (here he hints at the connection of Mehmed VI with the Freedom և Consent organization).
The fifth item called for amnesty in the country, and the sixth item was for discussing the demands of the communities in Anatolia and accepting those that are in the common interest.
 The seventh point was to unite the whole Islamic world, a nation presenting itself to the world as its ultimate goal5.
  This memorandum was kept secret for a long time.
  However, the Kemalists published it in a number of newspapers, showing the whole country to Abdul Mejid և Sultan ու See http:
//www.atam.gov.tr/dergi/sayi-61/veliaht-abdulmecitin-ankaraya-davet-edilmesi-meselesi. Contradictions between Damad Ferid Pasha.
 The Kemalists took this step with the aim of creating a riot between the "government" of the sultan's palace, showing the people that even the representative heir of the sultan's palace was among the opponents of Damad Pasha.
  Demonstrating the weakness of the Ottoman government and the sultanate system on the way to modernization and modernization of the country was a great opportunity for the Kemalists to prepare the ground for the abolition of the sultanate.
 This policy bore fruit. The government of Damad Ferid Pasha was replaced by the government of Ali Reza Pasha.
1919 The July 16 memorandum was not the only one of its kind.
 Earlier, in 1918. On November 14, the day after the capture of Istanbul by the Entente troops, Mejid wrote a letter to Mehmed VI proposing the formation of a strong government to end the occupation as soon as possible, convening a sultanate council, and making decisions for the future of the country in honor of the Ottoman dynasty.
  In another memorandum presented to Vahideddin, Mejid pointed out the weaknesses of the current government. In a memorandum dated May 31, 1945, Abdul Mejid explained how the Ottoman Empire should present itself at the Peace Conference.
 1919 On June 12, 1945, Abdul Mejid again sent a letter to Vahidedin, declaring that the conditions imposed on the Ottoman Empire by the Entente countries were tantamount to hanging the natural borders of Istanbul6.
It can be said that Mejid agreed with the nationalist ideas of the Kemalists in this matter.
 He demanded that the sultan inform the Entente countries that under such conditions the caliphate and the sultanate could not perform their functions.
  He offered to put an end to the struggle of the Anatolian "nationalists" between "Istanbul" (it was actually instigated by England, and the sultan was only doing his will), to send a delegation led by one of the dynasties to Antalya to try to unite the two sides.
  In this situation, this would be the most reasonable step for the most reasonable country.
 But Great Britain did not expect such developments at all, it could not allow them.
 The position of Abdul Mejid, a representative of the Ottoman dynasty, as a member of the Sultanate Palace. See http:
//www.atam.gov.tr/dergi/sayi-61/veliaht-abdulmecitin-ankaraya-davet-edilmesi-meselesi. He was worried about Great Britain.
  The Sultan was their henchman, and Abdul Majid with his rebellious attitude could shuffle the cards.
 The agent of the British tries to find out his orientation to the end through various contacts with such a dangerous person for them, to understand who was a supporter of the British from the sultan's palace and who was not.
 The agent informed Great Britain that the heir to the throne wanted to go to Anatolia with his son Omer Farouk to join the Kemalists.
  The British, in their turn, informed Mehmed VI about it, urging them to prevent the implementation of that decision.
 By the order of Mehmed VI, Abdul Mejid was detained for thirty-eight days, and Damad Ferid Pasha was assigned to supervise him.
Nevertheless, Mejid continued his secret contacts and correspondence with the Kemalists.
During this period, the Kemalists were extremely concerned about the fact that the Entente forces, using the caliph's careful authority, were trying to turn the people against Ankara, to present it as an enemy.
  Kemal decided to invite Mecid to Ankara as the caliph's deputy, using the caliph's authority to put an end to the Ankara-fighting, which was fueled by Istanbul's religious propaganda.
  In other words, Kemal's goal was to unite the people through Mejid.
 Abdul Majid's goal, however, was different, as a representative of the Ottoman dynasty, to lead the already widespread "national liberation" (actually nationalist) movement և to become a sultan.
 After being rejected by Mejid, however, Kemal immediately sent him a letter offering to become the sultan.
  Mejid, realizing that he would have a symbolic role on the sultan's throne, would be used as a tool for his above-mentioned purposes, once refused, but instead sent his son, Omer Farooq, to ​​Ankara to lead the movement as a dynasty representative.
  Omer, of course, was told very rudely that he had nothing to do there, and was sent back to Istanbul, not being allowed to cross into Ankara.
  Kemal was leading a movement that had already achieved great success, in fact he had taken the helm of the country, he had no reason to give up his position to anyone.
 Besides, the Kemalist movement had formed around him, բնական, of course, some Omer, who had a soft life in the palace, could not lead it.
 In addition to the mentioned circumstances, there was another, this time already a personal circumstance.
 According to the tradition still prevalent among the Young Turks, like the time of Enver Pasha, Mustafa Kemal sought to marry a woman from the Sultanate dynasty7.
 Kemal's chosen one, with whom he had some connections, was Sabiha, the daughter of Sultan Mehmed VI.
 However, Kemal was not allowed to marry Sabiha, the latter was married to Abdul Mejid's son, Omar.
 Abdul Meji tried to show that he rejects the Ottoman Palace's opposition to Wahiddin, wants to make peace with him, and put an end to the clash with the Sultan's government պատճառով government over his opposition.
 Thus, it turns out that in Kemal և mer's hostile relations, in addition to political and ideological circumstances, the personal episode also played a role.
After being sent with Omar, Mejid wrote a very rude letter to Kemal, declaring that no one had the right to dictate his will to any representative of the Sultanate dynasty.
  With this letter of protest, Mejid opposed Ankara's decision, according to which no representative of the Sultanate dynasty should set foot in Anatolia.
 This meant that the paths of the Turkish people և the Ottoman dynasty were clearly divided.
Kemal stated that he knew Omar personally and knew about his intention to become a caliph-sultan.
 He mentioned that he had told Omer about the impossibility and inexpediency of his incapacity.
 It was not possible to bring Omer to Ankara and make him a sultan-caliph, because that movement, according to Kemal, was the movement for the liberation of Anatolia էր would be limited only by that8.
Thus, in 1922, after the Kemalists, who had achieved de facto great power in the country and succeeded in foreign policy, were named after the sultan's apparatus, various attempts were made to discredit him. On the night of November 1, 2012, at 3 o'clock in the morning, the Turkish National Assembly passed a two-point law on the abolition of the sultanate.
  The first point stated that within the National Covenant (Misak-I milliye), no government other than the TAM government was recognized.
  And the second Mustafa Kemal competed with Enver Pasha in general, he tried to follow his example in everything.
 The issue of marriage, which at first glance seems very personal, but in fact pursues political goals, was no exception.
See http!
//www.atam.gov.tr/dergi/sayi-61/veliaht-abdulmecitin-ankaraya-davet-edilmesi-meselesi. According to this point, the Turkish state was declared a pillar of the institution of the caliphate.
In fact, the sultanate was abolished, but the caliphate was preserved.
 The complex institution of the Caliphate, deeply formed after the death of the Prophet Muhammad, united for centuries not only the Muslims of the Ottoman Empire, but also the Muslims of the whole world.
  The Muslim citizens of the Ottoman Empire had the idea that they were the citizens of the caliphate, the citizens of a state ruled by the leader of the entire Muslim world, "it is natural that Mustafa Kemal, realizing that he could not eliminate such deep-rooted people in one day." The influential system, at first, avoided openly, categorically, step by step against it, and subsequently discredited it, as it did in the case of the sultanate.
  In addition, Kemal did not immediately go for the abolition of the caliphate, given the fact that during the Lausanne Conference Turkey could use the fact that it was the center of the Islamic world to exert pressure on Britain and France, as the majority of their colonies converted to Islam.
After the incident, the sultan wrote a letter to Charles Harrington, the commander-in-chief of the occupying forces in Istanbul, after some hopeless attempts to stay on the throne, stating that he was in danger and wanted to leave Istanbul as soon as possible.
  1922 On November 17, at 6 o'clock, he was first taken to the port of Tophane with a nine-member procession, then transferred to Malta by an English ship.
  He was later transferred to Jeddah, then to Cyprus, and from there to San Remo, where he lived until the end of his life.
The Ottoman sultan found himself in extreme poverty in the last period of his life. He lived on rent, accumulating so much debt that he could not rest even after his death.
 The sultan was not allowed to be buried until his daughter paid the debts.
9 Hür A., ​​A Time of Caliphate vardı, See http:
//arsiv.taraf.com.tr/yazilar/ayse-hur/bir-zamanlar10 See "History of the Republic of Turkey", university textbook, Yerevan, 2014, page 49.
11 See Hür A., ​​A Time of Caliphate, See http.
//arsiv.taraf.com.tr/yazilar/ayse-hur/bir-zamanlar The leader of the Ottoman Empire united both secular and secular power, and Kemal, given the circumstances already mentioned, could not immediately abolish the institution of the caliphate, so the new There was a need to elect a caliph.
1922 The election of the caliph took place after the discussion of the expediency of giving an oath of allegiance to the elected caliph at the November 18 sitting of the National Assembly, his expediency to live in Bursa or Ankara.
  148 of the deputies who took part in the elections voted in favor of Abdul Mejid.
  Nine abstained, and 2 votes fell to Abdul Hamid II's sons Selim-Abdurahimi 12.
 Thus, Abdul Majid became the caliph by the name of Abdul Majid II.
The institution of the caliphate was preserved, but it would already have a symbolic significance.
 It could no longer have the former influential position. It would just be a fish structure with purely caring functions.
 By the decision of Kemal, the consecration of the caliph was to take place on a plain horse.
 Abdul Majid, however, made some demands.
Among other demands, Kemal rejected Abdul Majid ցանկ ցանկ Ֆ հանդ ուլ Մ ուլ ուլ ուլ 'և 6 «ալ եմ եմ եմ եմ եմ եմ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ ալ Ք Ք Ք Ք "Servants of the cities of Mecca and Madinah") titles.
 Abdul Mejid dreamed of bringing back the old days, and Kemal, logically, could not afford anything that would have a military council, endowing the caliph with other functions than care.
 Kemal made it clear to Abdul Mejid that his caliphate did not imply any interference in state or military affairs.
  The times when the sultan caliph held both the secular and the sovereign power of the country in his hands were left in history.
  The following details related to the consecration ceremony testified to that.
  During the ceremony, Friday prayers were recited first in Ankara, at the Hacıbayram veli Mosque, and then only in Istanbul.
  When the participants of the ceremony went to Fatih Mosque, before Friday prayers, the speaker did not recite His Holiness the Caliph (by the way, the title was given to him by TAMJ), but the head of the delegation Mufid Effendi, and the anthem was played in the courtyard of the mosque13.
 With this the Kemalists emphasized, 12 See ibid.
13 In the same place that power is now in the hands of Ankara, that they are moving towards the secularization of the country, which in this case meant not only a separate separation of power from the secular, but also state control over the church.
Immediately after the consecration of the caliph, the controversy between the newly elected caliph Abdul Mejid of the state began to deepen.
 The first trouble started when Abdul Mejid sent a letter of thanks after the ceremony not to the TAMJ presidency, but to the "Speaker of the Grand National Assembly in Ankara, His Excellency Marshal Mustafa Kemal" and signed "HalifeyiResullulah Hadimül Haremeyn Abdeliz Deputy Caliph, Haremain's servant Noringexadul Abdulmejid ") with the forbidden term.
  It turns out that Abdul Majid did not recognize the TAMJ as the supreme power of the country, moreover, he did not accept the circumstances of the abolition of the sultanate, only being a caliph, endowed with purely cared functions.
Some time later, Abdul Mejid asked for permission to invite the leaders of Islamic states to Turkey so that the Islamic world could get acquainted with the caliphate.
 And after the proclamation of the republic, Kayazim Karabekir and a number of other famous people started visiting the caliph and expressing confidence in him.
 The caliph received a white horse named Konya from Refet Pasha14.
In fact, with these steps, Mejid tried to take over the role of the leader of all Muslims like the previous caliphs, which would increase his prestige in the face of the whole Muslim world, gain support in the fight against the Kemalists, establish contacts with influential people in the country who can be dissatisfied with Kemal. to be in a camp with him.
 In addition, Mejid raised the issue of increasing the budget of the caliphate.
  Kemal used these demands of the caliph against him.
  He declared that the caliphate was a historic moment from now on, and referring to the caliph's request to invite delegations of foreign states, he noted that the desire to establish such political relations contained aggression against the state and endangered the country.
14 See Hürr A., ​​A Time of Caliphate, See http.
//arsiv.taraf.com.tr/yazilar/ayse-hur/bir-zamanlar The telegram ended by reminding that the means given to the caliph are not to live a luxurious life, but to maintain its existence15.
1923 Following the proclamation of the Republic of Turkey on October 29, 1945, Mustafa Kemal undertook some reforms, which were a continuation of the process of modernization that had already begun.
  From these reforms, secularism was considered a measure of progress.
  This meant the separation of the state from religion, the separation of education from religion.
 The Republic of Turkey should have been secular.
 Kemal spoke about the modernization, rationalization and establishment of democratic order in the country.
  It was planned to proclaim a constitution, to form local self-government bodies, in such a context the institution reminiscent of the remnants of the old caliphate did not fit in any way.
  Just as the situation favorable for the abolition of the sultanate was gradually increased, so it was in the case of the caliphate.
 Kemal stated that the caliph was interfering in the internal affairs of the country, trying to establish political relations with other states, increase his budget without the state budget, go beyond the scope of his caring functions.
  According to Kemal, the institution of the Caliphate was a major obstacle to the creation of a new state through reforms beginning in 1922.
Thus, in 1924. On March 3, 1945, the law on the abolition of the caliphate and the expulsion of the Ottoman dynasty was adopted by a vote of 157 to 16.
  It was forbidden for any member of the dynasty to enter Turkey.
 They were to leave, leaving their property, the Ottoman treasury.
Abdul Mejid first settled in Switzerland, then moved to Nice, France.
  1939 He moved to Paris due to the danger of war and health problems.
 1944 The last Ottoman caliph died on August 23, 17.
In his will, the caliph wanted not to be buried next to the infamous Ottoman sultan Mehmed VI Vahidedin and to be buried in Istanbul.
  His body was frozen պահել kept in a mosque in Paris for 10 years.
Daughter Durrushehvar, 1945 և 1953 to bury his father in Istanbul 15 See ibid.
16 See ibid.
17 See Son ifelmü sürgünde sürgünde sürgünde (cid.
31) tü, See http:
//www.dunyabulteni.net/haber/271851/son submitted applications, but his efforts were in vain, despairing, Durrushehvar in 1954. On March 30, 1945, his father's body was buried in Madinah and buried in Baku Cemetery18.
 By the way, none of the Ottoman sultan-caliphs was lucky enough to be buried in the holy city of Muslims.
While living in Paris, Abdul Mejid wrote an article about the Ottoman sultans.
 The last Ottoman caliph described the mentioned article to the thirty-six sultans who once ascended the throne in the Ottoman Empire, presented their good and bad sides, shortcomings and merits.
 The caliph stated that the cause of the collapse of the Ottoman dynasty was alcohol, something that was forbidden by Islam to suit the secular and caring leader of the country.
 Turkish journalist Murat Bardakci published some of those posts.
"Alcohol is one of the main reasons for the fall of the Ottoman state.
Alcohol is forbidden by religion և haram.
 The caliph's sons, the heirs to the throne, should never have forgotten this, when they forgot either to oppose the orders of the Most High or to betray the caliphate and sultanate entrusted to the Ottoman dynasty.
  Those who drank alcohol could not have rights over the caliphate and the sultanate. ”19 With these words, the caliph begins his writing.
Mejid blamed many of the Ottoman sultans for getting sick and dying from alcoholism and failing to benefit the country.
 Mejid wrote that the only mistake of a glorious sultan like Suleiman the Magnificent was that he sacrificed one of his sons, the clever and prudent Mustafa, and handed over the reins of power to a similar and greedy drunkard of Selim II.
 It was during his time that the Ottomans, who had not been defeated before, were defeated by the Crusaders, he was all over Europe, and Selim II was drunk at that time, which did not benefit the affairs of the state.
 One day, drunk with wine brought from Cyprus, he fell in the palace bath, injured his head, and died as a moral punishment for his actions.
 Abdul Mejid described Murad III և Mehmed III's sultans as "ruthless executioners of the Ottoman state".
  And Ahmed III spent his life in pleasures and pleasures in the period called "Tulip Age".
 «Padi 18 See Hür A., ​​A Time of Caliphate vardı, See http.
//arsiv.taraf.com.tr/yazilar/ayse-hur/bir-zamanlar19 See Bardakçı M., for the Ottoman Empire, see http.
//www.haberturk.com/polemik/haber/841565-osmanliyi-dedelerimin-ickisi-yikti. The interest, which had lost its head from the pleasures, had no time to see the horizon of the state.
 Even if he looked, there would be no correspondence to see.
 The pleasures had completely captivated him… ”20.
Mejid wrote about his father Abdulaziz. "My father, His Holiness Abdulaziz Khalifa, thank God, was not given to any of such weaknesses.
 He did not drink a single drop of alcohol in his whole life, he did not smoke, and he rarely drank coffee.
 Due to all this, he was quite strong.
 He never got sick during the fifteen years of the sultanate.
  But since there was no one to help him in the great deeds he had begun, he was overthrown and killed. ”21
Referring to the sons of Abdul Majid I (Murad V, Abdul Hamid II, Sultan Reshad, Sultan Mehmed VI Wahid), he noted that they were the cause of the collapse of the huge state stretching from the Austrian border to the Persian Gulf. "I leave these four leaders to the cruelest trial in history."
  In his writings, Abdul Majid stated that none of the Ottoman sultan-caliphs had gone to Hajj since 1916.
As we have seen, Abdul Mejid was destined to live and work in a period of transition, when the Ottoman Empire was replaced by the Republic of Turkey.
  Abdul Mejid opposes many members of the sultanate dynasty with their intellectual abilities, and not only with their own destiny, but also with concerns about the salvation of the country, the dignified future of the dynasty and the return of the sultan's former glory.
 Assessing the situation correctly, he had established contact with the forces that actually came to power in the country and was trying to unite.
 The common goal of Kemal և Mejid was to prevent the country from becoming a toy for foreign countries.
 However, if Mejid envisioned it as a way to restore the sultanate and become his sultan, Kemal would go for the formation of a secular republic, of which he would be the president.
However, the abolition of the institution of the caliphate, established after the death of the Prophet Muhammad and deeply rooted in the subconscious of Muslims, by a secular decision, however, was extremely controversial.
  Kemal, of course, managed to change the way of development of the country, to make a turn to the secular, but as shown in 20 See the same place.
21 See ibid.
22 See ibid.
As further developments took place, the religious base of society continued to play an influential role.
 In fact, in some sections of the population (especially the peasants) the laicist perceptions did not take deep roots.
 Especially in the provincial districts, the pro-religious people were in the majority, so in order to succeed, the country's political forces had to give a big place to religion in their pre-election campaign.
  The People's Party began to use Islam in the inter-party struggle to win over the electorate.
  The People's Party made some concessions on religion, the most important of which, experts say, is the permitting of religion teaching in schools and universities23.
 And after 27 years of one-party rule by the People's Party, the People's Party that came to power in the country became even more distant, taking steps that contradicted Ataturk's laicist reforms.
  Suffice it to say that in 1950 On June 17, 1944, the call to prayer was officially allowed to be sung in Arabic.
 Active work on the construction of mosques began, and the activities of religious communities and sects banned by Kemal were allowed.
  Thus, it seems that the stereotypes of the inviolability of Ataturk's reforms were broken. They began to be used selectively, the wording "reforms appropriated and perceived by the people, appropriated and incomprehensible reforms by the people" was introduced by the authorities.
 The forces that rely on the religious factor are still successful in Turkey.
 They are talking about that in 2015. The parliamentary elections held in Turkey on June 7. The pro-religious Justice and Development Party won, not the Republican People's Party, founded by Kemal.
Thus, it can be stated that the religious factor continues to maintain its great influence and significant role in the social and political life of Turkey.
23 See "History of the Republic of Turkey" University Textbook, Yerevan, 2014, p. 24 See ibid., P. 153.
Astghik Poghosyan THE LAST OTTOMAN CALIPH ABDUL MAJID II ACTIVITIES IN THE SUNRISE OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
