Sci. Head: Doctor of Technical Sciences prof. H. Sargsyan According to international experience, in developed countries, in the conditions of market economy, there are two options for determining economic results (particularly for the labor market), either through market mechanisms (USA) or under the influence of social partnership structures (EU) 1.
Necessary conditions for effective operation of market mechanisms are not yet provided in the Armenian economy, which further exacerbates the many social problems facing the country, the need for state intervention in the field of social priorities, and the formation and operation of institutional structures.
  Therefore, at this moment, the prospects of introducing a model of social partnership in our country և possible options, using the experience of developed countries as a guide, are of special interest.
Social partnership is any type of negotiation, discussion and exchange of information on economic and social policy between the government, employers's employee representatives or employers և employee representatives և 2.
From this definition it becomes clear that one of the problematic phenomena in the society is being reversed - the dependence of the state, the business environment on the labor resources.
  It is undeniable that an atmosphere of extreme distrust prevails in our country between these three issues, while these three forces are the guarantors of the development of the country's economy, as well as civil society, the level of democratization and the improvement of other constitutional norms.
In this case, the state must take the initiative to rectify the situation, providing the necessary preconditions both within the business environment and in the field of work 2 International Labor Organization official website, http.
//www.ilo.org. to review the status of relevant institutional structures.
  In other words, the first step that must be taken is a radical change in the status of trade unions, employers' unions, and other similar structures, to the status of a social partner, as well as the formation of other structures if necessary.
  Thus, these structures must become full participants in the process of socio-economic policy-making, which will have their significant contribution and influence in solving the economic and social problems in the country.
In Armenia, a legal consciousness must be formed to get the maximum result, accordingly, the maximum satisfaction of the public interest, which is impossible without the cooperation of all actors in the economy, that is, the harmonization of interests.
Business circles must understand that the creation of profit should be ensured not by exploitation of labor and underpaid wages, but by the creation of added value.
  Employers need to understand that they can increase their economic benefits and expand their business if they do not shy away from investing in one of their most important resources, labor.
  In the 21st century, the economic interests of any developed country are formed and pursued in the international arena, while Armenia is still developing a normally functioning domestic market.
Workers must realize that the most effective way to protect their rights is to consolidate them in the form of collective bargaining agreements, to unite around the goal of protecting their rights, and for the state to guarantee their legal rights.
Thus, the state must provide a clear strategy for the implementation of the social partnership model of the study of the best international experience in the field of social partnership, combining the socio-cultural heritage of our country, and strategies for ensuring the effective implementation of that strategy.
In other words, the "state-employer-employee" relations must be moved to a new level.
  The ideology of social partnership should be introduced in these relations, through joint dialogues, negotiations, development of a common socio-economic policy, the solution of the social problems facing the country, and mutually beneficial cooperation, ensuring overall economic growth.
Ignoring the fact that in the current socio-economic conditions in our country, housing is a matter of political importance, it should be noted that state intervention is inevitable in creating the means to solve this problem naturally.
As evidenced by the experience of the Soviet Union 1 English "construction communities" 2, the role of housing in the socio-cultural identification of society is undeniable. As a key component of the mass policy of creating a social and cultural environment for the life of the population, it is a means of creating a humanitarian atmosphere for generations to work, reducing differences within society, and developing a person-culture, the absence of which is fraught with aggravation of various social disasters.
It should be noted that one of the most important social problems of the population is the problem of housing, the solution of which at the national level should be included in the list of structural problems of the social partnership system.
  Under conditions of direct state control և participation գործ between employers և employees համաձայն there should be an agreement on wages, social assistance, material incentives, the establishment of housing savings systems, which will provide rational options for housing in the country.
Transfer of the solution of the housing problem և Sustainable establishment within the framework of the social partnership model will ensure the solution of the problem in accordance with the socio-economic development և requirements of each period, under the direct influence of social։ scientific and technical progress.
At present, the development of a social partnership model is of particular importance for Armenia due to the existence of many social problems in the country, including a large-scale problem such as housing, which stems from the low income level in the country.
  Therefore, the complete solution of these problems in the case of a small country like Armenia requires the formation of a national approach and cooperation on the principle of combining the interests of a "state-employer".
1 Gorlov VN, "Joint construction in the USSR.
 Achievement of the Soviet people2 Boleat M., "Building societies.
 A descriptive study ", United Kingdom, 1981, pp. 1-2. Anahit Yeritsyan THE NECESSITY OF FORMING SOCIAL PARTNERSHIP IN ARMENIA AND HOUSING SECURITY Keywords: social partnership, secure state support,
