GENERATION OF FANTASY. MYTHICAL ELEMENTS STEPHANN MAYER'S "TWILIGHT" VISIT Literature has always had close ties with folklore.
 Many literary works have folklore, mythical elements, characters, many of them even completely retell various myths and legends.
 And that close connection between literature and folklore at the end of the 19th century gave birth to the genre of fantasy.
Fantasy is a kind of fantastic literature, where myths are brought to real life with their heroes, they collide the past-present.
 The present, however, is not definite.
 Another reality independent of our reality is depicted, where mythical creatures live next to people: elves, dwarves, giants, vampires.
In fantastic literature, the author creates another world in our world with his imagination, tries to connect reality with his imagination, explains super-natural and many realities from a scientific point of view.
 Bright examples of science fiction literature are Jules Verne's works, where the actions are in the real world, while in the case of fantasy, the reality is different.
  The author creates his imaginary world, where any supernatural phenomenon is a part of that world.
 In both of them there are various mythical characters living together, the existence of which the author does not even try to explain.
Another characteristic of the fantasy genre is magic.
 Magic and miracles are identified with the hero, and many times they are personified, become the motive, basis, solution of many problems, on the contrary, create them.
 The witch has her own will, she decides who to help and who not, she always demands compensation for that help.
The author can create his world on our planet, in another constellation, even in different parallel worlds at the same time.
  In the genre of fantasy, all notions of the alienation of time are broken.
 The hero can go the impossible way in the impossible time for our reality or travel through imaginary and inexplicable space-time labyrinths.
  The author brings to our days the gods of the past. Business is connected with the present.
 All the foundations of time are broken, a new time is created, which corresponds to its reality.
 Day can be year, year - day, human life - a moment, endless eternity.
  The hero lives eternally, but he does not realize that eternity either.
The genre originated in the late 19th century with the publication of William Morris' book The Well at the End of the World, which flourished between 1954 and 1956 when John Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings was published.
 The book was a great success, և after that different authors became interested in this genre.
  Many of the most popular books in America and England today are fantasy.
 Joan Rowling's "Harry Potter", Stephanie Meyer's "Twilight", Melissa de Cruz "The Bosham Family" - other books of this genre are among the bestsellers in bookstores.
  In addition to literature, the genre is very popular in cinematography. Many films are made based on books.
 All the above-mentioned books have films of the same name, which are also in great demand.
Fantasy is widespread not only in the United States and England, but also in different countries.
 An attempt was made to write such a book in Armenia as well. 2010 Anina's "Fian" was published.
One of the best books of the genre is Stephanie Meyer's four-volume novel "Twilight", whose books "Twilight", "New Moon", "Sunset", "Sunrise" were published in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, respectively. և sold 9.5 million copies in the US և 3 million in the UK.
The book won various awards, and the author was named the best writer of the year.
In accordance with the laws of the genre, here too the author brings real life to the mythical heroes. The characters in the song are vampires and werewolves.
The main works of the fantasy genre include the myth of twins, which is very popular in the myths of different countries.
 The twins are complementary heroes, but at the same time opposing heroes, depicted as opposite poles.
 There is a clash between them, but one does not kill the other, but unites for the common goal.
 The twins can be close brothers, they can be blood relatives in general.
  The main characters of the "Twilight" novel series Edward Cullen Ջ Jacob Black are twin heroes.
Ս. In his book "Armenian Mythology", Harutyunyan singles out seven motives of the twin myth, which mainly correspond to the "Edward" and "Jacobic characters".
1 According to those seven points, let us present the Armenian epic Sanasar and Baghdasar 2, the Sumerian epic Gilgamesh and Enkidu 3 Էդ Edward and Jacob of "Twilight" 4.
1. The wonderful (divine, royal) origin or birth of twins. A) The mother of Sanasar և's brother gets pregnant from holy water or a pair of wheat given by the Catholicos, from which the heroes are born.
b) If Sanasar դ Baghdasar are twins, then Gilgamesh և Enkidu are born at different times և not from the same parents.
  Gilgamesh is of royal and divine descent, he is two-thirds immortal and one-third mortal.
 Enkidu was created by the gods from their saliva and clay.
c) Edward was born an ordinary person, but later became a vampire, gaining magical abilities.
 Jacob is a werewolf by birth, magic is in his blood, but he raised his head only after meeting Edward, that is, the wonderful origin of the birth is connected not with the day of their birth, but with the transformation that took place after the collision.
2. Contrast of characters. A) Sanasar is born from a handful of water, Baghdasar - half.
  Sanasar is stronger and stronger than his brother.
b) Gilgamesh tortures people, commits many bad deeds, is guilty.
 Enkidun is born to fight against him, at first he does not even admit his guilt.
c) Edward embodies ice, Jacob embodies fire.
 They oppose each other with their carnal beings - vampire վ werewolf.
  These two supernatural beings are in an eternal struggle against each other.
3. Contradiction between parents և twins ա a) Sanasar և Baghdasar's father (father) wants to kill his sons or idols.
 In some stories the sons kill the father (the father).
b) The opposite picture is in "Gilgamesh". There is no contradiction.
 Enkidu has no parents, and Gilgamesh takes him to his mother, asking him to accept her as his own son.
 With their mother's blessing, they become brothers.
c) Vampires and werewolves were forbidden to love mortals, but both heroes are opposed to their parents; they love the same girl, Isabella Swan.
4. Escape - persecution from the homeland, home. A) Sanasar դ Baghdasar flee from the homeland, persecuted by his father և in a foreign country
b) Gilgamesh և Enkidu is not persecuted or expelled, they just set out for a foreign land to kill the patron deity of the forest, Khumbaba.
c) Trying to escape Bella's forbidden love, both heroes leave the country.
  Jacob wanders in other countries in the form of a wolf, and Edward walks almost all over the planet.
5. Controversy between the twins ա a) The brothers argue and fight over a letter from a foreign girl to Sanasar, a controversy arises.
1 See Harutyunyan S., Armenian Mythology, Beirut, 2000, pp. 341-349.
2 See "David of Sassoun", Yerevan, 1961.
3 See Poetry of the Old East, Yerevan, 1982, pp. 101-169.
4 See Meyer St., Twilight, New York, 2005.
b) Enkidu was created to fight Gilgamesh, the controversy has existed since birth.
  There is no clash between them, but Gilgamesh dreams of losing to Enkidu, after which he seeks to befriend him.
c) The controversy between Edward and Jacob is hidden in their essence, but it escalates into enmity when they both fall in love with the same girl.
 A love triangle is created, which, by the way, is typical of many works of the fantasy genre.
6. Reconciliation. A) Sanasar և Baghdasar is reconciled by his mother.
b) Gilgamesh և Enkidu is reconciled by Gilgamesh's mother, accepting Enkidu as his own son.
c) The reconciliation of Edward ք Jacob takes place after Edward երեխայի Bella's child, Renesmeitsnund, who becomes the edge of their reconciliation և friendship.
7. Establishment of a new order (space, social). A) Sanasar և Baghdasar settled in Sassoon, founded Sasna Fortress, the city, their powerful dynasty, laid the foundation for the ruling dynasties of the Artsrunis and Gnuni 1.
b) Gilgamesh և Enkidu is built, their city is built, Khumbaba is killed.
c) Edward Ջ Jacob eliminates the eternal enmity between vampires և werewolves,, begins friendship.
Ս. The seven motives mentioned by Harutyunyan correspond to the myths of the twins in the works of the fantasy genre: "Vampire Academy", "Vampire Diaries", "The Supernatural", "The Bosham Family", etc.
Werewolf Jacob Black is from the Quilt tribe of Native Americans.
  In fact, even today these people consider themselves descended from wolves, they believe in the wolf totem.
They accept the wolf as a brother and severely punish those who want to kill that sacred creature.
  In "Twilight" the author presents the different myths of that race, bringing them to real life.
  According to one of these myths, werewolves were ordinary people, but they acquired magical abilities to save and protect the life of their race.
  At first, magic turned them into warrior-souls.
  During the enemy attack, the souls of the warriors leave the bodies, unite with nature, protect their wives and children, their country.
  They become one with nature and wildlife and win.
 Man is transformed to be saved or to save his beloved.
 There are similar examples of transfiguration in Armenian myths, when girls, wanting to escape a forced marriage, asked God to make them a stone, a plant or a bird2.
 Let us remember the myth of Daphne, who becomes a tree, rejecting the love of the god Apollo 3.
In the continuation of the myth of warrior-souls, the chief of the Quilts, Takha-Akin, loses his body due to the betrayal of one of his relatives, and his soul begins to wander, deprived of even the opportunity to die.
  After wandering in indefinite time, the soul loses all human features and turns into a wind.
 One day that wind-soul sees the sufferings of its race և, motivated by the great desire to help him, unites with the wolf, gets two essences - man and wolf.
 Man is united with nature, it is considered a heavenly gift, a divine grace.
  Later this talent is passed down from generation to generation, the werewolves become the defenders and guardians of their country4.
The myth of the werewolf also exists in Armenian mythology.
  Ս. Harutyunyan mentions in his book "Armenian Mythology" that werewolves are mainly women.
 They are human in the morning, at night they are wolves, they eat their own children in the form of wolves, they destroy graves and devour corpses.
 In Armenian mythology, the essence of the werewolf is a celestial curse, due to which the skin of a predator descends on a person from the sky, the latter is transformed.
 The curse works only at night, and during the day it falls on the fur 5.
Let's compare the Armenian myths of the werewolf with the myths of the Indians.
  In the first, the essence of the werewolf is a heavenly punishment, it harms people, threatens the lives of children, and in the second, it saves և protects life, is considered a blessing.
1 See Movses Khorenatsi, Armenian History, Yerevan, 1990, pp. 45-46.
2 See Harutyunyan S., The Old Armenian Novel World, Yerevan, 1987, pp. 30-34.
3 See Myths of Encyclopedia, Moscow, 2005, p. 18.
4 See Meyer St., Eclipse, New York, 2007, p. 239-267.
5 See Harutyunyan S., Armenian Mythology, 2000, pp. 281-286.
In the myths of the Quilts, the essence of the werewolf is in the blood of men և eternal, the werewolf can be transformed at any time, and in Armenian myths the curse is given only for seven years, the man changes his essence only at night, regardless of his will.
  At the age of seven, the fur burns.
  Here we encounter another difference. In the myths of the Quilts, the werewolf symbolizes fire, warmth, and in Armenian, avoiding fire.
 If his skin burns, the curse will disappear.
The common essence of a human-wolf is also expressed in the image of Gayl Vahan, the commander of the Armenian novel "War of Taron".
  The people endowed their hero with superhuman strength, which in the fight against the Persians reaches even extreme cruelty, when the latter cuts the noses of the enemy soldiers and puts them in a machete or takes out the liver of General Mihran and puts it in his mouth.
Like the werewolves of the Quilts, Gayl Vahan also fights for his country, his national number.
  He is strong, he has many traits typical of a wolf, which is why the Armenian people named him Wolf.
  With cunning and cleverness he defends his country, cruelly beats and tortures all those who endanger it.
Like a real wolf, Vahan the Wolf does not jump, does not run away, does not make peace with "those born from the pigs that eat garbage", but fights and defeats them1.
The essence of the predator expressed in the image of Wolf Vahan is not considered a curse, but a powerful one that protects the country.
Another quilt myth, told in the book Twilight, is about the flood: "There are many legends, some telling how during the flood the ancient quilts (as the tribe called it) tied their canoes to the tallest pines to save their children. "Noah."
2 The myth of the global flood is found in the folklore of various peoples.
Like the biblical story of Noah, the Sumerian "Gilgamesh" also tells of Utnapishti, the son of UbarTutu, who, on the advice of the goddess Lusak Ea, builds a ship "Saved from the Flood" (pp. 156-162).
The myth of the world flood is found in Greek mythology.
  Thunderstorm is angry with the atrocities committed by the people of the Copper Age and decides to destroy the whole world and flood it with water.
 Only Prometheus' son, D'Kalion, and his wife, Pyrra, survive in a huge box, swimming in the waves for nine days and nine nights.
This myth is common among many peoples.
 Some are like the story of Noah, others are not, but they all have common motives: an angry god, a flood covering the earth, a ship, or a wooden means of salvation — an alliance between God and the saved in the end.
Vampires play a big role in the "Twilight" novel series.
  Each of them is endowed with supernatural, magical power, which makes it look like a monster of Greek or Armenian mythology.
At the center of the novel is the Cullen family of vampires, which parallels the family of the gods of Olympus.
The father of the family is Carlisle Cullen, who parallels the Greek Z-Z, the Armenian Aramazd.
  In addition to being the father of all, being the head of the family, he is endowed with the gift of creation.
 He created his family, made his wife and adopted children vampires (remember, the life of vampires does not start from birth, but from the day of transformation).
Esme Cullen is the mother of the family.
  Her unique essence is to be a mother, to keep her family and home.
  She is the sponsor of the family, which parallels the Greek Hera and the Armenian Anahit.
Emmet Cullen is Ares (Vahagn), who has a powerful force, loves to fight, enjoys the battles of others, embodies the force.
 As in mythology, here he is married to Rosalie (Aphrodite, Astghik), who is portrayed as the most beautiful creature in the world.
Edward Cullen is Apollo.
 He illuminates everything, reads the thoughts of others like Apollo, guesses.
 Edward replaced Apollo's guitar with a piano, captivating and captivating everyone with its beautiful sounds.
1 Harutyunyan S., The Armenian Ancient Novel World, Yerevan, 1987, p. 175.
2 Meyer St., Twilight, p. 124.
3 See! Kun N., Legends and Myths of Ancient Greece, Yerevan, 1979, pp. 101-102.
Alice Cullen is the sister of Apollo Artemis, who loves her brother and is always by his side, helping and supporting him, gentle and tender, but at the same time a strong fighter, a lover of hunting.
Jasper Hale is Hercules.
  He joined the family late, before that he went through many trials and difficulties.
  These trials coincide with the twelve feats of Hercules, which only after overcoming him manages to achieve immortality - Olympus, like Jasper - the Cullen family.
In addition to the Cullens, there are other vampires who have various magical powers that are associated with this or that deity.
  One of them emits lightning with its body, blasts, the other is able to change the environment, read thoughts, see the future, control the four elements, and so on.
Stephanie Meyer's "Twilight" novel series is rich in mythological, generally folklore elements, which have close similarities with Armenian and world mythology.
Astghik SoghoyanFANGE GENERATION. MYTHICAL ELEMENTS STEPHANN MAYER'S "TWILIGHT" STORY Keywords: fantasy, folklore, "Twilight", vampire, twin myth, werewolf, Wolf Vahan, World Flood, Greek Pantheon
.
