ANTHONY DE SAINT EXUPERI'S "LITTLE PRINCE" TRANSLATION AND MEDIATOR TRANSLATIONS French writer, poet և professional pilot.
  His works are characterized by the absence of negative heroes in general.
  After all, he is the hero of his literature, because he speaks about himself in all his works.
The characters in Exupery's works are modern people who have interesting character traits.
 They are outwardly modest, they are people of duty and responsibility, who never present themselves as heroes.
 Exupery was given worldwide fame by the philosophical tale "The Little Prince".
The writer's style is really very poetic, this is the reason why the prose text is perceived as a poem, as a prayer.
 Antoine de Saint-Exupery reveals the personality of his narrator, the pilot, who wants to preserve his childish soul.
 Indeed, the style of the fairy tale is at first glance very "simple" և "childish" (in a positive sense).
The fairy tale "The Little Prince" has been translated into more than 250 languages, including the Braille alphabet for the blind.
The book has also been translated into Armenian, more than once.
 Saghatel Harutyunyan translated it into Armenian for the first time through the mediation of Anyr Russian [1].
Later, Nvard Vardanyan [2], Samvel Gasparyan [3] անմիջապես others translated directly from the original.
The material of the study of this work is the translations of Nvard Vardanyan, Nora Gali (in Russian) և Saghatel Harutyunyan (in some cases we will compare it with the translation of S. Gasparyan).
To translate, you need to find and select the appropriate phrases (words, phrases, grammatical structures) in the translating language.
  The translation process presupposes the establishment of a conscious connection between the "language of the original language" [4].
  It is not always possible to translate a work directly from the original.
  In cases where no one is fluent in the language of the original, they seek the help of an intermediary language and translate it.
 Some of the Armenian translations were made not directly from the original, but from Russian.
 Naturally, the translations made through Russian mediate more away from the original, deviate from the author's style, the way of depiction.
The fairy tale "The Little Prince" was translated into Armenian for the first time through Russian, despite the fact that there were many French translators.
  It was later translated directly from French.
Let us now turn to the examination of direct և mediated translations of the tale.
 In the title of the fairy tale, "Le petit prince", the word prince means "prince", "prince".
 Russian translator Nora Gal chose the word prince, avoiding the word prince, which means prince.
  Here, the choice of the title of the translation from the Russian to Armenian is interesting: the word prince instead of the word prince, because the word prince does not mean prince.
 One can assume that Saghatel Harutyunyan took into account the fact that he is from the noble family in Exuperins, he is a prince.
 And since Exupery himself is hidden in the image of the Little Prince, it would be wrong to attribute the title of prince to him.
Words in different languages ​​often do not match in meaning.
 Many words in French have a wide meaning, which includes the meaning of a series of Armenian words.
 In such a case, during the translation it is necessary to specify the meaning of the word, for that purpose it is necessary to penetrate deeply into the text, to understand the situation.
 For example, the word grandiose means magnificent, luxurious, glorious, impressive, majestic. The word in the middle of the given sentence complements the word picture. [5]
 In this case, the translator must choose a word from the series of synonyms that corresponds as much as possible to the original, «be" foreign "to Armenian.
 Let's see how the translators behaved. Why aren't there as many glorious pictures in this book as there are in the baobabs? [2]
baobabami? [6] (NG).
You may ask if there is another influential painter like Baobabs in this book [1] (S. H.).
Ն. Vardanyan chose the glorious determinant for the word picture, which, we think, is not the right word in this case.
 From the synonymous series he could use impressive, influential, adjectives, or even a successful derby.
The root of the French word grandiose is the adjective grand / e, which means big.
 Taking into account this etymology, we consider it necessary to refer to another direct translation of the fairy tale (translator: S. Gasparyan). Maybe you ask yourself a question. In this book, apart from the picture of the baobab, why there are no other large pictures [3] (SG).
Thus, S. Gasparyan used the translation of the word root, choosing the major determinant for the word picture.
 Given the simplicity of Exupery's writing style, we believe that this latter version is closer to the general text than the glorious adjective.
In the Russian version, the word adjective - influential, impressive, is a large adjective, և the translator, of course, translated it just like that - influential.
Let's look at another example: Ça ne fait rien, c'est tellement petit, chez moi! (358).
Nothing, the place where I live is very small (22) (NV) I's nothing, I only see small places (272) (NG).
It is not terrible, my place is very small (11) (S. H.).
In French, the conjunction chez moi is used to mean my home, my location.
 In direct translation, the translator used the descriptive method, that is, he explained what the connection meant, avoiding the literal translation.
  Russian is similar to French in this respect. у меня structure is also common in Russian ունի has frequent use.
 However, in indirect translation S. Harutyunyan turned to the method of literal translation, using my Russian studies, which is not a correct structure for our language, but "thanks" to the translators, it has already gained wide use.
When talking about misinterpretations from Russian studies ազդեց under the influence of Russian, we can not fail to refer to the phrase un astronome turc, which means Turkish astronomer. Vardanyan.
 In Russian, its equivalent is the Turkish astronomer.
 However, it is not clear how S. Harutyunyan translated it by a Turkish astronomer, not noticing the obvious mistake.
Je suis seriux, moi, je suis pricis (374).
I am a serious person.
 I am an accurate person (51) (NV).
Я человек серьёзный, ю люблю точность (292) (N. G.).
I am a serious person, I like everything to be accurate (32) (S. H.).
The adjective Précis means right, accurate, clear, և if we can say je suis précis in French, then in Armenian the phrase I am an accurate person is not correct.
 The word accurate in Armenian is used only with inanimate objects, such as exact science, accurate data.
 The translator could write: I love the truth by translating adjectives into nouns.
 This is exactly what the other translator, S., did. Gasparyan, only chose the word clarity instead of the word truth. I am a serious person.
 I like clarity (62) (SG).
The second time it was, then one by one, by a rheumatic crisis (374).
In this part, one of the heroes of the fairy tale, the entrepreneur, tells the little prince that he has been disturbed three times in fifty-four years.
The first time was caused by the May beetle, the second time by arthropod, and the third by the Little Prince.
The second time was eleven years ago due to the aggravation of arthritis (50) (NV).
(291) (N. G.).
The second time, eleven years ago, I had a rheumatic attack from a sedentary life (31) (S. H.).
Une crise de rhumatisme - Arthritis In the literal translation, instead of the word seizure, the noun is sharpened, which is not a significant change, it does not cause any distortion of meaning.
The interpreter used the rheumatic loan in the mediation, the choice of which is conditioned by the time of translation (1967). Many borrowings from Russians were made at that time, despite the fact that the Armenian equivalents of some words were fixed in dictionaries.
  Let's bring another example: When you have an idea of ​​the premiere, you will get the money.
 elle et à toi (375).
When you first come up with an idea, you give it a patent, then it's yours (52) (NV).
If you first come to the goal like a cuckoo, you will not get a patent.
What is yours? (32) (N. G.).
If for the first time a thought arises in your head, you take a patent for it և it is yours (32) (S. H.).
Let's talk about breveter-licensing, licensing, certificate talba translations.
 Ն. Vardanyan has chosen to patent the adverb, in the Russian version we see the adjective братբ патент, in the mediated translation, to take a patent.
  In this example, S. Harutyunyan used the word patent, which has the same reasoning that we mentioned for the word rheumatism.
Ir We would like to talk about the translation of the phrase avo in this sentence avoir une idée մի. In the direct translation it is chosen to conceive the adjacent verb, in the mediated one - to conceive.
 We consider it necessary to present S. on this occasion. Gasparyan's version: If you first invent an invention, you are given a patent for it, it is your invention (64).
As we can see, the word thought has been replaced by the word invention, probably considering that they grant a patent not for ordinary thought but for invention.
and you treat children! (359).
"And when they want a lamb, it is a proof of existence", if you say so, they will shrug their shoulders and put you in the place of a child (24) (NV).
(NG).
"And whoever wants to have a lamb, he has definitely existed."
 If you say so, they will only shrug their shoulders and look at you as they would look at an ignorant child (12) (S. H.).
In the original, Exupery does not emphasize at all what kind of child they should place.
 Being a child does not mean being misunderstood or ignorant.
 Therefore, in this case, we do not agree with the addition of the word "self-sufficient" by Nora Gal, from which, naturally, the mediated translation has suffered.
In the next example that we will present, the mediated translation շ deviated from the original, but this time it is not because of Russian. Et qui avait besoin d'un ami i (359-60).
"It happens, it doesn't happen, there is a little prince, he lived on a planet a little bigger than him էր he really wanted to have a friend (" (24) (NV).
его самого, и ему очень не хватоло друга »(274) (N. G.).
"There was a handsome prince.
 He lived on a planet that was a little bigger than him, սրտ he had no close friends… ”(13) (S. H.).
The French phrase qui avait besoin d'un ami means he needed a friend.
 Nora Gaul's translation corresponds to French in this sense, and S. According to Harutyunyan, he did not have a close friend, he mentions that the little prince did not have a close friend, but he did not express the idea that he needed a friend, he wanted to have a friend.
It is incomprehensible to translate the decisive one (Маленький (принц) beautiful (prince).
Thus, all the examples prove that N. For the most part, Vardanyan was able to make the right choice, to preserve the images created by the author, and Nora Gal unnecessarily deviated from the original, changed it, and in some cases expressed her attitude.
 That is why the mediated translation also suffered.
As we have already mentioned, the language of Exupery is clear, specific, և translators are required to maintain its writing style as much as possible.
 Every language has a system of imagery, it is natural that it is not possible, even verbal translation is not encouraged, because in many cases semantic inaccuracies can arise because of it.
  However, we will bring examples from the translations of "The Little Prince", when the translator (mostly NoraGal) used unnecessary additions, artificially "growing" the text, in some cases quite departing from the author's style.
raconter ces souvenirs (360).
I would not like my book to be accepted by the way.
 I feel great pain when I remember the Little Prince (24) (NV).
It is painful to remember and it is not easy for me to talk about it (274) (N. G.).
And I do not want everyone to read my book just for fun.
My heart breaks when I remember my little friend և It is not easy for me to tell about him (13) (S. H.).
  If we try to translate the mentioned sentence literally, it will look something like this. I feel great pain when telling those memories.
It is not mentioned in the original that the author feels great pain when he remembers the Little Prince, although it is already clear from the context that the memories about him cause pain.
  The Russian version could also look like this: My dear patient told me about these memories. As we can see, the translator translated the noun memories into a verb by making a verb-partial transition.
 We notice the same, N. In Vardanyan's translation.
 Ս. In his translation, Harutyunyan translated the phrase лшком больно вспоминать. My heart breaks when I remember my little friend with a sentence.
  First of all, it should be mentioned that he used the phrase to crush the heart, which, in fact, is not a bad choice.
 Surprisingly, neither in the original nor in Russian is the phrase Little Prince (or Little Friend) found, but it has appeared in Armenian ուղ 'direct, և' mediated translations.
The little prince, in spite of his beauty, soon became suspicious (37) (NV).
but soon suspicion awoke in his soul (282) (N. G.).
That the little prince loved the beautiful flower էր was very happy to serve him, but soon his heart became doubtful (22) (S. H.).
The attitude of the translator was again expressed in the Russian translation. First, Exupery did not use the word flower in this sentence, but replaced it with the word love, և then in any passage preceding or following it, the author does not describe the flower with the adjectives belle or magnifique.
 The translator used the adjective beautiful for the flower, which in the mediated translation was expressed with a wonderful determinant.
  And this is not the only example that Nora Gal (later Հարություն S. Harutyunyan) added that decisive part.
 In all the passages when it comes to the flower, there is a wonderful wonderful adjective.
Naturally, the interventions of the translators are not limited to the "Little Prince"'s helicopter և additions in indirect translations սակայն, but let us be satisfied with the examples given in this work.
Each language has its own grammatical structure, հաճախ it is often impossible to express the grammatical realities of the original language in the translated language.
 When translating, inevitable transitions, transformations, etc.
 Grammatical substitutions are used as often in translation as word substitutions.
The same meaning can be expressed in words belonging to different parts of speech.
 The four main parts of a word - noun, verb, adjective - can replace each other without any semantic loss.
 For example: La preuve que le petit prince a existé… (359).
The proof of the existence of the little prince is… (24) (NV).
(NG).
Here is proof that the Little Prince really was… (12) (S. H.).
Exister (exist, be) but in the first version was replaced by the noun ego, which held the position of the giver, supplementing the word proof.
 There was no idiomatic transition in Russian, the verb remained a verb, and in the mediated translation it is again expressed by a verb (to be).
Here we pay attention to the number of the noun la preuve - proof.
 As we can see, it is used in a unique number in the original, in Russian it has become plural - evidence, and in the Armenian translation from Russian - evidence.
When talking about the grammatical features of the translation, we should consider the use of pronouns in the role of subject (in some cases, supplements).
 According to the general linguistic classification, languages ​​are divided into 3 categories: separate, adjoining, oblique.
 Modern Armenian is an adjoining language, but it has some elements of inflection (especially in the case of the verb part) [7].
 The grammatical order of the Armenian verb (weather, time, number, face) is expressed either by the corresponding ending of the conjugation, or by the auxiliary.
 It is often superfluous to write every time the subject is pronounced with a pronoun.
  In French, the grammatical order of the face does not express the inflected verb in some cases, therefore, it is necessary to write the subject next to each verb.
 In Russian, the picture is a little different. If the present tense verb has the corresponding endings for each person (пишу, пишешь, пишет (although the gender is not expressed in the third person as well), пишем, пишете, пишут), then the past tense verb has -л / ла (писал /) for three unique faces писала), for three plural faces: -ли (писали) endings.
 In other words, we are obliged to write a subject so that there is no confusion.
It goes without saying that the translator must take into account these features of the language, write or omit pronouns in the right places.
 Let us bring an example from the translations of "The Little Prince", where one of the Armenian renewers managed to avoid the repetition of pronouns, the other did not.
amélioré mon opinion (354).
And so, throughout my life, I met many serious people.
  I lived in the environment of adults for a very long time, they got in touch with them, but my opinion did not change much (14) (NV).
luche (268) (N. G.).
I have met many serious people in my life.
 I have lived a lot as an adult.
 I have seen them very closely, but that did not force me to have a greater opinion of them (6) (S. H.).
In the given example we notice that N. When translating from French, Vardanyan took into account the differences between the verb systems of the two languages.
And if in French it is obligatory to underline next to each footnote, as in Russian, then in Armenian everything is not needed.
 In this example, we see one direct translation in front of the three subordinates used, and again three in the mediated one.
There are many uses for the adjective pronoun.
In direct translation, in many cases, the translator used reciprocal clauses instead of the pronoun, for example, mon livre - my book, mes ami - my relatives Gyle, and in the intermediate S. Harutyunyan did not use that feature of Armenian և in all cases he wrote the pronouns acting as the giver, such as my book - my book, my friends - my relatives, etc.
 In this section we will examine a grammatical feature - millions of etiquettes, which suffix for those who are heureux when they are regard (365).
If one loves a flower, which is the only one among a million, a million stars, that is enough to make him feel happy… (34) (NV).
million star, - enough of that.
 (280) (NG) If you love a flower, the only one whose name is not on any of the millions of flowers, that is enough.
 You look at the sky and feel happy (20) (S. H.).
In the original, the subject is expressed by the indefinite pronoun quelqu'un, which means someone, someone.
 One of the translators again used an indefinite pronoun - one, and Nora Gal turned it into a second-person subordinate structure (еслилюбишь… смотришь։).
  However, it is not a secret that the second person sometimes does not specify the perpetrator, but performs a general function in both Russian and Armenian.
 And there are proverbs in the second person in Russian, հայերեն in Armenian.
 Let's remember one example from each language: Поспешишь - людей насмешишь (Measure ten, cut one).
Referring to our example, let us mention that the Russian ևs has the equivalent of the indefinite pronoun quelqu'un - кто-то.
 Despite that, the translator preferred to change the structure to express the uncertainty in another way.
In general, it can be said that in some cases the transformations made by the translators (both grammatical and syntactic) are justified, taking into account the grammatical differences of the languages.
  However, there were cases when the translator could not use the grammatical features և even the advantages of his language correctly.
LITERATURE [1] Saint-Exupery A., The Little Prince, Yerevan, "Hayastan", 1967, p.
[2] Saint-Exupery A., The Little Prince, Yerevan, Antares, 2011, p. 28.
[3] Saint-Exupery A., The Little Prince, Yerevan, Areg, 2015, p. 28.
[7] Aghayan Ed., Fundamentals of Linguistics, YSU Publishing House, 1987.
Chagharyan Lusineantoine Antoine de Saint-Exupery's "LITTLE PRINCE" TRANSLATION AND MEDIATOR TRANSLATIONS Keywords: Exupery, "Little Prince", direct translation
.
