GEORGIA'S POLITICAL SITUATION IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE 18TH CENTURY. MAIN CHALLENGES IN THE CONTEXT OF GEORGIAN-RUSSIAN RELATIONS.
 1722-23 The Russian Caspian invasion was one of the first actions to strengthen Russia's position in the East and occupy the coastal areas.
  The Caspian region could become a source of raw materials for tsarist Russia, first in terms of silk, then in terms of providing large incomes.
  The annexation of the Caspian regions would allow Russia to expand trade ties in the East.
  Russia aimed to establish much stronger trade ties with Iran, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and India, to become a mediator in the transit trade between the East and Europe.
At the end of the 17th century, the Safavids were experiencing an economic and political crisis, and revolts of Afghan tribes broke out.
  Taking into account the unrest that started in Iran Վ Shah's desire to rely on the Georgian army, Vakhtang in 1712. He arrived in Iran to get permission to establish himself on the Georgian throne.
  Vakhtang seeks liberation in 1632. from the demand imposed on Georgian rulers to convert to Islam.
 1715 Artem Volinsky was appointed Russian Ambassador to Iran - the implementation of the Russian-Georgian rapprochement program gradually began.
 Rusbanagan was instructed to contact Vakhtang VI.
 Shadow negotiations began between his "Volinsky", as a result of which a secret Russian-Georgian agreement was signed.
  However, not all members of the Royal Council of Kartli (Darbaz) agreed that a favorable condition had been created for the liberation of Georgia.
 They were concerned and expressed the opinion that before the arrival of the Russian troops, the enemies of Georgia could take advantage of this situation and cause great damage to the country.
Nevertheless, Vakhtang, his comrades-in-arms determined to liberate Georgia, continued to negotiate secretly with Peter the Great.
1722 The Caspian invasion of Emperor Peter the Great began.
  According to the preliminary agreement, in 1722 In August 1945, the Georgian General Staff of Vakhtang VI և Armenian troops gathered in Gandzak to carry out the order of Peter I. to enter Shirvan և to unite with the Russian allied troops.
  When the Russians arrived in Derbent, the Russian emperor, as it is known, suddenly stopped the invasion and returned to Astrakhan, fearing to aggravate the Russian-Turkish relations.
 Peter wanted Vakhtang VI to mediate the negotiations between Russia and Iran.
 1722 In September 1945, Peter I sent his personal envoy to Georgia, Ivan Tolstoy, on a mission to stay with Vakhtang VI permanently.
  The Iranian side, alas, no longer trusted the Georgian king.
 By the order of the Shah, Vakhtang VI was deprived of all power.
The destructive invasions of the Afghans, which brought the Safavid state to the brink of collapse, attracted the attention of Ottoman Turkey.
  The Ottoman government found the opportunity to seize the whole of the Caucasus Այս to occupy Persia in order to carry out its long-standing intentions.
 In June 1723, Turkish troops invaded Tbilisi.
  In this fateful situation, Vakhtang VI asked Peter I to immediately send Russian troops to Georgia.
 However, in response to the Georgian ruler's request, it was impossible to send reinforcements to Georgia until they were fortified on the shores of the Caspian Sea and occupied Baku.
By conquering Eastern Georgia, the Turks aimed to make Kartli և Kakheti their pasha.
 The 12-year Turkish yoke (1723-35, Ottoman Empire) had a negative impact on the economic and political life of Georgia.
  1725-1726 Russia's attitude towards Georgia changed.
 Russia again avoided open negotiations with the rulers of the latter.
 The reason is 1724. This was the Russian-Turkish agreement signed in Constantinople on July 12, 1945, according to which Turkey recognized the Caspian regions as a zone of Russian influence, as it refused to occupy Iran completely.
 Russia, in turn, recognized Turkey's supremacy in Georgia and in Armenia, in northwestern Iran.
 If Russia avoided relations with the Georgians, Vakhtang և not only did not deny the alliance, but also left for Russia.
 During the secret interrogations, it turned out that the Russian court was trying to use Vakhtang to normalize its relations with Iranish Tahmasp.
  For that purpose in 1726. In August 1945, Vakhtang arrived in Astrakhan.
 Correspondence was soon established between his "interest".
 Kuch-Isfahan, located in Rashtimot, was chosen as the meeting place.
  The Georgian king left for Gillan to negotiate with Tahmasb.
  Vakhtang seeks to make the Georgian issue the subject of discussion.
 The issues of Georgia's liberation from the Turkish yoke and Vakhtang's return of Kartli to the throne were especially raised.
  However, the negotiations failed without a positive result [2].
  The Russian side considered it more advantageous to sign an agreement with the Afghan leader Ashraf, who was in fact the Iranian ruler.
  1728 Russia moderated its ambitions with the signed agreement.
 Ashraf, however, recognized Russia's rights to the coastal areas from Derbent to Rasht.
 1729 In November 1945, General Nadir defeated Ashraf near Isfahan.
  1730 The Afghans were finally expelled from Iran.
  1730 In January, Anna Ivanovna ascended the throne in Russia.
 His government is not interested in the Caspian territories, from the beginning Jet aimed to return those territories to Iran.
 1730 In October, Anna Ivanovna informed Tahmasp about her decision. to make a treaty with him ջ to cede the Caspian territories to the Kura River.
 1732 In Rasht, Russian envoys Lashov և Shafirov signed an agreement, according to which Gillan was returned to Iran on the condition of not giving in to another state.
  The Russian side, however, again did not support Vakhtang.
  As a result, it lost its domains.
The Russians, in fact, despite the efforts of the peoples of the region, did not take decisive steps to free themselves from the yoke of the Turkish conquerors.
Instead, they sought to strengthen Russia's position on the Caspian Sea coast near the Caucasus, but nevertheless failed to dominate those territories.
The final Russian-Iranian treaty was signed in 1735. March 10 in Gandzak [5].
 Russia returned all the Caspian territories to Iran.
  Iran, which recognized Russia as an eternal friend, undertook not to cede those territories to any other state.
 The Iranian side promised not to sign a separate agreement with Turkey.
 In other words, Russia's goal was to win over Iran and to form an alliance against the Turks.
 That is why he gave up his position in the Ice Caucasus.
  In Eastern Georgia, then, the Turkish conquerors were replaced by the Iranians.
 During Nadir's time in their country in 1735-47. The re-establishment of Iranian rule was called the Ghzlbashoba period by the Georgians.
 1735 In May 1945, Vakhtang settled in Astrakhan and informed Anna Ivanovna that he would not travel to Iran for further negotiations.
 He instructed his son Bakar to deal with Georgian affairs.
 Vakhtang died in 1737.
1736 Nadir Shah ascended the throne of Iran.
  He aimed to become the only ruling power in the Caucasus և 1741-42. invaded Dagestan.
  However, the mountaineers massacred most of Nadir's army [6, 7].
 Nadir had to change his attitude towards Georgia.
  He started supporting Kartli Governor Teymuraz and made some concessions.
  1744 Teimuraz proclaimed himself king of Kartli and Heraclius of Kakheti.
 Nadri allowed Teimuraz II to be crowned with a Christian rite in the Svetitskhovel Cathedral.
 It was the first case in 1632. then.
 Teimuraz reaffirmed the supremacy of Kartli in Lori-Tashir, which had conquered the nomadic Borchali tribe during the reign of Shah Abbas in the 17th century.
Thus, in the 20s of the 18th century. Georgian ruler Vakhtang VI made a fatal step. An alliance was formed with Russia.
  Both Turkey and Iran, which were hostile, took counter-measures, obstructing any of Vakhtang's foreign policy initiatives and taking a brutal stance on Georgia.
 He hoped to get rid of the Turkish-Iranian invaders with Russia, considering it the most real ally.
 However, these illusions did not come true. Vakhtang's foreign policy failed because he was a believer, blindly trusting all the false promises of Russia.
Despite repeated rejections and unsuccessful negotiations, Vakhtang did not change his orientation and foreign policy vector.
  Russian Empire, 1722 The Caspian invasion was conditioned by Russia's military-political-economic interests.
  Therefore, Russia considered its main goal not to liberate Georgia, but to establish the influence of its own sovereignty.
  Georgia was only an attachment and a means of support for the implementation of those programs.
 Russia would never clash with its adversaries, Turkey or Iran, without any interest in fighting for the liberation of the Georgian people.
  Nevertheless, the Georgians could not learn the right political lessons from the events that took place in the given historical stage, which was destructive for the Georgian statehood.
LITERATURE [3] Martirosyan V. M., The Cooperation of the Armenian-Georgian Peoples in the Liberation Struggle (1920s of the XVIII Century), Yerevan, 1971, pp. 92-3, 132.
Caucasus Politics Russia-Journal of the Adygea University, Series 1.
 Region.
  философия, история, социология, юриспруденция, политология, культуро Sargsyan TatevikVRASTANI political situation in the 18 th century KESIN.HIMNAKAN challenges GEORGIA-RUSAKANHARABERUTYUNNERI HAMATEKSTUMBanali words, Caspian raid, Vakhtang VI, pro-Russian, Russian-Georgian relations, osmaloba, ghzlbashoba.
