WHEN IN ANOTHER COURT OR ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL, THERE IS A JURISDICTION BETWEEN THE SAME SUBJECT MATTER OF THE SAME SUBJECT AND ON THE SAME REASONS.
 "On the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms" 1950 Article 6 of the European Convention (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) declares the right to a fair trial and its guarantees.
 At the same time, although this article does not explicitly provide for the right to a court ("right of trial or tribunal" 1), the European Court of Human Rights has concluded in a number of judgments that Article 6 of the Convention guarantees to all their civil rights and freedoms. the right to apply, which must be guaranteed by the States which have ratified the Convention, as an integral part of the right to a fair trial, an undeniable guarantee of its realization, one of the most important components of which is the right of access to justice;for the effective implementation of which the Convention imposes an obligation on States Parties to take appropriate measures, while not excluding the possibility of limitations to that right which "pursue legitimate aims and are reasonably proportionate to those pursued" 2.
  These rights are reflected in Articles 18 և 19 of the RA Constitution, and the right to go to court for the protection of civil rights is guaranteed by Article 2 of the RA Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter the RA Civil Procedure Code).
  These legislative provisions have a declaratory nature, respectively, according to the RA 1 Mubrey El., "Cases և Materials. European Convention on Human Rights ", Yerevan, 2010, p. 398, p. 415.
for the branch of civil law.
 They are reinforced by all the legal norms that contain guarantees for the effective implementation of the right to judicial protection.
A statistical study of modern case law shows that lawsuits for the protection of procedural rights, especially the right to a fair trial, are not inferior in quantity to lawsuits for the protection of substantive rights.
  Equally applies to appellate and cassation appeals.
Restrictions on the right to judicial protection of civil rights are related to the judicial institutions rejecting the acceptance of the lawsuit նելու the return of the lawsuit.
  Their bases are exhaustively listed in the RA city. trial Articles 91-92 of the Code, respectively.
 According to the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia, the existence of a case on the same grounds (hereinafter referred to as the same dispute) in the proceedings of the same court or arbitral tribunal on the same grounds (hereinafter referred to as the same dispute) is a basis for both rejecting the claim and returning the claim.
 The question arises, what decision should the court make in this case, to reject the acceptance of the lawsuit or to return it?
  It should be emphasized here that the above two procedural actions have completely different legal implications for the individual's right to judicial protection.
  They restrict the plaintiff's right to go to court to different extent, otherwise these two judicial institutions would not be separated.
The reason for such a follow-up is that the RA city. trial Pursuant to Part 3 of Article 92 of the Code, in case the violations committed in the lawsuit are eliminated and re-submitted to the court within three days, the lawsuit is considered accepted in court on the day of its initial submission.
 Article 91 does not provide for such a possibility, which presupposes that in case of elimination of the circumstances underlying the return, the same claim may be re-submitted to the court, while the grounds for refusal to accept the claim are immutable և cannot be eliminated, unlike the grounds for return.
  Thus, the differentiation of the judicial institutions of rejecting the acceptance of the lawsuit and returning it is conditioned by the nature of the so-called positive-negative preconditions of the right to sue.
  Therefore, it is obvious that the existence of a case on which dispute can not be a basis for "returning the lawsuit" or "rejecting the lawsuit".
 It is noteworthy that the NKR legislator made the same mistake that exists in the RA civil procedure legislation4.
 This case, which is probably the result of a mistake, has never been the subject of discussion; this issue has not been addressed by either the Council of Court Chairmen or the Court of Cassation.
This legislative error may not cause "major damage" to the exercise of the right to a fair trial, but it does not diminish the need to resolve the issue.
The restriction of the right to apply to court on the basis of the existence of a case on the same dispute is conditioned by the need to exclude the possibility of applying to the same court, to ensure the efficiency of the judicial system.
 It is also aimed at ensuring the uniqueness of the court decision, in order to exclude the existence of judicial acts resolving more than one case in the same case.
 What could be the reason for the plaintiff to file a lawsuit against the same defendant in the same arbitral tribunal with the same claim, on the same grounds, after filing a lawsuit or arbitral tribunal again?
  Such circumstances can be both subjective and objective.
  For example, after filing a lawsuit, not being sure that his or her case is within the jurisdiction of that court or arbitral tribunal, he or she files a lawsuit again, or the appellate court overturns the first-instance decision based on the plaintiff's appeal. The plaintiff, for some reason, re-submits the claim to the court of first instance.
The identity of the claim presupposes the simultaneous existence of three conditions: the identity of the parties, ie persons with opposite interests in civil proceedings, the identity of the subject of the claim, ie the substantive legal claim against the defendant, the basis of the claim, ie the circumstances on which G., Civil trial of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2012, p. 249.
4 NKR city. trial Code, Article 81, Part 3, Article 82, Part 4.
The claims are 5.
  In case of change of any of them, the claim can no longer be considered identical to the previously initiated claim.
First of all, it is possible to find out what kind of correspondence the parties consider to be identical.
  A dispute over the same persons is a case if a lawsuit is filed by the same plaintiff (or his legal successor) against the same defendant (or his legal successor) 6.
 In other words, not only the persons, but also their judicial status is the same.
  For example, a divorce lawsuit is filed by the husband in the case where the same lawsuit was filed by the wife.
 The same persons act as opposing parties, but with different procedural statuses.
 If we make the observation from the point of view of the substantive solution of the issue, then such lawsuits should be considered the same, as the examination of both cases presupposes the same legal consequence. With the rejection or satisfaction of the first claim, the outcome of the case with the second claim will be determined, therefore the simultaneous examination of such claims becomes meaningless.
 However, by this logic, the rejection of the acceptance of the lawsuit or the return of the lawsuit is unreasonable, as the subjects and grounds of the lawsuits filed by different plaintiffs cannot be reasonably the same.
Thus, in this case, neither the parties nor the basis and subject matter of the claim are the same, ների the claims of the spouses must be considered in parallel in the absence of other grounds for returning the claim or rejecting its acceptance.
Next it is necessary to find out the identity of the subjects of the present lawsuit և regarding the existing dispute.
  The latter will coincide if the material and legal requirements addressed to the respondent are absolutely the same in their volume, essence and content.
 The substantive material claim is the claim that the plaintiff presents against the defendant, on which the court makes a decision.
 Moreover, the object of the lawsuit must be distinguished from the subject of the lawsuit, the subject to which the material-legal requirement constituting the content of the subject of the lawsuit is addressed 7.
  When the claim in the lawsuit differs in substance from the substantive legal claim on the dispute between the same persons on the same grounds, the identity of the subjects of the lawsuit shall be revealed. 5 Nerkin Hand community of Syunik marz of the Republic of Armenia v. "G. Arshakyan ”LLC (RA VD decision on civil case No. EKD / ​​0407/02/11).
6 Ramsay v. Pigram (1968) 118 CLR at 282 (HCA), per McTiernan J (Australia); Toronto (City) v.Canadian Union of Public Employee, supra fn 34 (Canada).
7 ԵԱՔԴ / 4351/02/14 civil. Decision of the RA Court of Appeal on the case.
is standing.
  For example, in one case, the Court of First Instance ruled that the claim for annulment of the contract should be annulled and the application for annulment should be rejected on the basis of the fact that there is a case in the other court for annulment of the contract8.
 The court generally referred to the merits of the claim, while the Court of Appeal rightly overturned that decision, arguing that the court, when deciding whether to dismiss (or return the claim - LD) on the basis of a similar case, was obliged to refer to the plaintiff. on the basis of "applicants - subject", substantiating the identity of each of them.
 However, at the same time, the Court of Appeal did not state in the basis of the reversal of the above-mentioned decision that the subjects of the lawsuit were different, while the court of first instance identified them9.
It is noteworthy that the subjects of the claims cannot be the same when the subject of the second claim contains a wider substantive material claim.
 In particular, in case the same claim for confiscation of money from the same person is resubmitted, the court must reject the lawsuit or return the lawsuit, if the amount has not changed compared to the previous claim.
 However, if the claim for confiscation partially coincides with the amount claimed in the previous claim, ie the plaintiff in the second claim simply increased the claim, in this case the subjects of the claim will be different, the court must accept the claim again, the claim for confiscation of the sum is already different or is the subject of a dispute in the arbitral tribunal, must leave the case without examination for the remaining 10։.
And finally, the court must find out the identity of the grounds of the lawsuits.
 The basis of the claim may consist only of the factual basis, ie the factual circumstances that underlie the claim, as well as the factual-legal grounds. The legal basis is the legal norms that regulate the disputed legal relationship.
  The indication of the latter in the lawsuit is not directly required by the legislation, in contrast to the actual 8 EAKD / 4351/02/14 civil. on the case of RA Arabkir և Kanaker-Zeytun adm. Common law of regions. court decision.
9 EACD / 4351/02/14 city. Decision of the RA Court of Appeal on the case.
10 RA city. trial Code, Article 103, Part 2.
which suggests that in order to find out the identity of the claims in the case of the same subject matter, it is necessary to combine the subjects of the claims and the factual grounds11.
Thus, in order to ensure the effectiveness of the trial and the uniqueness of the judicial acts resolving the merits of the case, at the same time not to unreasonably restrict the possibility of effective exercise of the right of a person to go to court for restoration of his violated civil rights, the court should refer to all the mentioned elements, clarify, show their identity with the subject matter, subject և grounds of the submitted claim, that is, make a reasoned decision.
Unique mechanisms for returning the lawsuit are envisaged in a number of foreign countries with advanced legal systems.
  In particular, Italian civil law provides for the institute of "litispendenza" or "lis alibi pendens", which means "a case pending before a court" as well as "a situation where there are" disputes between the same persons on the same subject in different courts ". .
 The latter is the basis for applying "lis alibi pendens". The court to which the claim was first filed, or which was the first to hear the case, is considered an appropriate court, so the other court must, in accordance with the law, refuse to hear the case, declaring it to be an improper court. ի Require the Registrar to remove cases from court accepted case 12.
  The advantage of this judicial structure is that in Italy there is a general register of court cases, a common database, where all cases in Italian court proceedings are registered.
  There are no structures in the Republic of Armenia that would allow applicants to quickly obtain credible, complete information on the same subject, on the same grounds, or on the same grounds, when accepting a lawsuit or application to their staff, which would greatly facilitate the work of the judiciary.
  It is also noteworthy: 11 EACD / 4351/02/14 city. Decision of the RA Court of Appeal on the case.
The fact that in Italy the institute of “lis alibi pendens” is applicable only when a case on the same dispute is examined in the same court of first instance 13, while the current civil law of the Republic of Armenia. trial The wording set out in the Code allows for the rejection of a lawsuit or its return in the case of a similar dispute in a court of another instance.
In the Dutch Civil Procedure Code, the “lispendens” judicial institute is expressed in a unique way. If the civil case was first brought before a foreign court, which could lead to a judgment that could be recognized by the Netherlands and, if necessary, enforced, the Dutch court, which would later hear the same dispute between the same parties, could If the case becomes clear that the judgment can indeed be upheld by the Netherlands and, if necessary, enforced, the Dutch court is obliged to dismiss the case14.
It is worth observing "RA city. trial The draft law of the Republic of Armenia “On making changes in the Code”, by which a new legislative regulation of the subject matter was proposed.
 The advantage of this over the current Code is that the scope of the court's jurisdiction in the case of the same dispute is clarified.
  If the fact of the existence of such a ground is found out when deciding the issue of admission to the case, the court must return the lawsuit15. It is not among the grounds for rejecting the acceptance of the lawsuit16.
  Drawing parallels between the above-mentioned draft law "Administrative Procedure Code", it should be noted that in contrast to the above-mentioned draft law, according to Article 80, Part 3 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code, the court rejects the appeal if there is the same person in another court. on the same subject գործ a case on the same grounds.
  Administrative և Civil Procedure Areas 13 See ibid.
14 Code of Civil Procedure of the Netherlands, Article 12.
15 Draft Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia”, Article 125, Part 9.
16 Draft Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia”, Article 124.
They are closely interconnected in such a way that this difference can theoretically be conditioned by their branch-legal peculiarities.
  It is reasonably assumed that this is due to the dichotomy of theorists.
We consider that the acceptance of the lawsuit on the basis of the existence of a case on the same dispute in another court or arbitral tribunal should be rejected for the following reasons.
  First, as stated above, it is assumed that in the event that the circumstances underlying the return are eliminated, the claim may be re-filed with the court, while the grounds for refusing to accept the claim are inherently immutable; they cannot be eliminated, unlike the grounds for returning the claim.
 When a lawsuit is filed and the case is already pending in another court or arbitral tribunal, it is possible to predict that the dispute will be settled in the future by a court decision resolving the case on the merits or the case will be terminated if there are grounds provided by law17.
 If the application is rejected, the application will be rejected unequivocally in case the lawsuit is submitted to the court again after the relevant decision on the dispute in the case enters into legal force18.
  And when the same claim or application in another court or arbitral tribunal is left for examination, a corresponding decision is made.
  RA Civil Court It follows from the content of Article 104 of the Code that if the claim or application is left without examination, the proceedings of the case are not considered completed. it may be resumed after the elimination of the circumstances which led to the dismissal of the claim or application, either at the request of the plaintiff or the applicant, or in the event of revocation of the decision to dismiss the application.
  The same, of course, applies to the suspension of the proceedings19.
 If the application is rejected on the basis of the existence of a case on the same dispute, and later a decision is made to leave the claim in the case without examination, the plaintiff shall, in case of re-submission of the same claim to the court, be rejected on the same grounds. that the case remains in court until a decision is made on the case.
  A person fair in his work 17 RA city. trial Code, Article 109, Article 110.
18 RA city. trial Code, Article 91, Part 2.
19 RA city. trial Code, Article 107, Article 108.
In any case, he does not lose the opportunity to exercise the right to trial. he may appeal to a higher court against the decision to dismiss the case without examination; և if the decision is overturned by appeal or cassation, the plaintiff will have the opportunity to receive a fair trial և.
  In other words, it is pointless to envisage the existence of a case on the same dispute as one of the grounds for returning the lawsuit with the fear that if the application is rejected on this basis, the person's right to apply to court to protect his / her legal interests may be violated.
  The case when the plaintiff rejects the claim in the preparatory stage of the trial is subject to a separate discussion.
 RA city. trial Pursuant to Article 110 3 3 of the Code, in the event of termination of employment, the same dispute may not be re-applied to the court, unless the plaintiff rejects the claim during the preparatory phase of the trial.
 That is, if the acceptance of the lawsuit is rejected on the basis of the existence of a case on the same dispute, and the plaintiff rejects the lawsuit in the preparatory stage of the trial of that case, he can apply to the court again with the same lawsuit.
 This deviates from the general rule of legal regulation excluding the possibility of applying to court with identical claims, which allows the plaintiff, who conscientiously exercises his administrative rights, not to be deprived of the right to apply to court and a fair trial of his case.
Thus, the question of what the court should do is to reject the application or return it, but in the case of a dispute between the same persons in the same court or arbitral tribunal, on the same grounds, if that fact is found before the proceedings Admission, current RA city. trial It remains controversial և precisely unregulated by the Code.
 Therefore, the RA mouse is completely justified. trial The proposal for legal regulation amended by the draft of the new code.
  However, at the same time, we find that it is in fact wrong to envisage the existence of the same dispute as a ground for returning the lawsuit; In this case, on the one hand, the levers of effective realization of that right continue to be maintained, and on the other hand, the possibility of adjudicating with identical lawsuits is excluded; the efficiency of the judicial system is ensured.
It is necessary to pay attention to the fact that in order to make the work of the judicial system of the Republic of Armenia more efficient, it is necessary to make changes in the Decision No. 23L of the Council of Court Chairmen of the Republic of Armenia of December 21, 2007 "On Approving the Rules of Court Procedure".
  In particular, it is proposed to add a rule by which the clerk of the court office will check for the existence of a dispute between the same persons at the time of accepting the claim, գրանց registering in the Judicial System program (but not the "identity of the grounds 20"), which will establish an electronic connection between that case
 This will give the court an opportunity to refer to the issue of refusing to accept the claim without the mediation of the parties, already having as a basis the information posted in the electronic system.
Lily DrmeyanERB another court or the arbitral tribunal The ENUYN ON BETWEEN PERSONS AND WILL HIMKEROVVECHI GORTSBanali words the same subject matter, the dispute between the same parties, the same subject of dispute lis pendens, refused to accept the claim, the claim veradardznelAmpopum.
