FEATURES OF STAR CONSTRUCTION IN THE MEDIA (EXAMPLE OF HENRICH MKHITARYAN) There are many definitions of "stars", one of which belongs to the theorist Christine Gladhill, who, speaking about movie stars, says: "Actors become stars when the individuality of their non-screen lifestyles equals or exceeds their acting ability."
The image of a star is created not only in a movie or a TV show, but also through all the other materials in which they appear, that is, hospitality, publications, gossip columns, etc.
Media stars should be widely understood as products that are "produced" by media companies for the purpose of consuming the audience ստանալ to make a profit.
The stars and celebrities present themselves as capital. they are either the "property" of studios, record companies, agencies or individuals, or simply paid for by them.
 The status of the stars is also related to their economic function in organizing the market in the sense that they ensure the purchase of media texts, the purchase of tickets, etc.
 Thus, it can be argued that stars are vital to the media field են be considered their product.
 That is, like all media products, the images of stars are built.
The image of the stars is constructed with a number of primary and secondary elements.
 Secondary elements (for example, posters, badges, clothing, web pages) are created during the promotion process և Deliberate text structures of recording studios, PR (public relations) departments or fan clubs.
 What seems natural, unintentional, is also built.
 The main elements of building each character are the main texts - movies, videos, songs, TV shows, etc.
 Since the image of stars spreads in such a wide field, it is characterized by multiplicity.
  The main texts that define the star can limit or increase the variety of meanings to anchor or force the "preferred" readings.
Stars are also important images of self-identification for consumers.
In order to identify with the star, the audience must find common ground.
 On the one hand, the star must be "typical" in some way, that is, present the ideas about the human being that the audience has.
 In this sense, they must balance the ordinary։ extraordinary elements.
 On the other hand, if a star is too ordinary, it can no longer be enough to be a star.
The appearance of stars was a possible factor in the commercialization of sports.
 It is obvious that today most of the fans of football games worship the whole game of the star, following his activities.
It is obvious that the football agents, understanding this fact very well, artificially (that is, at the expense of the non-footballing qualities and skills of the football player) create new stars, not to lose the huge audience, depending on the profit.
It should be noted that during the commercialization of sports, the institution of foreign "stars" appeared in football, when representatives of other countries play in club teams.
 This phenomenon has arisen for the globalization of football, the expansion of borders, the aim of which, of course, is to provide more income, which proves the huge amount of money circulating in the football transfer market.
Footballer Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who plays for the Armenian national team (he is the captain of the team) at the English club "Manchester United", started his football career in 1995.
 Mkhitaryan, who played for Pyunik, Metallurg Donetsk, Shakhtar Donetsk and Borussia Dortmund during his career, transferred to Manchester United on July 6, 2015 with a record transfer of 42 million euros. The most expensive football player in the countries of the region.
 It is no secret to the football-loving public that Mkhitaryan's transfer was handled by football agent Mino (Carmine) Rayola, who earned more than $ 30 million a month through transfers [5] (this proves once again the fact that the stars are capital).
Mkhitaryan's appearance in the "English Premier League" immediately changed the content of the Armenian media field.
 If before the games of English teams were shown only on one TV, and the news was published only in the pages of specialized periodicals, now almost all the highest professional football championships for English clubs.
The media cover the English Premier League and Mkhitaryan, and captivate the audience with the argument that Mkhitaryan presents our country, our traditions and our culture to the international community, forgetting that they are not visible on the football field, and information about our country's football traditions is available to everyone.
2 One of the main elements of building Mkhitaryan's image is showing him as a professional footballer, which is done by organizing a display of his team games (even when he is not playing), game episodes, photos taken during training, highlights during matches, that is, goals by strikes and passes, as well as by disseminating and disseminating the opinions of the coach and teammates (about game qualities).
The secondary elements of his image construction are more diverse.
 Wanting to create the image of an exemplary son, Mkhitaryan often mentions in his interviews the fact that his father, Hamlet Mkhitaryan, was one of the forwards of "Ararat" football club, that he wanted to become a football player, following his father's example.
 And he spared no effort to achieve that goal.
 In one of his interviews, Mkhitaryan mentioned. "You can not imagine how I would like him to see my game.
 If my father was by my side, many would get easier solutions, not to mention professional advice.
 However, it turned out that he left us very early.
 I did not take anything consciously from him, because when he died, I was 8 years old.
  But everyone who has seen my father says that we run on the field and hit in the same way.
 So I will inherit many things that I have now. ”[6]
In addition to creating the image of an exemplary son, one of the secondary elements in building the image of Mkhitaryan is to present him as a bearer of universal values, interested in world issues, and concerned with human problems.
 The official social media pages (which are also designed to strengthen the image of the image) often contain posts about wars and genocides, photos of his charitable actions and events, and when Mkhitaryan became UNICEF National Goodwill Ambassador to Armenia, his In the pages you can find posts that are more general, more universal (for example, "all children should have a carefree childhood", "all children should be healthy", etc.).
2 The Armenian national team is ranked 123rd in the FIFA rankings.
 In other words, on the one hand, the image of a professional football player is built, who has reached the English Premier League with energy, works hard, spares effort and energy to reach new heights, has many fans, and on the other hand, the image of an "ordinary" person who wants He is like his father, he cares about human problems, he helps the needy.
What is interesting is the element of image building that the fans, not knowing anything about Mkhitaryan's real human features, present him as "smart", "modest", "hardworking", "pride of the Armenian nation" with other similar characteristics and proudly wear the national team or " T-shirts with the logo of "Manchester United" club, on which the football player's last name is engraved, and his playing number is embroidered (as it was created to build the image).
 For example, the Armenian fans of the Spanish club "Real Madrid" on their official website [7] discussing the possible match between "Real Madrid" and "Manchester United" were divided into 2 groups. Some of them insisted that they should stay loyal to the club, while others assured that they should make an exception for the rival club, otherwise it would be considered a betrayal of the homeland.
Another common code for stars is product advertising.
  Many professional athletes have made a lot more money from product advertising than they would have done in their sport.
 Why are star ads so important for the consumer market?
 The answer to this question may be that consciously or subconsciously consumers want to imitate celebrities as much as possible.
For example, Henrikh Mkhitaryan, advertising "Noy" water, says. "It also gives strength" [8], or as emphasized in the "Gatorade" advertisement shown by Michael Jordan, allows the consumer to "be like Mike" by allowing the consumer to drink the advertised product.
 That is, even if consumers are not athletes, they will not be movie stars or celebrities, they can still consume the same products that the star claims to consume.
In conclusion, the stars are constructed characters whose existence is only for profit, that the star who embodies the image of the star should not be identified with the star.
LITERATURE [1] Gledhill, C., Stardom.
  Industry of Desire, Routledge, London, 1991, 366 p. URL.
https:
//is.muni.cz/el/1421/jaro2017/FAVBKalt1/um/68312072/Christine_Gledhill__editor_ [2] Long, P. and Wall, T., Media Studies.
 Texts, Production, Context, Routledge, London, [3] Whannel, G., Media Sports Stars.
 Masculinities and Moralities, Routledge, London, [4] Brown, A., Fanatics.
 Power, Identity and Fandom in Football, London, 2002, 312 p. [5] Mino Raiola, Wikipedia free encyclopedia, https.
//hy.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D5%84%D5%AB%D5%B6%D5%B8_%D5%8C%D5%A1%D5
EVOSweZ8491kIZ7l5dPUP4 (Accessed.
 05.07.2017).
[6] Mkhitaryan. I have dedicated my whole life to football, I have achieved amazing achievements, December 21, 2016, 19.
48, URL.
 http:
//www.armsport.am/en/news/2016/12/21/mkhitaryan/761847 (Accessed.
 15.07.2017).
[7] See URL for more details.
 http:
//realmadrid.am/.
[8] Henrikh Mkhitaryan - The same gives me strength, April 4, 2012, URL.
https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=j3R9V_Z-83c,13.06.2017).
URL.
 https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=b0AGiq9j_Ak, duration.
 1.
00 (Accessed.
 13.07.2017). (Accessed.
0.
15 FEATURES OF CONSTRUCTION OF MISAKYAN STARS IN THE MEDIA (EXAMPLE OF HENRICH MKHITARYAN) Keywords: star, media product, star construction, profit, identification, Henrikh Mkhitaryan, football, sport.
