CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CRIME RELATED TO A MINOR In this article we have referred to the peculiarities of the proceedings on a crime attributed to a minor.
  The desire to refer to this institution is conditioned by the fact that it is a separate criminal proceedings, endowed with a number of features, taking into account the physiological-psychological features of the juvenile as a separate category, as well as the fact that the juvenile delinquency case arise of great interest and capacity, as the solution of such a crucial problem as the prevention of new crimes as much as possible in the future depends on the development of the right directions for its implementation, which is one of the main goals of criminal law, criminal proceedings and penitentiary law.
  In addition, juvenile justice is defined as an integral part of the social justice system1, so this institution must always be at the center of scientific research by developing new, child-friendly approaches.
The current Criminal Procedure Code, however, does not regulate this issue in detail, devoting only five articles to the given institutional regulation, which superficially touch upon the peculiarities of the given proceedings in terms of content.
  An attempt has been made to fill this gap in the draft Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft), which discusses in more detail the specifics of criminal proceedings against a juvenile.
  Let's try to reflect on the current Code և Draft Regulations և for this institution 1 See UN General Assembly Resolution 40 33, Minimum Standard Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (Beijing Rules) (November 29, 1981).
problems. When referring to the specifics of juvenile proceedings, it is first necessary to clearly define to whom the applicable rules apply: the person who was a juvenile at the time of the crime or the juvenile who was arrested or charged.
  The current Criminal Procedure Code sets out the substantive criteria for applying the procedure before committing a crime at the age of 18, while the Draft sets the procedural criterion for applying the procedure before being arrested or charged 2.
  The approach to the draft is more logical, it is entirely based on the essence and specifics of the case, as the specifics of the legislation apply only to minors, they are applied from the moment of arrest or indictment, therefore they should be applied to persons who are minors at the time of arrest or indictment.
 Such an approach is also at the heart of international law, in particular in terms of the new ways of responding to juvenile delinquency, juvenile justice, in Article 1 of WSEC Recommendation No. Rec (2003) 20, in terms of applying a special procedure to them. , who have reached the age of criminal responsibility, but have not reached the age of majority.
  If the Draft establishes structures in accordance with international standards for the protection of the rights of juvenile defendants, legal interests, and guarantees, the same cannot be said for juvenile victims.
 International legal norms, on the other hand, establish structures for the protection of the rights of juvenile victims and witnesses, based on their age.
  In particular, it stipulates that justice in the cases of children who have been victims of crime must be administered in the context of guaranteeing the rights of the accused4, and that every child (especially the victim) has the right to demand that his or her best interests be given priority.
 It also stipulates that the main principles of justice in the cases of persons victims of crime and abuse of power 2 See Collection of Scientific Articles Dedicated to the Problems of the Draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, Bar Association of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 525-526.
3 See CEC Recommendation No. Rec (2003) 20.
4 See UN Resolution 2005/20.
In accordance with the Declaration, States should endeavor to ensure that children տուժ who witness տուժ are provided with adequate access to justice և fair treatment, reparation, compensation և and social assistance.
  When referring to the protection of the rights of juvenile victims, it is necessary to consider the issue of the application of private charges in juvenile cases, especially when the victim is a minor.
  As far as we know, in the case of private accusations, the victim is fully protected, while in the interests of juvenile victims, taking into account the requirements of international law, it would be right to take a different approach in the case of juvenile victims.
 In this regard, we consider it necessary to refer to one of the precedents of the Court of Cassation 6, which provides for an exception in cases of private charges against persons whose rights are violated, but those persons can not defend their rights and legal interests due to their helplessness or other objective reasons.
The Court of Cassation finds that in such a situation the reason for initiating a criminal case is legal, and if the grounds are sufficient, a decision to initiate a criminal case should be made in accordance with the general procedure established for initiating public charges.
  We think it would be more childish to extend this position of the Court of Cassation to juvenile victims.
 In contrast to the current Criminal Procedure Code, the Draft stipulates a wider range of evidence in juvenile cases. Level of development այլ Other characteristics of the person, the influence of the elderly on the juvenile, the reasons for the alleged crime, the conditions conducive to it.
 Such an ideology is at the heart of international standards as well as the precedent decisions of the Court of Cassation.
 Expanding the scope of evidence stems from the psychophysiological characteristics of the juvenile, extremely 5 See UN guidelines.
6 See A. Decision of the RA Court of Cassation No. VB-73/08 of December 26, 2008 on Abrahamyan.
maturity as a complex և special age.
 Referring to the notation of juvenile offenders, L. Golubyan notes that the age-specific features of juvenile delinquents include a lack of life experience, rapid inspiration, and decision-making in a particular situation under the influence of emotions or authorial perceptions, which make it difficult to choose the right behavior.
  Taking into account the peculiarities mentioned by the theorist, it becomes clear that the definition of a wide range of evidence is necessary to apply measures commensurate with the crime committed against the juvenile.
 Juvenile delinquents are characterized by despair, a tendency to affect outbursts.
 Many crimes are committed by them with inadequate motives due to malice or being influenced by other people, especially adults.
Therefore, it is very important to include in the evidence the obligation to find out the influence of older people on the minor.
The approach to the draft in terms of expanding the circumstances to be proved is also the basis of one of the Court of Cassation precedents9, in particular the Court of Cassation notes that the above circumstances are subject to a comprehensive examination of each juvenile case.
 Only as a result of their comprehensive analysis can the court form a complete picture of the minor's personal և age characteristics և choose a means of influence that will be aimed at his correction and upbringing.
  In this regard, the Court of Cassation emphasizes that in addition to the general purposes of punishment (restoration of social justice, correction of a convicted person, prevention of crimes), the measure of criminal influence applied to a juvenile must pursue the natural mental and physical development of the juvenile. , a special purpose to ensure his welfare.
7 See Golubeva L. M., Sudoproizvodstvo po delem nesoсоershennolenitih vististeme sovsogo gogolovnovo proceva // Pravovedenie, 1985/6, s. 52.
8 See Рыбальская В. Zh., Features of production by division of non-sovereign non-sovereigns, Irkutsk, 1972, p. 5-6.
9 See A. Decision No. NEVAND / 0094/01/13 of the RA Court of Cassation of August 28, 2015 on Nunushyan.
Minors, being in the developmental stage և not being fully developed as individuals,, are more prone to fall under the negative influence of other people.
  Therefore, in all cases where the commission of a crime by a juvenile is conditioned by the influence of others on him, it is necessary to analyze in detail the nature of the existing relationship between them, the degree of negative impact on the juvenile and the consequences.
The Court of Cassation states that such influence, depending on the circumstances of the case, may have different criminal significance.
  In particular, if the crime was committed under the influence of threat, coercion or material, official or other dependence, then it should be assessed as a mitigating circumstance within the meaning of Article 62, Part 1, Clause 8 of the RA Criminal Code.
 If the extension of the scope of the circumstances to be proved is fully in line with international standards, is based on the protection of the rights of the child, on the legitimate interests of the child and does not give rise to controversy, the same cannot be said of the provision in the Draft which provides for expedited proceedings without undue delays. , due to which there is a ban on extending the terms of criminal prosecution at the preliminary investigation stage.
  Although the principle of accelerated procedure is substantiated by international legal acts, but, in our opinion, being deep in that problem, we can state that such a settlement will not be as much in the interests of a minor as he is in the interests of justice.
 The goals of criminal proceedings are to reveal crimes, to carry out a thorough, comprehensive and objective investigation, to prevent further crimes, to correct the perpetrator, all of which lead to the restoration of justice.
 In this case, does not the ban on extending the term of the criminal prosecution impede the disclosure and examination of all the evidence in the case, the failure of which will impede the full, comprehensive and objective examination of the case?
The draft Criminal Procedure Code stipulates the requirement of urgent proceedings without undue delay, at the same time prohibiting the extension of the period of criminal prosecution, but the prolongation may not be unnecessary. does not have.
  The draft sets out an expanded range of circumstances to be substantiated, each of which is in the best interests of the juvenile, but there may be times when the deadlines are not sufficient to establish all the evidence, in which case the objective outcome becomes highly questionable.
 We must accept the fact that the whole purpose and essence of pre-trial proceedings is to reveal the circumstances of the case, and in cases involving a juvenile, to find out the latter's upbringing, education, family conditions, reasons and conditions contributing to the crime, the influence of older people on the juvenile is not easy.
 Therefore, we think that no matter how wrong it is to exclude the extension of criminal prosecution cases in juvenile cases, it is more realistic to envisage the possibility of extension, which can be done only if it is in the interests of the juvenile և justice.
  If the application of the expedited procedure and the prohibition on prolongation of the term of criminal prosecution are conditioned by the protection of the juvenile's legal interests, they proceed from the consideration that the actions taken during the pre-trial proceedings do not leave a negative mark on the further development of the juvenile's psychology. not to refer to the terms of the pre-trial proceedings, but to the nature of the actions to be taken during that proceedings;
  If the actions of the body conducting the proceedings have a negative impact on the psychology of the juvenile, then that negative impact will be within the period prescribed by law, in this case it does not depend on the extension of the period.
  Therefore, it is necessary to pay more attention to the specifics of the bodies conducting the proceedings and the actions taken by them, hence our other suggestion, after establishing a justice system for juvenile cases.
  In order to achieve the goals of juvenile rights և maximum protection of legal interests և criminal proceedings, it is necessary to establish a comprehensive juvenile justice system և to ensure its effective functioning.
 As provided for in Article 40 (3) of the EIC, States Parties shall promote the establishment of special laws, procedures, bodies and institutions applicable to juveniles in violation of criminal law.
 A comprehensive juvenile justice system requires the establishment of specialized units in the police, the judiciary, and the prosecutor's office, as well as specialized advocates or other representatives who provide legal or appropriate assistance to juveniles10.
  Rule 12 of the Beijing Rules draws attention to the need for special training for all law enforcement officers involved in the administration of juvenile justice.
 From this point of view, since the police are the first point of contact of the juvenile justice system, it is very important that the police officers are informed and act properly.
In the context of juvenile justice in the Republic of Armenia, the Civil Society Institute NGO mentions cases of violence against juveniles in the framework of the study of torture and ill-treatment during pre-trial proceedings, then specializes in juvenile justice with the aim of exercising stricter and more specific control over the cases of minors.
  A study of international experience 11 shows that many countries, such as Austria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Serbia, Slovenia, Switzerland and other countries, have juvenile courts. or judges.
  In other countries, the law imposes additional requirements on juvenile judges.
 For example, expert knowledge (Greece), justice training courses (Finland, Italy), specialization (Turkey).
 In some countries (Romania, Kosovo, Germany) there are juvenile prosecutors and juvenile police (Turkey).
  If we accept that the establishment of specialized courts for juvenile cases in our country is connected with financial means, at the same time it is still realistic. 10 See Juvenile Trials Review (report), Yerevan, 2011, p. 33.
11 See ibid.
If there is no, then at least the training of specialized personnel in the judicial, police and prosecutor's office systems, in our opinion, is a necessity, arises from international legal acts, protection of the rights of minors, legal interests, the interests of justice.
 According to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, in cases where the establishment of specialized courts is unrealistic in practice, the contracting parties are obliged to guarantee the appointment of specialized judges and magistrates to conduct juvenile justice cases.
  This approach is also in the interests of the state, as the effective operation of specialized bodies will further prevent such catastrophic events as recidivism, public distrust and especially negative attitudes towards the country's legal system, etc.
  Summing up the work. We consider it necessary to mention that adolescence is the most difficult "problematic age period", juveniles as a special category must always be under the care of the society and the state.
  As stated in Article 24 1 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, "every child shall have the right to discrimination, regardless of race, color, sex, language, religion, national or social origin, property status or birth." He has the means of protection that his family and society need from him as a child. ”
  This is an indirect demand of States to treat non-discriminatory treatment of minors, taking into account in any case the age-individual characteristics of the minor.
  The continuation and substantiation of this is another international document, in particular, according to point 5 of the UN Standard Minimum Rules on the Administration of Juvenile Justice ("Beijing Rules"): "The juvenile justice system is primarily aimed at ensuring the welfare of minors in order to Any measure affecting juvenile offenders should always be commensurate with both the individual characteristics of the offender and the circumstances of the offender. ”
 As we can see, juveniles, as a special category, are always in the spotlight of international organizations, and because of this, states are obliged to constantly review domestic legislation in order to establish more effective, more child-friendly approaches to juveniles.
 Minors are the ones who shape the future, so the issues related to minors must always be in the center of attention of both the society and the state.
  It is even more important to study the characteristics and problems of juvenile offenders, as the prevention of recidivism in the future, և the legal system in general, depends on the application of appropriate actions against juvenile delinquency due to its age and individual characteristics.
  Research shows that most of the most dangerous recidivists committed the crime before the age of 18, 12 so juvenile justice has problems that need to be addressed.
We would like to summarize the work in the case law of the ECHR with a clear idea in the requirements of international legal acts, according to which juveniles, due to their maturity, physiological, social-psychological և other characteristics, are considered special subjects of criminal-criminal relations. protective, restorative և pro-child.
Hasmik Hakobyan CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CRIME RELATED TO A JUVEN. Keywords: juvenile, private charge, expedited proceedings, pre-trial proceedings, recidivism, justice system.
Summary.
