THE VALUE SYSTEM OF CIVILIZATION AND DEVELOPMENTS (EXAMPLE OF CHINA) Civilization was initially defined as the stage of social development following barbarism (Morgan, Engels).
 According to him, it is a social-political situation, which differs from the primitive state at a high level of development of human society.
Civilization determines the level of development of a society.
It is characterized by the social system, the formation of the state, the emergence of classes և private property.
 At the present stage, it has become a valuable value system of human society's self-knowledge, connection with nature, society, culture.
Today the level of modern civilization is characterized by the level of more developed countries.
 In other words, the level of development determines whether this or that country or nation is civilized or not.
  Naturally, such an opinion cannot be accepted unequivocally, as there are nations in the world that have a rich civilized past, but, not being able to modernize in a timely manner, are considered underdeveloped or developing.
The term "civilization" originated from the Latin word "civilis", which means citizen, civil, state.
 The term was used in antiquity in contrast to barbarism, and as an independent concept was used through the prism of the term "culture", entering the scientific vocabulary in the 18th century.
  The term "civilization" was first used by Victor de Mirabo in his "Friend of the Law" to describe the softening of manners, tenderness, courtesy, and knowledge that are spread in order to maintain the rules of decency in order to fulfill the rules of coexistence.
The concept of "civilization" is multifaceted.
  In general, it can be viewed in several senses.
  First, it is connected with traditional cultural and philosophical problems.
  In this sense, the emphasis is on the dead technicism of the living organism of culture։ civilization.
 In the second sense, the development of the world leading from division to unity is considered, in another sense, the pluralism of separate, isolated civilizations is pointed out.
  In this case, the view of the universal perspective is revised.
There are many authors who have interpreted the term civilization in one way or another, but there are a number of schools that have shown a systematic approach.
  Therefore, for a better understanding, let us turn to them!
Social-historical school.
  This school has older, "classical" traditions that date back to Kant and Hegel.
  The peculiarity of the social-historical school is that it views civilization in terms of culture, and the authors refer to the so-called periodization of civilized cultures.
  Among the representatives of this school are O. Spengler, A. Toynbee, N. Danilsky.
Commenting on the concept of civilization, Oswald Spengler states: “Every culture has its own civilization.
  It is a culturally inevitable fate.
 "Civilizations are the external artificial conditions that the developed human race is capable of."
 Civilization is a series of certain great epochs, which maintains its own existence within strict limits.
Arnold Toynbee accepted "the origin of civilization as an act of creation that encompasses the process of change over time" and "cultural elements as the essence of civilization".
    Civilizations respond to certain challenges, then go through a period of prosperity, accompanied by increased control over the environment created by the creative minority.
  The period of difficulties is growing, the emergence of a universal state, and after a while, the division.
In his turn, N. Danilsky puts forward cultural-historical typography.
 According to him, the cultural-historical type is an organic union, the evolution of which consists of a birth-old-death chain.
 At the same time, cultural evolution transitions from an ethnic state to a state, a civilized state.
  Civilization is created, reproduced by people for the sake of the people.
  Therefore, its most relevant features are the people who express the human dimension of civilization.
Racial-anthropological school.
 The main goal of this school is to show that the racial factor has a decisive influence on the cultural and historical development of civilizations.
    Human behavior is conditioned by their biological origin, civilizations develop on racial grounds, and the mixing of races in civilization causes its downfall and death.
 The representatives of this school are Joseph Gobino, Ludwig Waltmann, Georges Lapuzh.
In particular, L. Waltmann notes that even the Germans, who considered themselves Aryans, retained some of the purity of their blood, which alienated them from their own civilization.
Sociological school.
  The subject of study of this school is the society with its structure և social institutions.
  The basic idea is that culture is a social product.
  The main representatives are T. Eliot, P. Sorokin, A. The web.
 Their ideas are mainly related to cultural theories.
P. Sorokin views the cultural system within the framework of symbolic values-norms, moreover, cultural systems can be almost not used.
  But there are five most important ones: language, science, religion, art and ethics.
 Their combination creates super-systems in the integrated structure of the state, three of which are distinguished: ideological, emotional-idealistic.
Their variations make up the content of the story.
A. Weber և F. Tennis is believed that "civilization" means only the unity of technical and practical knowledge, tools for influencing nature.
  "Culture", on the contrary, is a set of normative principles - values, ideals, or in other words, thinking (spirit).
Symbolic school.
 All civilizational processes must be viewed as communicative processes.
  The most important component of civilization, culture, is seen as a system of symbols that form the code of civilization through which information is transmitted.
  The representatives of this school are F. de Saussure, E. Cassier, K. L. Strauss.
K. Speaking of cultural diversity, Li-Strauss points out that the concept of diversity of human cultures should not be perceived statistically.
 This is not a variety of designs.
 Undoubtedly, people have created different cultures due to geographical distance, environmental features, and ignorance of the rest of humanity.
Ecological school.
 At the end of the 20th century, the ecological factor began to be used in the study of civilizations.
  Changes in temperature and geography led to a change in civilization.
  At the same time, some of the hallmarks of dead civilizations have been adopted by later cultures.
 Such a process is called "civilization" (in civilization).
 It refers to the continuity of civilizations that arise in the same area, under the same ideological-ecological conditions.
Integralism.
 According to this direction, the civilization of mankind dates back to the Neolithic period, and the rhythm of the historical process is expressed by the periodic changes of the historical sciences, the social-cultural system of the generations of world and local civilizations.
 This periodization is based on sociogenic laws: heredity, variability և choice.
Every civilization has its own structure, but structural elements that are common to all: • Careful area. It transmits from generation to generation civilizational values ​​such as science, culture, education, ethics, and religion.
  It is possible that these are different from civilization to civilization.
• Social sphere. includes economic associations - groups of people, ethnos, politics, state affiliation.
 This system is regularly changed as a result of wars and revolutions.
• Economic sphere. It includes property rights, distribution methods, exchange rights, economic structure, economic governance rights.
• Technologies. These are the means of labor, the sources of energy, the technologies, the division of labor, the means of organizing production.
• Nation, people. The basis of the structure of civilization is the population, nature, ecology, territory of civilization, climatic conditions, population density and resources.
In addition to the above, the state elite can be defined as a way of life, a social layer that defines and reinterprets behavior, art as a way of preserving and transmitting the historical memory of the society, the church as a social institution that inherits the standards of morality.
There are many features that distinguish civilization from other forms of human life.
 We single out some of them. Adaptation. The generators of civilization must have extreme flexibility of character, the ability to adapt to new environments - Patience.
 These opportunities are needed to move from an underdeveloped economy to the development of a modern economy, from a life of disturbed past traditions to modern transformations, from a racially organized society to a modernized, industrialized society.
  Everything needs to be updated, even the way of thinking.
Adequacy. The emergence of civilizations in the past was not an absolute necessity.
  Not all human associations have been able to create or maintain a civilization.
 Only cultures that were environmentally friendly could do that.
Power. Civilization is associated with the maintenance of a "strong state power" of a centralized state, which has a great influence on the ideology and culture of civilization.
Boundaries. Huntington notes that civilizations have no clear boundaries, no exact beginning, no end.
  People can reconsider their identity, as a result of which the structure of civilization changes over time.
 Human cultures interact with each other.
 Their degree of similarity և differences also change.
Existence of existence. According to Huntington, the unique essence of all civilizations is due to its long history.
  In fact, civilizations are the longest-lived in history.
  Empires rise and fall, governments come and go, civilizations continue to live, undergoing political, social, economic, and even ideological changes.
Degree. Civilizations imply hierarchy, which includes language, mythology, power, and so on.
Chinese civilization is one of the unique ones that has come a long way in history, but has not lost its main features չի has undergone a transformation և has been modernized following the dictates of time.
The development of present-day China is based on civilizational-value system features, which on the one hand allow us to differ from other countries այլ civilizations, on the other hand, to keep pace with the modern wave of globalization.
Chinese civilization, like other ancient Eastern civilizations, originated on the banks of major rivers. that is, in places where natural conditions have allowed large numbers of people to feed.
 China, going through the rotation of many imperial dynasties, wars and divisions, today presents its own model of development to the world.
 Without delving into historical chronology և documentation, let us touch upon the value system peculiarities of Chinese civilization, taking into account the above-mentioned features.
Chinese civilization և culture can be compared to an iceberg, the lower part of which is under water չէ not visible to the West, which sees և perceives only the top of the iceberg.
 The part that is under water includes Chinese philosophy and ancient traditions, and the peak is the current development of China.
 "The tip of the iceberg" is a natural phenomenon initiated by the Chinese leadership.
  At the same time, there is an American "iceberg" in accordance with Western standards and values, which is directed against the Chinese.
 In fact, it is appropriate to refer to S. Huntington, who constantly spoke of the US-China civilizational "clash."
  Analyzing Handington's thought, we can go back. In the "world ocean", the West-Chinese icebergs may collide, which can be devastating for both, but we think that the icebergs can bypass each other.
Of all the civilizations that originated on the Eurasian continent, only the Chinese have always been in the same area.
 Thus, unlike other civilizations, China was not formed by conquest or migration.
Chinese culture has developed the only system of letters that works on the representation of ideas and situations, not on the basis of sounds, which is typical of all other writing systems on the Eurasian continent.
  This in turn serves as a basis for a unique domain, a vivid example of which is the fact that the Chinese have not changed the political system for 3,000 years.
 The well-known principle of meritocracy, according to which leading positions should be held by the most capable people, regardless of social origin and financial wealth, has given every Chinese the opportunity to participate in governance processes.
  Such a system offered a service to the best minds unchanged, in contrast to the French avant-garde, within the framework of which they could rise publicly only by orders.
 Later, due to the rise of the bourgeoisie, people began to understand the importance of education.
  For the Chinese, longevity is synonymous with efficiency.
 They do not understand why they have to change the system when it works so well for so long.
However, the political is hidden behind the cultural discourse.
It is about the ideological orientation of modern Chinese civilization.
  Chinese socialism was an innovation that paved the way for China's modernization.
  Combining socialism with communication systems, through various network structures, market relations, closed society, this country poses a serious challenge to the whole world.
Another feature is the lack of a common religion.
They become Daoists, for example, to appease invisible forces when opening a place, or Buddhists, when it is necessary to show a relative the right path.
 The basic idea of ​​Confucianism was first and foremost aimed at the perfection of man in coexistence.
 In other words, there is no saving religion in China, moreover, paradise or eternity.
The only eternity is the unchanging sequence of seasons.
At the same time, there are external signs of religion in the country, which are close to the Western perception: temples, monks, ceremonies.
The role of the individual in Chinese civilization is subordinated to the role of the family or collective.
 This is another difference from the Western civilization.
 This is why we emphasize the main feature of Chinese civilization - the collective mentality.
Hierarchy is typical of Chinese civilization.
 The family is always at the heart of the pyramid.
 In Chinese society, the ways of men and women are different. Confucian morality forced them to walk on different sides of the street.
 In China, women have always been seen as ensuring the continuity of life.
 At the same time, each person in the hierarchy has his share of responsibility ․ The father is responsible for the son, the neighbor is responsible և so on.
 It should be noted that all members of that group are equally responsible for the actions of one member of the family or community.
LITERATURE URL:
 https:
//www.esperanto.mv.ru/Marksismo/Pschsg/pschsg-9.html#c9 (датаобращения.
 25.06.2018) .24-7, URL.
 http:
//www.duke.edu/%7Eaparks/SPENG7.html (Accessed.
 24.06.2018) .terminologies, URL.
 https:
//sci.house/vsemirnaya-istoriya-scibook/peremenyiterminologii-94828.html (data date.
 11.05.2018) .URL.
  http:
//www.gumer.info/bibliotek_Buks/Culture/levestr/rasa.php (date of publication.
CHILINGARYAN VALUE SYSTEM OF CULTURE EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENTS (EXAMPLE OF CHINA) Keywords: civilization, value system, adaptation, principle of meritocracy, clash of civilizations.
