CURRENT CHALLENGES OF MIGRATION POLICY IN ARMENIA In the current conditions of the market economy, the urgency of monitoring the migration policy of the Republic of Armenia is conditioned by the direct impact of migration processes on public life and infrastructure.
  Comparative studies of the negative effects of migration16 will provide an opportunity to assess trends in the effective management of migration processes.
Due to Armenia's membership in the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), it is expected that the movement of the country's labor force to Russia and the EEU countries will reach larger volumes17.
 In this regard, the development and implementation of an effective immigration policy is of vital importance for the Armenian society.
  By controlling migration management structures, it will be possible to avoid the negative effects of migration and use the potential of migrants.
 The current challenges of migration policy are mainly due to the shortcomings of state regulation of negative migration risks.
In the current conditions, the issues of migration policy regulation have appeared in the center of attention of international - European organizations, states, research centers, scientists.
  This is especially due to the Syrian crisis, the influx of refugees to EU member states 16 See "Migration" development. "Study of the current situation in Armenia", Yerevan, ILO, 2009, Aleksanyan A., Labor Migration of Armenians into Russia.
  Problems andProspects, // Journal "Mir Rossii", 2015, p. 24, № 2, pp.105-128, Tadևosyan Z. և Others, Outgoing labor migration. assessments և reflections.
 Yerevan, 2014, Torosyan G., Reintegration.
 Old phenomenon, new approaches.
 Yerevan, 2014, Galstyan M., Migration և cultural transformations, // "Journal of Social Sciences", 2013, № 2, pp. 184-193 և others.
17 See Treaty of the Eurasian Economic Union of May 29, 2014 // https.
//docs.eaeunion.org/hy-am/Pages/DisplayDocument.aspx?s=bef9c798-3978-42f3aaf5d6e0d169&EntityID=3610.
with uncontrollable flows.
  They have become a real threat to the EU's unified economic system, cultural space and European identity18.
  The Armenian society, in its turn, being in the conditions of "non-war, no peace", has "indicators of undesirable migration" 19.
Migration as a social phenomenon is as old as humanity in general.
  Meanwhile, research on migration began in the late 1920s, in which migration was seen as the temporary or permanent movement of an individual, individual, or social group from one geographical location to another.
  Migration is a process of change of permanent residence, the motives of which can be divided into two types: forced ամvoluntary.
 In the first case, people change their place of permanent residence due to insufficient socio-economic conditions, wars, natural disasters, political persecution, religious beliefs, belonging to this or that minority, և other similar reasons.
  In the second case, people lead a self-sufficient life and move to another place of residence without planning.
  It is necessary to state that both motives had more or less their impact on the current socio-economic indicators.
  In particular, at the end of the 20th century, radical socio-political, socio-economic changes took place in the Armenian reality, which significantly affected all spheres of public life.
  As a result of the new social realities, the birth rate began to decline rapidly, the mortality rate rose, the population began to leave the country en masse in search of work, the natural population growth rate decreased, and as a result, the population began to age rapidly21.
 In other words, the demographic situation in Armenia has changed, which is a serious threat to national security.
18 See “Dmitry Medvedev's speech at the panel discussion” (13 February 2016, Munich, Germany) // Munich Security Conference, http.
//government.ru/en/news/21784.
19 "Migration Newsletters" // State Migration Service of the Ministry of Territorial Administration և Development of the Republic of Armenia: http.
//smsmta.am/?menu_id=140, "RA External-Internal Migration Sample Survey Report" // http.
//www.armstat.am/file/article/rep_migr_08a.pdf.
20 See Vasilenko P. В., Зарубежные теории миграции безления // http.
//izd.pskgu.ru/projects/pgu/storage/prj/prj_16/prj_16_05.pdf, Юдина Т. N., Sociology of Migration.
  Учебное пособие для вузов. М., 2006, Воробьева О. D., Migration policy // Migration population. Выпуск 6. Contribution to the magazine "Migration in Russia", M., 2001.
21 See Demographic Policy Strategy of the Republic of Armenia, // http.
//www.unfpa.am/sites/default/files/RA-Demography-Strategy-Arm.pdf Since gaining independence, both the migration processes related to Armenia and the reasons behind them, as well as the perception of the problem through state regulation .
  The mentioned changes, naturally, also affected the migration policy pursued by the RA public administration system aimed at solving the migration problems.
 If at the initial stage this policy was aimed mainly at solving the problems of a large number of refugees from Azerbaijan, Nagorno Karabakh and other territories of the former USSR, then in the following period the foundations of national legislation in the field of migration were laid.
  At the institutional level, a state administration body with the authority to develop and implement migration policy, the Department of Refugees under the Government of the Republic of Armenia, was established. The agency operating in the structure of the Ministry of Territorial Administration of the Republic of Armenia (now the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Development of the Republic of Armenia) was reorganized22.
In recent years, under the influence of globalization, international integration processes, new economic and geopolitical realities, the RA state migration regulation system has faced a number of imperatives, which make it necessary to refer to the regulation of those imperatives in the most important state documents.
Thus, still in 2007 ․ The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia considered as a threat to national security the low birth rate in the country, uncontrolled illegal migration, as well as the outflow of educational, scientific and cultural potential23.
2010 By the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, the main political guidelines and targets of the state regulation of migration were defined, the prevention of immigration and the promotion of immigration were recognized as one of the main priorities of the Government24.
 The Government of the Republic of Armenia undertakes to pursue the issue of migrants within the framework of the United Nations, the International Labor Organization (ILO) and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). 22 See Concept of the State Migration Regulation (December 30, 2010). 51 decisions) // http.
//www.smsmta.am/?id=948.
23 See RA National Security Strategy (RA Presidential Decree NH-37-N, 25-02-2007) // http.
//www.mil.am/media/2015/07/827.pdf.
24 See RA Migration State Regulation Policy Concept (RA Government Decision 151 of December 30, 2010) // http.
//www.smsmta.am/?id=948.
compliance with the requirements of conventions and agreements relating to cooperation on social protection issues25.
At present, Armenia's migration policy is influenced by its membership in the EEU, which enables "the free movement of goods, services, capital and labor, as well as the conduct of a systematic, agreed or common policy in the field of economy" 26.
  Moreover, the regular meeting of the Eurasian Economic Commission (EEC) took place on February 18, where, among other issues, the issue of simplifying the general migration policy of the Union was discussed.
 In particular, it was decided not to apply national defense measures to the citizens of the union, who can expect the same rights and privileges as the citizens of the host country.
27 Given that the Russian economy plays a key role in the need for cheap labor within the Union, the simplification of the EEC migration policy may have a mixed effect on Armenia.
  If there is a certain devaluation of the ruble in the near future, in this case we should already expect that the Armenian migrants rushing to the Russian labor market will obviously become more active.
  On the one hand, this will alleviate the burden of the domestic labor market, will provide a certain inflow of capital to the country, on the other hand, can become a serious threat to the national security of the country.
  It is no secret that human resources are of strategic importance for Armenia, the deprivation of which will raise the question of the prospect of the country's normal development.
  From the point of view of providing strategic and security guarantees, the "equivalent" of the loss of human capital in our country should not be considered the remittances of migrants to the homeland.
 The application of this formula in the near future may lead to insufficient level of human resources.
  In particular, it is necessary to develop and implement national structures that will make it possible to control the rate of emigration, to have clear, accurate statistics not for quarters, but for each month.
 Aiming to raise public awareness of the dangers of illegal migration as well as legal work 25 See ibid.
26 See the official website of the Eurasian Economic Union: http.
//www.eaeunion.org/?lang=am#about-info.
27 See http!
//www.eurasiancommission.org/en/nae/news/Pages/18-02-2016-4.aspx on migration opportunities, it is also necessary to establish free counseling centers.
In the 21st century, educational migration is a type of "soft" migration, which is conditioned by the following factors: 1) obtaining a temporary residence status in a developed country, 2) striving to receive a quality education in a developed country.
As a result of the reforms in the education system since independence, the Republic of Armenia has become a country accessible to higher education for foreign citizens28.
  One of the modern tools of the RA migration policy should be the encouragement of the admission of foreign citizens to the RA higher educational institutions, which may have a positive impact on the progress of the scientific research field, but in recent years there is a tendency to decrease the total number of foreign students.
Thus, the current migration situation in the Republic of Armenia is generally problematic, the reason for which can be considered the shortcomings of the policy of state regulation of migration in accordance with the requirements of human sustainable development and national security.
  It is undeniable that most of the challenges of the migration system of the Republic of Armenia are problems arising from the migration situation of the past twenty-five years, which, having not been solved before, have been transferred to the current stage.
 In order not to pass on these issues to the next generations, at this stage the main emphases of the RA migration policy should be considered the mitigation of negative migration risks, the effective management of migration flows և factors.
28 “Sustainable Human Development Index for Armenia.
  Methodology Development Considerations (Recommendations for Improving the Current UN Methodology) "// http.
//www.armstat.am/file/article/eco_11_16.pdf.
29 See "Statistical Yearbook of Armenia 2015", http.
//www.armstat.am/am/?nid=191&year=2015.
Narek Grigoryan CURRENT CHALLENGES OF MIGRATION POLICY IN ARMENIA Keywords: migration policy, migration regulations, migrants, foreign citizens Summary.
