COVERING THE PROBLEMS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES ON ARMENIAN TV ON LEGALLY AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVES
 Due to the inaccessibility of the physical environment, people with disabilities are artificially deprived of their right to be part of society.
 As a result, not having the opportunity to have real contact with people with disabilities, the attitude of most non-disabled people towards this social group is formed only on the basis of stereotypes or social myths.
  That is why the birth of a child with a disability in the family or the acquisition of a disability by one of the family members is often a shock to the whole family.
Many simply do not know how to deal with the situation.
The media has a huge role to play in informing the public, breaking stereotypes, and developing a positive attitude towards people.
 They, of course, can contribute to the formation of a society accessible to all in Armenia, a society that equally cares for all its members and guarantees the full protection of the rights of persons with disabilities.
Today, those in charge of the field և organizations concerned with the issue agree that the topic of disability should never be left out of the media attention.
 But it is not enough to talk only about the quantity.
  The quality of coverage is paramount.
  The principles of disability coverage have been developed over the years by NGOs working with the media7.
  Fundamental Rights of Persons with Disabilities Page 6 Sargsyan S., Law of the Republic of Armenia on Social Affairs, Manual, Government of the Republic of Armenia, Y., 2014, p. 1.
 http:
//www.mlsa.am/home/index.php?home.7 Andreasyan K., On the activities of the RA Human Rights Defender մարդու on human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country, annual report, Human Rights Defender's Office, Yerevan, 2015, p. 114.
 http:
//www.ombuds.am/. They follow the legislative pyramid, which consists of the RA Constitution, the Law on Social Protection of Persons with Disabilities in the RA.
  Article 14.1 of the RA Constitution stipulates the article. "All people are equal before the law."
 Discrimination based on disability, age or other social circumstances is prohibited. ”
  Article 3 of the RA Law on Social Protection of Persons with Disabilities stipulates: "People with disabilities have the same rights, freedoms and responsibilities defined by the RA Constitution և laws as other persons."
The priority for journalists should be the cooperation of persons with disabilities, organizations representing their interests, the study and generalization of their experience8.
 One should not focus too much on the physical problem of a person.
 It is necessary to show the opportunities of the people, to talk about their ability to become full members of the society.
 Education, equal opportunities to get a profession, appropriate technical conditions, social services, people with disabilities can bring great benefits to their families and society.
 Often the journalist և media outlet become the last instance to which the citizen applies, hoping to achieve truth և justice.
 In such cases, the journalist assumes the role of the defender of the citizen's interests, urging the relevant instances և officials to pay attention to the issue.
 In addition, media coverage also influences public opinion.
  The social policy pursued in the field of disability is aimed at the social protection of persons with disabilities in all areas (legal, economic, environmental, etc.), the provision of equal opportunities for persons with disabilities with other citizens of the country and the creation of equal conditions in all spheres of life.
 In order to create the most equal conditions, in addition to ensuring access to the environment, it is also possible to fully organize the social, psychological and professional rehabilitation of persons with disabilities, which will contribute to the process of education, employment and social activity of persons with disabilities.
 The topic of disability is mostly misinterpreted by the Armenian media.
8 Alaverdyan A., Involvement of children and youth with disabilities, methodological manual, Unison, E., 2010, p. 7.
Mistakes are very common, they are repeated by most journalists.
Very often, when a journalist with many years of experience is covering an event related to this topic, it seems to us that no mistake will be made, we listen to the material and that is all, we are satisfied with that.
  However, the fact of being a good journalist is often not enough. The journalist often does not know the topic well enough; in the report he frequently utters expressions that are not correct both ethically and legally.
  It seems to everyone that when covering the problems of people with disabilities, they should prepare a material that causes pity.
 Basically, there is no positive image that will break the stereotypes of the society.
  And our goal is to break all these stereotypes, to prove the complete opposite, to come to the conclusion that if there are rules in the legal-ethical field, then they must be applied in practice.
  All that is flawed so far.
 The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs of the Republic of Armenia, as well as other ministries and departments, successfully cooperates with non-governmental organizations and local self-government bodies in implementing social programs aimed at increasing the social protection of persons with disabilities and ensuring a comprehensive approach to solving existing problems.
  As the public is informed by the media, and the media prepares all the materials that reflect our current image, especially in the case of vulnerable groups, the journalist has no right to make mistakes, because everything they hear is copied.
Society is also educated through television.
 And very often the wrong expressions made on TV are used when talking about people with disabilities.
 This problem will be on Armenian TV as long as the legal field does not take serious steps in this direction.
The media representative has no right to be uninformed when covering such a topic.
 All sections of the society who have some connection with this field, the press, already have an obligation to be well aware of the legal-ethical norms of this field, taking into account the possible circumstance that the person in question does not comply with legal-ethical norms. which has been covered և incorrectly, can sue և defend its interests.
  Journalists and media organizations can strengthen or weaken stereotypes by presenting different social groups in a comprehensive or clear way.
 They can promote social tensions և conflicts, promote peace, help each group in society to receive proper treatment և attention.
 A journalist covering social issues should have knowledge of the target groups, as well as the problems and language of experts, social workers, communities, to avoid illiterate, naive writing, and to avoid misleading references from "government sources."
  Social journalism should cover more the impact of a situation or action on their victims than their course.
 From an ethical point of view, it can be called "upside down" journalism, because the mistakes and omissions are not only noticeable by the media.
Journalists covering social issues on Armenian television should have sources.
  Good journalism in this field means talking to drug addicts about heroin, children about school or nanny, the poor and minorities about their lives, while not forgetting that problems, before being emotional, are political4.
    Evaluations and conclusions that create stereotypes should be avoided.
 Publications should help the reader to break the accepted stereotypes that people with disabilities only need care և can not be useful.
2013 On December 3, AR TV broadcast a report by Nune Simonyan, a long-time experienced journalist.
  Nune Simonyan knows the political field better, her main job is to cover that sphere.
 However, the journalist covering the political sphere is sent to prepare a report on people with disabilities. What happens?
1) During the whole report, wrong expressions are heard about people with disabilities.
2) When preparing the given report, the shots do not correspond to each other at all. The journalist talks about people with mobility problems, and in the shot he shows people with mental problems, attributing these mobility problems to them.
4 Karapetyan I., How to communicate with people with disabilities, for young entrepreneurs, USAID, E., 2014, page 8.
3) Presents people with disabilities as if they can do nothing.
4) During the whole report, only the wrong expression of the word "disabled" is heard, instead of which we should say "disabled".
5) Presents digital data, saying that today 150,000 (one hundred and fifty thousand) disabled people are registered in Armenia, forgetting the fact that by that word we mean people with different problems.
 As a result, most people with disabilities, as well as some journalists, can imagine all the people in need, but let's not forget that both the person in a wheelchair and the person with a minor health problem, but who has a disability, have a disability as well. is considered to have a disability.
Now let's present examples of 2013. From Nune Simonyan's author's report aired by "AR" TV on December 3.
 They will prove once again that journalistic ethics has not been observed.
"More than 150,000 disabled people are registered in Armenia today.
They are our relatives, our neighbors, our compatriots.
 So let 's put aside our contempt քով and turn to those who feel the need for it more.
 Let's love our neighbors not only with words, "the journalist utters such sentences in his report, which already cause pity in the society towards those people, instead of breaking stereotypes.
We can not fail to mention Kristine Voskanyan, one of the journalists of this TV channel, who is more sensitive when covering the problems of the social sphere, տալիս gives information about each person and makes a preliminary check how the right egg will apply to him։.
 This is evidenced by 2015. The report prepared by him on February 24 on the topic "Presentation of a study on access to higher education for people with disabilities in Armenia with the support of the OSCE".
 All the norms of journalistic ethics were observed, from interviewing a person with a disability, when you have to sit down to be equal to him, or go down so that there is equality both in the staff and in general, in your "environment", observing the norms of journalistic ethics.
The use of relevant photos is encouraged.
  However, special attention should be paid to their choice.
 Here ևshould not choose personnel who are unnecessarily focused on a person's physical problem or do not contain enough information about him, which is ethically wrong5.
Conducting a comparative analysis with Disability, let's present what the mechanism of correct operation can be.
 In particular, in 2015 On June 25, 2012, Disability presented a comprehensive article on the rights of people with disabilities, their opportunities, and the correct rules of coverage.
  And this is not seen as a pity, but as a teaching, dictating the right rules, which contains all the standards of ethics.
  By making a comparative analysis, the omissions and shortcomings become noticeable, առավել the advantage of Disability becomes noticeable, which, unfortunately, is missing in Armenian TV.
The journalist tells stories that interest people in journalistic language, but making a complicated story easy to understand can have serious ethical consequences: • Do you not exploit someone's misfortune, • Do you over-simplify a complicated story, • Is it right when parents They use their children to point out the shortcomings of social services. • Do not the media perpetuate the notion of victim in describing people with social problems?
"Disability" is a social concept, not a medical one.
 In the context of the social model of disability, it is logical to use appropriate terminology that does not create negative stereotypes, does not offend the dignity of a person with a disability.
 Defamation ավոր Insult 87 According to Article 1087.1, a public expression in a given situation ությամբ in its content may not be considered an insult, if it is based on exact facts (except for natural defects) or due to a overriding public interest.
  As in the case of a racial description, the choice of a term for a person with a disability is often based on stereotypes and other sensory perceptions6.
A person should never be mentioned exclusively according to his disability: lame, deaf-mute, blind, mentally retarded, mentally ill, say 5 Asribabyan E., Relationships begin with attitude, E., 2013, p. 17.
6 Alaverdyan A., Equal Opportunities, information booklet, Unison, E., 2011, page 31.
nailed to the spray.
 The word "normal" should not be used to refer to a person without a disability (when compared to people with disabilities).
  The principle of correct terminology is that the primary person is 7.
The RA Law on Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ալական The Law on Social Inclusion defines the availability of information համար communication for persons with disabilities.
Համար Access to information, mass media, information technologies և electronic communication for persons with disabilities is ensured by the authorized body in accordance with the procedure established by the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
 Existing websites, as well as newly designed websites, are subject to customization taking into account the general design principles.
Եւ Public և private TV and radio companies provide translation of children's և news TV programs into sign language.
Համապատասխան For people with disabilities, based on their individual needs, the development of appropriate information technology և programs and the provision of equipment or rehabilitation equipment is carried out by the competent state bodies.
In fact, however, there is still serious work to be done in the field of protection of the rights of persons with disabilities, as well as in the field of their coverage ethics.
* The problems of people with disabilities are presented on the RA TV in pity-causing shades, as well as with local pathos.
 The media often do not pay attention to the words used to describe their heroes.
  They should broadcast the message with humor, which will give an opportunity to convey the material without boring the audience.
* When presenting people with disabilities, the media does not mention their opportunities in a positive light, for example, how much work they do, which can be useful in addition to providing care.
7 Sanosyan S., Equal Opportunities, information booklet, Unison, E., 2011, page 15.
* People with disabilities are represented on the RA TV ("AR" TV և RA Public TV) as full members of the society, not passive, non-self-observers, who have education, opportunities to get a profession, appropriate technical conditions հնարավորություն access to social services, which is very frequent. Not on other TV channels.
* Televisions often do not take into account the information about people with disabilities that inform the younger audience that children should be shown positive examples.
 They do not focus on one topic (education, employment, personal life, etc.), but present all this together.
* The RA media do not justify their choice of topic.
 Covering the issue of the accessible environment for people with disabilities, they also talk about the health problems of people with disabilities, which are more personal, it would be right when a special material was prepared about the person.
* From the point of view of journalistic ethics, there are general rules of conduct that are still open!
  Interviewing a person with a disability means contacting him / her, not the escort or the interpreter.
  This can be considered a violation of journalistic ethics.
 Talking to a person with a disability while standing is again wrong and unacceptable.
  A person who uses a wheelchair often becomes a serious topic of discussion in journalism.
  The journalist focuses on such details, pushing what can be said into the background.
As for the specific words և word combinations, there are many proofs, և the shortcomings do not always have corrections.
  Keywords և phrases that are offensive to a person with a disability, such as 'sick', 'lame', 'incomplete', 'wheelchair', 'congenitally disabled', 'immature', 'mental', 'epileptic' , "Shocking" և etc.
  The mentioned words and phrases are taken from the materials covered by the Armenian mass media about people with disabilities.
 These, of course, are stereotypical words և phrases that, unfortunately, have their bad consequences, leaving a mark on people.
Diana ManukyanHASHMANDAMUTYUN HOLDERS OF LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES ON TV LUSABANUMEHAYKAKAN TESANKYUNITSBanali words, behavioral strategies, medical records, fizikakankhndir, social policy, disability issues, the rule of law, ethics, persons with disabilities, to break stereotypes, legal and etikakankhndirnerAmpopum.
