CHARACTERISTICS OF NAME RESPONSIBILITY BASED ON CERTAIN FACTS Nomenclature is a comprehensive legal concept that is characterized as any offense that defames a person.
 In the foreign legal literature, three types of naming are traditionally distinguished: slander, libel և insult, moreover, the first two correspond to defamation in nature, are separated by the expression h (oral or transitive: slander, և written or permanent - libel), and insult is identified with insult.
 There are different types of names per se qu per quod.
 The first is the nomenclature with an expression that the court recognizes as defamatory in its content, in which case the plaintiff is required to prove only the fact of publishing information about him that does not correspond to reality.
 The second is the naming of an expression which attributes to the victim the commission of a crime, dishonest conduct in commercial, business or public activities, an abominable disease or ill-mannered conduct in which the plaintiff must prove his or her reputation, thereby causing real harm to him or her. measured at material value [1].
In the legal doctrine և there are different definitions of the concept of naming in explanatory dictionaries ․ In some sources, naming is explained as the dissemination of both untrue and untrue defamatory facts (information) about a person [2], and in others only the dissemination of defamatory facts (information) that are untrue [3].
 Erdelevsky distinguishes between the following types of naming: a) intentional publication of falsifying names, ie defamation or false naming;
Accurate evidence-based nomenclature is provided in cases where information about a person relating to his or her private or family life is infringed in order to tarnish that person's honor, dignity or business reputation.
Violation of the right to privacy and family life is often accompanied by naming based on accurate facts.
 There are cases when these exact facts reveal a person's lawful actions that do not contradict the law (for example, going to a nudist beach), but are able to demean his reputation, as these actions may not be unequivocally accepted by different circles of society.
  The question arises: is it possible to talk about listing if the published facts are reliable?
  This issue was first widely discussed in 2009 in the United States in connection with the case of Nunen v. Staples.
  The US Court of Appeals, reaffirming the fact that proving the veracity of published facts is a means of absolute protection against defamation, excludes liability, adding that if the publication of the facts was done with the intentional naming of the person (actual malice), it should lead to liability.
 Although this norm is provided by Massachusetts state law, the courts have used it only in the case of naming public figures.
 The verdict in Nunen's case was a turning point in American case law.
 It was criticized by theorists, but it should be noted that this provided a reasonable solution to the problem. If the principle of proportionality is maintained, this regulation can be effectively applied for the purpose of naming any breach of privacy or family life.
In legal theoretical sources, such as the case law of the European Court of Human Rights, there are many concepts according to which the "reputation of a person" and the right to privacy are closely interrelated.
  This view is based on the fact that the violation of the inviolability of private life leads to the degradation of the victim հեղինակ հեղինակ հեղինակ հեղինակ հեղինակ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 The interest in not disclosing certain facts relating to privacy is intended to protect a person's reputation.
Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia [7] stipulates that everyone has the right to privacy, family life, honor and good reputation.
 A person's private life is the part of his personal life that is inviolable to others.
 A person's family life is the family relationship he or she has, which includes the relationships between family members: spouses, parents, children (adoptive and adopted).
 The ECtHR, however, does not limit family relationships to the above-mentioned framework,, considering at least relations between close relatives և as they և can play a significant role in family life.
 Family ties should not be viewed from a purely legal point of view, but from a legal point of view, as they arise regardless of the fact that the relationship is legally (un) formalized. [8]
  Thus, naming based on accurate facts simultaneously violates two constitutional rights: the right to privacy - the right to inviolability of family life, the right to honor and reputation, the two basic fundamental rights - the right to respect for private, family life and the protection of authority.
  However, Armenia has adopted the general principle in many countries (including Germany [9], Austria [10], Russia [11], Czech Republic [12], Latvia [13]) that naming is a basis for liability only when The information spread in order to tarnish a person's honor, dignity or business reputation is false.
The following are some of the substantive issues of the RA Civil Code based on naming based on exact facts ներ Suggestions for their solution: 1. The RA Civil Code defines two ways of defamation of honor, dignity և business reputation through insult վիրslander.
  Both are different types of naming.
  Insult is a public expression used to defame honor, dignity or business reputation through words, images, sounds, signs or otherwise, and if the public expression is based on exact facts (other than natural defects) or is in the public interest, then տվյալ It may not be considered an insult in its content.
  Defamation is the publication of factual information about a person that does not correspond to reality and tarnishes his or her honor, dignity, or business reputation.
 At the same time, the publication of factual information about a person that does not correspond to reality, defaming his honor, dignity or business reputation, is not considered slander, if in the given situation և the content is due to the overriding public interest, և if the person presenting the facts publicly proves that he has taken reasonable steps. veracity (source: truth) և justification, as he և balanced և presented these data in good faith.
  Equilibrium refers to the data presented գեր overriding public interest.
  In other words, the publication of data should not contain defamatory information that is not related to that issue են is beyond the permissible limits due to the overriding public interest.
    Integrity presupposes a change in factual data, a complete, meaningless change of facts.
  In fact, if the published factual data are false, but measures have been taken within reason to find out their veracity, the "justification, as it is presented" in a balanced manner, in good faith, then the published facts are "equated" with accurate facts.
 It should be noted that the published expression or fact is accordingly insulting և the legal significance of the overriding public interest for not being considered a slander is placed on different levels ․ in the first case it emerges as a basis independently, in the second case if the other condition exists at the same time.
  We believe that the objectives of Article 1087.1, Part 5, Clause 2, Part 2, Paragraph 2 coincide, therefore, the criteria set by them should be the same.
 Based on the experience of some countries (Canada [15], Australia [16]), we are inclined to think that the simultaneous existence of two conditions is mandatory in case of "insult" and "slander".
  Therefore, it is proposed to edit the 2nd paragraph of Part 2 of Article 1087.1 of the RA Civil Code with the following content: "For the purposes of this Code, a public expression in a given situation և in its content may not be considered an insult if it is based on exact facts (except for natural defects) և is conditioned by public supremacy."
2. The legal regulation defined by Article 151 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, that is, if a citizen has been morally harmed by an act violating his personal non-property rights or encroaching on immaterial property, as in other cases provided by law, the court may impose monetary compensation on the offender. .
  That is, when moral damage is caused by violation of personal non-property rights or encroachment on intangible property, the damage is compensated regardless of whether such compensation is specifically provided by law or not, while in case of violation of property rights, the existence of a special law providing for such compensation is mandatory.
 162.1 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia 150 Articles 150 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation define the concept of intangible assets, moreover, with literally the same content, that is, intangible assets, in accordance with this Code and other laws, are protected in the cases and in the same manner as in those cases. within the limits to which the use of civil rights protection methods derives from the nature of the violated non-substantive law and the nature of the consequences of those violations.
 In fact, the enactment of this legal norm makes it possible to consider the use of civil remedies in case of violation of personal non-property rights, in particular, compensation for non-pecuniary damage, even if they are not directly provided by law for the protection of this personal non-property right.
 Meanwhile, according to Part 4 of Article 17 of the RA Civil Code, non-material damage is subject to compensation only in cases provided by law.
 We believe that Articles 150 և 151 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation are in line with the protection of all personal non-property rights and non-material goods provided by the Code, which cannot be achieved in connection with the RA Civil Code by combining the provisions of Articles 162.1 և 17 above.
  Therefore, it is proposed to amend Part 4 of Article 17 of the RA Civil Code, to edit with the following content: "If a citizen has suffered moral damage by violating his personal non-property rights or encroaching on intangible property, as in other cases provided by law, the court may impose a monetary obligation on the offender to compensate the damage caused."
 This will enable the objectives of Article 162.1 of the Civil Code to be effectively implemented in practice.
3. It should be noted that the RA Law on Personal Data Protection has been in force since 2015 [17], the subject of which is regulated by sole state or local self-government bodies, state or community institutions or organizations, legal entities or individuals. the procedure and conditions for processing personal data, exercising state control over them.
  In general, personal information is any information relating to a natural person that allows or may allow the direct or indirect identification of a person.
  This means that the RA Law on Personal Data Protection does not regulate the cases when data related to a person's private or family life are illegally published by other persons without their consent.
Liability for violation of the RA Law on Personal Data Protection is defined by Article 189.17 of the RA Code on Administrative Offenses [18].
  At the same time, the RA Criminal Code provides for the punishment of disseminating or collecting or keeping such information considered to be personal or family secret without the consent of the person through public speeches, publicly displayed works or through the media, if they are not provided by law.
  In this case, the punishment is a fine in the amount of 200,000 to 500,000 drams or detention for one to two months.
  This crime covers the situation in question.
Taking into account the fact that the legislation provides an opportunity to file a civil lawsuit against a person accused of committing a crime against life or health, demanding contractual obligations, such as military service, police service, compensation for damage to life or health of a citizen while performing other relevant duties. Article) proposes to establish the possibility of compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused by naming based on exact facts by the RA Civil Code.
 Moreover, the addition can be made both within the framework of Article 1087.1, as well as by envisaging a separate article.
  Of course, in the case of the implementation of the previous proposal, there will be no need for special provision for the possibility of non-pecuniary damage caused by naming based on exact facts.
LITERATURE [1] Conclusion of the Board of the Scientific-Analytical Center under the Council of the Chamber of Advocates of the Republic of Armenia № 26-11-A, Yerevan, 08.11.2011, pp. 6-7, URL.
  http:
//www.lex.am/docs/ezrakacutyun%201087.1.pdf (link made on 13.04.2018).
[2] Aghayan E. B., Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian, "Hayastan" Publishing House, Yerevan, 1976.
[3] Cambridge Dictionary, URL.
https:
//dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/defame(Accessed.
 01.04.2018), English Oxford Living Dictionaries, URL.
 https:
//en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/defamation (Accessed.
 01.04.2018). [4] Эрделевский А. M., Compensation of moral value.
  analysis and comments [5] Noonan v. Staples, Inc., No. 07-2159 (1st Cir. 2009), Justia US Law, URL.
https:
//law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/ca1/07-2159/07-2159p2-01a-2011-0225.html (Accessed.
 16.04.2018). Anne SY Cheung, Open Access Laws, Revisiting Privacyand Dignity.
 Online Shaming in the Global E-Village, 2014.Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 2012, URL.
http:
//law.aua.am/files/2012/03/PAPER.pdf. Karako v. Hungary, no 39311/05, ECHR, URL.
 https:
//www.echr.coe.int/Documents/FS_Reputation_ENG.pdf (Accessed.
12.04.2018).
[7] Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, adopted on 05.07.1995, entered into force on 13.07.1995, the last amendments were adopted on 06.12.2015, entered into force on 22.12.2015, ARPA 2015.12.21, Special Issue, Article 1118
[8] "Amended Constitution. personal rights. Part 2 ", Armenian Legal Directory, Legal Portal, 16.02.2016, URL.
 http:
//legalportal.am/cat/viewnews/2296 (Accessed.
 12.04.2018) .URL.
 https:
//www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_stgb/englisch_stgb.html#p1703.[10] International Press Institute, MediaLaws Database, URL.
http:
//legaldb.freemedia.at/legal-database/austria/?target=civil-defamation.29.12.2017), Article 152, URL.
http:
//www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_5142/1de6cd3cbb386056a2ecd2c64f
f087b13c8de585 / (date of application.
 12.04.2018) ․157, URL.
 file:
/// C:
/Users/Home/Downloads/Latvia_CC_am2013_en.pdf.[14] Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, Article 1087.1, was adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999, ARPA 1998.08.10 / 17 (50).
[15] Dearden R., Wagner W., Canadian Libel Law Enters the 21st Century.
 The PublicInterest Responsible Communication Defense, page 353, URL.
https:
//commonlaw.uottawa.ca/ottawa-law-review/sites/commonlaw.uottawa.ca.ottawa-lawreview/files/16_41ottawalrev3512009-2010.pdf (Accessed.
 12.04.2018) .URL.
 https:
//www.thenewsmanual.net/Resources/medialaw_in_australia_02.html. [17] The RA Law on Personal Data Protection was adopted on 18.05.2015, entered into force on 01.07.2015, ARPA 2015.06.18 / 35 (1124), Article 462.
[18] The RA Code on Administrative Offenses was adopted on 06.12.1985, entered into force on 01.06.1986 ․ HSSHGST 1985/23.
[19] RA Criminal Code, Article 144, adopted on 18.04.2003, entered into force on 01.08.2003, ARPA 2003.05.02 / 25 (260), Article 407.
Lily Drmeyan FEATURES OF RESPONSIBILITY OF NAME BASED ON EXACT FACTS Keywords: accurate fact-based naming, definition, honor, dignity, business reputation, author
.
