THE FUNCTION OF SIGNIFICANT WORDS IN GERMAN: IN COMMANDMENTS REQUIRING DEMANDS Adjectives belong to the number of parts of speech that appear relatively late.
However, when we say that they appeared in terms of time later, it does not mean that they were completely absent in the old period of German history.
 First of all, grammatical words differ from other parts of speech in that they have neither a material nor a grammatical meaning.
  They are words expressing attitude և show the thought-thinking attitude that և differs from other parts of speech that do not bend in their main meaning and syntactic uses.
Adjectives are syntactically distinguished by the following features: • Adjectives, unlike other inflected parts of speech, can be preceded by a preposition.
• Weather words can not be stressed.
• Weather words can not make degrees of comparison և etc.
According to the semantics, Lehmann and Spreger distinguish five groups of modal words: • Vowel (vielleicht, kaum) • Severe (offenbar, selbstverständlich) • Emotional or evaluative (leider) • Positive և negative (ja, doch, gewiss, nein) • Concise (übrigens, schließlich, eigentlich) Adjectives have their own role in all kinds of expressive functions - sayings, assertions, assumptions, etc.
  As the speaker's comments, they reflect the speaker's attitude toward the situation presented by him.
In imperative sentences, as a rule, there is only a limited group of adjectives - wirklich, bestimmt, gewiss, unbedingt. These adjectives differ from other adjectives in that, in general, they themselves bear the emphasis of the sentence. For example, since the rest of the syntactic words are not used in imperative sentences, the latter are used as test sentences to distinguish them from the macabre modules.
  Demanding sentences do not always have the form of an imperative sentence.
 Weather words are widely used in narrative sentences, some of which can also appear in imperative sentences.
The aim of this work is to study the peculiarities of the use of modal words in demanding sentences.
 The article raises the following two questions: • In what sentence expressing command, demand, what are the modal words?
• What function do the latter perform in such sentences?
The work is based on K. of the classification of moderating words. Principle 1 of Dealing.
The following groups are considered: • [+ categorical] moderators, subgroup: [+ secondary], for example, wirklich.
• Modifiers with [-categorical] attributes, subgroups of [+ subjective motives], eg sicher, vielleicht.
• Sensitive, clearly subordinate, subgroup [+ typical], such as freundlicherweise.
• Interpretive words that are clearly subordinate, subgroup [+ typical], for example, vorsichtigerweise.
Demanding sentences have been studied from an early age with different approaches.
 V. Motch, for example, describes demand as a means of serving the speaker, which motivates the speaker to perform a certain action.
 As strong presuppositions, Mott puts forward the following: • The action required must be about the future, • The speaker must assume that the speaker will master the action, • The speaker must accept the speaker's desire or purpose.
Imperative sentences fulfill these important conditions in the context of the Linguistic Conjugation.
  However, as Barchat shows, imperative sentences are not always the best way to express an order, a call, a demand.
In order to differentiate whether the demand is subject to mandatory fulfillment or not, the fact that the speaker is competent to submit such a demand is of great importance.
Demand, command expressions are different from ordinary utterances.
  The classification of non-mandatory sentences is based on the circumstance of who is preferred, the speaker or the interlocutor.
Second-person narrative sentences that refer to the future are aimed at the speaker, who in the sentence acts as an actor (Agens), will not be perceived by the speaker as a conviction, as his initial knowledge of the situation does not allow such an interpretation.
 He concludes from the expressions և from the situation that he is obliged to do what the speaker expresses as a conviction.
  Based on this, he understands that order as one that does not tolerate rejection.
 In these sentences, even the word bitte is not given any choice.
(2a) (2b) (Der Polizist zu den Kindern).
(The Director is the Secretary).
To make such a strong claim, one can take into account the speaker ողի conversational-social relations.
 The following example (Der Direktor zur Sekratärin) would not be acceptable.
In this example, the speaker is not authorized to present the mentioned content as a demand, an order.
 In general, such content can only be expressed as a request.
However, it is sufficient to add to this expression the moderators of the 2nd category [-category], կդ it will become acceptable and will be perceived as a request, for example: Thus, the command is given a hint of assumption instead of the tone of assertion, , because it is possible that the assumption is wrong.
  The function of the predicate word here is to formulate a clear command as a request, or rather to give such a nuance to the word in general that it is acceptable as a requirement, whereas without the predicate word as a requirement it would be rejected and would not succeed.
Of course, the word moderator retains its semantic function in a broad sense, that is, the tendency of the speaker to make a demand.
  However, as a moderator, his verbal 1 Dieling K., Modalwörter des Wissens und Glaubens, in.
 Daf 4/1985. The meaning is obscured.
  Մ. Doherty has studied the meaning of the word wohl in expressions such as "Du bist wohl müde?"
 He comes to the conclusion that the word wohl does not really mean anything in those expressions և has only a communicative nature.
Commands whose speaker is empowered by their social role lose their unwavering rigor when they use group 2 adjectives: sicher, gewiss, bestimmt, wohl, for example (5a) Der Polizist.
(5b) The Director.
Command expressions in which the speaker is authoritative due to his social position lose their cold sternness if they are used with gewiss, bestimmt, offenbar modes, such as (6a) Der Polizist.
(6b) The Director.
If we use the moderators of the second subgroup (zweifellos, gewiss, bestimmt, wohl) in these prepositions, the command will sound louder than without the modifier words.
  If these words are emphasized, they will be severely curtailed, for example, (7a) Der Polizist.
(7b) The Director.
Quite the opposite result is obtained when the speaker organizes modulators with [p Vp] attributes.
 If the speaker does not impose anything on the speaker, but tries to advise, then he leaves the speaker free to choose, և the latter will either do or not, for example, (8a) (8b) Sie machen das vielleicht bis morgen fertig. If the interlocutor does not use that apparent freedom և does not fulfill the demand, then the speaker will express that demand in a different tone.
  The function of the moderators in utterances is to express the speaker's position on the situation based on their awareness.
Requirements limit the possibilities of evaluation.
 According to Motchi 1 and Haftkayik, one of the prerequisites for the demands is that the speaker does not have a negative attitude towards the action he is obliged to perform.
 Therefore, the use of negative moderators in demand expressions is excluded, in other words, if a negative moderator word is used in a narrative sentence, such a sentence can only be interpreted firmly, but not as a demand, call or encouragement.
Since the demand or urge is addressed to the speaker, և the latter acts as the subject in the narrative sentences, it is to be expected that only subjective or interpretive words will be used, such as sentences with gottseidank, glücklicherweise և similar modal words. can only be understood as an assertion, since the mentioned modal words are definitely not subject.
  Sentences with the modal word Liebenswürdigerweise, on the other hand, are perceived as a requirement in the appropriate context.
 It is necessary to make a certain distinction between the moderators that are definitely subject.
 Only modifiers that correspond to the typical features of the sentence can be used in the expressive sentences.
  The phrase "freundlich sein", "liebenswürdig sein" can be attributed to the speaker, but not "dankenswert sein" or "lobenswert sein".
 The words of the 3rd group, sensory, subjunctive, are applicable in such demanding expressions.
  They give a binding tone to the sentences expressing a mandatory demand.
Explicitly related subject words (vorsichtigerweise, klugerweise, anständigerweise, korrekterweise, etc.) can be used in demanding sentences, such as the sensory words listed above, for example: (10a) Sie gewähren mir (doch) fairerweise Revanche! (10 b) Bei dies! fährst du vorsichtigerweise mit Interpretive words are not used in mandatory expressions.
  In this case, it does not matter whether the speaker is entitled to make such a request or not, because even if he is authorized, he does not use that circumstance.
  In such sentences, the use of sensory և adverbial words is identical with the [-spoken speaker] attribute.
  The word weathering here also assumes a communicative function, as it expresses not only the position of the speaker, but also shows that the word belongs to the theoretical subgroup.
 Compared to examples (5), (6), the word modifier does not lose its specific interpretation.
If the communicating persons are socially or legally equal, the direct demand of one takes the form of a non-binding demand of the other.
  The request is defined only as an issue within the interests of the speaker.
 A narrative sentence without an adverbial word is not intended to express a request, as its dry tone contradicts the nature of the word.
 This is a bit like example (5).
 On the contrary, in the Requests "s" or rarely, but there are interpretive words.
 In that case, it seems that the speaker points out the moral right to fulfill his request.
  Compare (12a), (12b), for example, so only [+ morally valued] commentary words are applicable to this type of request.
  Logically valuable interpretive words such as klugerweise, umsichtigerweise are excluded, as in the case of's (12) example, when using the word fairerweise instead.
Logical interpretive words can also be found in demanding sentences.
 Haftka1 describes such proposals as [in the interest of the speaker, in the interest of the speaker].
 If the action relates equally to the "speaker" to the interlocutor, the speaker can naturally rely on the interlocutor's intelligent behavior, for example, the first person plural can also be used to make suggestions.
Even without the appropriate word, the corresponding phrase will be perceived as a suggestion if the situation already dictates it.
 And outside of the verbal context it will be perceived as a promise, for example, it is enough to add comment words (anständigerweise, klugerweise, etc.) clearly in the sentence only in example (16), բոլոր all possibilities of perceiving the sentence as a promise will be excluded at once, և sentences will be perceived only as sentences.
Indirect sentences expressing a non-binding requirement can be expressed in the first person singular past tense (Konjunktiv Präteritum).
  The interlocutor informs the interlocutor what he would do in such a situation, thus pushing him to act in the same way.
 Adjectives are not necessary to understand such sentences, but they can be helpful.
 In this case, the words of the 2nd group with the [+ categorical] attribute and the commentary words referring to the subject are applicable, for example, B. Barchat considers question sentences to be a very common way to make indirect claims.
  The demand expressed in question sentences is considered polite.
 The questions "Kassnt du ..." are widespread, for example: Since modal words, with some exceptions, are out of use in interrogative speech, thus they are seldom used in demanding interrogative sentences.
  The exception is the word modifying vielleicht, which can be used in interrogative sentences such as "Kannst du".
Exceptions are emotional words related to the subject.
  The latter are also often found in requesting interrogative sentences, intensifying the tone of the obligation in the speech, for example, interrogative sentences with negative subjective words directed at the subject in person 2 are first perceived as reproach, then as unspoken demand, for example, Mariam Martirosyan IN EXPRESSIVE SENTENCES Keywords: moderating word, command, sentence expressing demand,
Comment word:
.
