THE IMPACT OF MODERN TRENDS ON GLOBALIZATION IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF ARMENIA'S TOURISM INDUSTRY At the end of the 20th century, human civilization collided with new phenomena and spread rapidly.
We are talking about globalization, which can be considered one of the main concepts characterizing modern life.
 Globalization is talked about from various platforms, from yard pavilions to high chairs.
 A number of experts have referred to the study of the phenomenon of globalization, putting forward different positions, but so far it has not been possible to give a final qualification, putting the positive and negative consequences of globalization on the scales.
But one thing is clear: globalization affects everyone.
 If we try to define globalization in the simplest way, based on different authors, in particular, R. Robertson, E. Giddens և P. The definitions put forward by F. Drucker, then it will sound as follows: "Globalization is the process of intensification and integration of economic, political, social, cultural relations outside the state borders."
It is self-evident that globalization could not bypass one of the most dynamically developing sectors of the economy, the tourism industry.
  The relationship between globalization and tourism is quite complex.
 On the one hand, the processes of globalization affect tourism, greatly predetermining its development paths and prospects, on the other hand, tourism is one of the ways of globalization.
  According to futurologists J. Nesbit և P. Eburdin's tourism, trade և television form the basis of the world way of life [1].
  However, in this article we will focus only on the impact of globalization on the tourism industry.
The impact of globalization on the tourism industry becomes more visible when we consider its separate trends.
Globalization has brought with it a number of tendencies, which have been actively integrated into the economic and social life of the society.
Among them, economization (economization), technology և informatization, ecology, cultural identification (unification) արտ standardization are especially widespread.
  Tourism has not been left out of the influence of these tendencies.
  They have created wide opportunities for tourism development and added a new quality to the tour product.
 Let's talk about each of them: Economization ․ As a result of globalization, the economic borders between the states were "erased", which made it possible to increase the level of international cooperation, increasing the competitiveness of the sector.
 The current stage of economic development is characterized by an increase in the number of transnational organizations and their levers of influence.
  The latter also have a great weight in tourism այլ other related spheres - air transport, hotel-restaurant industry և elsewhere.
 At first glance, all this seems quite positive and profitable. Large transnational corporations set up subsidiaries in developing countries in transition economies, providing a large flow of investment and creating large numbers of jobs.
  However, this phenomenon has a negative impact on national economies, especially in developing countries, which are pushed out of competition due to lack of sufficient resources, giving way to large "players".
  In Armenia, this is very vividly expressed in the hotel sector.
  Large hotel chains, such as Hilton, Marriott, Radisson, and Best Western, dominate the industry, limiting the chances of national companies succeeding.
  It is conditioned by the fact that the above-mentioned networks already have a clear strategy, occupy a certain position in the market, have formed their image with the customers.
 Therefore, it is not surprising that when choosing, customers prefer these hotels.
As a result of economicization, the structure of the economy changes.
 In the past, the economy could be represented by a bourgeoisie, which was based on agriculture, the middle zone belonged to industry, and here the narrowest part was to the services sector.
 Now the picture is quite the opposite: the pyramid has turned upside down.
 The structure of the economy is typical mainly of post-industrial countries, but in Armenia we also have this picture, which is conditioned not by the theatrical, regular development, but by a number of other reasons.
After the collapse of the USSR, the industry of the Republic of Armenia is in a paralyzed state, and the rates of development of agriculture and the villages that are being emptied day by day prove that the way out of the current situation is the development of the third sector.
 It is not accidental that tourism is considered a priority direction of economic development in Armenia.
Technology և Informatization. The spread of globalization became possible through technological progress, which laid the foundation for the formation of the information society.
  At present, information has become the most valuable resource.
  Due to the unprecedented development of information technologies, today the level of access to information has greatly increased, which becomes a stimulus for the development of tourism.
  People have easy access to information about different countries and their cultures, which leads to interest, և the well-known "AIDA" model of customer behavior (attention, interest, desire, action) is activated.
 However, the behavior model of customers who are members of the information society is slightly different, that is, two Ss have been added - "AISAS" (attention, interest, search, action, share).
In addition, as a result of these trends, a wide range of online marketing opportunities have been created, both through PR and advertising, which are powerful tools for promoting tourism products.
 Recently, Armenia is registering success in this field.
  Videos are actively shot in which Armenia is presented in the best way through the eyes of a tourist.
  Thus, the commercial shot by Arthur Janibekyan with the participation of Russian-Armenians entitled "Stars are close in Armenia" was presented to the public.
The technology also introduced the electronic booking system, which shortens the existing chain between the customer and the service provider, often leaving tour agents out of the game.
 Now the number of tourists who organize their vacation without leaving home through online booking and payment systems is gradually increasing.
 Here, of course, it should be taken into account that there is a risk of leakage of tourists' personal data.
Informatization also has its disadvantages, among which, from the point of view of the tourism industry, the most dangerous are the manipulations carried out through information.
 Arriving in Armenia, tourists have been pleasantly surprised to see the current situation. Most of them think that there is a state of war in Armenia, the security of tourists is not ensured.
 All this is a result of spreading misinformation, which leads to a decrease in interest in our country among potential tourists.
Ecology. The main goal of this և mission is to introduce and implement the ideas of preservation of the natural environment և sustainable development in different spheres of public life.
  As a result of combining ecology and tourism, the concept of sustainable tourism has been created.
 Sustainable tourism presupposes the development of tourism that does not question the ability of future generations to meet their needs, make extensive use of resources while preserving and ensuring their long-term use.
The development of sustainable tourism in the Republic of Armenia will allow solving three groups of problems at once: economic, socio-cultural and ecological.
  Economic tourism contributes to the active involvement of the local population in the process of serving tourists, ensuring the employment of the population, the sale of local goods, and raising the standard of living.
Sustainable tourism (CE) is also a tool in the field of economic development and decentralization, which is considered a very serious problem for Armenia.
  In socio-cultural terms, the CC contributes to the popularization of national culture among the population, and as a result, to the increase of national self-consciousness.
  The CC presupposes a new quality of relations between the host population and the "tourists", which views the tourist not as a purse of money, which should be emptied as much as possible, but as a guest to be received and seen off at a decent price.
 In Armenia, however, we still have this problem.
 Of course, the ecological aspect of the CC will allow the tourist destinations to be used rationally և Do not exceed the maximum permissible recreational load limits.
 From this point of view, eco-tourism ագր agro-tourism is considered a promising branch in Armenia, for the development of which we have excellent opportunities: beautiful և unique natural resources, centuries-old traditions իհարկե, of course, hospitality that has no prototype in the world.
  We already have successful experiments in this regard, among which the Kalavan community stands out, which proves the inevitability of success as a result of a harmonious combination of the above three aspects.
Standardization և cultural identification. The next form of globalization is standardization, which has also entered the service sector.
 Some experts consider this process to be a positive tool for quality control.
 It is no secret that the variability of quality is one of the main features of any service, which leads to certain difficulties associated with each sale.
  According to German professor Gunther Schuah, "Service standards allow us to grow from a service jungle to a service park."
  On the one hand, standardization provides an opportunity to find comparisons և to facilitate the process of choosing services for customers, on the other hand, the question arises: to what extent is it appropriate to standardize the service that exists among individuals?
  When we talk about services, we emphasize its orientation towards the individual with unique needs.
  As a result of standardization, we lose the "individuality" of the service.
 A situation arises when it becomes impossible to find out in which country you are, the same services are provided to you, from the airport to the hotel.
  All this leads to cultural identification, which not only does not contribute to the development of tourism, but also hinders it, as one of the main goals of tourism is to communicate with other cultures.
 If we take into account the fact that the Republic of Armenia as a tourist destination attracts tourists more with its unique cultural heritage and not with the development of infrastructure, then these trends are quite a serious challenge for the tourism industry of the Republic of Armenia.
Recently, as an objective response to these phenomena, a new process has been formed - globalization, as a result of which, as a result of globalization, not regional features disappear, but their preservation and strengthening.
  The famous words of the Rome Club: "Think global, act local" can be considered as the slogan of globalization.
  One of the ways of globalization in the sphere of tourism is ethnotourism, which is developing rapidly all over the world, և Armenia is no exception.
Thus, globalization has a huge impact on other countries of the world, as well as on the tourism industry of the Republic of Armenia, and as a result of full understanding and analysis of the ways of that impact, it is possible to use it in the desired direction.
LITERATURE [2] Weaver D., Sustainable Tourism.
  Theory and Practice. London and New York, Julieta Hovasapyan THE EFFECT OF MODERN TRENDS ON WORLD WORLDWIDE ARMENIAN TOUR INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT Keywords: globalization, tourism, ecology, tourism, tourism
