EDUCATION EFFICIENCY FACTORY EXCHANGE WITH THE USE OF "SMART" BOARD 2015-2016 Our observations and surveys conducted in a number of public schools during the past year show that a significant part of the schools are provided with interactive whiteboards. In the teaching process, blackboards with interactive communication capabilities are currently ingrained.
 The technical possibilities fully meet the teaching requirements of all school subjects.
  The most convenient of these tools for teaching geography are the interactive "SMART" blackboards, which are called "smart blackboards".
 Today, from a technical point of view, the implementation of the teaching process through them does not present significant difficulties.
 Most of the schools in Armenia have similar blackboards, but some personal experience has been developed.
  There are also positive results in the field of Internet coverage.
  This circumstance is especially important in the process of using communication programs during the lesson.
 The use of "SMART" whiteboards և "SMART Notebook" software package in the school geography class expects the availability of the necessary visual materials.
  There are libraries of standard materials on the Internet in the software package, the use of which greatly facilitates the work of the teacher.
Currently, TV + computer + monitor + blackboard are being offered new technical solutions, which is the development of "smart blackboard".
 These devices have a brightness control system և can be used in bright class, ensuring clear color reproduction.
 You can write on the surface of the monitor with the appropriate pens and simultaneously combine it with the displayed material.
 You can save time by adjusting your hand movements to the monitor instructions.
  With the sequential use of these tools, it is possible to turn the classroom into a single work area, presenting the work of each student to a general discussion.
The use of interactive teaching և communication software և communication tools և technical tools in the geography class allows the teacher to make quick transitions from comment to comment, to ask questions, to get answers, to give their reflection on the blackboard.
 In addition, when solving problems, it becomes possible to present the task more vividly, stimulating students' imagination and pictorial thinking, to propose both logical and creative solutions to students [1].
  Ready-made vector images, which are modified according to the solution phases, contribute to the rapid mastering of the topic, increase the efficiency of problem solving.
  Images are memorized faster.
 Therefore, the geography teacher is obliged to combine not only ICTs and interactive teaching methods, but also to combine them with other modern pedagogical technologies in order to create more favorable conditions for mastering geographical knowledge, of course, based on the pedagogical situation.
The introduction of interactive whiteboards in the course of "Geography", the continuous nature of the latest technical developments, the arming of their software packages with other components of commands of other everyday devices (telephone, TV, etc.) և give grounds for assuming their widespread use in the educational process [2].
  This implies seeing the interactive whiteboard as the main means of depiction, modeling, and the use of traditional teaching aids in the educational process.
In order to justify the effectiveness of the educational process using the interactive whiteboard, we have given a comparative description of the lessons organized using the traditional means of teaching (Table 1).
Lesson phasesHomework checkNew report materialClassroom interactiveClassroomTraditional weather chartHomework done
using a computer, it is then presented on the PG.
Use of additional information materials during the transmission of new material.
Learner work
presents in a notebook, the inspection requires considerable time.
Missing from the textbook
The teacher fills in the important information with traditional echo methods.
Reported material Reinforcement Reinforcement of the material by self-employment Homework assignment Oral work Problem solving Lesson summary Topic information on the topic is not limited The training material is limited to the materials of the education program.
content.
Students solve problems, work on a sketch map, make tables, diagrams, directly depicting them on the screen.
All homework
can be presented on the PG for the class.
The lesson goes through questions and
in the form of a debate, in a debate, in an interactive environment.
The process of solving the problems with the help of ready-made vector drawings is more efficient.
Classroom information used by PG is retained, նման taking advantage of such an advantage, traditional teaching methods and tools are of a reproductive nature.
Homework is assigned exclusively from the textbook.
The task is written on the board in advance, the solution process is not saved և is repeated.
Traditional methods of solving problems assume only the use of a blackboard, chalk, problem book or textbook և subject book.
In the traditional lesson process, the effectiveness of the lesson summary is ensured. The key teacher can refer to any poster, paper section of the material on the questions.
with the help of maps and other didactic items.
Table 1. Comparative Characteristics of Course Processes Using Traditional Interactive Whiteboards և As compared to the comparisons presented in the table, in contrast to the traditional methods used in the curriculum, the use of an interactive whiteboard (CC) completely transforms the structure and content of the course. .
 PGs have additional benefits: The absent learner or the material who has deteriorated the material can repeat the whole course of the lesson with the use of PG on their own computer, mastering the lesson better.
 And that is not all, because the active use of PG presupposes the combination of other modern pedagogical technologies, methods and means.
 Let us mention some of them.
Explanatory-pictorial method, when the pictorial materials are more eloquent, have a high quality, quality, the pictorial material is mobile, manageable, attractive and effective, the explanatory works done by the teacher in the presence of such materials are brief, but convincing, pictorial-effective.
Research-research method, when the research activities carried out through ICT in the classroom greatly contribute to the formation of students' research culture, the inclusive nature of the teaching process is served to strengthen interdisciplinary and inclusive connections, search for new connections in that system and change them. Students' cognitive, cognitive-creative activity is created, various opportunities are created for the realization of the accumulated creative energy, interactive or, as it is said, constructive study of natural phenomena with the help of "smart" blackboard and visual material contributes to the formation and development of geographical research thought. along with additional devices (scanner,Simultaneous use guarantees the quality of perception, the development of computer literacy, the technology of the teaching process leads to the discovery of various educational resources, their effective use, the enrichment of the basic didactic principles with new content;
Ensuring the proper level of realization of the geography class in the use of FG և other information and communication technologies presupposes the additional training of the learners, as a result of which they should know the meaning of using the FG և its software tools, be able to use the whole toolkit, markers and so on. Master the skills of simultaneous use of materials, tools and software capabilities.
In conclusion, we can argue that work based on the post-didactic basic principles of the interactive whiteboard significantly changes the learner-teacher approach to the lesson.
  Therefore, each teaching process with high teaching efficiency pushes one step forward the process of improvement ամբողջ dynamic development of the whole system of general education, which presupposes the interconnection of the structural principles of the modern educational system և classical and informational (interactive) didactic approaches.
LITERATURE [1] Asatryan L. T., The problem of management of the ecological education system (doctoral dissertation), Yerevan, 2006, p. 410.
[2] Manukyan A. M., Technologies of professional practice of the teacher լուծ solution of pedagogical problems in problem situations, Yerevan, 2013, p. 362.
[3] Manukyan S. P., General Pedagogy, New Course, Yerevan, 2007, p. 335.
Ajamoghlyan ARMENIAN EDUCATIONAL PROCESS EFFECTIVENESS REQUIREMENTS USING "SMART" BOOK Keywords: interactive whiteboard, internet, pedagogical and technological means.
