THE LEGAL STATUS OF ARMENIAN CHURCHES IN TURKEY More than a century has passed since the Armenian Genocide, but to this day the historical and cultural heritage of the Armenians of Turkey continues to be destroyed.
 1915 As of today, the Armenian historical and cultural heritage included thousands of churches and monasteries, which had great historical and aesthetic value.
The actions taken to destroy the culture of a people or an ethnic group are called national-cultural genocide.
Genocide is not only the physical annihilation of a national or religious group, but also the destruction of its national-caring culture.
  Numerous facts show that along with the massacres and deportations of the Armenian population in the Ottoman Empire, the Young Turk government deliberately and premeditatedly sought to destroy the material evidence of its Armenian civilization.
 Realizing the role of the church, the faith in the life of the Armenian people, the Turkish government deliberately killed the Armenian clergy, destroyed churches and monasteries, confiscated church property, and thousands of medieval manuscripts.
 According to 1912-1913. According to the official historiography submitted to the Turkish government by the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople, the number of Armenian churches and monasteries throughout the Ottoman Empire exceeded 2,000 (including unique early Christian monuments of IV-V centuries).
  Most of them were robbed, burned and destroyed during the genocide.
  The policy of extermination of the Young Turks towards the historical and cultural heritage of the Armenian people continued in Republican Turkey as well, as these monuments were considered as unwanted witnesses of the Armenian presence.
The process of changing the place-names of Western Armenia began in Turkey in the 1920s.
  At present, more than 90% of the toponyms of Western Armenia are Turkish.
 Armenian geographical names have been replaced by Turkish ones, hundreds of architectural monuments have been deliberately destroyed, or their Armenian identity has been neutralized.
According to UNESCO 1974 According to the data, 464 of the 913 Armenian historical-architectural monuments that remained standing after 1923 have completely disappeared, 252 are in ruins, and 197 are in need of complete restoration.
Armenian architectural structures were blown up, used as targets during Turkish military exercises, and stones were used as building materials.
  In some rural areas they serve as barns, warehouses and prisons.
 In many cases, Armenian churches have been turned into mosques.
 1987 Point 6 of the resolution adopted by the European Parliament on June 18 states that the Turkish government should pay attention to the language, culture, education system of the Armenian community living in Turkey, and at the same time show proper attitude towards Armenian monuments in Turkey.
  The consequent destruction of the Armenian cultural heritage is the continuation of the Turkish policy of genocide against the Armenians.
  The renovation of the Holy Cross Church on Akhtamar Island is considered a political step, which must be accompanied by clear measures so that the entire Armenian heritage, forgotten during the "periodically destroyed centuries", immediately appears under state protection, restored and returned to its rightful owners, as enshrined in international documents signed by Turkey.
 Therefore, this issue must be clarified from the point of view of international law.
  Under Article 42 3 3 of the Treaty of Lausanne, the Turkish government undertook to take full care of the churches, synagogues, cemeteries and other religious institutions of these minorities.
 Naturally, complete preservation includes not only the demolition and non-demolition of churches, but also their strengthening and repair.
 Therefore, St. The partial renovation of the church building is not an expression of goodwill, but a very incomplete fulfillment of the international obligations assumed by Turkey as a basic law, using some political speculations.
  The Turkish authorities obstruct the preservation of Armenian churches and chapels by using religious services.
  Any kind of restoration, reconstruction or alteration or expansion of the Armenian Church, which is beyond certain expenses, is under the jurisdiction of the General Directorate of Religion, as well as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
  Neglected Destroyed Architectural Heritage of World Importance for Both Armenian and Foreign Scholars.
The list of the destruction of the Armenian historical and cultural heritage is quite comprehensive: 1. Tekor temple, built in the 5th century, domed basilica church in the village of the same name in Shirak province, now in the town of Digor, Kars region, Turkey, not far from Ani.
 At the moment it is completely destroyed and turned into a mosque.
2. St. Aghbak Bartholomew Monastery. Deir, Dher, in the Vaspurakan province of Greater Armenia, on the top of a hill on the right bank of the Great Zab River.
  According to the legend, it was founded in the 1st century by King Sanatruk on the tomb of the apostle Bartholomew, after he was cured of leprosy by the water of Katnaghbyur near him.
  The monastery has been mentioned since the XIII century.
3. St. Karapet Monastery was looted և partially destroyed in 1915.
  It turned into a pile of stones.
 1960 The Turkish army was used for artillery training during that period.
 Later, these same stones were used to create a village in the same place.
4. Varaga Monastery. It is the famous religious and cultural center of medieval Armenia, which is located southeast of the city of Van, on the western slope of Varagalera.
 It was founded in the VII century.
 The monastic complex consists of six churches, a porch, a vestibule, and auxiliary buildings.
  1923-1930 The ground floor was destroyed by the order of the Turkish government.
5. 1998 The Church of the Holy Apostles in Kars has been turned into a mosque.
Numerous stone fragments, valuable Armenian khachkars ե stone inscriptions were used in 1973. For the renovation of a mosque in Bitlis.
 Turkey has included Ani in its list of candidates for UNESCO cultural monument status.
  UNESCO has approved the list, which includes 35 monuments.
 And when Anink will be included in the final list, it will become clear in the coming years.
  According to Turkish law, churches and their affiliated institutions do not have the status of a legal entity.
 As a result of legal restrictions, these institutions can receive income exclusively from the sale, rental or summing up of real estate.
 These institutions accumulate income from renting property for their own needs, as well as to help schools and hospitals.
  Armenian institutions in Turkey, not having the right to acquire property, may even be deprived of their property.
  If the community uses its property for about ten years due to the reduction in the number of volunteers, then, according to Turkish law, the state gets the right to use and dispose of that property [2].
A detailed account of the condition of the Armenian churches in Turkey can be made, in particular by referring to the current condition of the ancient Armenian village of Gez (Gezkyo), 9 km west of Erzurum.
 The expressions "Kill 7 Armenians, you will fall in heaven", "Armenian birth", "Armenian" և "Armenian child" are still used as curses and insults in Erzurum.
 Hatred and disgust towards Armenians has not disappeared since the 1915 Genocide. Now they are taking revenge on the Armenian people, turning the Armenian churches into ruins.
 The church of Surb Minas in the old Armenian village of Gez is in a very bad condition today. This structure of historical value has turned into ruins.
  As part of the transformation work in Aziziye, Erzurum, it was found out that the church built by Armenians in the 17th century was used as a stable by the residents of the region until 2012.
 In addition, the church of St. Minas has suffered, and to this day continues to suffer from the adventures of treasure hunters, and words insulting Armenians are written on the walls of the church.
 The destruction of the Armenian cultural heritage in Western Armenia and Turkey was continuous.
  Numerous facts prove that along with the Armenian Genocide, the Turks deliberately "planned to destroy" the material evidence of the Armenian civilization [3].
Recently, the Turkish authorities have begun to restore some Armenian monuments, which is explained by the desire to both increase international prestige and develop tourism and have a new source of income.
  However, not all Armenian churches are in the center of the Turkish state's attention; Armenian-sized monuments are either destroyed or used as quarries, or are turned into buildings of other significance: barns, stables, warehouses.
By renovating the Armenian churches, Turkey wants to overshadow its policy of denying the Armenian Genocide and opening the Armenian-Turkish border.
  Such a way of working in Turkey is forced by the always negative attitude towards "everything Armenian".
 Turkish policy of renovating churches has both political and economic interests.
  St. The official announcement on the restoration of Kirakos Church was made by Archbishop Aram Ateshyan on October 30 last year.
  The Turkish Minister of Culture also spoke about the restoration of the church, promoting Turkey's economic development interests.
As for St. Kirakos Church, then it was turned into a mosque in 1918. It is one of the seven churches located in K. Under the auspices of the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople.
 One of the largest Armenian churches, which housed more than 2,000 people and had seven tabernacles, now retains only three.
 It has not been used for more than 50 years and only last year it was used for a purpose.
  Although the church will be renovated, there is no Armenian community in present-day Diyarbakir, and if in 2004 there were 22 Armenians, in 2006 there were 7, now there are only 3 Armenians living in Diyarbakir.
Following the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, a process began when a large number of international instruments were adopted, which now serve as the basis for international human rights norms and norms.
 In the field of human rights, Turkey has signed numerous international instruments, which do not directly enshrine the special rights of minorities, but ensure equal rights for all.
 At the same time, most of the international documents, which in some way relate to minorities and their rights, were signed with special reservations by Turkey in accordance with the 1923 Constitution of the country. In order to avoid contradictions with the provisions of the Treaty of Lausanne.
Turkey's policy towards the religious minority, particularly the Armenian cultural heritage, is of a markedly discriminatory nature.
Turkey violated the 1982 Article 63 of the Constitution, which defines the responsibility of the state for the historical, cultural, protection of natural heritage, and the measures taken for that purpose.
  These actions do not correspond to the chapter "Crimes against religious freedom" of the Turkish Criminal Code.
 Turkey's policy of destroying the Armenian cultural heritage is a violation of the basic norms of international law guaranteeing the protection of cultural values.
  Preservation of cultural heritage means respect for it և guarantee of its security, which is provided by some international documents submitted below: 1. 1899. և 1907 The Hague Conventions, in particular the Rules of Articles 27 և 56 of the Fourth Hague Convention of 1907.
2. On the preservation of scientific and cultural institutions and historical monuments in 1935. by the Zurich Agreement of April 15.
3. UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of Cultural Heritage in the Event of Armed Conflict (Hague Convention of 14 May 1954), with two accompanying Protocols (14 May 1954 - 26 March 1999); With the First and Second Additional Protocols to the Fourth Convention
This is the kind of freedom of religion that prevails today in Turkey, a country that has repeatedly committed the genocide of Armenians, Jews and Assyrians, destroyed a Christian temple and turned it into a mosque.
 Turkey is now building mosques around the world, especially in Germany, demanding freedom for Islamic proselytism, activating Turkish Islamists, expelling them from the country, and sponsoring schools and mosques.
LITERATURE [1] Committee for Monitoring Minority Rights.
 Minorities in Turkey, Istanbul, 2004, p. 6. [3] Mirzoyan L., The Armenian historical and cultural heritage in Turkey, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 14-7.
Arman Andrikyan THE LEGAL STATUS OF ARMENIAN CHURCHES IN TURKEY Keywords: ethnos, identity, religious foundation, UNESCO, leasing, mosque, UN, international provisions և norms համաձայն norms, Haaghazerik, Haagayzik
