THE TOPIC OF MODERNITY'S Loneliness G. KHANJYAN'S PROSE Gurgen Khanjyan is one of the most prolific and original creators of modern Armenian prose.
 His novels, novels, and short stories address topics of all times, especially the twenty-first century, which are formulated as existential, that is, ontological, in literary science.
These are problems related to the inner world of man, the secret holes of the soul, which may seem insignificant to the "naked" eye at first sight, but they endlessly gnaw, destroy man, tear him to pieces of thousands, but on the other hand we must admit that these existential problems Thanks to the preservation of man, he still continues to preserve his human structure and humanity.
The man of our time, less than in other times, is stormed by the eternal themes of freedom, the search for the meaning of life, the division of the person, the alienation, the growing disconnect between man and his environment, and finally, loneliness and loneliness.
 In this article, we have referred mainly to the latter, the artistic reflection of the problem of loneliness. In Khanjyan's novels "Hospital" (1990), "The Eye of Enoch" (2012), "Give Your Hand, Pstlo" (2017) և In the novel "Kill the Savior" (1999).
 The time and actions of the works mostly refer to a transitional period, when the Soviet state collapsed, Armenia became independent, and today the Armenian, a citizen of the former giant empire, now a small republic, faced serious psychological problems. Losing the old, the past, he, in fact, found nothing or almost nothing in the present, which was supposed to be synonymous with Nori, Azat, Ankakh.
 The man in the dead end had no choice but to flee.
 In terms of artistic expression, we can say that this escape is first of all an escape not from the homeland, the native environment, but from one's own essence and identity, one's own past… And through that sad escape, a problem that arises in people becomes deeper day by day: man is alone, alone in both literal and figurative senses.
In the above-mentioned novels, the problems that concern us are portrayed in one case as absurd ("Hospital"), in the other case as existentialism ("Killing the Savior", "The Eye of Enoch"), and in another case as a stream of consciousness-surrealism ("Give your hand, pstlo").
  Of course, these divisions are not unambiguous; other elements of other modernist directions can also be seen in novels and short stories.
Grigor, who has obvious similarities with the Kafkaesque hero in the "Hospital" (the choice of his name - Grigor "Gregor Zamza, is not accidental) finds himself in the Hospital against his will, whose mission is exactly the opposite. It is called to turn a perfectly healthy, strong man into a sick, exhausted, nervous man who carries the bile and poison of old age into youth.
  The hospital is also a symbol of chaos in our time. There is the most swallowing machine of Time, this building is a labyrinth, from which a person can get out only at the cost of sacrificing his best energy, strength and energy.
In the novel "The Eye of Enoch", the chain connection between the generations from grandson to father-grandfather to cave ancestors is emphasized.
  Driven to different shores of life բեր diametrically opposed to reality, the brothers are concerned with life և death, family, morality, freedom, and other existential issues, which Gor և Countshares in a unique way.
Grig, the hero of the novel "Give your hand, pstlo" (the title will be abbreviated as TZP) is in a serious and difficult search.
 He carries within himself the questions that oppress the man of our time and tries to find their answers through transfers.
  In general, it should be noted that all the characters of the mentioned works are wandering, deeply searching individuals.
 They are in endless search, those searches do not give them peace, they push them to be sometimes in the north, sometimes in the south, sometimes in the tundra that seems cut off from the world and slipping from the orbit of life, sometimes in an overcrowded megalopolis, sometimes caught unlucky. All these ways prove once and for all that life is the same in the cold tundra living in the pagan spirit, in the modern Moscow, in the city of the Quintos in Tbilissi (Georgia), or in Yerevan, which is changing day by day, stripping itself of traditional honest ornaments.
  Moreover, this life draws the same period everywhere, which is similar to the sequence of seasons, the rotation of the planets of the solar system, the course of the train, that is to say, it is a path where the beginning becomes the end.
 Therefore, it is a coincidence that especially in this last novel, the reader listens very strongly to the pedophile, because the roots of all the misfortunes and pains are hidden in childhood, which will later rise to the head of an adult.
It may seem that the novel "Kill the Savior" is completely different from the mentioned novels, at least with the depiction of different events.
 It is true that the epic time and space of this work are different: the first century AD, Israel, Galilee, then Jerusalem.
However, the hero, Chunak, is very close to the other Khanjyan characters with his wandering, thinking, freedom-loving nature.
 It emphasizes the human image that will be created to carry out the instructions of others, more precisely, Chunak was ordered to come to Jerusalem, to seek and find the King, Jesus Christ, who declared himself the Savior and to kill him.
 But doubts arise. and if Christ is indeed the Savior, or does he have the right to kill, whether he kills man or God? to obey his master, especially if the master is king.
 However, these arguments immediately complain to the human conscience. Chunak, who is the mentor of modern man, begins to realize that he is powerless to help himself, that he is alone, that he is unable to kill the voice of reason in himself, no matter how much he tries to consider himself a member of the great human herd, we are still alone with "Well, I will help myself. When the power of the gods diminishes, I must double in strength, otherwise I will perish in this accursed land. "[1]
  And it is interesting that the hero's soul descends lightly only when he "finally headed north, home."
After outlining the general process, let us try to single out the main features or motives that unite the characters of the works we are interested in around the theme of loneliness, the impracticability of striving to be alone with oneself, 1. escape և return, 2. Individual-society relations, 3. The division of a person, the many selves that torment him, 4. human impotence in a highly developed, modern world, 5. Contradictory desires and fears, 6. the light at the end of the process.
1. Escape և return.
 There are two key mental states in the creation of the characters of endless search: escape և return.
 At the beginning of the essay, we talked about the possible reasons for the escape, but those reasons are actually much deeper, more complicated than just the change of residence, which leads to the hero's always gradual, mobile state, in some ways distorting the character.
 In that escape, the hero tries to find possible consolation and forgetfulness, for the time being he is enchanted by mental drowsiness, when there is no burden of the past, when you are light about yourself, your past, childhood, when there are no chains of attachment and memory.
 For example, Grieg avoids looking at his friends' photo albums because he is afraid of confronting the present with reality, because friends of the past are no longer in that reality, and of course Grieg is afraid of the loneliness of the present.
 Or the hero urges to run away, never to be connected to anything, because everything is transient and changeable. "From the day a person is born, he must be alienated, alienated, left, nothing to be associated with, nothing to love, nothing to feel sorry for, because everything dies very quickly, stone, tree, city, village, animal, man… Connect, woe to you, the holes will not be filled [2] or he says to his friend who has already obeyed the inevitable: "You too are attached to life, your thing is difficult too, brother" [2].
Escape from memory is formulated as follows: "After all, you will be lost, naive man, tear yourself away, if you want to live, the memory that has become a fairy tale is a dangerous predator, sweet, honey-bearing, it deceives, it will take, it will destroy" [2].
The idea of ​​return inseparable from escape is much more interesting.
 Return, in fact, is inevitable, because a person is helpless without his past, memories, and finally, without childhood.
 The hero, who found only a temporary escape by means of escape, makes his turn, he feels his inseparable connection with his native land and childhood, he experiences the joy of standing firmly on his own land. "Get up, oh, aren't you an orphan? You sat here alone, he is your Armenian, he feels like a master." [2]
 In that return only everything on the mainland is realized. "This herbaceous juice is the thickest and highest in the world, this smooth, full-bodied bread is the most delicious bread in the world, this salt is the whitest, the saltiest salt, J. In the rays of the sun, there is no delicious herring that swallows rainbow trout… "[2].
 As we see, everything here is superior, incomparable, because it is connected with a very close childhood.
This is the bright side of Return. In it, the problem of human loneliness seems to be solved.
 However, there is a shadowy side in Return that makes reconciliation, the embrace of childhood, almost impossible.
 In this case, the hero returns, but everything has already changed. The threads connecting him with the past have been cut long ago, relatives (Lena, Slava) and their passions have been extinguished, so he is tragically lonely, alone both in the former relatives and in his foreign shelter. "It happens that the deportee returns to the homeland, but it turns out that he is late, he is a foreigner here too, he is not married, they do not accept to be married, it takes time, often in one life" [2].
 It is a terrible tragedy when a person realizes that he is late, that delay can cost his whole life.
"How do you leave me alone with my childhood? How am I going to endure this?" "He did not want to be alone, it was difficult to be alone in the old house, one could think, it is good, he had wine inside, he was a defender, at least now" [2].
2. In individual-society relations, a person's alienation from society is manifested. The person is expelled from his society, found in the margins of life, so he is terribly lonely.
  Thus, one of the heroines of the novel "The Eye of Enoch" (abbreviated to EA), Uma, is environmentally friendly.
  This woman, encased in a turtle shell, has created a reality, she is the owner and director of the car and her dreams, no one has the right to enter that world, not even her husband, moreover, the miracle of adoption is excluded in that world. "No one should encroach on his privacy, no one should take him out of himself if he does not want to." [3]
It is difficult for Uma to imagine the terms "intimacy", "to get closer", because "how can he get closer, why, is intimacy by order?" [3]
  Uma had created a barrier between his "society" that could not be broken, he had the limits of rights and responsibilities, which were also adapted to that barrier.
  He is a stranger to everyone, everyone to himself.
  Maybe the reason is that the life was not arranged correctly? Uma found himself in an environment that was completely foreign to him, no matter how hard he tried to break down the barriers, he failed ․ It was a deception of his own conscience, which was simply unbearable for the clever Self-proclaimed Uma.
Is the closeness of a person և society at all possible?
  Grig is trying to resolve this issue in a positive way in "… Pstlo". "It was childhood, but he felt like a stranger.
 He will try to get closer "[2].
Grofo, the man with the seal of being a stepchild, appeared in the same marginal situation in the novel "The Eye of Enoch". "I am superfluous there.
The unfortunate thing is that I am superfluous here as well. ”[3]
The miracle of creation, adoption, is also rejected in the novel "Hospital" (H).
  Gregory feels sorry for Mariam, who is expecting her third child, considering the gift of having a child nonsense, at least for a human being, because "a human being is just an instrument" [4].
The other side of human-society relations is when a person, stripped of the burden of his own self, escapes from his identity, finds lightness of soul in the crowd, assimilates, dissolves into the common. "I was dissolving in the crowd, losing weight, dispersing my sexes, getting rid of complexes." [4]
 But that assimilation is short! It is followed by the hero's longing for escape, the covering of his self. "I missed my self, my loneliness, my thoughts.
 I left with quick steps, feeling with joy how I entered the deep entrails of my own skin again. "[4]
The root causes of an individual's alienation must be sought in childhood.
 This is confirmed by the example of the main part of the heroes of the novels.
Here is Grig "Give your hand, in the pstlo novel".
 The immoral behavior of a teacher leaves an indelible mark on eighth grade adolescent psychology.
 The child is overwhelmed by erudophobia, the fear of blushing in front of a crowd.
"I was going, but I was waiting for the lights to be turned off, to enter a new hall, in the dark, unnoticed.
  It was unbearable to see people.
  And no one understood what was happening to me, even my closest ones, and I, of course, did not tell them how to tell it, and telling it was like appearing in front of a crowd. "[2]
  Then he goes on to compare his condition with that of a hedgehog or an armored carrier.
3. The irony of the person, the many selves that torment him.
 Almost all the heroes of the novels we have studied suffer from duality of personalities.
 They are surrounded by many selves, each of which cries out for its existence, using every opportunity to feel its evil, ironic, tearing presence.
  Those selves are not one or two. They are so numerous that the nouns "dichotomy" և "fragmentation" acquire the value of verbal antonyms in the text.
  Thoughts are created between the "Khanjyan heroes" of Hesse's "Steppe Wolf".
  The selves living in the depths of the human essence are very powerful, multi-faceted and multi-voiced.
 They are sometimes malicious, murmuring, squeaky devilish giggles, sometimes mocking gossip, sometimes it is the most visible eye of Enoch, which becomes a unique mask for Grofo, sometimes it is the Greedy living inside Grieg, sometimes the ignorant spirit of the graveyard, the other They are always vigilant, always keeping their "masters" alert, and on the other hand, slyly whispering to the evil one from within, trying to mislead, numb the sobriety and win over the "master" person.
 The "presence" of the plotters in the novel "Give Your Hand, Pstlo" can be considered convincing in terms of fiction.
 In some cases, the plots are identified with the eyes, symbolizing insight, intuition.
  The whisper of the plans becomes especially noticeable when Grig aspires to the drink. In all such cases, the will tries to overcome the tempting charm of the drink, and the plans urge and often embarrass the hero to drink vodka without hesitation.
 In this way, the planners get out of Grig and acquire the value of a full-fledged character.
 Gossip, whisper, whisper, prompt, talk, mock, bite, giggle, raise your head, encourage, ridicule, rebel, shout hysterically. The series of verbs are the most telling evidence of those polyphonic, strong "tormentors".
The "brothers" of the planners are Tapur և Paramol.
 Vacancy և Grigi's meeting takes place in the cemetery. Tapur smiles insidiously and whispers in Grig's ear.
 And Paramol appears when Grigine calls from an unknown phone number, ամ Paramol raises his head inspired by the secret holes of the soul. "Can he be from abroad?"
"Did they like the book? Do they want to translate and publish it? Ի Call an agent" [2].
In the "hospital" the selves are talking to each other. "The more lonely you are, the more often you talk to yourself, finding your ego as an interlocutor next to you.
 And there is no need to be surprised.
What is so strange, if your wandering ego needs to meet and talk sometimes, who will they find more dear?
Leave them alone, leave yourself alone, let yourself go, let it go with you, let it be as it will be, it does not matter, you are not your master. "[4]
 The human eyes deserve special attention.
 The author repeatedly draws the reader's attention in the direction of the eyes, in essence calling for a mirror of the depths of the human soul.
  Modern man is concerned with the problem of the masked essence.
 Involuntarily, a person is covered with several masks, և even he finds it difficult to decide who his real face is, այն does it exist?
 Life becomes a masquerade.
 Here are some examples. "We always apologize for sincerity, for some reason, sincerity is necessary, it is very necessary, we constantly falsify, we become chronic hypocrites, that is why we all have a disgusting mask of hypocrisy on our faces.
 Yes, right somewhere, no matter, the man is finally alone, he must take care of himself, he must love him… "[3].
  Or "For a moment they looked like Grofon, Enoch, the mask of death…" [3].
  "Greg Seth felt that the real face was sinking in, realizing that he no longer needed it."
  In other cases, the planners urge: "Keep playing, make art, wood, iron, wire, garbage, asphalt, glass, dust, noise, march, confusion, vanity, people, dogs… Extract art, your role is on you, take it forward" » [2]
 These masks are curtains that hide the inner and outer worlds, and it is difficult to say what is hidden inside them. "Inside, lost idle, outside smiling." [3]
4. The weakness of man in the highly developed, modern world, the impossibility of striving to be alone with himself.
  Today's man lives in a world where nothing else is impossible, there are no boundaries, every moment, every second man can be where he wants.
  According to Khanjyan, the world wide web has been created: "the whole world is an infinite department store, the homogeneous ensemble of the world walks there, the same smile in everyone's eyes, the same language in everyone's mouth, everyone with the same posture" [2] the man.
 Even if the person under constant control tries, he is not able to stay behind.
 "There is no escape.
 Today's man has no escape, can not be alone, can not urinate calmly, can not escape, at the top of the mountain you want, in the cave you will find… When they want, they manage, when they want, they enter your time, pocket, gut… always hanging They keep you in, you do not exist, instead of you there are numbers, keys, screens, papers, plastics, photos, without all that you do not need anyone, you are not interesting "[2].
 Still more tragic. Man becomes a prisoner of the screens he creates, the places of numbers, the "miracle of encounters" does not happen anymore, the hunt for views is impossible, we are already caught.
  We created screens and now we rarely look each other in the eye.
 And what is there, in the eyes, in the depths, behind the translucent veils, infinite, unrecognized… "[2].
In such a situation, the person is terribly alone.
 The existentialist question is raised again, what is the meaning of life, what is death, what will a person take with him?
 And the answer leads to the idea of ​​life և an eternal cycle of death. Man is born alone, defenseless, helpless, and in the same way he leaves his earthly life.
5. Contradictory desires and fears.
 A person living in a chaotic reality is overwhelmed by conflicting desires and passions, which establish the natural regularity of life.
 These desires are always covered with an atmosphere of fear. Man wants to love, but he is afraid to love, he wants to die, but at the last moment even the old man becomes aware of the miracle of life, which is Life itself, man wants to forget, but is afraid of losing his identity, strives for solitude, but silence terrifies him In other words, these inclinations fill the empty spaces of the human soul.
 It is the tragedy of a modern man, which has received a unique formulation by Henrik Edoyan, that is, I want everything I do not want, և I do not want what I want… 6. The light at the end of the process.
 Every field of art has its principles and ways of reflecting reality.
 Regardless of the variety of these forms, the task of art in all cases should not be to lead the person (reader, listener, viewer, etc.) to a dark dead end, but to show the light at the end of the tunnel while depicting the darkest reality.
Գ. Observing Khanjyan's works in question in the artistic whole, we can say with confidence that that light is noticeable in them.
 From "Hospital" to the novel "Give me your hand, pstlo" the darkness-light ratio is changing, the light is getting brighter and brighter.
  The hero of "Hospital" Grigor, tired of life, following in his footsteps, from the system that has already reached every step before him, sees the only way out in suicide, involuntarily becoming a murderer, someone "who refuses to fulfill his mission."
 From the last word, however, it seems that the author believes in creation, in the mission of man to come into the world in some sense, he is simply rebelling. "Bloody rebellion hanging from the gallows.
 All this was strange… "[4].
In the novel "The Eye of Enoch" the existential creeps of the heroes no longer lead to an irreversible deadlock.
 Each of the brothers reconciles with his condition, summed up in their case, in any case, there is at least a momentary attempt to look into each other's eyes, to look for a look, which is a hint of reconciliation, a tendency to leave the world of loneliness.
  For the next second, "the rising speed of the car tore them apart."
The novel "Kill the Savior" is closer to the last novel "Your Hand, Pstlo".
 Running endlessly from himself, from his self, from his doubts, Chunakni finally manages to meet the peace of mind, looking at the home, the homeland.
  The process of escape, return and reconciliation is much more complete in the last novel, the title of which is not accidental.
 Who is Pstlon, who is the man who reached out to help him?
 Following the inner development of the novel, it can be mentioned that from the very first page, Grig, who appeared in a state of wandering, finally finds the nest, returning to his childhood.
 It is an individual who carries the chain link of generations, has a genetic memory, who makes a return to childhood, to the roots.
  Such an end does not happen at once.
 Let's go back to the process.
 If at first he is pessimistic, alone with his sorrows and desires, if he leaves endlessly, trying to make space a way to dispel duality and loneliness, sometimes relying on vodka, sometimes on inner silence, then the tundra becomes a temporary lifeline.
 But the mystery of the smallest particle is finally revealed to the man who seeks great meaning and advice in everything, when he returns to the old house and sees the old things of himself and his ancestors. "How did the lost tar appear? Who opened the lid? How many of me are there in this world?" Thought Grig, remembering the mystery of the tiny particle. [3]
 At the end of the process, the hero, full of ideas of death, realizes the vitality in him, the endless denial questions, "what, what will I return, what will I gain, what am I preparing for?" The human idea. "Inside, through the mystery, the Upper Man was rising with his forgiving-sarcastic smile. He knows, He knows Something that Grigich knows. "Experiment, the real thing is in another place, you will see later." [2]
From this consciousness the idea of ​​identifying the beginning and the end is born.
The hero finishes from the point where he started. "I did not know that it would be torn from the end, but I was brought to the end again, that where life flew, far away or very close, it was the end again."
  He makes the last spin, trying to find the places and people he had become accustomed to, or perhaps accustomed to, Eya, Ule's blower, old friends, but they did not find him, then searching for the ocean, he is suddenly overwhelmed by the youthful joy , gets rid of the enslaving influence of the watches, calendars and compasses that have always oppressed him in the past, is enveloped in optimism and lightness, and is not irritated by the sometimes furious phenomena (for example, snoring).
 The inner voice calls him: Wake up, ներքին The man who has found his inner peace, restored the peaceful solitude, stands firmly in his city. "On the other side is the city, your city", the life-giving sun warms him. "Ar was not killed, the place was overshadowed, he searched anxiously, he found him on the opposite side, he moved, he turned his other cheek against it, և it seemed to him that the cheeky young man with a smooth skin was now playing with ar" [2].
  The hero who regained the city, the city, the lost childhood and adolescence finds God!
 At the end of the novel, the image of the ascending dome of the monastery is a symbol of divine immaturity.
 The old child listens to his mother's womb, the pulse of childhood, "he thought, when you take the illusions out of you, the place is filled with peace, peace is very much in the process of completion, it is easy to wait with a peaceful soul, somewhere even pleasant.
 Wait for peace.
 Stay in peace.
 The day will come, they will meet, His hand will come out of obscurity, he will approach, he will clear the shore, he will say, give me your hand, pstlo, I have brought you, I will take you, come… "[2].
LITERATURE [1] Khanjyan G., "Kill the Savior", Yerevan, 2001, pp. 14, 43.
[2] Khanjyan G., "Give your hand, pstlo", Yerevan, 2017, pp. 118, 110, 111, 272, 173, 211,195, 180, 171, 264, 199, 225, 162, 138, 171, 153, 275 , 279, 324, 326-327.
[3] Khanjyan G., "The Eye of Enoch", Yerevan, 2012, pp. 35, 37, 168, 100, 246, 94, 279, 287.
[4] Khanjyan G., "Hospital", Yerevan, 2012, pp. 261, 279, 275, 237, 326.
Kristine Bagratyan TOPIC OF MODERNITY'S Loneliness G. KHANJYAN'S RELEASE Keywords: Gurgen Khanjyan, existentialism, loneliness, alienation, division, "Hospital", "Kill the Savior", "Enoch's eye", "Give me your hand, pstlo".
