URBANIZATION AND ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS Cities are considered to be the leading force in the territorial, socio-economic organization of modern society.
The increase in the number of cities was accompanied by an increase in the urban population.
  In 1800 the share of the world's urban population was 3.0%, in 1919 - 13.6%, in 1950 - 29.8%, in 1978 - 39%, in 2015 - about 50% 1.
 At present, scientific and technical progress and developed social infrastructures have made it possible to create an "armor of civilization".
 It is the totality of all the factors that enable the development of man as a biosocial being.
Now the question arises, being a progressive phenomenon, why is urbanization considered a global problem, why has it become a cause for concern?
  When discussing these issues, it is necessary to focus on the study of "positive" negative aspects.
Cities are better able to meet the mental, cultural, educational and health needs of the people, as the level of morbidity and mortality is lower in the cities, the average life expectancy is higher.
Thus, urbanized areas cover less than 1% of the land area, but more than half of the world's population lives here, producing about 80% of GDP.
 High rates of urbanization have a negative impact on nature, atmosphere, water and biosphere.
 Noise, aerosol, light and electromagnetic pollution are sources of environmental pollution by cities.
The work is dedicated to revealing the negative impact of urbanization on the natural environment.
 How to make predictions about the situation if the current pace is maintained.
  The work will also present the ecological problems in Yerevan related to urbanization.
  The aim of the work is to inform people about the negative consequences of urbanization, as well as to suggest certain solutions.
1 M. Manasyan, Geography of Population, 2011, Yerevan, p. 211.
Urbanization is the process of increasing the number of urban dwellers in the general population, increasing the role of cities, and urbanization.
Urban development inevitably leads to changes in all components of the natural environment.
  Powerful և man-made pressures in the conditions of modern large cities, concentrated in a limited area, on the one hand, lead to the change of all components of the natural landscape, on the other hand, to the emergence of a series of negative natural phenomena.
 Urbanization has a greater impact on the atmosphere, water bodies, land, relief.
Atmospheric pollution.
  The influence of big cities is much greater on the atmosphere.
  Cities are the main "producers" of aerosols, greenhouse gases, acid rain, dry and wet smog.
 Almost 70% of air pollution in cities is due to road transport.
 It is not accidental that they say "the car is a chemical enterprise on wheels".
 Calculations have shown that air pollution in large cities is 15-20 times higher than in rural areas և 150 times higher than in the ocean.
  The radical change in thermophysical properties contributes to the formation of the urban microclimate.
  Observations in the Russian city of Smolensk have revealed that the temperature in the city center is 0.2-2.20 C higher than near the city, due to the increase in the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
  And the soil temperature is 1.30 C higher.
Water pollution.
 Among the ecological problems caused by urbanization, the most important is the pollution of water bodies, the change of their hydrochemical regime.
 The increase in the number of urban dwellers first of all affects the volume of water use.
  Urban dwellers use a large amount of water (on average 300-400 liters per day) for their needs.
Water pollution with targeted substances has significantly increased.
  Waters are mostly polluted with heavy metals and biomaterials.
High rates of urbanization affect the most conservative element of the landscape, the relief.
 Builders usually flatten the surface of the earth by filling gorges and small river valleys.
  All this usually leads to changes in natural processes.
  Urban buildings often cause landslides and ravines.
  The leveling of the relief has a negative effect especially on the level of groundwater.
  The groundwater flow block is mainly created by the length of roads և building foundations.
 Demolition of other hard paved roads and other related roads.
The soil layer has a rather large anthropogenic effect.
In the cities artificial soil is formed "urban soil", more than 40 cm on the surface of which is created by man, they are mainly construction "household garbage, road cover" etc.
Noise, aerosol, light electromagnetic pollution are significant sources of pollution on the environment by cities.
Noise is one of the most important problems in urban life, its main source is considered to be rail, road and air transport.
  Urban noise is called "toxic", it differs from abiotic-biotic sources.
 60-80% of urban noise falls on road transport, the next are industrial enterprises, automobile signals, etc.
Large urbanized areas are characterized by light pollution.
 The main source of light pollution is street lighting, billboard lighting, as a result of which so-called light domes appear on large cities.
City dwellers most often suffer from cardiovascular, pulmonary, tumor, allergic, nervous system, respiratory diseases.
Cities are always attractive to the poor rural population, they aspire to the city.
 But coming to the city, they are not always able to find sufficient living conditions and a job.
 Such populations are often called fake urban dwellers, and the phenomenon is called "fake urbanization".
 False urbanization has its definition. Expelled from rural areas, the population settles on the outskirts of the city, creating poor neighborhoods without basic living conditions - "poverty zones".
Now the idea of ​​"ecopolis" is becoming widespread in science.
  The requirements of ecological complexes should be taken into account during its design.
 As a result, the model of the "ideal" city is formed.
During the inter-Soviet period, there were 4 cities in Armenia: Yerevan, Gyumri, Gavar, Goris.
 At that time the level of urbanization was 11%.
 1989 There were 58 urban settlements, 25 of them were urban settlements and 33 were urban settlements.
 It was at this time that urbanization reached its maximum value, amounting to 68%.
 In the 1990s, during the years of independence, the number of urban dwellers decreased due to the economic crisis.
  Currently 64% of the population lives in 49 cities of Armenia 1.
Most of the population in Armenia lives in the Ararat depression.
  In the capital Yerevan, և adjacent areas, 1/3 of the total population is accumulated, and more than half of the urban population.
Such a large concentration raises a number of ecological problems.
 Such ecological problems are the atmosphere, water, pollution, change of relief, reduction of green areas, faster spread of diseases, etc.
There is a high density of industrial enterprises, especially in Yerevan, Vanadzor, Alaverdi, Kapan, Ararat.
  Yerjan is considered a powerful industrial center.
  Almost half of the industrial potential of the Republic of Armenia is located here.
  There are food, light, chemical and metallurgical factories here.
There are two types of air pollution sources: fixed and mobile.
Industrial sources are considered to be real sources.
The mobile source is the transport.
The main materials of air pollution in Armenia are dust, sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide.
 Most of the emissions are from mobile sources and a small part from stationary sources.
 For example, in 2006 the amount of emissions from real sources in Armenia was 23%, and from mobile sources - 77%.
  In 2007, respectively, 18.6% և 81.4%.
Figure 1.
 Atmospheric air pollution by RA regions.
21 M. Manasyan, Geography of Population, 2011, Yerevan, p. 210.
2 Ս. Gorgyan, Problems of Ecological Security in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2014, p. 24.
It can be seen from the diagram that ԠԠԠԤ-2011. The number of atmospheric emissions has increased.
  The most prominent regions are Lori and Kotayk.
The number of emissions has increased sharply in recent years in Yerevan.
The high amount of air pollution is still preserved in Armenia!
Figure 2.
  The share of harmful substances caught in the materials separated from the immovable sources in 2012.
1 Strong concentration of the population leads to congestion of the transport network ավել increase in the number of cars.
Figure 4.
  The number of emissions from vehicles to the atmosphere in 1995-2006.
2 75-90% of atmospheric emissions fall on road transport.
  Studies were conducted in the cities of Yerevan, Gyumri, Vanadzor, Hrazdan, Alaverdi and Ararat.
  Studies in Yerevan have shown that the amount of ground-level ozone has increased in recent years, especially in summer, which can cause photochemical smog.
 High levels of nitrous oxide and hydrocarbons are observed in Yerevan.
  The atmosphere in Yerevan is polluted with 4 main substances: dust, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide and nitrous oxide.
 According to 2008 data, pollution in Yerevan exceeded dust by 1.3 times, nitrogen dioxide by 1.7 times, and ground-level ozone by 1.5 times.
Thus, a huge amount of emissions in Yerevan is the reason for the formation of a microclimate.
 The temperature rises, the number of foggy and cloudy days increases.
 The temperature is 0.20 C higher than in the surrounding areas in the center of the capital.
The main monitoring of the air basin in Lori region is carried out in the cities of Vanadzor and Alaverdi.
 The monitoring is carried out by the "Environmental Impact Monitoring Center".
There are 3 monitoring stations in Alaverdi.
  These stations produce the content of dust, sulfur and nitrogen oxides.
Studies are also being conducted on the content of carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide.
  2014 According to the data, sulfur dioxide exceeded the MAC by 1.6 times.
In recent years, the number of respiratory diseases in Armenia has increased by 46%, the main reason being air pollution.
According to the RA Ministry of Health, the respiratory problems in 2000 made 169 thousand, in 2010 247 thousand.
The most common problems in Armenia are bronchial asthma, lung and throat cancer.
  The increase of green areas is considered to be the best way to fight against air pollution.
In the capital, water is distributed to consumers in 1964 km. through a length distribution network.
  2015 According to the decision of the RA Public Services Regulatory Commission from April 15, 2012, the minimum water supply in Yerevan is 17 hours.
  80% of the subscribers are provided with round-the-clock water supply.
 20% for at least 17 hours.
  However, at present there is a problem of drinking water in the Ararat depression.
 This is first of all conditioned by the strict concentration of the population.
  The large concentration of the population causes the pollution of the water basin.
At the Environmental Impact Monitoring Center, surface water monitoring is carried out at 131 observation points.
They include 50 rivers of the Republic of Armenia with 6 reservoirs և Lake Sanaa.
 1000-1200 samples are taken from surface waters annually.
The content of basic chemical components, heavy metal chlorides and organic pesticides are obtained.
 There is a problem with the oil pipelines.
  There have been many cases when sewage water in Armenia mixes with drinking water and has become a cause of infections.
Currently, hydraulic structures are being built in the territory of Yerevan, which should protect Yerevan from floods.
  Getar was covered with a layer of asphalt and concrete in some parts of the capital.
 However, garbage accumulates everywhere in the open parts of Getar.
  A large amount of construction and household waste has been accumulated.
  Sewage enters the river and causes a stench in the area.
  Closed sections make the situation worse, as self-cleaning is slow in some sections.
  River protection is very important for the city.
Urban development and landscaping were inversely proportional.
 Intensive urban development works have a negative impact on green areas.
 Gardens, green areas are being destroyed, cafes, entertainment places, business centers, etc. are being built instead.
The increase of green areas will also contribute to the microclimate regulation of Yerevan.
Armenia has a rather small area.
  Environmental problems are best expressed in countries with small areas, due to the concentration of population և industrial enterprises.
  Atmospheric problems are narrower than ecological problems.
 Studies have shown that there is air pollution in Armenia.
  The most polluted inhabited areas, particularly the Ararat depression.
Most of the industrial enterprises are concentrated here.
  Concentration of transport is observed in Yerevan and the suburbs.
  As a result of the research, it was found out that the main part of the air pollution falls on the vehicles.
  Most of the emissions are carbon dioxide oxides, as well as emitting organic compounds.
  Their quantitative increase leads to the emergence of a number of respiratory diseases.
Concentration, on the other hand, leads to the faster spread of infectious diseases.
Studies have shown that large amounts of emissions increase the amount of ozone in the Yerevan riverbed, which can cause photochemical smog.
  In addition, a microclimate is developing in Yerevan.
  As a result, the temperature rises.
 As Yerevan is located in a dry arid climate zone, a further rise in temperature will lead to a further drying up of the climate նվազ a decrease in atmospheric precipitation.
  As a result, the landscapes will begin to decay even faster ացումը desertification will take place faster.
The next link of air pollution is considered to be the cities with large industrial enterprises: Alaverdi, Vanadzor, Hrazdan և Kajaran.
 These cities need the creation of cleaning stations.
 It is necessary to catch the most harmful substances emitted into the atmosphere from industrial enterprises.
  The main role in the fight against air pollution should be played by the increase of green areas, but the opposite process is taking place in Armenia and in the world.
 Green plants are considered the main producers of oxygen "green plants".
  Their increase will contribute to maintaining the natural state of the atmosphere.
Large crowds of people are the reason for the excessive use of water.
  The biggest water problem in Armenia is in the Ararat depression.
  In addition, with the dense urbanization, there is a greater amount of water pollution.
The accumulation of household waste is considered to be a rather serious problem, mainly in the nearby metropolitan areas, such as the capital Yerevan.
 There are quite large accumulations of garbage in the open parts of Getar.
 Accumulation of garbage leads to a number of serious problems.
 Accumulation of garbage in the streets can cause diseases.
 The best way to dispose of landfills is to separate the waste into household and food scraps.
It is possible to recycle as much household waste as possible.
As a result of my sociological survey, it turned out that our eco-education is at a rather low level.
Although there are currently many courses on environmental topics և nature protection, but in my opinion these courses only provide the theoretical side without taking into account the practical.
 I think it is necessary to compile these programs in such a way that the participants get acquainted with the situation on the spot and try to find solutions.
  It will contribute to the raising of people's consciousness, to the emergence of caring by nature.
 Literature 1. Maxim Manasyan, Geography of Population, Yerevan, 2011.
2. Suren Gorgyan, Problems of Ecological Security in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2014.
3. Yurik Muradyan, The Global Problems of Humanity ուղ Ways to Solve Them, Yerevan, 2014.
Varditer Antonyan URBANIZATION AND ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS Keywords: urbanization, ecological issues, urban population, atmosphere, water, noise, pollution.
Summary.
