NATIONAL RENAISSANCE IDEOLOGY IN DANIEL VARUZHAN'S "COLLECTED HEART" COLLECTION "The Heart of the Tribe" is the second collection of poems by Daniel Varuzhan,
  Due to the poem fighting with unique poetic touches, D. Varuzhan became the central figure of the new literary movement of the time.
 In the post-constitutional years following the gloomy Sultanate, he sowed the seeds of struggle and encouragement in the Armenian-Armenian reality.
  The new wave of awakening the consciousness of the national-liberation struggle made Varuzhan's poetry politically mature.
  Patriotism, after the revelation of Varuzhan's book, was no longer just a feeling, but a poetic belief, an obligatory artistic presence in a reality that most of all needed a bold presentation of national ideas.
  "Tseghinsirt" continued the collection with new content and new poetic expressions by Kh. Abovyan, Ts. Alishani, M. The romantic traditions of Peshiktashlyan, Raffi, Siamanto.
Varuzhan became the creative developer of those traditions.
P. Syak has a remarkable observation about the universal significance of Varuzhan's national-patriotic lyre.
 J. Varuzhan's patriotism is of a much more general, much more universal nature, not in a negative sense, but in the sense that here (in the series "On Bagin" by R. H.) national suffering and misery are transformed into a universal line. "Out of line" of feelings "1.
It is noteworthy that the first reaction and the first descriptions about the collection are authorial. "…" The heart of the tribe "consists of three parts. "On Bagin", where I tried to give the tragic episodes of the people's sacrifices. The "In the Circus" section will contain songs dedicated to heroic struggles.
  The third section is already known, they are epic novels ”2.
 The response of the press of the time to the book was mostly praiseworthy. In particular, the patriotic spirit of the collection and the national-ideological saturation were emphasized.
  The line of Vahagn's myth "Heavens to Heaven" from Goghtan songs was chosen as the basis for the book: "Money floated with reeds".
 And the first poem, "Dzon", not only condenses the whole ideological message, turning it into a unique poetic message, but also sounds like a fierce and cosmopolitan dedication dedicated to the homeland, the holy struggle for its freedom, the rebirth of the nation.
  This surprisingly strong and structural strip, as mentioned by V. Gabrielyan, "fair" can be considered one of the best works dedicated to the freedom of the homeland in Armenian and world poetry3. And struggle, struggle, struggle I sang: - A gift to you, Armenian warriors - My pen became the furnace of unbroken hearts… - A gift to you, brave warriors - I sang revenge with a reed pen. Money came out of the reed 4.
The collection "Tribal Heart" also has "Prelude", which refers to the three sections of the book, is presented with the line "Nemesis", "once again blessing the poet" in the face of the vengeful spirit of the people, which is not broken by past calamities, scars and mountains. P., Works in three volumes, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1983, page 494.
2 Patrick A., Daniel Varuzhan in my memoirs, Yerevan, 1965, page 69.
3 Gabrielyan V., Daniel Varuzhan, life և work, Yerevan, 1978, page 98.
4 Varuzhan D., Complete Collection of Poems (hereinafter referred to as YELJ), Yerevan, 1986, p. 70.
from the scales.
 And the artist who created the sculpture of Nemesis, the goddess of revenge, is the one who condenses the mental abilities of the people, who builds from the hard quartz of his own past the goddess of revenge who predetermines his own future, relying entirely on her power.
  The spirit of rebellion, optimism, specific to Varuzhan's patriotic poetry, is first opened by the Door of Hope, Light, Struggle and Revival, and then followed by the gloomy images and episodes of the first series, "On Bagin".
  In this article, we will mainly refer to the second series of the collection, "In the Circus", as it is especially in this series that Varuzhan discusses the ideas of rebellion and national revival.
Varuzhan likes to present the poetic message in a condensed form, first in the titles, then in the titles.
  This is what the poet himself says about this. "It was the period 19041907, when the Armenians were drowning in the nightmare of the sword, and I did not want to give way to my personal pains, I almost forcibly silenced my heart and preferred to sing the heart of the Tribe, the pulses of which I would feel in me, deep in my own blood.
  Armenians will growl and growl in me (emphasis is ours - R. H.) "1.
 It is obvious that the "cry of the Armenians" pervaded the poet so loudly and so deeply that he did not need to "silence his heart." Completely imbued with the fire of patriotism and national ideas, he became the heart of the Tribe.
  The patriotic pathos of the collection is intensified and is most evident in the poetic series entitled "In the Circus" 2.
It is noteworthy that the poet connects the future of his people with a woman. The heroes of his poems dedicated to the national revival are women. As eternal companions of Armenian folklore, they condense Varuzhan's ideological conviction that it is the Armenian daughters and Armenian mothers who keep the "tribe's heart" beating and full of revenge.
  That is why female heroes appear in her poems: Hayuhi ("Fight"), Renaissance ("Renaissance", "April"), and even Martkuhi ("Fighting March"). She is a renaissance, a mountain girl, as powerful as a storm, a rose. like a charming, On the lip lined with His Greek, there is a sweet kiss on the lips, on the nose of a man, And the soul burns with a longing, to give.
The poem "Renaissance" of the "Circus In" series is a perfect poetic embodiment of the idea of ​​national revival.
  The heroine, who is again the name of the Renaissance, or the "birth of curses", but is endowed with the grace to be reborn, to rise, just like the people she symbolizes: I will go, I will go. I am the birth of curses. As powerful as Sunday, supernatural. Like human consciousness. and I'm leaving!
For a moment I am still able to breathe with the veil of blood արդ 4 I will free my feet from the veil of blood… 4.
This poem differs from the others in terms of the ideological emphasis of the whole collection, condensing in it the main message, which from its different points of view will still be opened and discussed in the other lines of the book.
According to Varuzhan, the torchbearer of the idea of ​​national revival is the generation growing up in a rural family, which, despite (or at least because of that) difficult childhood and youth 1 Varuzhan D., YELJ, h. 3, pp. 463-464.
2 By the way, Varuzhanology has left almost unanswered the question why the poet titled the series "In the Circus". Really, why a "circus"?
 We think that the use of this word has nothing to do with the modern understanding of its meaning: by "circus" the poet means an arena or a horse race (see New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language, Venice, 1836, v. 1, p. 1134), in which, in See the competition of other peoples and races, the heroic history of our people has taken place.
 It is noteworthy that in addition to the significance of the arena, the circus also meant a youth house (see the same), which makes Varuzhan's choice of words for the series quite significant, insofar as the author directly relates the idea of ​​rebirth of his people to the youth, the Renaissance Haykaks.
3 Varuzhan D., ELJ, h. 1, p. 155.
4 Ibid., P.
However, the cradle of the Armenian, whom the poet calls Haykaks, who "tomorrow will be Razmik m'hrachya," is the name of the Armenians (their cradle is "Made of fir and painted with blood. The owls will sing to him. The crickets will be angry"). a shining cloud. "
  The poet has great, almost saving expectations from that generation, because it "Jesus will eat us in the manger, And the Armenian cradle will rebel."
D. In Varuzhan's book, the ideology of national revival is clearly connected with the idea of ​​educating a young generation ready for self-sacrifice.
 The poet has no doubt that only his unwavering devotion to the homeland and the nation can bring a new day to the homeland and the nation, a "new dawn".
  In the "Wounded" line, which, as the poet suggests, was written "on the occasion of the Armenian-Tatar wars", the "fallen on the road to freedom" fighter sacrifices his life for the freedom of the people, for the rebirth of his nation.… The wound is deep. He runs out of his hole.
 A new Dawn is brewing for us in the red bay.
The metaphor of "fiery blood, happy" amazes not only with its unexpectedness, but also with its ability to complete the image of "cooking a new dawn".
It is obvious that Varuzhan's patriotic ideas had only one way to be implemented: the way of struggle. That is why in his poems the words "Rebellion" (p. 163) and "Rebellion" ("Out of the snow, with a thunderbolt, I bring you rebellion", 155) appear in capital letters, which are not only emphasized in capital letters. , but symbolize ideas in a unique way.
The line "A hero's sword" stands out with the perfection of poetic art.
  It is a glorification of the "sword", and thus of the hero, who is the Armenian hero fighting for the national revival.
 And the image of the "creation" of the sword of freedom is simply glorious.
The poet "worships the righteous Sword." The latter appears in his pen again in capital letters, symbolizing the struggle, heroism, sacrifice and devotion for the realization of the sacred idea of ​​the rebirth of the Armenian people.
  It is remarkable how boldly Varuzhan calls the main culprit of the current miserable condition of his people, to whom the lightning strike of the Sword of Justice must be aimed.
 Poetry is damaged. "I will worship Sword justly, against the crescent moon."
  It seems to be an ordinary image, a sword shining against the crescent moon, but the poetic genius has found a nightmarish episode in the history of his people with a poetic image, a trick to hint at Turkish rule.
Thus, in the collection "The Heart of the Tribe", Varuzhan declares the Sword as his new faith, "He is the faith of my heart" (p. 185).
 And since his heart is the heart of the Tribe, the picture is completed with the following: the heart of the Tribe does not have faith, the faith of "Sword", the faith of struggle, encouragement, rebirth, resurrection.
Ruzan Hovasapyan THE IDEOLOGY OF NATIONAL REVIVAL DANIEL VARUZHAN'S "COLLECTED HEART" COLLECTION Keywords: ideology of national renaissance, poetic art, Turkish domination, movement, liberation, literary
