Barbed wire, BUT WHY FLOWERING? (G. MAHARU'S "FLOWING barbed wire" NOVEL) At first glance, it always seems "easy" to talk about a writer who has been talked about a lot.
 "A lot" in the sense that the latter's literature has been in the center of attention of literary critics and critics for decades.
  Nevertheless, it is necessary to clarify in which period of the writer's works he is referring, especially when the question concerns the study of the writer's specific works.
 After all, the existence of many scientific texts does not always indicate the consumption of material content.
 After all, in many cases, even in the "said" one can find the "unsaid" or, so to speak, the "new" that needs to be raised.
  In this respect, it is appropriate to remember one of the literary critics. "Innovation seeks, and when they search, they often get lost."
 There is that, of course, but in literature, if there is a "search", then the text also gives the opportunity.
 Therefore, even the risk of “making a mistake” cannot be an end in itself.
 Finally, let us not forget the role of time.
 A time that, having the imperative, brings about a new way of thinking, and consequently the literature receives a new interpretation in that context.
 It is possible not only to look at the writer in a new light, but also to approach the given writer with the imperative of new times, that is, how relevant is the given work?
  This begs the question: what makes a writer's literature last for decades?
  The question, of course, has a logical answer, by how persistent it is in what it says at the present time.
Mahari's novel "Flowering Barbed Wires" has been talked about many times, but let's try to look at the novel in the context of the title or, so to speak, interpret the novel "Flowering Barbed Wires" by asking a specific question - barbed wire, but why flowering?
 But first two words about the novel: why was the novel written or when was it written?
1936 Gurgen Mahari is exiled on baseless charges (as a result of Stalin's repression).
  However, many other famous intellectuals (A. Bakunts, E. Charents, Z. Yesayan, V. Totovents and others) were not even able to live in Siberian camps.
 And, in fact, exile even becomes "salvation".
  In this case, it would be right to take the word "salvation" in quotation marks.
  After all, what was the cost of saving lives?
  It was many years of repressed life in the cold Siberian camps.
 Mkrtich Armen, Vahram Alazan and many others got such an opportunity to be saved.
 Among them was Gurgen Mahari.
 The novel "Flowering Barbed Wire" is one of his Siberian works.
 It was written after the novel "Burning Gardens", when the novel was published.
  The work started in 1965.
  The novel was written in a very short period of time, during one summer.
  And talking about the novel, Mahari himself says: "I finished the novel.
  I had a story plan, a novel came out.
  It is not a novel, a novel ”2, and A. In the letter addressed to Melik Sargsyan, he says about this novel. "It is written with the motives of 'SJ man', three times more voluminous, thirteen times more shocking and deep."
 Let us now turn to the novel.
 It can be said that it starts with a special emphasis. "That day".
The author immediately singles out one of the camp days.
 After all, it was famous.
 The author himself states that the situation is "famous". "The potter had not seen a woman for a long time.
Samo took with him the last of the memories of Lyalya. ”4
 And who were Lyalyan և Sano?
  The author does not go into details.
  But after the appearance of a new wife, LyudmilaShart, as we can already see, her connection with Mamo already, it seems, is interpreted by the fact that the Lyudmila-Mamo couple was neither the first nor the last in the camp.
1 Aghabekyan K., Gurgen Mahari, Yerevan, 1975, page 16.
2 Mahari G., Siberian, Yerevan, 2009, p. 743.
3 In the same place.
4 Mahari G., Flowering Barbed Wire, Yerevan, 1988, page 13 (the pages of the other passages quoted from this book will be mentioned on the spot).
In Brutanots camp, as in other Siberian camps, the laws set by the government apply.
 And according to those established laws, a person is deprived of all the rights inside the barbed wire.
  The hero-writer often goes to the past with memories.
  The border seems to intersect here. The period of the writer's autobiography expands its borders from the given "place", the pottery camp.
  Memories also depict the writer's life outside the barbed wire.
 Thus, the Mahari-heroic path inside the barbed wire is "clarified" and present.
  But life outside the barbed wire is the image of life that begins for Mahari to appear inside the Siberian barbed wire.
 What was the sin?
 But in this case Mahari is not the only one.
 In fact, he is not the only one who treats his "criminal" with irony.
  Those who appeared inside the barbed wire are all "criminals", but their guilt has only one explanation. "Times are hard, we have to adapt ․․․" (page 14).
 Therefore, strangers should even ask each other directly. “Did You Work?” (P. 17)
 The question, however, is not so much a way to find out the guilt of the accused, but it is just interesting what they were accused of.
  Everyone is kind of (from their own experience) convinced that those inside the barbed wire are not guilty, but innocent defendants.
The image of Mahari-writer և Mahari-acting hero is interesting.
  When the story begins, Mahari just seems to be a narrator who describes the events in the first person.
  Moreover, it seems that the main character is not "himself", and the reader is kind of waiting for the life story of Lyudmila-Mamo "main" heroes.
  But this is Mahari's style.
  He seems unintentional, but "deceives" the reader ․ The main character of his novel is himself, and the rest are the accompanying heroes of his life.
  And page by page the image of a struggling man is drawn, who seems to be unable to stay inside the barbed wire. he is able to create his world, which is far from the Siberian camp. "I sat on the river bank for ten to fifteen minutes, blessing the creation of the world and the birth.
 All the forgotten bitterness and my miserable condition, I was disappearing with my soul, far from the hovering business yard, անգամ could not even think of the armed guards, that I am with my whole being, infinitely beyond their checkpoints ”(p. 20).
 The memories that lead to the birthplace of Van, Yerevan, նկատ noticing the beautiful surroundings become one of the preconditions for surviving inside the barbed wire.
  Otherwise, how to survive?
  But it is not.
  They survive, but, nevertheless, life has its imperative, and even in the created situation it can be joyful.
  Here Mahari somehow comes out of "himself" or, to be more precise, represents everyone through him.
 Here, in a way, everyone is equal.
  When you are surrounded by barbed wire ես you have to live in the conditions that exist, there seems to be no other way out արդեն The only way out is to accept the reality as it is.
 The ability to accept it also makes it possible to find something in the difficult daily life that, roughly speaking, makes life bearable.
  But Mahari is not the only one. Here everyone has created their world, a world that has changed inside the barbed wire, but it can also be so "different".
 After all, there is a way to resist ելու to color your own life inside the barbed wire.
In general, Mahari's style of storytelling is interesting.
 Mahari, in fact, crosses the temporal-spatial boundaries. he flies from one pottery with memories to the past, different episodes of one camp life are "mixed" with his present, and in another case, the author speaks from a "different" time, when it is already clear that he has crossed the border, out of barbed wire, already barbed wire The inside has become a memory.
 But does Mahari only remember those days of the pottery with bitterness?
 Absolutely!
 Regardless of everything, it can be said that he does not deny the life he lived.
  Finding the thread to resist, to always be able to live, between the writer's lines, a longing is drawn for the life inside the barbed wire.
 And the pottery, strange as it may sound, even seems to be a dear place, the memory of which evokes sweet memories. "Pottery, my pottery, I will remember for a long time, rather, I have never forgotten you and I will never forget you" (p. 47), and in the following lines the warm picture of the pottery is already more clearly underlined.
 And the author not only warmly describes his "singing stove" of the pottery, but also the beautiful nature of the cold Siberian winter.
 Mahari directly crosses all the borders.
 Thus, in the novel, different times, the writer's mild humor, satire, even sarcasm are mixed together.
 And it is not accidental that Mahari's mild humor in the next line can become a satire, even a sarcasm.
 Very often sadness vibrates between the lines.
 Here, on the one hand, the cruel reality is emphasized, on the other hand, the author shows how even the human character definition changes inside the barbed wire.
 Here, in fact, a person loses even his professional title.
Mahari states with bitter irony. "But here is the head of the business yard, Vasily Bichko, who said that now painters are more respected than painters.
 Is it?
 This catastrophe, it is clear, refers to the land that is inside the barbed wire, and outside the barbed wire, the painters are respected, the painters are even engaged in painting.
  Yer! ”(P. 40).
  Maharu managed to convey the special stylistic-spatial transitions to his addressee, the reader.
 And for the reader those transitions are more than clear. The writer was able to depict all aspects of Siberian life with this "mixture", not forgetting the most important, to see the bright even in the worst.
Thus, the author separates two different worlds, the world covered with barbed wire, the world outside the barbed wire, but at the same time he manages to present those separated worlds as a whole.
 After all, these two realities are different, but at the same time they are identical as part of a common world.
 The unity of these "two worlds" emphasizes the most essential thing: one should not be separated from each other, but pretended that life should be accepted as an undeniable reality, which seemed to be just that.
 This is what gives life love.
 A life that is not limited to physical existence.
 And it is not accidental that people even fall in love in the Siberian camp.
 They fall in love when love is not only forbidden by law, but is punishable.
 The Mamo-Lyudmila couple are remarkable in this respect.
 A couple who seem so out of place is an educated painter և coachman Mamo.
  But their love, in fact, is conditioned by the situation.
For Lyudmila from the very beginning, Mamo becomes someone who is not only willing to help her in any way, but also shares with her what is most important to the prisoner - bread.
 And if we generalize Mamo's steps, which are conditioned by capturing Lyudmila's heart, we should notice that sometimes those steps seem ridiculous, but they also emphasize the tragic sides of the situation.
Finally, let's try to interpret the title - barbed wire, but why bloom?
 Note that the noun "barbed wire" in the title already emphasizes the limitation in a certain space.
 But Mahari, presenting the life of the Siberian people in the context of that "limitation", puts the idea of ​​his novel - the ability to find the good, the enlightened in the difficult conditions of life, an ability, which in this case is the manifestation of human willpower.
  Thus, the so-called "flowering barbed wire" is an expression of the human willpower to withstand the Siberian conditions.
  But let's be a little more detailed.
  Here we must note that there is a bitterness towards the difficult life, the problem of looking at that difficult reality with one's own worldview, worldview.
  And it is from this worldview that the two worlds separated by barbed wire are perceived in such a way that the difficulties are overcome.
  It is in this context that the ability to accept life in all its colors arises.
 That's the only way to overcome the difficulties, to continue living.
 Therefore, life is valued and loved just as it is at the moment.
And Mahari must not only notice the beauty of the Siberian nature, but also "hear" the "song" of the stove burning in the corner of the pottery. "He knows even the funniest songs, it's enough, remember your son's weather, he will sing" (p. 42).
 Mamo should also have her favorite corner.
 Corner, which is a kind of home in the Siberian camp for him. "Coming out of the tub, Mamo լվ the laundry անոց entered the dryer.
 Without any other.
 With firm steps.
 Without feeling uncomfortable.
No one could accuse him of indecency or disorder because Mamo had set up several boards in the corner of the dryer, on which he rested every day after dinner ”(p. 15).
  In fact, the birth of love here should have been very natural.
  Love, that even the fruit inside the barbed wire is doomed to non-existence, but nevertheless, it is not through generation that the permanence of love is confirmed inside the barbed wire.
 After all, they are not only capable of loving here, but there is the most important thing - the monopoly of preserving the human face.
  People can not only help each other if necessary, but are ready to stand up for their own principles.
 Let's remember the character of Ashot Dayu.
 He does not like to lie, but lies for Mamo. "... in general, he did not like when people lied, but this time he lied, so as not to spoil Mamo's work" (p. 18).
  And the barbed wire, yes, even though it is not in bloom, should be viewed as such.
 The repressed life of a person surrounded by barbed wire can be appreciated. After all, the laws of life operate alongside the laws written inside.
Laws that make it possible to "love" to be loved while preserving all human rights to be called.
 Barbed wire is flourishing because, unlike many, those who have found themselves inside the barbed wire have the opportunity to live and hope to return to their homeland.
 It emphasizes the ability not to lose one's self.
 Examining this "I" of Mahari-writer և Mahari-hero should not look bitterly at the bitter life he lived, he said that by not denying the life he can continue to live or, to be more precise, to establish his own right.
And how modern is Gurgen Mahari's "Siberian"?
 In this respect, a little comparison may not sound so appropriate if we connect the topic of current emigration with the repressed exile presented in the novel.
  Despite the difference, the topic is also painful in the context of our times.
  After all, what is the difference between leaving a repressed homeland and leaving it voluntarily?
  It is true that times are incomparable, but nevertheless, there are many similarities.
 The root cause of the question has simply changed: what is the reason for the increase in the number of exiles, who are the culprits?
 Leaving the homeland, leaving home and family, the Armenian acquires a name whose sound does not distinguish between the contextual significance of the times, "to be repressed or not", in other words, the word "exile / Siberian" has not changed the tragic sound of its meaning over time. There are many mamos and Ashot uncles now.
 If Gurgen Mahari's Siberian is a repressed person, then becoming a Siberian voluntarily (միայն not only Siberian) is a choice conditioned by some economic and political factors of the country.
  But the questions, however, are not exhausted.
  Given these economic and political conditions, new questions arise: to be voluntarily Siberian, but why և until when?
Arpine Vardanyan Barbed wire, BUT WHY FLOWERING? (G. MAHARU'S "FLOWING barbed wire" STORY) Keywords: different sides of barbed wire, outside world, distance from the world, memories, Mahari-writer, Mahari-her
