TURKEY'S RELATIONS WITH CENTRAL MACRIPIAN COUNTRIES 1996-2002 1996 On June 28, 2012, pro-Islamic Necmettin Erbakan became the Prime Minister of Turkey.
 If Turgut Ozal was trying to partially replace Turkey-West economic ties with Turkey-Arab countries with Turkey-Iran economic ties, then he thought that Turkey should strengthen its political relations with non-Islamic countries at the expense of the West.
  More precisely, Erbakan sought to create a "just Islamic society", Islamic structures similar to those of NATO, the EU and the UN, as well as other supranational organizations uniting from Kazakhstan to Morocco1, in which, of course, Turkey had to play a leading role. .
  Although Erbakan did not stay in power for long, his ideas show that relations with Islamic countries tended to deepen in Turkey's foreign policy.
These shifts in foreign policy have had a positive effect on relations between Turkey and the countries of Central Maghreb, such as Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.
  In addition, the rise to power of Islamist forces in Turkey has also had a significant impact on the domestic political situation in the central Maghreb, pushing Islamist political forces to cooperate with more secular parties in order to gain power.
  To fully comprehend this, it must be borne in mind that in connection with the colonial past of the Arab Maghreb, Islamist movements in the Arab Maghreb opposed European values ​​to European models, calling for a return to Arab-Islamic origins and therefore no inclination to cooperate with secular powers.
 This was not typical of Turkish Islam2.
 As an example of the positive influence of the "Welfare" party, we can mention the fact that the Moroccan "Orientation-Revival" Islamist movement, which had ideological similarities with the latter, was founded in 1981. և until 1996 refused to enter the political arena, impressed by the rule of the Islamist "Welfare" party, in 1996. In the summer of 1918, he agreed to join an alliance with the secular-conservative Democratic-Constitutional National Party to run in the upcoming elections3.
It is noteworthy that in 1996-2002. Turkey's relations with the "Central Maghreb" countries differed from those of the Arab Maghreb countries with Libya's "Mauritania" relations with Turkey.
  More precisely, unlike the other Maghreb Arab countries, the relations with the central Maghreb countries were developing steadily, and the spheres of cooperation were expanding.
  The regular visits of Turkish officials to the mentioned Arab countries, the leaders of those countries to Turkey, as well as the agreements signed between Turkey and the Central Maghreb countries are a proof of that.
  It should be noted that both before and during the period under review, all three countries had a number of reasons for closer relations with Turkey.
 Here are the most important ones.
 In particular, cooperation with Turkey would curb possible Islamic movements in Tunisia (at that time there was a high probability that Islamic sentiment from Algeria, which was in a civil war, would penetrate into Tunisia), counterbalance the Arab countries 1 Куртов А.
//www.rau.su/observer/N12_97/12_14.HTM.2 Torelli S., The AKP Model and Tunisia's al-Nahda.
 From Convergence to Competition ?, Insight Turkey, vol. 14, № 3, 2012, p. 71. Cooperation with, would provide economic development to the country, etc.
 Algeria, which was striving for internal stability, had good reasons to strengthen relations, it needed reforms, so Turkey would be a reliable partner in that matter.
Turkey had its own reasons for strengthening ties with the mentioned countries.
In particular, in addition to other reasons for the import of energy, the territory of the central Maghreb was an open door for Turkey to Africa.
 It is not accidental that at that time Morocco was trying to establish a trilateral Turkey-Morocco-Africa cooperation, to achieve this it was trying to act in its relations with Turkey as a state whose territory is an open door to West Africa 1.
  Therefore, in the presence of these other preconditions, a number of steps were taken between Turkey and the countries of Central Maghreb, with the aim of strengthening the existing ties and expanding the spheres of cooperation.
  The point is that during the mutual visits a number of agreements were signed, as well as a number of agreements were reached, which contributed to the closer relations between Turkey and the Central Maghreb countries.
One of the significant advances in the rapprochement between Turkey and Tunisia was made in 1998. Turkish President Suleyman Demirel arrived in Tunisia on a two-day visit on May 4, 2010 at the invitation of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.
  During the visit, the Turkish President discussed with Bin Ali issues related to increasing bilateral trade, the region, terrorism and other issues.
  The President of Turkey arrived in Tunisia accompanied by the Minister of State նախարար Minister of Culture, who, after negotiating with high-ranking Tunisian officials, signed agreements on tourism and culture2.
In the period under study, the relations between Turkey and the Central Maghreb countries in 1998 were possible. The signing of a cooperation agreement between Turkey and Algeria on June 22 in Ankara.
  Another year later, in 1999. Turkish President Suleyman Demirel paid an official visit to Algeria on January 25, ending his visit the following day, January 26.
  During the visit, Demirel met with Algerian official Liam Zerual, Prime Minister Ismail Hamdani and other high-ranking officials.
  Suleiman Demirel arrived in Algeria accompanied by a large delegation, which included ministers, parliamentarians, as well as about a hundred businessmen3.
  During the meetings, the two presidents discussed a number of regional and international issues, as well as the existing relations between the two countries.
 These issues included the peace process in the Middle East and the Mediterranean, as well as the two countries' relations with each other and with the EU.
  During the meeting, the Turkish President also expressed his condolences over the "terrorist attacks" that have killed thousands of innocent people4, thus expressing his support for the Algerian government in its fight against the Islamic opposition and its intolerance of radical Islamic movements in Algeria.
 During the visit of the President of Turkey, a decision was made that the Turkish airline would resume its flights to Algeria5.
1999 Morocco sent a team of 37 rescuers to Turkey after a strong earthquake in central Maghreb on August 17 to save the lives of several people trapped under the rubble in Turkey's Sakarya region.
  Morocco also sent 900 tents, 5,000 blankets, as well as a large amount of medicine to Turkey.
 The Moroccan Red Crescent also sent a large amount of humanitarian aid to the victims6.
2 “President Demirel in Tunisia”, Cumhuriyet, 05.05.1998, http:
//www.hri.org/news/turkey/trkpr/1998/98-05-05.trkpr.html#01.
http:
//www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/990127/1999012765.html.4 Ibid.
http:
//www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/990519/1999051908.html.http.
//www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/990825/1999082544.html. Another year later, in 2000. On February 8, King Mohammed VI of Morocco met with Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem, who sent him a letter from Turkish President Suleyman Demirel.
  Ismail Cem also meets with his Moroccan counterpart Mohamed Benaisa, during which the possibilities of economic, trade, scientific and technical cooperation between the two countries are discussed.
 During the same year, 2000 On April 20-22, Ismail Cem will pay a visit to Algeria.
 Here he meets with Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika and Algerian Prime Minister Ahmed Benbitour.
  During the Algerian President's meeting, Cem conveyed to the President the invitation of Turkish President Suleyman Demirel to visit Turkey, to which the Algerian President responded positively.
  During the meetings, the political, economic, cultural bilateral relations were discussed, as well as a number of regional and international issues.
Among the possible visits can be 2001. The Turkish parliamentary delegation headed by Mahfuz Kolir, Secretary of the Turkish-Moroccan Partnership Group, visited Morocco in May 2010 to discuss the coordination of relations between the two countries' legislatures.
  On May 24, the members of the Turkish delegation will have separate meetings with the speakers of the two houses of the Moroccan parliament, Abd al-Wahd Radi and Mustafa Oukacha.
 During the talks on bilateral relations, it was noted that there is a need to raise bilateral economic relations to the level of political, economic, cultural and historical relations connecting the two countries.
 The role of the two countries in the Islamic world and the Mediterranean and Middle East regions was also discussed.
  The talks also touched upon the issue of the Western Sahara, during which the Moroccan side thanked Turkey for its position of respect for the territorial integrity of the kingdom և sovereignty1.
It should be noted that it was not accidental that high-ranking Turkish-Moroccan officials regularly addressed the issue of the Western Sahara during the meetings, as expressing such a position during such meetings, the two countries reaffirmed the key role in the relations between the two countries. Morocco did not recognize the independence of Western Sahara.
  This underscored the unity of the two countries' positions in such an interview, which contributed to the closer relations between Turkey and Morocco.
Examining these visits and the agreements signed, it becomes clear that during the period under study between the central Maghreb countries and Turkey, the strengthening of ties and the expansion of spheres of cooperation took place.
  It is obvious that in 1996-2002. In its policy with the Central Maghreb countries, Turkey sought to maximize its relations with these countries, which was positively perceived in the central Maghreb.
It is noteworthy that in addition to the political and economic spheres, the relations between Turkey and the Central Maghreb countries were developing in a number of other spheres.
In parallel with the Turkish-Algerian political and economic relations, the cooperation in the field of energy was developing, due to which in 1996-2002. Algeria was one of the main suppliers of oil and gas to Turkey, and its territory was an open door for Turkey to Africa.
 Therefore, in the presence of these "other preconditions", a number of steps were taken between the parties, which aimed to strengthen the existing ties, to expand the spheres of cooperation.
  In particular, in 2000 On May 31, 2012, at the Turkey-Algeria Business Council of the Organization for Foreign Economic Relations (Dış Ekonomik İlişkiler Kurulu (DEİK)), Turkish State Minister Hasan Gemis suggested that Algeria use some of its gas revenues from Turkey to finance import projects from Turkey and construction projects involving Turkish construction companies.
http:
//www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/010525/2001052522.html. Significant progress was registered between the two countries in the field of energy in 2002. Turkish Minister of Energy and Natural Resources Zeki Çakan's Algerian counterpart Shakib Khelil signed an agreement on further development of energy cooperation between the two countries on June 4, 2010.
  It is worth mentioning that during the meeting of the ministers of the two countries, the Algerian minister mentioned that his country wants to cooperate with Turkey in exporting its liquefied natural gas to third countries1.
Most likely, the close political and economic cooperation between Turkey and Algeria had created certain preconditions for the peculiarities of the Turkish state system to be imitated to some extent by Algeria.
 It is not accidental that in Algeria, already in 2002. From the beginning, the army began to separate more strongly from the country's leadership, as more transparent, more regulated relations between the army and the "country leadership" began to develop, which was typical of Turkey2.
 On the other hand, in 2002 From the beginning, these processes would gradually lead to the weakening of the army positions in the country, with which the developments in Algeria had some similarities with similar developments in Turkey.
 This refers to the fact that in 2002 After the recent rise to power of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Turkey, certain steps were taken to weaken the army in the country.
In the field of foreign policy, there were some other changes in Turkey-Tunisia relations, which were special for Turkey in that Tunisia acted as a mediator in 1998. Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Shara met during the Doha Conference of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (ICO) in March 2010.
 The purpose of the meeting was to eliminate the cold relations between Turkey and Syria at that time.
Turkey-Tunisia relations were strengthened by the fact that Tunisia, unlike a number of Arab countries, maintained its ties with Israel, which could not be welcomed by Turkey, a traditional ally of Israel in the region, especially given that most Arab countries were concerned at the time. From the existing military cooperation between Turkey and Israel.
Most likely, such an understanding in foreign policy is the reason why the two countries were trying to deepen relations in the military sphere as well.
 For this purpose, a number of visits of the defense ministers of the two countries took place, the main purpose of which was to deepen military cooperation.
  In particular, in 1998 Tunisian Defense Minister Habib bin Yahya visited Turkey on November 3-4.
 The purpose of the visit was to promote the deepening of military cooperation between Turkey and Tunisia3.
2002 Another official visit from Turkey to Tunisia will take place on January 15.
 Turkish Defense Minister Sabahattin Cakmakoglu is paying a two-day official visit to Tunisia.
  The latter meets with Tunisian Defense Minister AdDali al-Jazi.
 The main purpose of the visit was to organize Turkey's participation in the modernization program of M113 armored vehicles.
  The Turkish Defense Minister also met with Tunisian President Bin Ali to discuss bilateral relations between Turkey and Tunisia.
 After the meeting, the Minister announced that he sees almost the same views on some regional and international issues4.
This visit at the level of the Minister of Defense in Turkey-Tunisia was not the only one in 2002. during.
 In October of the same year, al-Dali al-Jazeera paid a visit to Ankara, where he met with Turkish Defense Minister Sabahattin Çakmakoլlu.
  Turkish Defense Minister meets 2 Werenfels I., Managing Instability in Algeria.
 Elites and political change since 1995, Routledge Abingdone, 2007, p. 60. http:
//www.arabicnews.com/ansub/Daily/Day/020118/2002011812.html. He noted that cooperation with Tunisia is quite successful in the Mediterranean, within the framework of the North Atlantic Alliance, noting that there are some significant developments in the field of military exercises, military cooperation in the field of military industry1.
It should be borne in mind that such a rapid development in the direction of deepening military cooperation between Turkey and "Tunisia" was not accidental, was largely due to the fact that after the formation of the EU, Tunisia, appearing between the Arab League and the EU, was very interested in cooperation. The third direction, with which cooperation in various fields, from political and economic to military, could be an alternative to cooperation with the two.
 It is obvious that Turkey could be the third direction in the foreign policy of Tunisia, which is an alternative to the Arab-European countries.
  As for Turkey, the latter was interested in strategic cooperation with the Arab countries of the Maghreb, which would help strengthen its influence in the region, "maintain peace" and strengthen it in the Mediterranean basin.
A significant development in the relations between Turkey and the countries of central Maghreb was the fact that already in 1998 During this period, Turkey was negotiating with Tunisia and Morocco to have a free trade zone2.
  In all likelihood, when negotiating a free trade area, Turkey took into account the fact that both it and Tunisia and Morocco had already signed an association agreement with the EU; they were also interested in Turkey becoming an EU member because The position was that after Turkey became a member of the EU, Tunisia and Morocco would be included in the list of countries closest to cooperating with the EU, whose aspirations the EU would simply have to meet.
During this period, by strengthening relations with the Central Maghreb, Turkey sought to remove as much as possible the obstacles that prevented the countries of the region from acting together.
  Therefore, if in the 1980s. late և 1990s During the first half of the 19th century, Turkey sought to strengthen its position in the Arab Maghreb, thus filling the vacuum left over from the weakening of the USSR after the subsequent collapse, then in 1996-2002. Turkey's efforts to cooperate with the countries of the central Maghreb in the international arena were already evident during that period.
Armen ZhamharyanTURKEY'S RELATIONS WITH CENTRAL BATTALIONS 1996-2002 Keywords: Turkey, Tunisia, Algeria, Maghreb, North Africa.
