LINGUISTIC FEATURES OF HIGH TERRITORY PROTOCOLS Bardzrakash S. Grigor monastery is located in Dsegh village.
 From the inscriptions that have reached us in ruins, it is clear that it was built in the 13th century.
 The monastic complex consists of two churches, a vestibule, a chapel, the Mamikonyan family cemetery, an oil mill, and the remains of khachkars.
  The main church of St. It is the Mother of God.
  The construction was started by Hamazasp Mamikonyan's grandson և Sargis's son Martspan.
  The vestibule is adjacent to the church from the south.
"It was called Bardzrakash because of its position towards the village. below the plain, weighing down, trying to point out the place of the church built in the 9th century.
 High weight has become a place name "1.
To the south is the medieval cemetery, in the area of ​​which S. The Chapel of the Resurrection, which is also called the Ark of the Crow.
  It was built by Hovhannes Vardapet ևnra's brother Sargis in 1234.
  Ս. There was an oil mill on the south side of Harutyun Chapel, from which the lower part was preserved.
 It was built by Vardapet Gorg2.
In this article, our goal is to decipher the inscriptions made on the walls of the monastery, to reveal their linguistic and stylistic features.
 The topic is so relevant that the protocols summarize rich linguistic, historical, Armenological and ethnographic material.
  Through the records we can find out what holidays were spread among the Armenians in that period, that personal names prevailed, how many of them were used in that era, what was the system of writing symbols, etc.
In total, we found 24 protocols of different volumes and different contents.
 The name Bardzrakash is found in 4 inscriptions, 3 in the southern part of the vestibule, 1 in S. On the south wall of Astvatsatsin Church.
The protocols are written in the first person են are divided into structural groups.1. First of all, it is biographical information, from which it is found out who the builder is, the purpose of the construction, 2. We separate from the inscriptions the names, in which the names of the predominant men are mentioned, next to them are mentioned the names of women, 3. The inscriptions summarize the names of the sponsors, 4. The idea of ​​the sanctity of the family becomes clear from the inscriptions, as the author represents parents, sister, brother. woman's names, 5. It becomes known who reigned in that period, during whose time the monastery was built, etc.
 At the end of the protocols there are usually curses, those who destroy the target, those who disrupt their work, and at the end they ask for God's blessing for the work they have done. The following names are read in the high-weight inscriptions: Holiday Blessing, Feast of Hripsimeans, Feast of the Holy Cross, Ascension, Feast of St. Ignatius, St. Sargis, St. Theodosius, David, St. Gregory, Forty Days, Easter, Feast of the Cross.
Many special names are mentioned in the protocols, mostly personal names.
 Some of them have biblical origins, such as Judas, Christ, Cain.
Hrachya Acharyan considers the origin of many personal names unknown.
  Among them are the names Ashot, Hamlik, Praush, Smbat, Khaghbak, Hripsime.
  The Greek names are Grigor, Tekli, Persian: Marzpan (Martspan), Vasak, Kurd, Hamazasp, Khorishah.
  The surname Markos is of Latin origin, Mlkan is Arabic.
  Gavka և 1 Divan of Armenian lithography, Prak 9, Yerevan, 2012, p. 356.
2 See G. Shakhkyan, The Stony Pages of Lori History, Yerevan, 1986, pp. 36-38.
We have no information about the origin of Julbek names.
  Mamkananun is of Armenian origin, which is based on the word mam, and how is an ending.
 Among the listed personal names are Tekghi, Khorishah, Hripsime, Mamkan, Mlkan1.
Most of these personal names were used in the 13th-16th centuries, many of them were not used in Armenian after Eldra!
Some family names are included in the protocols.
  Among the ancient family names, Mamikonian, Khaghbakian, Hamazaspian are mentioned, and later the surnames of the region, Hakobyan and Unanyan.
Among the special names we find five places in the inscriptions: Voghjaberd, Tsaghkut, Serekagom, Khram և Sanahin.
Abbreviation was widely used in both ancient bibliography and lithography.
 In manuscripts մեջ In ancient literature it was customary to type a few letters at a time.
 This event was called a summary or diploma.
  In ancient times there was only a summary of seven words: God, Jesus, Christ, Lord, Holy, Jerusalem, Israel 2.
Only the sacred words were summarized, on which was placed the sign of honor (-) specific to the punctuation system of the ancient Armenian language, from which the word honor originates.
 Later, honor became a common acronym և used for every word3.
In the high-weight inscriptions we find the following abridgments: subject the word.
We meet the sign of honor on separate letters.
B.
 We no longer see this as a summary, because here we are dealing with the numerical value of the letter.
 That sign had its original meaning by being placed on the numeral letters.
Inscriptions are an integral part of lithography.
  An attachment or attachment is a type of writing that consists of a combination of one or more letters.
  In order to save space, they worked to place as many letters as possible on the same space.
The largest group of high-weight inscriptions are the attachments formed by the right column of the previous letter, joining the left column of the next letter.
  The following letters were joined in this way: OR, AV, PA, EV, MI, AB, AR, KA, IS, U, PE, KA, YER, ME, AM, MA, AK, IR, ME, AK, TA, NA, IT, TI, MY, OR, KAR, DANCE, MAR, GOR, EVERYTHING, TB.
 There are attachments when one letter is sitting on the shoulder of the other: TAR, TE.
  In some appendices the letters are arranged in such a way that one letter seems to be written in the other.
 They are called Tsotsagir4: Ri, Any, En.
Attachments can be grouped according to the number of fonts.
  The largest group consists of two-letter attachments, relatively fewer attachments when three letters are joined together.
 Four-letter attachments are rare.
 The latter are the appendices of the word AMEN.
 Once in the protocols, we come across a two-letter appendix, TB, which is at the same time a brief ending.
 We can consider this an appendix-summary.
1 See H. Acharyan, Dictionary of Armenian Personal Names, Yerevan, 1942.
2 See Abrahamyan A., Armenian Literature, Yerevan, 1973, p. 195.
3 See H. Acharyan, Complete Grammar of the Armenian Language, vol. 6, Yerevan, 1971, page 372.
4 See Abrahamyan A., p. 187.
The most commonly used in captioning are the letters that have columnar lines: A, K, M, R, O, S, R.
 The following letters play an auxiliary role: D, E, T, I, X, J, N, P, U, P, Q.
 The letters Z, Y, Ժ, L, Ծ, D, Ճ, Y, Sh, Ch, Ջ, V are relatively rarely used1.
In the above-mentioned protocols, the following appendix, R.
It acts as a connection between the letters U, that is, O, and in some cases simply r.
There are almost no punctuation marks in the protocols.
  The ending that is placed at the end of the protocol is rare, and only in some cases.
 The dot sign can most often be seen to the right or left of the numbers represented by letters.
  For example:
F.
A.
  or.
OTHER.
  և etc.
  There is almost no use of a semicolon, if we do not take into account a recent protocol.
  In one of the recent records we see the use of the fraction sign.
 We will talk about those two signs in more detail below.
The inscriptions are mainly made in the 13th century, except for 2.
  We strongly believe that they are from a later period.
 We are talking about the following inscriptions made on the south wall of the porch. «20 / V 28 Ա. Hakobyan "և" Lev. Unanyan. "
 The existence of a period of these protocols reveals several circumstances.
 First of all, they are written in modern orthography. In case of Grabarian orthography, they should have been written "Hagopian" and "Unanian".
 We are also witnessing a summary, which, however, was made not with a sign of honor, but with a gap, which was alien to the given period.
 The fraction sign (/) is used, which was absent in the punctuation system of ancient Armenian.
  In the protocols, the numbers are represented in letters, such as NO or ALL, and here we see a numerical number expressed in numbers: 20, 28.
One of the stylistic features is the presence of self-deprecating horses.
 Such words are humiliation, insignificant և other words.
 In some of the inscriptions we find the use of the word servant as a form of self-humiliation. "I am Sarkis the servant of the Lord" or "I am Mark the servant of God" և etc.
In borrowed words, there are especially differences in vowels a2.
A similar phenomenon is found in one of the inscriptions, when the word atabek is represented by an atapak egg: "Tamar, son of King Geurga of the kingdom, and Ivane's prince of power, and his eldest son."
Examining all the inscriptions of the monastery, we came to the conclusion that the basis of their orthography is phonetic.
 The rules of historical orthography are not observed.
  And so, in the Old Armenian, the vowel was written after the vowels, but in the carved inscriptions we notice a decrease in the sound, such as Martspana, Ashoto, Hogo, Hamlka, etc.
 This proves that already in the 13th century y was not pronounced differently!
Of course, there were some exceptions, in particular the word y was preserved in the word of God, as it could be confusing when abbreviated.
 In one inscription, the name Soradera is written in Soray's language, "soul", "soul", "son", "sons" etc. were used in parallel.
Sometimes in the same protocol we see orthographic versions, for example, they meet the church, at the same time the church members, or instead of being ours, it is our own.
  In the same way the pronoun zsotsa is found with zsatsa egg.
  Witnessed with the horse back to back.
The same word can be spelled with different rollers.
  For example, the word monastery appears in the inscriptions with the external conjugation ի ի -i, արտաքին արտաքին externally from vans // vanats.
Ordinary nouns belonging to different conjugations are more common than parts of speech, in contrast to special nouns, which are mainly subject to external conjugation.
 But here, too, there are exceptions, such as the names of John, Judas, Cain, Christ are subject to external conjugation, the names Gregory ոտ Ashot are subject to external conjugation, and so on.
Most common nouns are subject to external connotations o-a և i-a.
There are also examples of transitions: come, Lord, etc.
Verbs and pronouns are often found after nouns.
  Verbs are mostly past perfect tense forms, put in the singular of the first person, sometimes 1 See Abrahamyan A., p. 187.
2 See H. Acharyan, Complete Grammar of the Armenian Language, vol. 6, p. 838.
plural.
  There are also some negative signs used with a negative pointer, do not perceive.
In connection with the composition of the last derby, we can mention that in the 13th century, the ending was already used in parallel with the ending, as well as decorated with gold and pearls.
Pronouns are mainly reciprocal (my, his), demonstrative (this, he, that) և personal (I, we).
 There are a small number of definite (each, every, all) և interrogative pronouns (who, who, who, what).
 Receiving pronouns were usually used later in ancient Armenian, for example, of our nation, and in these inscriptions there are many sentences of their use, for example, of our nation.
The number of adjectives and adjectives is limited. There are only 3 macabas, there, now, again.
Connections are rare, some of which are prepositions for, in the name of, for, according to, before, for, some of which are prepositions, for, behind, for.
  There were almost no subsequent connections in Grabar, and the above-mentioned examples testify to their existence already in the 13th century.
 In one inscription, the connection is used in the following sense: After death, my father.
Connections are frequent, but they are often repeated, especially and sometimes other connections.
 References և sounds are not verified, and numbers are expressed in letters, except for a recent inscription where the numbers 28,20 were used.
Lilit Ghulinyan LINGUISTIC FEATURES OF HIGH-RESOURCE PROTOCOLS Keywords: high weight, protocol, summary, attachment, cap.
