ORGANIZATION OF NATIONAL MINORITY EDUCATION IN ARMENIA Everyone knows that for centuries the territory of Armenia has been inhabited by representatives of different nationalities who have never been discriminated against.
  In the Republic of Armenia, the national minority are the persons permanently residing in the Republic, having the citizenship of the Republic of Armenia, who differ in ethnicity from the main population of the country.
 According to the 2011 census, national minorities make up 1.8% of the population of the Republic of Armenia.
 There are more than twenty nationalities living together with Armenians in Armenia, of which 11 ethnic communities are self-organized: Assyrian, Yezidi, Kurdish, Russian, Belarusian, Ukrainian, Georgian, Jewish, Polish, Greek and German.
Our state policy is to support national minorities and small peoples as much as possible.
First of all, let us refer to the provisions of the national legislative field, which refer to the protection of the rights of national minorities.
  Thus, first of all, the main axis of the implementation of the state policy on the protection of the rights of national minorities is the main law of the state, the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia. "All people are equal before the law."
Discrimination, depending on gender, race, skin color, ethnic or social origin, genetic characteristics, language, religion, worldview, political or other views, ethnic minority status, property status, birth, disability, age, either personal or social from other circumstances, it is prohibited ”[1].
Article 41 of the Constitution declares that everyone has the right to preserve his national-ethnic identity.
 Persons belonging to national minorities have the right to preserve and develop their traditions, language, religion and culture.
Then in 1993 Article 1 of the RA Law on Language stipulates: "The Republic of Armenia guarantees the free use of the languages ​​of national minorities in its territory" [2].
The existence of an appropriate institutional system is also very important from the point of view of protection of the rights of national minorities.
 One of these institutions is the establishment of the Coordinating Council of National-Cultural Organizations of National Minorities of the Republic of Armenia under the Office of the President, the functions of which include support and protection of freedoms and rights of national minorities, discussion of issues related to educational and cultural programs, etc.
 According to him, the Department of National Minorities and Religion of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, which coordinates the spheres of religion of national minorities, has the authority to perform functions on national minorities in the system of state bodies.
  In other words, these institutions are engaged in solving the vital problems faced by national minorities.
It is a step forward that the new Electoral Code has allocated 4 seats in the RA National Assembly to the national minorities with the largest community - Yezidis, Russians, Assyrians and Kurds, which will allow them to voice their concerns in the parliament.
 It is very important that national minorities in our country will now have their representative in our legislature.
Let us prove one possible circumstance. Since 2000, 10 million drams have been allocated annually from the RA state budget to national minorities.
  That amount is equally distributed among national minority NGOs. "
As for the organization of general education of national minorities in Armenia, we can say that the analysis of the RA legislation allows proving the fact that there are serious preconditions for the realization of the educational rights of national minorities in Armenia. Եւ The Ministry takes practical steps to increase the educational process of ethnic minority children in the direction.
The right of national minorities to receive education in their mother tongue is enshrined in Article 4, Clause 10 of the RA Law on General Education, adopted in 2009, according to which "General education of national minorities may be organized in their mother tongue or national language with compulsory education in Armenian."
 In other words, national minorities are given the opportunity to learn their national language as their mother tongue, and at the same time they are required to learn Armenian as the state language of the given country, as they live in Armenia.
 And the teaching of a minority language is very important for the protection of language rights and the preservation of languages.
Secondary education is available in the languages ​​of the national minority communities under the protection and patronage of the Government of Armenia.
Within the framework of secondary education, the Ministry provides appropriate language teaching as an integral part of the curriculum for students who have submitted such applications, the number of which meets the relevant requirements.
The legislation of the Republic of Armenia allows the representatives of national minorities to receive education both in schools taught in the language of their national minority and in classes taught in Armenian, as they wish.
On the basis of the order adopted by the Minister of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia on November 24, 2010, the children of a citizen belonging to a national minority are admitted to a school taught in the child's national (mother tongue) language or in a school (class) with that language course. the parents of the children.
The Ministry has created all possible conditions for the organization of continuing education of children of national minorities at the elementary, basic and senior levels of secondary schools.
Every year, the Ministry approves the curriculum of the general education school of national minorities, where hours are allocated for the study of the mother tongue, literature, culture and history of national minorities.
The Ministry of Education has launched a number of programs aimed at organizing the education of national minorities.
For example, the National Institute of Education introduces "exemplary curriculum for the national minority secondary school (grade)" every year, training courses (23.02.09-27.02.09) for 10 Yezidi teachers, Yezidis, Kurds and Assyrians at the National Institute of Education The subject commissions of "Iranian Studies" and "Semantics" of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia function in order to assist in the solution of educational needs, to carry out examination programs, textbooks and manuals in the relevant languages.
 At the request of national minorities, Armenian language courses were organized for 20 representatives of national minorities.
 Training courses were organized for 21 Yezidi teachers (2013), 16 Kurdish teachers (2014), and 7 Assyrian teachers (2015).
 A database of students belonging to national minorities has been set up in the Department of General Education of the staff of the Municipality of Yerevan to encourage and encourage the latter to participate in their national holidays or other events.
On the initiative of the Ministry of Education, in 2009 the relevant specialists translated the 5th grade "Homeland Studies" և high school mathematics textbooks from Armenian into Russian and provided them to the students of national minority schools.
  This process is continuous, the ministry is working to organize the translation of the necessary textbooks.
Elementary education in ethnic languages ​​is available to communities of national minorities under the protection of the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  Within the framework of primary education, the teaching of national minority languages ​​is provided as an integral part of the curriculum; this teaching is organized even in case of insufficient number of students.
 For example, the teaching of Yezidi Kurdish in primary schools in Yezidi Kurdish settlements can be carried out in the presence of a relevant specialist, regardless of the number of children studying.
According to the "Curriculum of the National Minority Secondary School (Class)", 4 hours per week in grades 1-5 and in grades 6-12 are allocated for the teaching of the subject "Mother Tongue" of national minorities included in the state component of the curriculum. 3 lessons each.
 In addition, optional language teaching is provided in mixed settlements where the number of national minorities is small.
Assyrian is taught in elementary classes in the secondary schools of VerinDvin, Dimitrov, Arzni, Nor Artagers villages, in the elementary classes of Yerhani Pushkin Basic School No. 8, and in Andranik Margaryan High School No. 29, even with 2-3 children.
  We consider it necessary to mention the fact that since 1979 the Assyrians have been given the right to have lessons in their native language in the Armenian school.
 Assyrians in Armenia do not have any problems with textbooks, even the textbooks published here are used in Assyrian communities abroad.
  In 2009, the National Institute of Education presented the standard curriculum for grades 1-12 in Assyrian, which was approved after passing an examination.
 With the funding of the Ministry, in 2009 the textbook "Speak Assyrian" was published, the textbook of the 2nd grade "Write, read and write in Assyrian" was published, and in 2011 the textbook "Speak Assyrian" was republished.
  In order to develop elementary education in Assyrian, the authors of the textbooks were offered to create appropriate educational materials.
As for other minorities, there are difficulties for the Assyrians, especially in the training of Assyrian language specialists.
 Young Assyrians who want to study Assyrian and later teach in schools are admitted to YSU Faculty of Archeology due to lack of knowledge of Armenian, mainly for a fee.
 And the money allocated from the budget to the Assyrian community is enough to pay even the tuition fee of one student.
Let us mention from the Assyrian culture of scientific thought the old custom that when a girl spoke Assyrian, her father gave her little dowry, because language skills are already valuable.
Elementary education in Kurdish is available to all Kurdish children whose parents wish to teach their children Kurdish education.
  In all the settlements where the number of children is enough for one grade (according to the Ministry of Education - 5-7 students), elementary education is provided in Kurdish.
 Through the efforts of the Ministry of Education and Science, the Zmane de Kurdish primer was published in 2002 by Karlen Chachani, President of the Kurdish Section of the Writers' Union of Armenia, [5] which was, of course, an important event for the Kurdish community.
 This gives an opportunity to the Kurds living in Armenia to integrate with about 40 million compatriots of the world.
 Let me mention an interesting fact! The Kurds have had a Kurdish newspaper published in Armenia for about 80 years, which is unique in the world.
As for the Yezidis, it should be noted that during meetings with journalists, the chairman of the Yezidi Union Aziz Tamoyan repeatedly stated that Armenia is the only country where Yezidis receive education.
In Armenia, Yezidis write a half-hour daily program in their mother tongue, on public radio.
 In other words, it is only in Armenia that the Yezidis have been able to create literature, native alphabet, communication, newspaper, etc.
 We can say that there are full opportunities to preserve the national image of the Yezidis in Armenia.
 Armenia is the most fertile environment for the preservation of the Yezidis.
 They may be able to improve their financial situation outside Armenia, but they will lose their national image, as there will be no schools, textbooks, nationalist factors.
In 2005-2006, with the funding of the Ministry, the textbooks of the elementary classes of "Yezidi Language" were published, in 2010 the textbooks "Yezidi-1" were republished, and in 2011 the textbooks "Yezidi-2".
Yezidi literature is taught in schools where there is a corresponding number of Yezidi schoolchildren.
  There are such schools in Armavir, Aragatsotn, Kotayk, Ararat regions.
  At present, Yezidi literature is taught in more than two dozen rural areas.
The biggest problem for Yezidis is the lack of professional education in schools.
 Due to the lack of highly qualified Yezidi language teachers, teachers who do not have adequate education guaranteed by non-governmental organizations teach in Yezidi as an exception.
 They only teach children to read and write in their mother tongue.
It should be noted that the issue of education of Yezidi women is quite serious among the Yezidis living in Armenia.
  Many Yezidi girls are still known in the forest.
 Some Yezidi regions believe that a Yezidi girl who has finished school or is studying at a university can not arrange her life in the future.
  Very often Yezidi girls do not even finish the 5th or 6th grade, because their parents do not allow them to continue their education.
 In other words, one of the reasons for the violation of the right of Yezidi girls to education is the early marriages spread among them.
 And if we take into account the fact that now 12-year secondary education is compulsory in Armenia, it turns out that the majority of Yezidi girls are illiterate.
It should be taken into account that schools are funded by the number of students, very often, especially in rural areas, children are enrolled in schools, but do not actually participate in the learning process.
 There are many such cases in Yezidi villages.
 If the relevant structures of the ministry find out in time the possible cases outlined by us, the cases of violation of the Yezidi women's right to education can be significantly reduced.
 It is necessary to raise the level of public awareness so that Yezidi parents first realize the importance of education, then understand that they are responsible for their children's education, and may even be punished by law for violating children's rights.
In order to fully organize the primary education of the children of the Yezidi, Kurdish-Assyrian communities, the ministry is working to recruit specialists in Yezidi and Kurdish-Assyrian languages, because, as we noticed, all of them were concerned about the lack of relevant staff.
 Thus, at the Faculty of Archeology of Yerevan State University, Yezidi, Kurdish and Assyrian are taught as compulsory subjects, if the teaching of those languages ​​corresponds to the student's chosen profession.
    YSU Faculty of Ethics allows graduates to work as language teachers.
  Teaching Yezidi language is also offered by Yerevan University of Management.
 Classical Assyrian has been taught at YSU Faculty of Archeology since the 2005-2006 academic year in the 1st։ 2nd և 2nd year of the Master's program.
 However, the state's efforts in this regard will be effective only if the representatives of the Yezidi, Kurdish-Assyrian communities apply to the higher education institutions of Armenia with a desire to receive a corresponding profession in order to use the free places of education.
  It should be noted that based on the results of the entrance exams, the Republican Admissions Committee allocates targeted places to the Assyrian, Yezidi-Kurdish communities from the reserve places each year at the suggestion of the given community, and as we know, the state guarantees free higher education in RA universities. the right to education.
  And every year since 2010, by the decision of the Republican Admissions Committee, the representatives of other national minorities nominated by the organizations representing the respective communities in the council, who wish to study in the culture departments of higher education institutions, have the opportunity to use these privileges. and to develop the language.
 For example, in 2012, 1 seat was allocated to the Assyrian-Yezidi communities, in 2014, 2 seats to the Yezidi community, and in 2015, 1 seat to the representatives of the Assyrian-Yezidi communities [4].
 In the future, through the mediation of the Coordinating Council of National-Cultural Organizations of National Minorities of the Republic of Armenia, the university provides full or partial tuition discounts for students.
 However, it should be noted that national minorities have not yet developed a proper interest and motivation for higher professional education.
As for teaching Greek in primary education, we can say that since 1996, with the support and funding of the Greek Embassy in Armenia, Greek has been taught in Yerjan Basic School No. 74 as a compulsory subject, and in School No. 122 in School No. 132 at the expense of the school component. .
The Greek Embassy provides methodological and educational literature to schools No. 74 և 12 in Yerevan.
 It should be noted that Basic School No. 74 is the only Greek-leaning school in Yerevan where Greek is taught.
 However, the education here is not in Greek, but is taught in Greek, unlike other schools.
  In addition, there are no separate textbooks for grades 1-12.
 That is why Greek children mainly attend Armenian schools, as not everyone can get to that school from different parts of the city.
It should be noted that due to the activities of the Greek community of Pontie, which has been operating in Yerevan since 1995, Greek lecturers hold Greek language courses for two days a week for a small fee.
 These courses are designed for both adults and children; the emphasis is on oral Greek, as there is a group of Greeks who do not speak the language at all.
 In general, the Greek community lives with active cultural interests, participates in both national and national celebrations.
 We can say that the activity of the educational and cultural life of the Greek community is largely conditioned by the active activity of the Greek Embassy in Armenia, which unites the representatives of the community.
Speaking about the Russian community, we can say that their problems are mainly solved due to the measures taken by Russia.
 NGOs are especially active, which carry out active educational and cultural activities through various grants.
  Among those organizations are, for example, "Russia", "Harmony", which often implement private programs.
As we know, according to the curriculum of the RA secondary schools, in 2-9 grades, the subject "Russian language" is included in the list of subjects of the state component.
  The training is carried out both with textbooks published in Armenia, which take into account the peculiarities of teaching Russian in a national school, and with textbooks guaranteed by the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation.
The teaching of the complete general education program in the Russian language in the Republic of Armenia is carried out only in one state secondary educational institution, in the secondary school of Fioletovo village, which has a history of 109 years.
 The students of this school study with Russian books and programs provided by the Russian Embassy.
Currently, there are two private schools in Yerevan: "Slavyanskaya" school, where education is conducted in Russian, and "Mashtots", which has classes in Russian.
  In general, there are Russian-language classes in 42 secondary schools in the regions of Yerevan, where general education is taught in Russian, with the exception of "Armenian language and literature" as well as "Armenian History".
It should be noted that according to the curriculum of the secondary school (grade) taught in Russian, the list of subjects of the state component defines the subjects "Armenian language" and "Armenian Literature" as 2-6 hours per week for each grade of the secondary school, which assumes that the school After graduation, the learner must be fluent in Armenian.
 However, it should be noted that according to the procedure established by the Ministry, if a graduate has studied the subject "Armenian language" only in the last two grades, then in the relevant line of the secondary education certificate it is written "not studied", the student can be released " From the state graduation exam of the subject "Armenian language և Armenian literature", and in the corresponding line of the certificate it is written "exempt".
  And the Assessment եստ Testing Center provides the examination tasks to such applicants in Russian.
  However, this is a bit of a controversial issue, as very often the children are Armenians who simply have Russian citizenship; it is unfortunate that an Armenian does not know his mother tongue properly;
With the support of the Russian Embassy in Armenia, various events are regularly organized in public schools: competitions, festivals, such as the International Romance Competition, Russian Culture Days in Armenia, etc.
 We already know that Russian is included in the subject list of the annual schoolchildren's Olympiads held in the republic at school, city, regional and republican stages.
 As well as training courses for Russian language teachers, seminars-consultations, "Best Teacher of the Year" competitions in the Russian language, and other events are organized jointly with the RA Ministry of Education and Science, the National Institute of Education and the Russian Center for Science and Culture in Yerevan.
 Teacher training courses are also organized at the Armenian-Russian (Slavonic) University.
 Competitions and festivals related to the Russian language are organized.
  Armenian schoolchildren participate in the Russian language distance (distance) Olympiad.
 Every year educational and methodological literature is imported to Armenia from the Russian Federation.
  The Russian-language magazine in Armenia is also published in Armenia, which is given free of charge to all schools.
It should be noted that Sunday schools in their languages ​​have been established by non-governmental organizations of national minorities.
  As an example we can mention the Armenian-Russian-Assyrian "Arbela" scientific-cultural center established in 1995 in Verin Dvin secondary school, which aims to start educating the national consciousness at school age, to lay the foundations for knowledge of the mother tongue, literature, history and culture.
 Events were held at the school entitled "My mother tongue", "Our language is the guarantee of our existence" (Assyrian day, April 21).
The Arbela Center also organizes conferences at the Post-Institute School of Archeology and History.
  There is an "Arbela" dance group at school.
2014 There are currently Polish, Greek, Georgian, Jewish, German, Belarusian and Ukrainian Sunday schools.
 The courses are open without age-national restrictions.
 The courses are organized by the Government of Armenia at the House of Culture provided for the educational and cultural activities of national minorities.
 If necessary, the ministry assists by providing school premises for the opening of national minority centers and Sunday schools.
 For example, in the territory of the basic high school of Gyumri Pedagogical University, an auditorium was provided for the Sunday school of the center of the Polish non-governmental organization "Polonia".
Thus, based on the questions raised during the meetings with representatives of national minorities so far, as well as the analysis and research on the actual situation of national minorities in Armenia, we can say that the atmosphere of tolerance towards national minorities in general continues to prevail in Armenia.
  It is true that they have problems, but they are not of a pronounced national nature, they are mainly of socio-economic nature, and Armenians also face similar problems, their solution is connected with the improvement of the socio-economic situation in Armenia.
National minorities are always in the center of our authorities' attention.
  They are involved in political, economic, as well as educational and cultural development processes.
  Although there is no clear law on national minorities in Armenia, which would make it possible to resolve many issues in the legal field, the absence of a law does not prevent the Armenian government from making a major contribution to establishing and developing the educational and cultural system of national minorities.
National minorities do not face any objections when exercising their right to learn their mother tongue, but for all national minorities there are problems of և´ specialists,, preparation of educational programs.
 Exceptions are the minorities that have statehood և receive some assistance։ support from their ethnic state, for example, Russians, Greeks, Poles, Georgians.
  And stateless minorities receive support from the Armenian authorities, and in some cases from NGOs abroad.
Among the problems of organizing the education of national minorities, we can single out the problem of staff training, as there is a lack of necessary staff in almost all communities.
Finally, it should be noted that despite the fact that the Armenian state budget annually allocates funds to support the educational and cultural activities of national minorities, which are available to all national minorities, it should be noted that these funds are not enough to hold serious events.
  These funds are distributed equally among all communities, but it should be borne in mind that there are significant quantitative differences between these communities.
 In addition, some communities receive foreign aid and some do not.
  It is especially about the communities without statehood.
  Therefore, when allocating funds, it would be more purposeful to take into account the needs, capabilities, number of community members, the availability of outside assistance, and other circumstances.
LITERATURE [1] Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (as amended), Official Gazette of the Republic of Armenia, special issue, December 5, 2005, Chapter 2, Article 14.1, page 5.
[2] Chronological collection of current laws of the Republic of Armenia (1990-1995), Yerevan, 1995, p. 477.
[3] Protection of the Rights of National Minorities in the Republic of Armenia, Extraordinary Public Report, Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 16-55.
[4] URL.
 http:
//www.irtek.am (Accessed.
 26.05.2017).
[5] Third Report of the Republic of Armenia in accordance with Article 15 1 1 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Yerevan, 2012, p. 53.
Hasmik Vardanyan ORGANIZATION OF GENERAL EDUCATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES IN ARMENIA Keywords: national minority, community, legislation, government, educational law, general education, accessibility, tolerance.
