SOVIET-AFGHAN WAR. STRATEGIC NEED OR GEOPOLITICAL RACE? Every war, in addition to political, economic, social consequences, has a significant psychological impact on the participants.
 After demobilization, the fighting soldiers push their accumulated emotions into civilian life, which brings about significant changes in the society.
From ancient times the state's armed forces have been the main guarantor of state security.
 This structure has come up with a unique structure and tactics in different historical periods, in different nations, peoples.
  But one thing is clear ․ At all levels of development, military action was greatly influenced by both the military and the moral and psychological state of the society and the cognitive understanding of the service rendered to one's homeland. [1]
From time immemorial, any state or state-building in the pre-war period has tried to instill in society the idea of ​​a "just war".
 In other words, it has legitimized the war in the public sphere, because the society as a whole is not only the bearer of the burden of war, but also responsible for its result2.
1 The issue of personal characteristics of servicemen has always been in the focus of researchers.
2 Before the war, war classics Sun Tzu, Friedrich the Great, Carl von Claus, and others spoke about calculating the possible dangers.
In some societies, the cognitive understanding of public service to the state is based on national ideology 3, religion 4, the formation of the image of an ethnic enemy, etc. [3].
1975 Shortly after the withdrawal of American forces, the Vietnam War ended.
  The Asian region came under the influence of the Soviet Union.
  The leadership of the USSR was convinced that no problem on the planet could be solved without their intervention.
At the same time in 1979 The Islamic Revolution in Iran completely mixed the international situation in the region.
 Tremors were observed all over the Muslim world.
Afghan society has been in turmoil throughout the 20th century.
  1973 Mohammed Daoud carried out a coup d'etat, during which the established power did not last long.
 Most of the reforms implemented by David failed, and in 1978. The Saur Revolution, which began on April 27, 1945, ended with the proclamation of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
  The newly formed government sought to rapidly develop Afghanistan's backward society.
 The country faced chaos, meeting the opposition of radical Islamic forces.
  A civil war broke out, in which the giants of the time, the USSR and the USA, were not left out.
Soviet specialists have been supporting various Afghan governments since the 1950s, trying to win over Afghanistan to their sphere of influence.
 At the same time, the American special services in 1978 Then they started cooperating with the Mujahideen, the fighters of the military irregularities.
  Initially, $ 20-30 million in aid was provided, and in 1987. The amount of aid reached 630 million dollars a year.
 In such circumstances, it is appropriate to note that the United States significantly "contributed" to the Soviet government's involvement in the war.
 1973 Then the United States tried in every way to get revenge for the Vietnam War.
 1970s In the second half, with the exception of the nuclear arsenal, used to gain an advantage in the conflict, the 3 Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) best embodied the above concept.
 It is no coincidence that Israel has a special concept for the conduct of the Jewish military.
4 From the second half of the 20th century, a significant increase in the ideas of Islamic radicalism became noticeable.
  It eventually led to a number of extreme manifestations, including jihadist terrorism.
5 The "instructive" example of the preaching of an ethnic enemy is the propaganda policy of the Third Reich.
Today we are witnessing such manifestations in Azerbaijan in connection with the anti-Armenian and anti-Armenian propaganda.
all six possible means.
 In the event of a nuclear war, it was extremely profitable for the Americans to involve the USSR in the Afghan conflict.
The Soviet leadership justified its entry into Afghanistan with several factors.
 First, the geographical location of Afghanistan was mentioned.
 The Soviets feared that the Afghan gates would become a stronghold for Britain to disrupt the trade routes between the Far East and Central Russia.
Western powers also believed that Afghanistan would be a bridge for Russians to enter India.
At the same time, both the Soviet Union and modern-day Russia are concerned about the security of their southern borders.
 The USSR made enormous efforts, first to control American activities in the Asian region, and then to completely withdraw the United States from the region.
  That is why a Russian military base still operates in Tajikistan.
The task of strengthening the cognitive transition from duty to mission and the legitimacy of participation in general military operations in the society is more complicated when the operations take place outside the territory of one's own country.
  It is self-evident that security is directly related to regional and international security, but there are cases when this idea is either not acceptable to the society from the beginning or becomes unacceptable at some stage of action.
 In this respect, the "hot" manifestations of the Cold War, the six Vietnam-Afghanistan wars, are quite instructive.
Initially, both had a high degree of legitimacy from the American Soviet societies, respectively, but during the war the society came to the idea that this war was not its own.
 This was the reason for the withdrawal of the troops of the superpowers from the above-mentioned territories.
Both wars were fought between the "third world powers" of the superpowers.
  In both cases, we were dealing with a clash of ideological strengths and geopolitical interests.
  The territories of the two countries were turned into a arena of hostilities, where the "latest war of the time was demonstrated and tested." 6 Comparisons were made between the two above-mentioned wars.
 It is no coincidence that in the pages of Western literature the Afghan war is called the "Bear Trap" or the "Vietnam War of the Soviet Union."
weapons 7.
 In both cases, the superpowers were defeated in the information process by winning the battle on a large scale.
On the eve of the Vietnam War, in the early stages, many young Americans were inspired by the struggle against communism and saw the war as a priority in preventing the spread of communist ideology in Southeast Asia.
  It was the same situation in the Soviet Union in connection with the war in Afghanistan, where the ideological basis for the propaganda of the world international was the mission of the Soviet people as a socialist society to reach the world proletariat.
After years of waging war and suffering human and material losses, the Americans were still unable to achieve their set geopolitical goals and faced the "domino effect".
Besides, the idea was spread among the society that not everything can be decided at the expense of a thick wallet or military force.
  In honor of the Americans, it should be noted that they were able to overcome their mistakes and achieve brilliant victories in subsequent wars.
The situation was different in the USSR.
 Today, the previous arguments related to the security of the southern borders of the USSR, to help the brotherly peoples, to socialize in India, are already being questioned.
 The fact of excluding the cutting of Americans in the given region is pushed to the foreground.
  After the war in Afghanistan, there was a 10-year increase in the armaments industry, contributing to the collapse of the USSR economy and the collapse of the superpower.
One of the major innovations of the Vietnam War was helicopter aviation.
The helicopters were damaged after making 18 thousand flights (0 "005% loss).
  Some historians call the Vietnam War a "helicopter war."
8 It is no coincidence that in the Vietnam-Afghan wars it was customary to single out the issue of the information component.
 I consider the information processes to be parallel to the air operations արին parallel to the ground guerrilla struggle.
9 The best examples of these victories are 1991. The Gulf War և 2003 The Iraqi campaign.
 It is natural that in 2003 The losses of the Iraqis during the 38-day air strikes of the Americans had the following picture. Air force - 10%, armored vehicles - 18%, artillery - 20%, and as a result of the anti-propaganda, the morale of the staff fell by 40-60%.
  The Americans distributed 30 million leaflets to demoralize the Iraqi military, and more than 2,500 radio transmitters were used for misinformation.
 This և proves that the first of the combat features is the spirit.
10 1970-1980 "scientific and technical innovations were mainly aimed at meeting the demands of the military industry.
  Soviet Armenia also had its place and role in the system of the USSR military-industrial complex.
As a result, the Russians had serious geopolitical problems both in Central Asia and with the Muslim population of the Caucasus.
  In this case, we can see some similarities with the Vietnam War.
 That the American public was quite well informed about the course of the war and its actions until 1984. The Soviet propaganda machine presented only the positive aspects of the military front.
 Until 1987 Zinc coffins were kept in a semi-secret state, and tombstones were forbidden to write that the deceased had died in Afghanistan.
 The public gradually received more information from the front, but by 1989 The idea of ​​internationalist fighters prevailed.
  Even in those years, there were still attempts to present the war as a "just war".
The first precondition for starting a "just war" is to substantiate the reason for getting involved in the war.
 The reason for launching hostilities can be considered the fact that the lives of innocent people or groups were endangered, which, for example, from the point of view of international law, was one of the legal reasons for the involvement of Armenia in the Artsakh war.
 Self-defense is considered a legal reason to start a war, ie if another state or non-state armed group attacks the country, then the state's use of self-defense through war is considered a legal basis.
The next legal principle for starting a legal war is the so-called "just intention".
 By righteous intent we mean the restoration of the rights of a group that has suffered or is still suffering as a result of a crime that has taken place or is still going on.
 In the meantime, however, the one who starts a war must exclude the acquisition of material and economic capabilities11.
A war can be considered fair if it is substantiated that all other means have been exhausted before the start of hostilities.
 This principle of legal warfare presupposes that the state wishing to launch hostilities has proved that it has no resources for diplomacy, dialogue, mediation, sanctions, or other similar peaceful means, or that they have lost their effectiveness.
From the point of view of international law, the next principle of a just war is the question of the competence of the perpetrator of hostilities.
History has shown a number of manifestations of "righteousness."
  The most notable, unfortunately, were the crusades.
Involvement in war can be considered justified if it is carried out by a state with legitimate political power, where the current political system is based on clear legal bases, such as the constitution.
 That is, if hostilities are carried out by totalitarian regimes, they cannot be legitimized by the logic that if totalitarian regimes do not have justice within them, they cannot decide the justification of a possible war.
This principle of the theory of legal warfare is, unfortunately, the most misunderstood, as there are currently many constituencies with states with a legal system, which, however, operate on the basis of totalitarian principles, or are, in fact, dictatorships.
1985-1991 Changes in USSR Afghan policy led to drastic changes in the country's foreign policy priorities.
 Such zigzags did not increase the power of the state at all, moreover, political adventures led to a catastrophe, the collapse of the state.
1988 After the signing of the agreements in June 1945, the USSR undertook to withdraw its troops from the territory of Afghanistan.
 It was implemented until 1989. February 15.
  The Mujahideen were not involved in those negotiations, they refused to recognize the agreement reached.
  With the withdrawal of Soviet troops, the Afghan crisis did not end.
  Losing Afghanistan, the Russians not only lost geopolitically and strategically, but also suffered economically and culturally.
  The Soviet-Afghan war became one of the catalysts for the destruction of the USSR.
As for Afghanistan, it should be noted that the country is still embroiled in a civil war, it is too early to talk about peace in the country.
LITERATURE [1] Avanesyan H., Harutyunyan N., Hovhannisyan S., Stepanyan L., Asriyan E., Methods of assessment and development of a soldier's mental qualities, Practical Psychology, Yerevan, 2017, pp. 5-24.
12 In general, the question of the justice of war has troubled thinkers of all times և from Aristotle to Hugo Grotius, from Khachatur Erzurum to Martinwan Krzeld.
[3] Veranyan K., On the policy of Israel, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 52-9, Grigoryan S., Islamic State ․ From its origins to the proclamation of the Caliphate, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 32-6, Kotanjyan H., The National Politics of the Sacred War on the Example of Afghanistan, Political Science Problems of Security. Reconstruction of the USSR-Karabakh, Armenia, Transcaucasia-Afghanistan, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 228-41, The History of Terrorism, From Antiquity to AlUniversity, URL.
  https:
//blogs.harvard.edu/karthik/files/2011/04/HIST-1572-Analysis-ofNazi-Propaganda-KNarayanaswami.pdf (Accessed.
  24.09.2019), Адибекян А., Элибе [4] Сармачар П., М. David Hahn.
 Popular radical modernization of the economy of AfghanistanURL.
  https:
//histrf.ru/biblioteka/b/afghanskaia-voina (data date.
 15.09.2019). [7] Ищенко Р., Неутихающий хаос.
 чему Афганистан всегда объят войной, URL.
 https:
//sptnkne.ws/nfk9 (date of application.
 06.02.2019) .URL.
  https:
//ava.md/2014/01/09/v-etnam-afganistan-dve-voyny-dva-istoricheskih/обращения.
  25.09.2019), Yousaf M., Adkin M.
  Afghanistan - The Bear Trap.
  The [9] Hovhannisyan A., The development of martial arts in the 20th century. Perspectives, Yerevan, 2017, pp. 202-3.
 Вьетнам. Fighter application vertoletov in 2 parts, ref. [11] Hovhannisyan A., The development of martial arts in the 20th century. Perspectives, Yerevan, 2017, pp. 494-508.
[12] Гайдар Е. T., Гибель империи.
 уроки для современной России, Москва, 2006․Khachatryan K., Armenia in the system of the USSR military-industrial complex, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 253-85.
[14] Gasser H., International Humanitarian Law, Introduction, Yerevan, 1999, pp. 31-62.
[15] Martin Van Creveld, The Transformation of War.
 The Most Radical Reinterpretation [16] Clark W., Waging Modern War.
 Bosnia, Kosovo, and the Future of Combat. N. Y.
[18] Люттвак Э., Strategy.
 Logic of War and Peace, Moscow, 2018, p. 330.weeks, 11.02.2009, URL.
  https:
//argumenti.ru/politics/n171/39722 (data date.
Gurgen Muradyan COUNCIL-AFGHAN WAR. A STRATEGIC NEED OR A GEOPOLITICAL RACE? Keywords: USSR, just war, mujahideen, Afghan syndrome, irregular wars.
