CONFLICT OF STATE AND SERVICE SECRET IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
 In parallel with the regular military attacks, the so-called "information war", which covered both the mass media and the official information sphere, was in full swing.
 To be more precise, several cases of information leakage have already become known, in connection with which law enforcement bodies are conducting an investigation to find out whether the rules of protection of state or official secret have been violated.
  It seems that these issues should be discussed and resolved exclusively on a practical level, but we believe that in order not to face unnecessary problems in practice, it is necessary to improve the legislative framework by establishing more effective structures for maintaining state and official secrecy.
  Issues related to state-service secret have been regulated by the RA Law on State-Service Secret, according to Article 2 of which, state secret is the information in the fields of military, foreign relations, economic, scientific-technical, intelligence, counter-intelligence, operative-intelligence activities. , which are protected by the state, the spread of which can have serious consequences for the security of the state.
  Business secrets are information in these areas that is protected by the state, the dissemination of which may be detrimental to the security of the country.
  Such information, as a rule, contains data that are part of a state secret, but does not in itself reveal a state secret.
 The information constituting a state-service secret is considered the property of the Republic of Armenia, is protected and protected by the state.
 Article 4 of that law stipulates: "The degree of confidentiality of the information constituting a state-official secret should be in accordance with the level of severity of the possible damage to the security of the Republic of Armenia due to the dissemination of the mentioned information."
  Secret, top-secret, special-purpose stamps shall be affixed to documents classified as confidential.
By the above definition, the law does not specify which information is considered to be of special use, which is highly confidential, and which is confidential.
 ARTICLE 19, an international organization for the protection of freedom of expression, in its model law on freedom of information1, mentions a three-part test, which is recommended to government officials in all cases where the need arises to encrypt information.
 According to the test, in the first stage, the official must find out whether the information relates to legal exceptions to the freedom of information legislation (for example, national security).
  In the second stage, it must be found out whether the disclosure of the information will cause significant damage to the pursued goal.
  And in the end, however, it must be clarified whether the publication of that information, even in the event of harm to the pursued goal, will not be of greater benefit to society and the country than keeping it secret.
Examining the Georgian legislation on state secrets, we noticed that the Georgian law on state secrets gives 2 more specific definitions of the above-mentioned issue, in particular, Article 13 stipulates that information of dissemination or loss of which will significantly harm Georgia's defense, national interests In the security, economic and political spheres, it can have serious consequences.
  Information with a "top secret" level of confidentiality, the dissemination or loss of which could have serious consequences, which would harm Georgia's interests in the fields of defense, national security, economic and political spheres.
  Information that has a negative effect on the dissemination or loss of information has a "confidential" degree of confidentiality. 1 See www.article19.org.
2 See http.
//www.right2info.org/resources/publications/laws-1/laws_georgia_law-on-state-secrets1996_eng.
Georgia's interests in defense, national security, economic and political spheres.
 We think it is expedient to give such a settlement to the mentioned problem in the domestic legal system.
According to the RA Law on Freedom of Information 3, it is prohibited to publish information that contains state or official secrets.
 Although the legislation prohibits the disclosure of state secrets, at the same time it does not specify the boundaries of this concept.
 The RA law on "State's official secret" stipulates that the RA Government develops and approves the list of information classified as state secret.
 Based on the drachma in 1998. On March 13, the Government of the Republic of Armenia adopted Resolution No. 173 "On approving the list of information classified as a state secret of the Republic of Armenia".
 The above list consists of 33 items, which present the information classified as a state secret պետական ​​The state bodies with the authority to manage them.
However, the borders of state secrets are not defined here.
For example, according to item 3 of the above-mentioned list, information on the number of troop deployments is considered a state secret.
  The question arises whether the information on the number of new conscripts is included in the notion of state secret.
 Another example, according to the 12th paragraph, the information revealing the "essence of the RA troops" is considered a state secret.
  "The essence of the troops" is a very broad concept; any information related to the border troops, in the case of such a definition, can be considered revealing the essence of the latter.
  The issue is urgent, as in the context of such a general settlement, officials may express arbitrariness by restricting the right of individuals to receive information, or face difficulties in adequately perceiving or applying legal norms.
  On the other hand, such a regulation may be an illegal basis for bringing individuals to justice.
  In such a case, any information related to the spheres mentioned in the approved list of the Government of the Republic of Armenia may be included in the notion of state secret or not provided to the members of the society.
  Therefore, we think that it would be expedient to make changes in the list, more 3 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=1372.
4 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docid=6572.
Clarifying the question of what information is considered a state secret.
Until 2012 The decision of the Constitutional Court of 5 March 2006 5, the expanded departmental lists of information subject to encryption were encrypted չէ were not subject to publication.
 2011 On November 23, 2012, the Vanadzor Office of the Helsinki Citizens' Assembly applied to the Constitutional Court for compliance with Article 12, Part 7 of Article 6 of the RA Law on State Service Secrets.
  The Constitutional Court, considering the legality of the non-public nature of the expanded departmental lists of information subject to encryption, noted that Article 3 of the law, which discloses the content of the concepts used in the law, defines "information encryption" as "state" official secret information application of restrictions on distribution. "
  Article 13 of the mentioned law, entitled "Information Encryption", stipulates that encryption is expressed in the manner prescribed by the Government of the Republic of Armenia to determine the degree of confidentiality of each individual piece of information and to issue a seal of confidentiality to the relevant informant.
  Comparing the above-mentioned norms with the definition of state's official secrecy given in Article 2, the Constitutional Court notes that it follows from the general logic of the law on regulating the information encryption process that restrictions apply to information, the dissemination of which can have serious consequences. For the security of the Republic of Armenia.
Based on the above, the wording "departmental lists are encrypted" in the disputed part 7 of Article 12 of the law would mean the application of restrictions on those lists, due to the fact that the disclosure of their contents can cause serious consequences for the security of the Republic of Armenia.
  Meanwhile, the departmental lists simply detail the areas mentioned in the public list provided by law and approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
 Regarding the possible situations when the specific information included in the departmental lists 5 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=74497.
6 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docid=82719.
The letter itself may inevitably constitute a state secret by virtue of the fact of fixation, then in such cases, in accordance with the principles of encryption derived from the law, in particular, the principle of justification of encryption, it can be considered as information, the dissemination of which can cause serious consequences for RA security.
  Based on the results of the examination of the case, the Constitutional Court decided to recognize the provision of the RA Ministry of State "Secret of Service", Part 7, Article 7, "Departmental lists are encrypted, not subject to publication" insofar as it does not refer to specific information subject to encryption. Contrary to the requirements of Articles 27 և 43 և invalid.
Article 10 of the RA Law on State-Secret Service defines the information that cannot be classified as a state secret, however, in our opinion, the law provides a rather limited settlement to this issue, without listing the information exhaustively.
 In particular, it is mentioned: "1. Information on emergencies, disasters, as well as natural (including officially predicted) disasters and their consequences, threatening the safety and health of citizens.
2. The general state of the economy, as well as information on the real situation in the fields of nature, environment, health, education, agriculture, internal trade, culture.
3. Information on the facts of restriction of citizens' rights, freedoms, violations of the results of sociological research.
4. The information, which, if classified as a state-service secret, will have a negative impact on the implementation of the state-sectoral programs of the RA socio-economic, scientific-technical, care-cultural development.
5. Information on rapid response to reduce or eliminate possible consequences in case of emergency or their occurrence, to carry out emergency rescue and rehabilitation works, to provide humanitarian assistance.
In our opinion, the above-mentioned material should be brought in line with the constitutional principle of certainty.
  For example, information about offenders is not considered a state secret, while a significant part of it is not subject to publication in criminal proceedings.
A study of the Latvian legislation on state secrets shows that the Latvian law on state secrets 7, in addition to the above-mentioned points, also states that information related to crime statistics, corruption cases, illegal actions of officials can not be considered a state secret.
  The law of the same name of Georgia gives a much broader regulation to this issue, noting that it can not be considered a state secret: "1. Normative legal acts, with the exception of acts of national security bodies which include matters of internal influence, such as international treaties and agreements.
2. Maps, except for special military maps.
In our opinion, in order to make the domestic law much clearer, it is necessary to give a wider settlement to this issue, therefore, it would be expedient to follow the experience of these countries, to include the mentioned points in the article of the law, which lists which information can not be considered a state secret.
Other issues should be singled out.
  According to Article 12 of the RA Law on State Secrets of Service, the list of information classified as RA State Secrets is ratified by the President of the Republic of Armenia, reviewed if necessary and subject to publication.
  2015 With the referendum on constitutional reforms of December 6, 1945, our country laid the foundation for the government of the parliamentary republic.
  In these conditions, reserving the right to ratify the list of information classified as a state secret to the President will no longer be justified.
  In the case of a semi-presidential horse of the Republican government, endowing the President of the country with such authority is unequivocally justified, but in the Republic of Armenia, preference has been given to the parliamentary republic;
A study of the experience of other countries shows that in most parliamentary republics the list of information classified as a state secret is ratified by the head of government, and in semi-presidential republics it is adopted. 7 See http.
//www.legislationline.org/documents/action/popup/id/4769.
to reserve that authority to the President.
  In particular, let's bring two examples. In Georgia, which was a semi-presidential republic, the list of information classified as a state secret was ratified by the President of the country.
 However, after Georgia became a parliamentary republic, that authority was reserved for the government.
  And in Latvia, which is a parliamentary republic, the list of information classified as a state secret is developed and approved by the government.
  In order to implement a joint state initiative in the field of information decryption, a list of information classified as a state secret of the Republic of Armenia shall be developed in accordance with the procedure established by the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  We believe that with the relevant amendments to the law, it is necessary to limit the powers of the President of the country in that area, to reserve the right to ratify the list to the Prime Minister, so that this process is carried out by one body, excluding information leakage as much as possible.
  Such a settlement, more than the previous one, will correspond to the essence of a parliamentary republic.
In practice, problems arise in connection with the declassification of state secrets.
  Article 15 of the RA Law on State-Secret Service stipulates: "Information constituting a state-secret service, from the moment of encryption, is kept as a secret - information with a degree of" special "or" top secret "secrecy for up to 30 years.
 Based on the necessity, the Government of the Republic of Armenia may set longer terms than the mentioned term.
"Information with a degree of" confidential "privacy - up to 10 years."
Article 16 of this law stipulates: “The grounds for declassification of information are the international obligations assumed by the Republic of Armenia for the open exchange of information constituting state-official secret, change of objective circumstances, as a result of which further protection of information constituting state-official secret becomes inexpedient.
 After the expiration of the storage terms provided by this law, the information constituting a state-official secret shall be declassified in the prescribed manner, shall be considered open for inspection or shall be destroyed in the prescribed manner.
  The deadlines for the protection of confidential information may be reduced, and the information may be declassified prematurely by the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  The information constituting a state-service secret shall be subject to the protection of the RA State Archive within one month after declassification. ”
2015 As a result of applying to all the ministries of the Republic of Armenia, the "Freedom of Information Center" NGO found out that none of the ministries had declassified any document during the previous year.
  The results were almost the same in the previous years, when the FOICA found out that out of 18 ministries, only the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had declassified 3 documents.
  Meanwhile, after the expiration of 10 years of storage, the information constituting a state-official secret must be declassified.
  He, as we mentioned, according to Article 16 of the RA Law on State's Official Secret, the mentioned terms may be reduced, և the information may be declassified early by the decision of the RA Government.
 Thus, at least during the last 15 years of the 25 years of the independence of the Republic of Armenia, the information with the degree of "confidential" secrecy that had remained secret during the previous 10 years had to be declassified every year.
  In this context, the lack of declassified documents becomes very problematic, it gives grounds to claim that the state administration bodies do not declassify the information on the grounds expired.
  It should be noted that, for example, on the official website of the US Central Intelligence Agency, anyone can find all the state secrets that have already been declassified8.
  The issue is urgent, as this restricts the constitutional right of persons to receive information, և they are deprived of the opportunity to access the documents subject to declassification.
 In order to solve this problem, it is proposed to establish committees under the heads of state governing bodies, which will properly deal with the declassification of information and will provide the protection of the RA state archive in the manner prescribed by law.
Ruzanna Khudaverdyan 8 See www.foia.cia.gov/records.asp.
CURRENT PROBLEMS OF STATE AND OFFICIAL SECRETS IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: state secret, security, freedom of information, encryption, degree of secrecy, declassificationSummary.
