CONCLUSIONS CONCERNED WITH THE INSTITUTE OF CONFLICT IN THE CIVIL PROCEDURE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA In the legal system of the Republic of Armenia, the content of the term "alternative method of dispute resolution" is missing.
  Not so long ago, there were mediation courts in Armenia, which in their essence were arbitration courts.
  They could be either permanent or for the purpose of settling the dispute (ad hoc).
  Their decisions were implemented voluntarily.
  A mediation agreement was required to initiate the proceedings, the applicable law could be chosen by the parties, just as the language of the proceedings was chosen by the mediators. everything that is typical of arbitration.
  At present, arbitration, financial system mediator, and mediation are used in Armenia as alternative ways of resolving disputes.
 Meanwhile, we believe that the use of more methods will be effective in the Republic of Armenia, as the variety of alternative methods will allow the parties to the dispute to choose the most acceptable, appropriate method for resolving their dispute.
 Since each method has advantages and disadvantages, so with a wide choice, the parties can choose one of the methods based on the circumstances of the dispute between them.
Expanding the use of alternative dispute resolution methods will significantly reduce both the workload of the courts and increase the efficiency of dispute resolution, thus reducing the risks of corruption in general1.
1 See Decision N 92 of the Council of Court Chairmen of the Republic of Armenia on approving the draft Anti-Corruption Strategy Program of the Judiciary of the Republic of Armenia.
Conciliation is one of the alternative ways of resolving disputes.
Pursuant to Article 149.10 of the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia), a conciliation agreement is a written agreement between the parties in a civil, employment or family law relationship to resolve any existing or possible disputes through conciliation.
According to the modern perception, conciliation began to develop in the second half of the 20th century, first of all in the countries with the Anglo-Saxon legal system, such as the USA, Australia and Great Britain.
Then it gradually spread to Europe.
Initially, the institute of conciliation was tried to be applied in the field of family law, but later mediation began to regulate legal relations in various fields.
 At the beginning of the 21st century, the institute of conciliation becomes a subject of interest for international organizations.
 As a result, conciliation is enshrined in international law in a number of legal acts, such as the International Trade Reconciliation Procedures Standard Model (UNICITRAL), the adoption on June 2, 2004 in Brussels of the Code of Conduct for the Member States of the European Union. "On Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards" New York 1958 Convention of the European Parliament խորհրդի Council of the European Union 2008/52 / EU Directive on the Multiplicity of Conciliation in Civil and Commercial Matters, etc.2.
Today, the Institute of Mediation operates in countries such as the United States, Germany, Great Britain, China, India, Austria, and Japan.
 Conciliation in foreign doctrine is considered an alternative method of dispute resolution (alternativedispute resolution).
  By alternative dispute resolution, we mean by all means any method of dispute resolution - a means that bypasses the judicial-administrative procedures established by the state.
 The rapid development of alternative dispute resolution methods is explained by the fact that the parties seek to achieve 2 See History of the Institute of Mediation, the official website of the Arbitration Court of the Republic of Buryatia: http.
//buryatia.arbitr.ru/process/mediation/history. to resolve the dispute between them in a fast, mutually beneficial way by ensuring the confidentiality of the procedure.
Legal relations in foreign countries are regulated by more than 20 types of alternative dispute resolution.
 These include expertdetermination, negotiation, facilitated negotiation or facilitation, conciliation, and many other methods.
 The most common are: • dispute settlement by the parties to the dispute (negotiation) • settlement of the dispute by an independent mediator, which facilitates the parties to reach an agreement (mediation, conciliation), • dispute settlement with the participation of an arbitrator, which facilitates the parties to reach an agreement, but In case of disagreement, he / she has the right to settle the dispute as an arbitrator according to the rules of arbitration (med-art).
 Mediation has a universal nature. There are no rules on jurisdiction.
 The parties are free to choose a mediator, to envisage a procedure for selecting a mediator, to actively participate in the settlement of their dispute.
  Usually the parties seek to settle their dispute through conciliation in cases when: • further disputes between the parties to the dispute (for example, the maintenance of a normal relationship in business to protect the rights of children after divorce); • a dispute between legal or natural persons, which requires a quick and effective settlement; • the emotional side of the dispute affects the situation. , • there is a need to maintain complete confidentiality, the procedure should be confidential, • it is necessary to reach a comprehensive decision, and the legal side is only a part of the issue, etc.3.
In foreign countries, conciliation is especially used to regulate business relations.
For business people, resolving a dispute through mediation can often be more beneficial, as the court 3 See Mediation - Experience in Resolving Conflicts, official website of the International Institute of Mediation - http.
//www.institute-mediation.com/mediacia/. In the event of a dispute, it is almost impossible to continue the business relationship with the other party in the future, while further cooperation with the other party may be more profitable than the claim that the court can satisfy.
 In case of conciliation, the parties, compromising, agree on a mutually acceptable solution to the dispute between them.
Conciliation is a faster procedure than litigation.
 The dispute between the parties can be resolved through conciliation in a very short time, even in a few hours, and the litigation takes a very long time.
 At the same time, the RA CCC sets a maximum term for conciliation - 6 months from the moment of appointing a conciliator.
  The parties may stipulate in the conciliation agreement another maximum period, but not more than 6 months.
By its nature, conciliation is not aimed at resolving the dispute, but its purpose is to end the dispute.
  The ombudsman does not demand that the dispute be settled, does not find out who is right and who is wrong.
 Mediation is simply a method of negotiating without the mediator's assessment of the legal side of the dispute4.
Article 227.2 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia states that the conciliation process is carried out on the basis of the principles of voluntariness, secrecy, equality of the parties, and the mediator's impartiality.
Unlike litigation, conciliation is based on the principle of voluntariness.
 Volunteering is expressed in several ways: • freedom to mediate, • freedom to choose a mediator, • freedom to terminate the conciliation process at any time, • freedom to set conditions in the conciliation agreement.
Freedom of conciliation is expressed in the fact that the parties can agree on the conciliation both before and after the dispute.
The parties are given the opportunity to apply for conciliation 4 See Davydenko D., Mediation as a conciliatory procedure in commercial disputes.
by stipulating a condition both in the contract and by concluding a separate agreement.
In the United States, conciliation may be instituted not only by the parties but also by a judge.
 The latter may send the case to conciliation at any stage of the proceedings for the purpose of concluding a conciliation agreement between the parties.
  That is, in this case, the application of conciliation becomes mandatory for the parties.
 And this begs the question. Isn't that a violation of the principle of volunteerism?
 In our opinion, there is no violation of the principle of voluntariness, as long as the parties have the right to terminate the conciliation at any time, they are free to set conditions in the conciliation agreement.
In Italy, conciliation is applicable to the settlement of any legal relationship։ is considered a mandatory procedure.
The person intending to file a lawsuit should try to reconcile with the other party through conciliation.
 If no conciliation agreement is concluded as a result of the conciliation or if the other party has refused the conciliation, it is necessary to send to the court a document signed by the mediator, which confirms the fact that the plaintiff has taken steps to mediate.
In England, judges have the right to propose conciliation to the parties, if there is a possibility in a particular case that the dispute between the parties will be settled by agreement of the parties.
  If in such a case one of the parties refuses to apply for conciliation, the apostate must provide a reasonable explanation as to the reasons for the refusal.
  If the judge does not consider the given explanations to be reasonable, he can, regardless of the outcome of the case, impose the court costs on the party that refused to apply for conciliation.
In the Republic of Armenia, the judge also has the right to appoint a conciliation procedure with the participation of a licensed mediator in order to reconcile the parties at any stage of the first instance or appellate proceedings.
 But unlike the US and Italian legal systems, in Armenia the judge can appoint conciliation only with the consent of the parties or their mediation.
  We think that there is a legislative gap here, as a significant part of the cases encountered in court practice does not require a legal solution "to resolve the illegal relations between the parties".
  When a conciliation mediator specializing in the relevant field is involved in the conciliation procedure, the latter, as a specialist in the field, applies a more flexible approach, studies the dispute more thoroughly, reveals specific details, and focuses on the issues that are most important to the parties.
 And the judge is obliged to follow formal procedures և usually does not have a narrow specialization5.
  In addition, in court practice, the parties avoid offering conciliation, as they think that the other party will assess this step as its advantage in the possible outcome of the case.
 However, in case of conciliation, which in some cases is mandatory, such problems will not arise.
 We propose to establish a norm in the RA CCC, according to which the judge will have the right to appoint a conciliation, which will be mandatory for the parties.
 If the parties do not sign a conciliation agreement within the time limit set for the conciliation, then after the expiration of that period the trial of the case will continue from the moment from which it was terminated.
 In the event of a conciliation by a judge, the parties will be more interested in presenting their proposals, demands, demands to the other party through negotiations, գալ reaching a consensus through discussions and compromises.
  Due to the conciliation, the parties will reach a settlement of their dispute in a shorter period of time and will avoid further litigation.
The parties are free to choose a mediator.
 They may provide for a procedure for selecting a mediator in the conciliation agreement.
  If there is no such procedure, the parties must choose a mediator within a month after the dispute arises.
 If the parties are unable to select a mediator, they have the right to apply to a court to appoint a licensed mediator.
 Article 149.11 of the RA CCP stipulates that if a party avoids the election of a mediator, the other party has the right to apply to the place of residence with a request to appoint a mediator.
 If one party avoids choosing a mediator, and the court appoints a mediator based on the other party's application, it turns out that the freedom to choose a mediator is restricted for one party, then the principle of voluntary mediation is violated.
5 See Riskin L., Understanding Mediator's Orientations, Strategies and Techniques.
 The freedom to terminate the conciliation process at any time applies not only to the parties but also to the mediator.
  Either party may renounce the conciliation at any time during the conciliation եցնել terminate the negotiations.
 It is very possible that the parties are not obliged to give explanations as to the reasons for terminating the conciliation.
Thus, the conciliation ends: • by one of the parties terminating the process, • by the mediator terminating the process, • by concluding a conciliation agreement as a result of the conciliation, • in case the parties do not reconcile within the set time.
If the refusal to mediate is a right for the parties, then it is an obligation for the mediator.
 The mediator is obliged to refuse to mediate if he / she considers that his / her participation in the conciliation process will lead to a violation of any of the principles of conciliation6.
The freedom to set conditions in a settlement agreement is reflected in the fact that the parties determine the terms of their agreement.
 They can make any offer և reject the other party's offer without explanation.
  Only the conditions agreed upon by the parties may be included in the reconciliation agreement.
One of the main advantages of the Institute of Conciliation is the principle of confidentiality underlying conciliation.
 The conciliator is obliged to maintain the secrecy of the conciliation.
The CCP of the Republic of Armenia provides an opportunity for the parties to stipulate a condition of secrecy in the conciliation agreement7.
Confidentiality is understood in the institution of conciliation in two senses: • the secrecy of the negotiations for reaching a conciliation agreement, • the secrecy of the conciliation agreement reached as a result of the conciliation.
6 See Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, Article 227.3, part 2, point 2.
7 See Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, Article 149.13, point 3.
According to Article 227.4 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, the information revealed or expressed during the conciliation is confidential.
Pursuant to Article 227.12 of the same law, in case of gross violations of other legal requirements of the law, the general meeting of the mediators' organization resolves the issue of dismissal of the mediator, which must be resolved no later than one month after the violation is discovered or reported.
  We can say that the legislation of the Republic of Armenia establishes the responsibility for not keeping the information disclosed or expressed during the conciliation only for the mediator, but the legislation of the Republic of Armenia does not ensure the application of this article by the other parties to the conciliation.
 The lack of guarantees of the secrecy of the conciliation procedure also creates a real danger of paralysis and improper legal consequences.
Therefore, we propose to define at the legislative level the specific responsibility of each person who participated or is participating in the conciliation, for not disclosing the information revealed or expressed during the conciliation.
 An example of such liability may be the imposition of a fine by the mediator on the other party's complaint in favor of the other party if the latter fails to maintain the confidentiality of the information disclosed or disclosed by the mediator, or where one party does not keep the information disclosed or disclosed confidential. then that party undertakes to compensate the damage suffered, etc.
According to Article 109 of the RA CCP, when the court approves the conciliation agreement, including the conciliation agreement concluded, or when the parties conclude the conciliation agreement, stating that the court terminated the proceedings without the conciliation agreement, the court terminates the proceedings. ։ makes a decision to terminate the proceedings.
 Article 133 of the RA CCP states that in case of approval of the conciliation agreement of the parties, the court decision must contain the verbal transcript (text) of the conciliation agreement.
 Since this norm does not clearly state the terms of the conciliation agreement reached, we can assume that here, by conciliation agreement between the parties, the legislator means the conciliation agreement reached as a result of conciliation.
 It turns out that if the parties do not envisage a condition on secrecy, then the reconciliation agreement reached between them is included in the decision, and the decision, based on the principle of publicity, is open to the public.
  That is, in fact, the principle of secrecy of conciliation, which is envisaged by the RA Judicial Code, is violated.
The current situation can be resolved as follows: In any case, when the parties enter into a conciliation agreement as a result of conciliation, that conciliation agreement shall not be included in the court order, which confirms it.
 In this case, there is no need to make a note of the termination of the proceedings in order to keep the conciliation agreement confidential in order to keep the conciliation agreement secret.
  The conciliation agreement will be kept secret in all cases, the principle of secrecy of conciliation will be maintained.
The principle of equality of the parties means that the parties to the conciliation are endowed with equal rights.
  One side has no advantage over the other. Each of them can express their opinion on the negotiations, on the election of a mediator.
 During the negotiations, the parties have equal opportunities to issue conditions in the agreement.
The next principle, which is enshrined in the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, is the principle of impartiality of the mediator.
 This means, first of all, that the mediator must be objective, fair, during the conciliation he must not give preference to either party, he must not be inclined to reach a more favorable agreement with one of the parties8.
The number of so-called vanishing trials is growing in the United States.
 This is the case when conciliation is ordered by the court, after which the court has no information about the further settlement of the dispute, since the parties have already made a conciliation agreement, they do not return to the court.
  This is due to the fact that in the United States, as in a number of other countries, a court settlement agreement is not required.
8 See Christoph Besemer Mediation. Vermittlung in conflict.
 2001, Stiftung Gewaltfreies Live; If the parties do not fulfill the obligations stipulated in the agreement, it is possible to apply to the court in the order of non-fulfillment of the obligations stipulated by any civil law contract.
Our legal system provides for another procedure, where the judge has a more active role.
  Pursuant to Article 149.13 of the CCP of the Republic of Armenia, upon receipt of the mediator's due notice, the court shall approve or reject the conciliation agreement reached within a short period of time, but not later than thirty days, or terminate the proceedings, ensuring the secrecy of the conciliation.
 Another norm stipulates that the court does not approve the conciliation agreement if it contradicts the law այլ other legal acts or violates the rights of other persons և legal interests.
 Some scholars believe that the terms of an agreement reached between them may be kept secret by the parties by the judge, by the plaintiff rejecting the claim.
 However, the plaintiff must fully defend the legal consequences of his actions, because in case of termination of the proceedings between the same persons, on the same grounds, the dispute on the same grounds is not allowed to go to court again, except when the plaintiff withdrew the lawsuit in the preparatory stage.
9 The conciliation agreement reached as a result of conciliation is subject to the approval of the court.
  Confirming that agreement, the court makes a judicial act.
Pursuant to Article 2 of the RA Law on Compulsory Enforcement of Judicial Acts, civil acts are subject to compulsory enforcement, except for judicial acts declaring a legal proceeding on initiating a tender proceeding to declare a legal entity or a citizen bankrupt.
  Therefore, despite the voluntary principle of the Institute of Conciliation, the implementation of the conciliation agreement concluded as a result of conciliation is ensured through the Compulsory Enforcement Service.
The cultural development of mediation in the RA legal system is one of the priority issues.
 There is no trust in conciliation in Armenia, which is conditioned by the mediator 9 See Загайнова С. K., On the complex approach to the development of mediation in Russia / S. K. Due to the lack of legal information on pollution, many citizens are not aware of the nature and effectiveness of the institution.
  In the current conditions of our legal system, when the courts are overburdened with court cases, and because of that the judges do not have the opportunity to study the cases in more detail, the conciliation should have a wider spread - a positive effect.
 Judges should also be interested in increasing the use of the conciliation institute, as applying it will enable the courts to focus more on disputes that have arisen over legal issues.
Tatjik Gziryan SOME ISSUES RELATED TO THE INSTITUTE OF MEDIATION IN THE CIVIL PROCEEDINGS OF RA
.
