Sci. Head: Candidate of Technical Sciences, Prof. A. Saribekyan's goal: The situation, the challenges in the labor market.
The RA labor market is in a constant stage of formation.
  It is still in an unbalanced state under the influence of information asymmetries.
  Despite the fact that there has been some improvement in recent years, there are still large-scale "structural" discrepancies between supply and demand in the labor market.
The general high level of unemployment makes it even more difficult to find a lucrative job for the first time entering the labor market, significantly increasing the relative risk of unemployment.
  This fact is even more important to those who are directed.
The need to promote youth employment is conditioned by the following circumstances.1. Difficulties for young people, in particular, the likelihood of employment as a result of economic upheavals, the difficulties of entering the labor market due to lack of experience, 2. Passive, out of employment, the youth in the country creates tangible economic costs. As an active workforce with a relatively higher education base, this target group is not sold in the labor market, which carries significant risks of migration, in-generation poverty, social isolation, and youth-related skills loss in the labor market.
According to the employment data, the social membership level in the countries is 3. Low levels of youth employment increase costs due to increased opportunities for social conflict, violence, and crime.
Currently, the issue of youth employment in the world is a strategic challenge.
The issue of youth employment is the subject of a wide-ranging debate today, according to estimates by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The high rate of youth unemployment in the world will continue until 2018 2,
The official material of the European Commission on youth employment states that the tendencies of youth unemployment are alarming: "22.8% of youth unemployment in the European Union4.
The youth unemployment rate in the EU is almost twice as high as the overall unemployment rate5.
The 2014 report 6 states that after the crisis, the recovery of youth employment trends is still significantly suppressed. In 2013, 74.5 million people were registered in the world. Unemployed young people, which is about 1 million more than the same indicator in 2012!
The global youth unemployment rate is 13.1%, which is almost 3 times higher than the historical level of adult unemployment, the maximum.
1http.
//www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/youth/fact-sheets/youth-definition.pdfhttp.
//www.ilo.org/global/research/global-reports/global-employment3 ILO, Trends Econometric Models, April 2012 - http.
//www.ilo.org/global/research/global4 European Commission, Youth employment.
 overview of EU measures, Brussels, 8 May2014 - http.
//europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-14-338_en.htm?locale=enhttp.
//ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=89&langId=en&newsId=2030&furtherNews=yes6 Global Employment Trends 2014.
 The risk of a jobless recovery, ILO report, January 2014.kazmakerputyanAshkhatankihaseloviremijazgayin sharkkrtakanochchbavararoghen, vorevmasnagitakanoraknerisotsial-tntesakanorakikoghmnoroshman ardyunavetnrantspahanjnereZargatsogh economies, including Armenia as the problem is most acute, due naevkhisteritasardnerimisahmanapakumnerov, barenpastmitumnerov, labor supply and demand eakansheghumnerov, effortless reproduction of labor, social, mshakutayinanendhatverakangnmann insufficient level of targeted solutions, availability of informal employment, etc.
 In the conditions of the mentioned factors, in the RA labor market there are mostly long-term unemployment risks կայումmigration.
The analysis of the RA labor market 7 shows that the young people are more uncompetitive, mainly due to the unsatisfactory choice of labor market profession, lack of professional system, lack of skills, experience, professional qualification, stable presence of informal employment and other factors.
Employment rate increased in 2008-2014. Since 2015, both the general employment rate and the employment rate have been observed. The employment rate of young people in Armenia is significantly lower than the overall employment rate.
  This fact is evidenced by the small share of young people in the total number of employed.
  According to the Labor Market Survey 9, in the last three years the share of young people in the employed population has not exceeded 8.5%, which, taking into account the age structure of the population, is a significantly lower figure.
7 http:
//www.armstat.am/file/article/rep_ashx_09a_800.pdf 8http.
//armstat.am/en/?nid=126&id=08016&submit=%D5%93%D5%B6%D5%BF%D6%80%
9 NSSRA, Labor Market Research, Statistical Yearbook: http.
//www.armstat.am/file/doc/99499388.pdf in the trend of young people.
Although it is noteworthy that the proportion of young employed in the total number of employed in 2008-2016. Outward trend of steady decline by 1 percentage point.
  Considering 2008-2016. With employment only, the calculated correlation coefficient for 15-19 և 20-24 year olds is 0.27, for 15-19 և 25-29 year olds - 0.87, for 20-24 և 25-29 year olds - 0.31.
 At the same time, the correlation between the employed aged 15-19 was 0.8, the employment of 20-24 was 0.59, and the employment of 25-29 was 0.72.
It should be noted that a significantly lower correlation was registered between the employed couples aged 15-19 և 20-24, 20-24 և 25-29, which indicates that the number of young people in this age group ընդհանուր the total number of employed changed disproportionately.
  Only the highest correlation with employment was calculated for the 15-19 age group.
That is, only the changes in the employment index change the indicators of this group more proportionately.
  The 20-2410 age group with the lowest correlation coefficient is the most problematic with total employment.
The above picture proves that the promotion of youth employment continues to be one of the priority issues, the effective solutions of which have a systemic impact on the positive demographic, migration, educational and, ultimately, positive macroeconomic developments in the region.
Apart from the analysis of the statistical picture of the labor market, from the point of view of employment problems, they are also interesting, as the group of young people among the latter will have surveys 12, focus 10 A. Aslanyan, Expert, UNFPA - Solutions to Promote Youth Employment Uncompetitive in the Labor Market in the Republic of Armenia, 2014.11 See http.
//armstat.am/en/?module=publications&mid=6&id=184712 Ani Aslanyan, regional research coordinator. "Study of the issues of employment-education interrelationships in the RA labor market" study "2016", National Institute of Labor and Social Research of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the National Institute), the results of employers' youth surveys 13, as well as the results of a survey 14.
As a result of the conducted surveys, the challenges of the education-labor market connection, the supply of supply and demand in the labor market were identified.
The challenge is not to work in the profession in the first round.
 29% of working young people mentioned that the professional education they received does not meet the requirements of the job in accordance with the profession.
  7.9% of young people working in the profession.
  The young people mentioned, in their opinion, the main obstacles to finding a professional job.
  According to them, the main obstacle to finding a professional job may be the low demand in the labor market on the one hand, and low professional knowledge on the other.
  Of course, such self-awareness on the part of students is commendable, but comparing the assessment of the educational components made by them, it is safe to say that the second of these obstacles can be eliminated if the practical abilities and skills of students in educational institutions are increased.
Willingness to take young people seriously.
  According to a survey of about 3,000 employers, 31.9% of employers expressed a desire to hire young professionals over the next three years.
  It is surprising that the vast majority of employers want to fill vacancies 13 Ani Aslanyan, Research Coordinator. "Identifying the Problems of Youth Employment from a Demographic Perspective" Survey 2016, National Institute 14 Ani Aslanyan, interviewer. "Discovery-Study և Study of Education's Reciprocal Relations Issues in the RA Labor Market" Survey 2016, National Institute և's challenge to employers-specialists will be further strengthened by professionals who do not have a job.
  To fill vacancies, 54.3% of employers were trained by existing staff, while 21.8% of employers needed highly qualified professionals.
Another difference is the difference between the opinions of employers and employees on expected wage rates.
  The results of the շրջանում focus group survey of students (the survey was conducted among about 1500 students of RA universities, and the focus group survey in 4 regions of Armenia ՀՀ in the city of Yerjan) show that the desired salary is quite high among young people, taking into account the growth rates of the average nominal salary.
The majority of students - 55.1% - want to receive a salary of 50 thousand to 250 thousand AMD, 35.7% want to receive a salary of 250 thousand to 500 thousand AMD, and a small part - 7.8% - think that they should receive 500 thousand AMD Salary more than AMD.
  The average salary mentioned by the students was 301 thousand AMD, which is about twice as much as the average 15.
  67% of employers are ready to pay a nominal salary of 55 thousand to 100 thousand AMD to a young specialist, and 21.3% are willing to pay a nominal salary of 100 thousand to 150 thousand AMD.
 4.66% of employers are ready to pay an average salary above 150 thousand drams.
 The average salary that employers are willing to pay in young drams.
The comparison of the salaries of young people with the desired salaries իրենց the salaries paid by employers shows that in the current labor market the expectations of young professionals related to salaries can not be met.
The always urgent challenge today is the lack of practical professional knowledge and skills of young people, towards them.
//armstat.am/en/?nid=126&id=08001&submit=%D5%93%D5%B6%D5%BF%D6%80
The specialist in the republic, the composition of the Republic of Armenia and the strict demand from the employers.
  From the point of view of these employers, especially the connection between educational institutions is used, which is quite passive today.
  The problem can be solved if the employers take part in the development of curricula, thus contributing to the training of their future staff.
The identified challenges are not complete, and the ways to overcome them և solutions require further ongoing research.
The current situation of youth employment in the Republic of Armenia Keywords: labor market, youth, employment,
Challenges, survey, research.
