AMERICA-IRANIAN RELATIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT (BUSH JUDGMENT PERIOD)
  Many of the current conflicts start in the Middle East, and the redistribution of the borders of the states here still continues.
 In general, the Middle East can be considered as a large region, where not only the interests of different ethnic and religious communities intersect, but also the interests of the main geopolitical forces, which are often manifested through various conflicts.
In recent decades, many Middle Eastern countries have faced the serious threat of losing their sovereignty for a variety of reasons; By the United States.
 A classic example of this is the issue of the Islamic Republic of Iran's nuclear program, in the settlement of which various geopolitical actors are involved: the EU (represented by Great Britain, France, Germany), the UN, the Russian Federation, China, and especially the United States.
The beginning of Iran's nuclear program [1] can be considered the statement of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Shah in 1953 about the launch of a civilian nuclear program, which was implemented within the framework of US President Dwight D. Eisenhower's "Atom for Peace" initiative (D. Eisenhower's famous speech [2] UN On December 8, 1953, the Assembly announced the launch of the above-mentioned initiative.
 At that time, Iran was considered a key ally of the West, particularly the United States, in the region.
 However, as early as 1979, when the Islamic Revolution ousted Mohammad Reza Pahl's interests in Iran, established a theocratic regime in Iran under Ayatollah Ali Khomeini, Iran's nuclear program was completely out of US control (the revolution itself was anti-American that the consequence would be the severance of all kinds of interstate relations between the United States and the United States became the main subject of the tense relations between the United States and Iran.
Relations between the two countries became particularly tense during the presidency of George Walker Bush (2001-2009).
 It all started after 2002. One of the American non-governmental organizations published photos taken from space in Iran, where a number of uranium enrichment facilities were clearly visible.
It became clear that Iran had violated the 1974 UN Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) դր has carried out large-scale undeclared activities in the nuclear field.
 Due to this fact, the US government began to exert political pressure on the Iranian side, demanding to reveal the previously carried out nuclear activities, to abandon the uranium enrichment program.
 Unfortunately, the Iranian side agreed to fulfill the first demand, declaring in parallel that it will not give up the uranium enrichment process.
 It should be noted that the American society was still under the heavy impressions of the tragic terrorist attack of 9/11, which was successfully used by the political elite of the United States.
  The belief was put forward that Iran's development of a nuclear program aimed at creating weapons of mass destruction, that is, it threatens the security of the American people.
  Meanwhile, the Iranian side continued to counter that their nuclear program pursues exclusively peaceful goals.
In a 2002 speech entitled "Axis of Evil," US President George W. Bush singled out the Islamic Republic of Iran, along with Iraq and North Korea (DPRK), as "evil countries," the latter's policies as a threat to US national security.
  The US President accused Iran of supporting international terrorism.
 These "similar statements" of official Washington were addressed to both internal and external audiences, as a justification for the pressure to be exerted on Iran.
 It is obvious that with the above-mentioned statements, the US President aimed to raise the rating of the US in the international community as the most effective, decisive country in the fight against international terrorism.
 Particularly noteworthy is President Bush's message to the Iranian people that Iranians have the right to revolt against the regime, to live in a "free and democratic" society, and that the United States is ready to support such manifestations.
From the content of the provisions of the US "National Security Strategy" (2002) [5] published in the same year, it is possible to identify the 4 key directions of "Bushidoktrin". (a) the use of force in the American interest; (b) the right to take preventive action against perceived threats; (c) the right to act unilaterally, if necessary; (d) the pursuit of democracy abroad.
2003 On May 4, the Swiss government sent the so-called "unusual" և "unsigned" memorandum to the US State Department, consisting of only one page.
 Attached to the memorandum was a "roadmap" for US-Iranian diplomatic relations (compiled by Swiss diplomat Tim Guldiman), consisting of "US Goals" and "Iran Goals" sections.
 This document, which contained rather ambitious provisions, nevertheless remained unanswered by the American government.
  Later, various American media outlets, politicians and analysts gave conflicting assessments to the "Road Map".
 Some of them were convinced that the tough stance of the Bush administration was the main reason why the "map" was not implemented, others believed that it was only the expression of the will of one diplomat, completely cut off from reality.
2003 During this period, however, some revival was observed, on the one hand, between Iran and, on the other hand, the United Kingdom, Germany and France.
The result of the informal negotiations started in 2004 It was the agreement signed in Paris, by which the Iranian side undertook to present clear, long-term guarantees of a peaceful nuclear program, and in the meantime, to temporarily suspend uranium enrichment.
 Official Tehran clearly showed its readiness to establish diplomatic relations.
  This aspect of the negotiations was considered by the Iranian side as a possible bridge for establishing diplomatic relations with the United States.
  On the other hand, the Iranian authorities sought to obtain clear assurances from Washington that pro-US troops would not invade Iran (which at the time was considered possible in Iranian socio-political circles due to the US-British invasion of Iraq in 2003) and to avoid possible sanctions.
However, this stage of the negotiations was initially unsuccessful, which was conditioned by a number of circumstances. (a) the views of the EU Member States on the negotiation process were not in line with their differing economic and political interests; (b) the USEU positions were marked by apparent differences;
The Bush administration's Middle East policy at this time was generally based on the idea that the US military-political-economic potential allowed it to spread its democratic values ​​in a relatively short period of time, as well as to fight regimes (especially the Iranian government) which, according to the government. They posed a direct threat to US national security.
 President Bushcher also avoided criticizing the previous democratic government, noting that the extremely "liberal" policies of the Democrats were replaced by neo-conservatism with radical foreign policy changes.
 The US administration did not trust the Iranian authorities in any way, did not imagine the dialogue with the Iranian side, pushing for the need to stop the plan to enrich the Koran to overthrow the regime.
 Thus, during the first term of President Bush Jr., there was no significant change in US-Iranian relations.
2005 In March, US Secretary of State K. Rice stated that Washington will not block Iran's membership in the World Trade Organization, will lift the embargo on some Iranian products if official Tehran abandons its uranium enrichment program.
It should be noted that already in 2005-2006. The positions of the Iranian side became quite harsh.
  On the one hand, the discussion of the Iranian issue was facilitated by the transfer of the discussion to the UN Security Council, which significantly changed the nature of the talks, on the other hand, the attitude of the newly elected President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad և political positions.
  President Bush's letter to President Bush on seeking "new ways" to resolve the issue in 2006 was described as "diplomatic intrigue" and did not receive enough attention.
The US government has made every effort to spread the idea in its socio-political circles that Iran, in particular President Ahmadinejad, is directly threatening the security of their country, contributing to the spread of international terrorism, thus justifying possible unilateral pressure on the Islamic Republic.
  2006 In January, Iran resumed its uranium enrichment process at Natanz.
  In fact, the process of first enrichment after 1980.
On May 31 of the same year, US Secretary of State K. Rice stated that the United States is ready to resume dialogue with Iran, if the latter was the US government willing to negotiate with Iran under certain conditions.
 Already on June 6, the so-called "5 + 1 group" (the "six" were formed by high-ranking officials from the United States, China, Russia, Great Britain, France and Germany to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue) presented a new package of talks to the Iranian side. , which included quite ambitious preconditions, tougher demands, which, naturally, met with tough resistance from the Iranian side.
Iran also refused to implement Resolution 1696 (which is considered a violation of international law by Iran, as implementation of UN Security Council resolutions is mandatory for all member states), which later gave the US government a wider opportunity to increase international pressure on Iran. Without avoiding the possibility of using military force.
 The situation will not change after the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1737 [7].
  In fact, December 2006 marked the beginning of the first phase of economic sanctions against Iran.
2007 The report of the Director of National Intelligence, Mohamed ElBaradei, was published [8], in which it was stated that Iran was still in 2003. stopped the process of creating nuclear weapons.
 This event raised new questions not only within the framework of official Tehran աշին Washington, but also within the societies of the two countries և the international community.
Clearly, if this fact had been made public earlier, it could have: (a) called into question the US administration 's tougher stance on the imposition of more sanctions on Iran (Vice President D. Cheney and his supporters even suggested discussing a military operation against Iran); b) to show that the preconditions presented to Iran by both the US and the EU are exaggerated; c) to deepen public pressure և to cause a political crisis.
 It is noteworthy that a number of former members of the US government, as well as many senators and congressmen, did not agree with the foreign policy of the president, which was stated in both official and unofficial statements.
 The attitude of the American public towards the activities of President Bush was not unequivocal (the results of the social polls conducted during the engagement [9], which reflect the unprecedented low ratings of the President նախագահի administration).
 However, it can hardly be argued that ElBaradei's report significantly changed the American foreign policy line.
The meeting of high-ranking officials of the two countries after a break of almost thirty years - direct talks in Baghdad (negotiated by Ryan Crocker, US Ambassador to Iraq, and his Iranian counterpart Hassan Kazemi Com) - did not yield any results.
Early the following year, US authorities accused Iran of inciting naval provocations in the Strait of Hormuz and launched active anti-propaganda operations against it on the media platform.
2009 Negotiations between the "six" of Iran resumed.
The tense nature of US-Iran relations, and in a number of areas, their complete absence, as well as the ineffectiveness of the nuclear negotiations, indicate the deep roots of the issue under study.
 During the period under discussion, both countries will be characterized by their different, often significantly opposing geopolitical interests and ambitions in the region, as well as political leaders pursuing rather harsh foreign policies in the person of Presidents J. Bush և M. Ahmadinejad.
 The Bush administration sought to maintain its influence in the Middle East in every possible way, and in the event of having a nuclear weapon, Iran could seriously impede that process.
  The US National Security Strategy (2006) [10] clearly stated that: 1. Ensuring security of gas and oil supplies, 2. Eliminating the threat of terrorist organizations, 3. Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction և 4. Israel's military ության military advantage Adherence is a key part of US policy.
  It is obvious that the above-mentioned provisions are interrelated.
 The following chain reaction is obtained. Iran is independent in oil and gas exports, and its nuclear program (according to the Bush administration) is aimed at the production of weapons of mass destruction, which directly threatens the existence of Israel. Moreover, it is not ruled out that nuclear weapons may fall into the hands of terrorist organizations, as Iran is considered their sponsor and largest financier.
  The priorities of the Iranian side were different - to preserve the territorial integrity and regime of the country, as well as not to lose influence in the Middle East.
The Bush administration believed that Israel was a key, if not the main ally, in the Middle East, so it was logical that the Israeli-Israeli relations were still far from friendly.
  More than once, each side has threatened to destroy the other.
  The Iranian side has generally refused to recognize the State of Israel, the Holocaust the Shoah, and Israel has considered Iran's nuclear program the most dangerous threat to regional security.
 President Ahmadinejad's rule, from 2005 to 2013, can be considered the most pronounced phase of the Iran-Israel conflict, in which mutual accusations and threats allowed to make various predictions, including the inevitable armed conflict.
  On the other hand, President M. Ahmadinejad did not rule out the intensification of political and economic cooperation with the Russian Federation, thus trying to gain the support of the Russian side during the talks at the level of the "six".
President J. Bush's approach to the nuclear issue can be described as a "two-clock" strategy. on the one hand, delaying concrete actions until the roadmap for Iran's nuclear program becomes clear; A strategic step to start a dialogue with the international community.
Thus, during the two terms of President Bush's rule, US-Iranian relations not only did not change significantly, but also registered a rather large setback.
 The reasons for this should be sought not only in the ideology of the American economic, political or military potential, but also in the ideology of the political convictions of the Bush administration.
  The stereotype of "American exclusivity", typical of the foreign policy of the government, presupposed the use of the language of threats, the influence of fear, which, of course, could not leave room for effective negotiations and compromises.
To put it mildly, the president's attempts to "impose democracy" on the Iranian state to its citizens through international political pressure, economic sanctions, "American exclusivity" and the language of "American exclusivity" were unsuccessful.
  It has not been possible to break the two-decade-old diplomatic deadlock between the two countries, to create an atmosphere of trust in those societies, and as a result, to finally resolve the issue of overcoming the crisis over Iran's nuclear program.
LITERATURE [1] Jahanpour F., Chronology of Iran Nuclear Program, 1957-2007, URL.
https:
//www.oxfordresearchgroup.org.uk/chronology-of-irans-nuclear-programme-19572007 (Accessed.
 02.05.2018). [2] Eisenhower DD, Atoms for Peace Speech, URL.
https:
//www.iaea.org/about/history/atoms-for-peace-speech (Accessed.
 01.05.2018) .URL.
 https:
//interaffairs.ru/jauthor/material/1603 (date of application.
 28.04.2018). [4] President Bush.
 Axis of Evil Speech, URL.
 https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=btkJhAM7hZw&t=101s (Accessed.
 08.05.2018). URL.
 https:
//www.state.gov/documents/organization/63562.pdf (Accessed.
 12.05.2018). [6] Simpson K, US Nuclear Diplomacy with Iran.
 From the War on Terror to Obama [7] UN Security Council Resolution 1737.
URL.
 http:
//www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/RES/1737%282006%29(Accessed.
 11.05.2018) .December 2007, URL.
  https:
//www.iaea.org/newscenter/pressreleases/statement-iaeadirector-general-new-us-intelligence-estimate-iran (Accessed.
 06.05.2018). Overview.
 Bush and Public Opinion, URL.
 http:
//www.people-press.org/2008/12/18/bushand-public-opinion/ (Accessed.
 04.05.2018) .https.
//www.state.gov/documents/organization/64884.pdf (Accessed.
 09.05.2018). [11] Khalafyan N. Israel և Iran. Multi-layer relationships, URL.
 http:
//theanalyticon.com/?p=9952 (The link was made on 14.05.2018).
URL.
 http:
//iranprimer.usip.org/resource/george-w-bush-administration (Accessed.
Tadjosyan SurenAMERICA-IRANIAN RELATIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT (J. Bush Jr.
