THE STRUCTURAL NATURE OF 19TH CENTURY ARMENIAN YOUTH AND INTER-INTERGOVERNMENTAL IMPACTS RAFFU "ARMENIAN YOUTH" OF WORK.
 Particularly noteworthy are the issues of reinterpretation of the national sociological tradition (in this case, the concept of "national liberation struggle"), which aim to reveal the prospects for the further development of the Armenian sociological thought.
If we take as a basis for the development of that idea the approaches formed within the framework of the Armenian social-sociological tradition of the 19th century, then the primary task becomes to discover the bases of the latter.
 Particular attention should be paid to the analysis of the theoretical concepts of the nation և generation, which are considered to be the basic categories of social thought of the time.
 These are the concepts that underlie the reproduction of the Armenian reality of that period.
  Nation–
Comments on the issue of generational relations can be seen especially in Raffi's "Armenian Youth" [1].
  It is, in fact, an attempt to take a new approach to the perception of the internal processes of understanding the Armenian reality of the 19th century.
 An attempt was made to examine the intragenerational and intergenerational processes and interrelationships specific to the Armenianness of that region, to put forward theoretical substantiations that would allow interpreting the intra-national processes, classifying them in a specific socio-historical-spatio-temporal context.
 At the heart of the research is the notion of "youth", being considered as a generation, both in terms of intragenerational dynamics and intergenerational relations.
  Raffi attaches special importance to the in-depth research of the youth, noting that it is not only a "fresh force", but also a guarantee of the progress and future of a given nation.
  The basis of this theoretical approach is the romantic-historical direction, within the framework of which the place and role of culture in the interpretations of intergenerational and intergenerational processes is great.
 This allows not only to view these processes under the influence of micro-subjective factors, such as culture, but also in a certain social-spatial connection [2].
The comparative method is widely used in theoretical approaches to the interpretation of the internal generations of the Armenian youth of the 19th century.
  An attempt is made to examine the many layers of that generation, as well as to find out the process of formation and formation of the Armenian youth through intergenerational interactions.
  The layered nature of the Armenian youth is more obvious due to the separation of rural and urban Armenian youth.
  This distinction is based on a feature that makes it understandable why the comparative method is used to interpret intra-generational dynamics.
  It is, of course, about social status.
 In particular, speaking about the Armenian youth living in the 19th century, it is necessary to mention that it is the result of intergenerational post-figurative relations.
  This youth is formed on the basis of traditional norms, using the experience of the elderly, the intergenerational orientation of socialization.
  Insufficient material resources force the youth to spend more time on agricultural activities than on education.
As a result, the predominantly agricultural type of youth prevails in the society, not the educated ones.
 In such conditions, rural Armenian youth can not develop quickly, as it is not flexible to changing processes.
 As for the Armenian youth living in urban areas, it can be noted that it is the result of intergenerational configurative relations, which are based on the prefigurative nature, as based on the present, it rejects the previous experience and norms.
 It becomes a unique "counterculture" that does not take steps to obtain higher education as opposed to material security.
  This diversity of intersex figures really reflects Nietzsche's fundamental principles of historical experience and the peculiarities of its application.
This is the main stratification to which the Armenian youth of the 19th century was subjected.
 Rural-urban Armenian youth can be considered as separate units operating in one generation, which, despite belonging to the same socio-historical space, do not participate in "common luck".
 This intergenerational dichotomy becomes more understandable only when we examine the structural foundations of these relatively isolated intergenerational groups, the "entelechy."
 According to Mannheim, these are, according to Pinder thinking, intragenerational goals that shape the worldview of that generation [2] (Chart 1).
Graph 1. Figurative structure of rural youth in 19th century Armenianism The study of the intergenerational entelech structure shows that the entelechs of rural and urban Armenian youth are not natural, as in the first case the entelechy is mostly "conservative" and in the second case "free".
 It should be noted, however, that these young people, despite various entelech bases, nevertheless form a single generation.
 The entelechies that are the basis for the differentiation of those generations are common entelechy or common ground in terms of finding the edges of the union of two structures.
The possibility of the unity of these structural types leads to the theoretical privatization of the generation as a single social phenomenon, according to which it cannot be considered a social group, as it is not created on the basis of specific goals և social relations.
  This opportunity for unity allows young people, as a one-generation generation, to view themselves at the level of relationships with the older generation, where traits emerge as a result of those relationships, such as newcomers to cultural processes, "removal" of former participants, and participation in a historically specific process. Transfer of accumulated cultural heritage from one generation to another Ensuring continuity of the network [2].
 The entelech mechanism of analysis allows to observe the intergenerational և intergenerational dynamic processes as a process of interrelationship of entelech bases specific to those generations (Chart 2).
Graph 2. Intellectual structure of the generation Intergenerational relations are not interrupted, there is always a layering of experience and memory.
  This is what determines the formation and establishment of the Armenian youth.
 The stratification of experience և memory, which can be seen as the experience of the older generation, accumulated at a young age, through dialectical relationships can influence the current experience of data youth.
 The degree of experience և memory stratification is directly related to the type of intergenerational relationships adopted by the intergenerational generations.
In particular, in the case of the prefigurational relationship type, the շերտ memory layering of experience is at a low level, as the youth of the present period deny past experience and normative standards.
The layers of experience and memory are used also because the youth, carrying the knowledge of the given period, will develop more flexible activities, developing the ability to adapt to the changing social reality.
 This is the basic way, through which it will be possible to solve the priority problem of ensuring the continuity of the succession of generations through intergenerational interactions.
  This problem is observed, in particular, in the field of conceptualization of the national liberation struggle, which fits into the level of sociological knowledge, the quintessence of which is considered the concept of the national liberation struggle, the scientific interpretations connected with it.
  The national liberation struggle, according to Rogozin, is "the struggle for the և free and independent development of the national liberation of colonized or dependent nations."
Raffi's "Armenian Youth" is aimed at proposing these question-and-answer approaches.
 Speaking about the use of the means of preserving the Armenian identity in the Armenian national liberation struggle, Raffi says. "The people themselves raise protests, both with weapons and with words; we call it the root of the feeling of freedom, it comes from the heart of the crowd, it rises from below."
Referring to the intra-generational processes prevailing in the youth, it can be stated that the Armenian youth of that region is divided into two main layers: rural-urban Armenian youth.
  As already mentioned, these two youths are based on two non-identical, often opposing entelechies (the first type of youth is the bearer of conservative entelechy, the second is liberal).
 Such a contradiction between entelechs often makes it difficult to put forward theoretical approaches to include these young people in the general generation.
 However, if we look at these relations in a stable environment, where the everyday social reality becomes existential, the need for the younger generations to act in one union for the sake of survival will become clear.
 Here, in essence, the intellectual relations related to the social position become secondary, the instincts of one's own existence, national self-consciousness and preservation of identity begin to function.
  This unity allows the youth to unite around one common entelechy, which is based on national-existentialist, national-liberation ideas.
 "Why not become a participant in the preservation of one's national identity" is the basis of the national liberation struggle.
Speaking of intergenerational processes և relations, national-
On the role of the liberation struggle և in the preservation of the national identity, it is necessary to use the ideas of experience և in the permanent, reproduction, preservation of the national consciousness.
 At the heart of this reproduction are the relations between the young and the older generations, which are based on inter-tech relations.
 These relations are often of the nature of dialectical contradictions, where the's older generation's younger generation clash.
  The totality of these often loaded and contrasting entelechs characterizes the spirit of the age.
  In order to use the spirit of the century in the framework of the national-liberation struggle, the opposition of the entelechs must be placed not at a destructive level, but at a constructive level, where contradictions will contribute to the stratification of experience և memory [9].
  In the analytical entelech mechanism, this is the idea of ​​a pan-national entelech basis, a national interest, which in one way or another exists both in the entelechs specific to the given youth and the older generation.
 From this point of view, the national liberation struggle can be considered as a set of purposeful actions of the unification of generations, which is based on the principle of nationwide realization of the entelech basis.
  By this logic, the concept of the national-liberation struggle turns into a chain of phased processes, where the primary stage is the realization of the existential situation (there are stages of national consciousness of the non-technical basis, unification on the drachma - concrete actions), and the final stage - the progressive result.
 Here, the youth moves through the combination of their own և existing experience, further developing the intra-generational-national consciousness.
 The development of this consciousness is a result of permanent socialization, which begins in the family, from the youth of the Armenian youth.
  In the Armenian reality of the 19th century, where the Armenian national statehood was absent, the role of the older generation և family was more in the formation of the national spirit and consciousness of the youth.
 The elderly become the social unit which, by adopting a certain policy, contributes to the formation of national consciousness.
  Thus, intergenerational relationships become a complex process of social experience և accumulation of memory, stratification և generational rotation.
A process in which the older generation brings forth a new generation, the youth, which builds its self-consciousness by combining the past accumulated by the older generation with its own experience.
 This is the way in which the new generation develops the national consciousness, puts it at the highest structural level, contributing to the further reproduction of that consciousness.
LITERATURE [1] Vermishyan H., "History of Armenian Sociology. Late XIX-beginning of XX century ", Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2013, pp. 16-25.
[3] Raffi's "Armenian Woman and Armenian Youth", Tbilissi (Georgia), Aror, 1890, 222 pages.
[6] Rogozin O. K., War and Peace in Terms and Definitions.
 military-political [7] Raffi, "It is not too late yet." Philological, "Mshak" - 41, Tbilissi (Georgia), March 15, 1878, page 1.
[9] Sarukhanyan N., "Raffin և The Armenian Question". Historical-Philological Journal, № 3, 2015, pp. 99-107.
[10] Makaryan L. B., "Raffi as an ideologue of the national liberation movement", Banber Yerjan University 3 (69), YSU, 1989, pp. 159-64.
Vahan Yengidunyan THE STRUCTURAL NATURE OF THE 19TH CENTURY ARMENIAN YOUTH AND INTER-INTERGOVERNMENTAL IMPACTS RAFFU "ARMENIAN YOUTH" WORK, youth,
