INSTITUTE OF GROUP LAWSUIT ACCORDING TO THE DRAFT CODE OF CIVIL CIVIL PROCEDURE The group claim is still an institution foreign to the domestic legal system.
  The first country to enshrine the right of group action at the legislative level was England.
  Later, this institute became widespread in the United States as a class action lawsuit1.
 Examining the extensive work of forensic expert Tarrufo 2 on the class action claim, we can distinguish the latter with its characteristic features.1. The right to a group lawsuit arises when there is a need to protect the interests of a large number of individuals, and the participation of each in the case is not expedient.
  The literature states that there can be no limit to the maximum number of members of a group (even a few dozen or hundreds of plaintiffs can file a class action through their representative in court), but less than ten participants can not be considered a group;
2. A group action is possible only in the conditions when the rights of the persons included in the group have been violated by the same circumstance,, their claims are based on the same ground, that is, they are based on the same factual basis և legal justification.
3. One or more members of the group, the so-called representative plaintiffs, are directly involved as plaintiffs in the proceedings of cases heard on the basis of a group lawsuit, while the other members of the group are considered plaintiffs but do not participate in the trial.
The requirements presented by the representative include the requirements of all group members.
1 See Yeazell SC, From Medieval Group Litigation to the Modern Class Action. New Haven.
 YaleUniversity Pres, pp. 12-14.
2 See Tarruffo M., Some Remarks on Group Litigation. Law-paper. 2001 No 11, page 406.
3 See RA Nagareda, “Class Action Lawsuits,” University of Chicago Press, 2007, p.
Theorists distinguish several types of group lawsuits according to certain criteria.
 According to the claimants, we differentiate between the types of group lawsuits filed by groups of individuals, organizations or state authorities4.
It is noteworthy that over time, the above-mentioned types of group action have had different development processes and histories.
  The right of individual groups to file lawsuits was originally enshrined in the laws of the Anglo-American legal system.
  Most jurists argue that the key purpose of class action lawsuits is to protect the rights and interests of groups of individuals, so it is no coincidence that in the beginning the subject matter of group action lawsuits was limited to groups of individuals, not including organizations and government agencies.
 Group claims are divided into several other groups, for example, taking into account the value for which the claim is made.
 However, in all cases, the separation and differentiation of group actions are not of essential importance, as the same rules apply to the proceedings of all cases filed in a group action.
Unlike the Anglo-Saxon legal system, the institute of group claims was not widespread in the continental legal system.
 Moreover, the requirements on which a group action can be brought, such as the composition of the subjects entitled to make such a claim, are considerably limited6.
  Thus, the institute of group action was not generally accepted in German law until recently.
 The practice of uniting separate lawsuits in one proceeding was widespread here, and the issue of protection of common interests was regulated by branches of public law.
However, the German legislature in 2005 It passed a law dealing with securities litigation based on a class action lawsuit.
  Legislative acts regulating group lawsuits through civil disputes were later adopted7.
  In France, despite the negative opinion about this institution, the President signed an order, according to which the government should further develop a group lawsuit in 4 See Puchinsky V. K., Civil Process SSA, M., 1979, pp. 58-68.
5 See Oskave K., Class Studies in the American Citizenship Process // Protection of Law and Legal Interests of Citizens and Organizations, Sochi, p. 1, 2002, No. 3, pp. 69-71.
6 See https.
//www.lawyersandsettlements.com/.
7 See D. Bund, Capital Markets Model Case Act Hamburg, 2006, July, pp. 3-6.
session, thereby increasing access to justice.
2006 In November 2006, the French Ministry of Finance introduced a bill that allowed lawsuits with a claim of up to 2,000 euros to be merged into one group lawsuit8.
There are conflicting opinions in the theory about the necessity and effectiveness of the group lawsuit.
  Some theorists criticize the existence of a group lawsuit, noting that despite the mechanism of effective protection of the interests of group participants, it is quite difficult for a representative to keep in touch with all participants during the trial, to inform about litigation, etc.9.
  Finally, a situation is possible when the number of group plaintiffs exceeds several tens, sometimes several hundred, in this case, how should the representative organize his activities?
  However, we believe that civil lawsuits based on group lawsuits have a number of advantages: the existence of the institute of group lawsuits is justified by the grounds presented below.
Civil lawsuits based on group lawsuits combine a large number of individual claims into one representative civil case. Եւ The protection of group members' rights and the restoration of violated rights take place in a much shorter period of time (than would happen if each member filed an individual claim). savings 10.
Such a union can increase the efficiency of the trial և reduce court costs.
  The effectiveness of this institution is evidenced not only by the rich experience of a number of European countries, but also by the practice of the European Court of Human Rights.
 Article 34 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms stipulates that the court may accept complaints "from any person, non-governmental organization or group of persons".
Accordingly, individuals, their groups 11, public 8 See Frank T., "France approves class actions - Point Of Law Forum". Paris, 2006, p. 5.
9 See Kolosova V. В., ,, Виды исков в гражданскам судопроизводстве. Групповые иски '' Москва, 2010, էջ 11-13.
10 See Marcus RL, Redish MH, Sherman EF, Civil Procedure in Context, New York, 2006, p. 202.
11 See ECtHR 14967/89, 19.2.98, Guerra and Others v. Italy.
 Forty residents of an Italian city have filed a lawsuit in this case: protest organizations, companies, shareholders, unions can file a lawsuit.
 However, there are some rights that only individuals can complain about.
  These include the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, the right to education, the right not to be subjected to degrading treatment of human dignity.
In order to better understand the substance of a class action lawsuit, it is necessary to identify its characteristics տարբեր the distinguishing features by which the institute of group action differs from the institutes of co-claim or combining several claims in one proceeding.
 Article 30 of the current Code of Civil Procedure of the Republic of Armenia stipulates that a lawsuit may be filed jointly by several plaintiffs (co-plaintiffs), moreover, each of the co-plaintiffs appears in court independently, but may assign the case to one of them.
  This institution, with its advantages, has several salient shortcomings.
  Thus, if you do not have the opportunity to examine the case effectively, as here the co-plaintiffs are allowed to have an independent position, they may not match the basis and subject matter of the claim submitted by the co-plaintiffs. It is incomparably more difficult to find out the issues of jurisdiction.
  These այլ several other practical problems unnecessarily burden the trial և make it difficult to discover the truth in the case.
12 The difference between a group claim and a group claim is that a group claim is a claim of an authorized body aimed at protecting the interests of a certain group of persons, while the institution of a co-claim is a joint claim.
The group lawsuit differs from the lawsuits that are united in one lawsuit in that the merger in one lawsuit is done with the lawsuits already in the court proceedings, that is why such cases do not unite all the persons whose interests have been violated by the defendant14.
The Draft Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) has supplemented the list of cases under special litigation by examining on the basis of a group lawsuit the pollution caused by a chemical plant one kilometer away or the risk of a possible serious accident.
12 See Clermont KM, Principles of Civil procedure. St Paul, 2005, p. 386.
13 See Kolesov P. P., Group groups, Civil process for collateral parties. M., 2007, p. 153.
14 See Bronstein J. Fiss O., The Class Action Rule // Notre dame Law review 2002-2003, no. 73, p. 1417.
with ongoing cases.
  The idea of ​​introducing the institute of a group lawsuit was enshrined in the 2009-2011 period of judicial reforms. The Strategic Action Plan15, which justifies the need to introduce a group action, և clearly defines the range of issues that the group action will address.
 In particular, the introduction of the group claims procedure can solve the problem when individuals, interested in receiving small amounts of compensation, apply to court to protect the rights of those who are not interested.
The class action claim ensures that the respondent, who engages in large-scale damaging actions, causing minor damage to each individual plaintiff, nevertheless compensates for the damage caused by a joint examination of the claims.
Taking into account the above-mentioned several other issues and the unevenness that arises in practice, the RA Government still in 2012 Approved the draft laws "On Making Amendments to the RA Civil Procedure Code16", "On Making Amendments to the RA Administrative Procedure Code" and "On Making Amendments to the RA Law on Compulsory Execution of Judicial Acts", which were included in the 2015 NA resolution. In the agenda of the sittings of November 16-19, it is obligatory և among the issues discussed as necessary.
  This package of proposals was aimed at ensuring the introduction of the institute of group lawsuits.
Pursuant to Article 190 of the Draft, a claim filed jointly by at least 20 co-plaintiffs is considered a group action if: 1) the claim is brought against the same respondent (s); 2) the subject of the claim և the grounds are the same.
It is obvious that in order to consider the claim as a group, the simultaneous existence of the following conditions is necessary: ​​1) the number of persons on the visitor's side.
  The draft sets only the minimum threshold for the number of group participants.
 It is clear that the above definition of co-plaintiffs would not be very reasonable, as it would undermine the essence of the group claim, that is, the unification of a large number of individual claims under a single representative claim.
172) Existence of the same respondent or correspondents.
  A group lawsuit is aimed at protecting the interests of a certain group of people who have suffered 15 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=66236 (as of 12.04.16).
16 See http: // www.
//parliament.am/drafts.php?sel=showdraft&DraftID=6930&Reading=0 (as of 12.04.16).
17 See https.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_of_Trial_Lawyers_of_America.
following the actions of the same respondent.
  The group action procedure makes it possible to avoid situations where different judgments set "conflicting standards" of behavior that must be observed by the respondent.
3 3) Identity of the basis of the subject matter of the claim.
Moreover, the plaintiffs with a group lawsuit manage their cases in court through a representative with a group lawsuit.
 The participation of a representative in a group lawsuit excludes the plaintiff's participation in the case, except in cases when the plaintiff himself acts as a representative in a group lawsuit.
 In case of legal actions envisaged by the Code with the participation of a representative with a group claim, they are considered to have been performed with the participation of all plaintiffs.
 The law clearly defines who can be a representative, how the powers of a representative are confirmed, how the powers of a representative in a group claim are terminated, the replacement of a representative in a group claim, the procedure of instrumentation in a group claim.
  However, the study and comprehensive analysis of the legal norms related to the institute of group lawsuit allows us to prove that, nevertheless, the regulation of the Draft is not perfect, the latter has some shortcomings.
  In particular, the Draft does not answer the following questions: Is it possible to consider a non-group lawsuit originally filed as a group lawsuit and apply the rules for group litigation if the number of plaintiffs in the original lawsuit was less than 20, but over time the number of plaintiffs increased to 20? or passing 20.
We think so.
  Otherwise, if the court ignores the claims of these 5 plaintiffs during the examination of the claim filed by 15 co-plaintiffs, then the introduction of the institute of a group claim will become meaningless.
 After all, the very meaning of a group lawsuit is to satisfy or reject the same demands in one court act.
  The situation will not change significantly օրինակ in the event that, for example, the court terminates the proceedings ի starts a new case, already on the basis of a class action and according to the rules of group action.
  After all, this comes from litigation, as it is aimed at invoking the principle of judicial austerity.
 Of course, the above-mentioned regulation will be applicable only if the co-plaintiffs reach an internal agreement to participate in the examination of the case through a representative or several representatives. 18 See коврков В. В., ,, Групповой иск.
 short comments ”, Moscow, 2007, pp. 18-19.
about flea.
 At the same time, we consider it necessary to note that it would be fair to limit the possibility of the court filing the initially filed group lawsuit to the group stage by preparing the case for trial, in particular by resolving the issue of distributing the burden of proof.
Is everyone free to join a group lawsuit at any stage of the trial if the basis and subject matter of the lawsuit to be filed by him or her repeat the group lawsuit and legal grounds already in court?
Again, the answer will be positive if we derive the answer to the question from the essence of the group lawsuit.
 It is worth mentioning that during the studies we noticed in the legal system of some countries of continental law a norm defining such a right of third parties, but our draft law does not incomprehensibly answer this question.
Should the distribution of court costs be settled in accordance with the general rule in the case under consideration for a group action, or should a special rule be established or applied in the case of a group action based on its special nature?
In connection with this issue we meet different legal regulations in the legislations of different states.
  For example, Article 254 of the Danish Code of Civil Procedure stipulates that the court requires a representative or all plaintiffs to pay a certain amount of court deposit before starting the proceedings, which will later cover the court costs.
  The court determines the amount to be paid in each case, based on the case, the claims, their nature, etc.
  Moreover, if the court costs are higher, the parties will not incur additional obligations.
 The court costs are covered by the amount that will be formed from the payments of all the plaintiffs.
  Bulgarian legislation offers a completely different regulation. The winning party has the right to reimburse the court costs incurred as well as its own costs, which were directed to the organization of judicial protection in proportion to the satisfied claims.
  The rule "Whoever loses pays" applies, but the law reserves the right to demand that the loser reduce court costs if it proves that the costs incurred by the opposing party were not unreasonably related to the organization of judicial protection 19.
19 See http: // www.
//www.libralex.com/publications/class-actions-in-europe-and-the-us.
As we notice, the Draft is silent about this, therefore it is supposed that part 1 of Article 73 of the current RA CCO applies. Court costs are distributed among the persons participating in the case in proportion to the amount of the satisfied claims.
Thus, the study of theoretical sources on group action վերլուծ analysis of the legal regulations of different countries allows us to distinguish the following advantages inherent in the institute of group action: The union increases the efficiency of the trial և reduces the court costs.
It is true that the introduction of the institute of group action in our legal system is a progressive step, however, the provisions dedicated to the regulation of the institute have some shortcomings in the draft - omissions, which were addressed, solutions were suggested in this work.
Arpine Arakelyan GROUP LAW INSTITUTE ACCORDING TO THE RA CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE DRAFT Keywords: group suit institute, group suit right, group (class) bread, group suit representative, group suit representative.
