SOME REVIEWS OF THE FOREIGN PRESS ASSEMBLY OF YELDZI'S ASSASSINATION For many years one of the main goals of the Armenian revolutionary organizations was to intimidate Sultan Abdul Hamid II.
That desire arose among Armenian politicians back in 1895-1896. After the massacres of Western Armenians, when there was an atmosphere of widespread despair throughout the country.
  The following memoirs with ARF Dashnaktsutyun figure Mikayel Varandyan give clear ideas about the created moral and psychological state. "The situation was great.
 There was a moment of grave peace in the country.
 The Armenian movement on Mount Garahisar և S. He had fired the last bullets near the monastery of Bartholomew… However, a murmur of revenge would pass from the Armenian world.
 The Armenian youth was not dead yet, they were shouting for revenge.
 The most desperate people shouted that it was the same, without beating or fighting, we would be massacred, we would be massacred even by making a peaceful, innocent procession, we would be massacred even in the most legitimate position, taking a defensive position against the looting, anti-Armenian bandits, why not us? »1.
1904 In January 1904, the 3rd General Assembly of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun was held in Sofia. They met in Athens in May.
  As a result of these several other meetings and discussions, it was decided to implement the judgment of Sultan Abdul Hamidim.
 "To strike the man who is most responsible for the massacre of hundreds of thousands of Armenians, to strike the crowned Assassin, whose existence was a perpetual" whipping deed, an insult to the Armenian people, to the Armenian Revolutionary Organization, "wrote Mikael Varand.
  According to the final decision, the death sentence was to be carried out by a car bomb.
 The head of the demonstrative responsible body, Kristapor Mikaelyan, who personally headed the experimental bombs 1 Varandian M., H. Յ. History of the ARF, vol. A, Yerevan, 1992, p. 130.
2 Ibid., Pp. 365-366.
rib group, 1905 He died along with Vramshapuh Kendiryan during a test on March 17, 2006 near Mount Vitosh in Bulgaria.
 "Kristapor Mikaelyan's death, of course, had a severe impact on the members of the responsible body, but the ARF council decided to pursue the defeat of" Nzhuyg "until the end, even if only one person remains."
After a long preparation, the explosion finally took place.
 1905 On July 21, 1945, after a religious ceremony in Selamlik, when Hamid was to return to the palace, a car bomb exploded in front of a mosque in Eldiz Square.
 About 15 carriages were smashed, several dozen people were injured or killed, but Hamid survived.
 Even before Christopher's death, the members of the body had studied the Salam al-Malik religious rites in detail.
  Further examination of the reasons for the sultan's survival showed that one of the main reasons for the failure of the case was the low quality of the bombs and Hamid's departure from the mosque a moment later.
 "However, on that day, at the moment when Sultan Hamid was leaving the place of worship, the meeting with Sheikh-ul-Islam Jalal al-Din al-Effendi had taken a little longer than usual. The conversation with Sheikh-ul-Islam was late.
  "When the bomb exploded, he was still heading for the carriage to the stairs," Tahsin Pasha wrote in his "Memoirs" 5.
The reaction of the international press was not late.
  A number of international periodicals covered the incident, including some quite authoritative ones.
  Some of them referred to the case not only as K. The news received by their correspondents in Constantinople was presented by separate analysts.
  A number of German, English, Belgian and French newspapers ("Daily Telegraph", "Vorwarts", "Mattin", etc.) were directly impressed by the explosion.
  They included articles both close to reality, criticizing Abdul Hamid, and far from reality, for example, describing the explosion as underground.
  It is noteworthy that in the context of all this, young Turks were not late. 3 Simonyan H., On the Ways of the Liberation Struggle, Book 1, Yerevan, 2003, p. 579.
4 Varandian M., ref. work., page 367.
5 Ibid., Pp. 367-368.
conversions in the form of "Ittihad" published in Paris and "Meshveret" newspapers published in Paris.
The work mainly examines some remarkable references in the international press, which to some extent have been left out of the attention of researchers to this day.
The explosion was made interesting by the authoritative London "Daily Telegraph" newspaper, whose K. The Istanbul correspondent first presents the details of the explosion in detail6, then the newspaper's editorial staff expresses its opinion on what happened. "A monarch who has shown such heartless rigidity knows for sure that he inspires fanatical hatred in his course.
  "He did not hesitate to tolerate" for state purposes ", if not to incite the massacre of Armenians."
The German "Vorwarts" newspaper published an article titled "Turkish bomb", noting that "the death of the sultan would be welcomed by anyone who respects him and is aware of the horrible crimes he has committed."
 According to the German newspaper, Hamid brutally "bloodily suppresses every movement towards freedom, closing the state to the development of new times."
  "Thus, the situation in Turkey today is not better than it was decades ago," the newspaper concludes9.
Initially, the newspapers wrote various versions, not even having an idea about the circumstances of the explosion.
For example, the newspaper Neue Freie Presse received information on July 22 that "about 80 people fell from the explosion of an underground mine, one part killed, the other part seriously injured."
  The same newspaper then expresses its irony towards the Turkish newspapers, noting that, in their opinion, the explosion is "directed against civilization and humanity".
  Great was the disaster caused by the explosion, the commotion of the palace circles, and finally the horror.
  An interesting version about that is put forward in the July 26 issue of "Die Zeit" newspaper. "The two servants of the sultan killed in the blast do not have any wounds, they died of a heart attack caused by horror."
6 See "Flag", Gen., 1905, №8 (161), August, appended, page 2.
7 Ibid., P.
8 Simonyan H., note work., page 588.
9 "Flag", note. for pages 6-7.
10 Ibid., P.
11 Ibid., P.
According to the ARF official newspaper "Droshak", in one of the issues of the Belgian "Mattin" "the assassination attempt of the sultan is eloquently glorified, the commemoration of Constantinople, Sassoon, Urfa, Trabzon is remembered, The "red sultan" always tried to stifle the struggle for the freedom of the subject peoples 12 "12.
  However, for the sake of justice, it should be noted that unlike other news և editorial points of view, which are placed in the translated version in the mentioned issue of "Droshak", the latest information is not translated, it is written only with the editorial of "Droshak".
"Berliner Tageblatt" writes in its July 22 issue that the most surprising thing about the incident is that the assassination attempt was not made much earlier. "The experience of the sultan's life, if we take into account the revolutionary currents and riots in Tajikistan, will not surprise us," the Neue Freie Presse newspaper wrote in its editorial. "It is only necessary to remember Abdul Hamid's bloody invasion of the Armenians in Tajik Armenia."
  The same "Berliner Tageblatt" newspaper writes 5 days ago, on July 27, that the bomber most probably intended not to kill the sultan, but to force him to carry out reforms14.
 Of course, that was not the case, as evidenced by the great surprise of the friends who carried out the assassination attempt, as soon as they learned that Hamid was alive, and then the mutual accusations that followed.
The ARF expectations were different.
  This is evidenced by the letter written by Rostom, one of the prominent ARF figures, on behalf of the Western Bureau to the Eastern Bureau, where the latter states that the necessary attention was not paid by the European press, only the German press was relatively more active15.
 H.Y. The ARF was not only dissatisfied with the result, because not only did the bloodthirsty Hamid survive, the international press did not respond properly, but along with the material losses, the ARF lost one of my founding husbands, Kristapor Mikayelyan.
And how did the opposition Young Turk revolutionaries react to the events?
 The Young Turks ask an interesting question in their daily newspaper, Ittihad. “12 Ibid., P.
13 Ibid., Pp. 4-5.
14 See ibid., P.
15 See Materials H.Y. For the history of the ARF ", vol. B, Beirut, 1985, p. 257.
One should grieve for the attempted murder against human life, but can one grieve for a creature who commits thousands of heinous crimes day and night, ruthlessly destroys his country and sows hatred among the various elements of the empire? ”16
 However, as often happens in such cases, everyone tries to use the case based on internal political interests.
  The Young Turks were not spared from this, the vivid proof of which was both the references made and the continuation of Sultan Hamid's anti-Armenian policy in the future.
 "The sultan wants to use the incident against himself to fill the country with a flood of blood, attributing the case to a young Turk, a Bulgarian or an Armenian, but never to the powerless situation in the country," they said.
Ahmed Riza, one of the leaders of the Young Turks, referred to the case with the same principles, appearing in a relevant article in the "Meshveret" newspaper published in Paris.
  Ahmed Riza sharply criticizes Hamid. "Abdul Hamid knows perfectly well that the people hate him, curse him and wish him a quick loss," on the other hand, he uses what happened again for internal political reasons. "The sultan can not escape from it, but only by opening a chapter of justice and freedom guaranteed by the Constitution."
Thus, with some references in the international press, the period following the sultan's assassination attempt showed that the perpetrators were mainly driven by narrow personal or narrow political interests, as evidenced by the continuation of Hamid's anti-Armenian policy by the Young Turks.
  In that sense, the calculations of the ARF leadership were a bit wrong.
  However, not only the assassination attempt had a negative connotation.
 Let us not forget the terrible horror that befell Sultan Abdul Hamid in the period following his assassination attempt, which directly enabled Hamid to continue the massacres in that period, both physically and morally and psychologically.
16 "Flag", note. for page 7.
17 Ibid.
18 Ibid.
Gegham Asatryan SOME FOREIGN PRESS REFLECTIONS ON YELDIZ'S ASSASSINATION Keywords: Sultan Abdul Hamid II, ARF General Assembly, Yeldiz blast, foreign press, Young TurksSummary.
