THEORETICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS OF POSTMODERNISM Since the middle of the 20th century, postmodernist ideas have spread in the fields of philosophy, culture, aesthetics and science.
  But what is so-called "postmodernism", what were the preconditions for its emergence?
  To consider the most accepted postmodernism today as a world-cultural current, although the theorists on that issue do not agree.
 Postmodernism has different definitions, that is, a new artistic style, a new artistic direction, a cultural consciousness, and so on.
 In a broad sense, postmodernism is the general name for the culture of the second half of the 20th century, which is based on the perception of the world as chaos, as it is seen as an independent direction, characterized by the severance of ties with modernism.
  However, when we say postmodernism, we do not mean any particular field of literature, architecture or science, as it is the general manifestation of the world-recognition of the present age.
  Vsevolod Emelin mentions. "It is customary to differentiate between two types of postmodernism: what literally means the period following modernism, և postmodernism, which means the self-awareness of the culture of the region" 1.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the mentality of the modernist era was replaced by non-classical, and at the end of the century, it was replaced by post-classical.
  A new term was needed to name that direction completely different from the previous one.
 The word "postmodern" appeared in America, thanks to the pen of sociologists and critics, to indicate the structural and ideological changes taking place in the second half of the 20th century in the cultural and cultural life.
  Leonid Karasyov notes. "Whether the term 'postmodernism' is successful or not is not so important, we understand what we are talking about, it is not enough."
  The term was first used in 1917 ․ In Rudolf Panwitz's The Crisis of European Art, about the people who were called to overcome the decline of European art.
  Already in 1934 ․ In An Anthology of Spanish-Latin American Poetry, Federico De Onis uses the postmodern as a reaction to the ideology of modernism.
  Later, in 1947, Arnold Toynbee, in his book The Achievements of History, gave postmodernism a cultural meaning that symbolized the end of Western domination of art and religion.
  Arsenih Guliga mentions. "As early as the 1950s, postmodernism in the United States was called the crisis of avant-garde literature, and later, giving a more positive meaning to the same concept, it was associated with the hope of overcoming the same crisis."
 However, Leslie Fiedler's 1969 article, "Cross the Borders and Cover the Holes," published in Playboy magazine, is considered a proclamation of postmodernism.
  Later, the term was expanded to include French philosophy, and then to all areas of art.
In the second half of the 20th century, a new intellectual movement called poststructuralism began in France.
  It is already clear from the name that it is a direction related to structuralism, which, by promoting structuralist ideas, aims to overcome its main slogans.
 Poststructuralist ideas took a wider range 1 Emelin V., Labyrinths of postmodernism.
 identifikacija uskolьzaющego smysla »// Научный πληροφοционно-аналитический, 2 Карасев Л.
 materials «round chair», Questions of Philosophy ». Moscow, found in the activities of Jacques Derrida.
  The latter laid the foundation not only for the ideology of poststructuralism, but also for postmodernism.
 The main essence of his theory is deconstruction.
  Evaluating the philosophy of his time as a crisis, he sees philosophy as a new method in deconstruction, which should contribute to the development of philosophical thought.
  The deconstruction derived from poststructuralism, which became the basis of postmodernism, as a theory, refuses to study the problems of the notion of existence, even refutes the notion of "existence" as such, referring to the explanation of that refutation through the text.
 According to Derrida, the essence of deconstruction is the futility of any comprehension and interpretation of the text, if the reader does not actively participate in the creation of the final text.
  Derrida suggests dismantling the text, that is, changing the other internal-external, d-meaning-other contradictions in it, creating a new structure.
  Thus the creation takes place in a close dialogue between the reader-researcher և text.
 Under the influence of deconstructivism, postmodernist writers, in turn, avoid even accepting the possibility of a text having an unambiguous meaning.
 Although poststructuralism has been following postmodernism for about ten years, it is still the original type of postmodernism in its ideas and methodology.
  Postmodernism as a philosophical direction originates from poststructuralism, the two are so interconnected that it is difficult to distinguish them clearly, as all poststructuralist philosophical ideas later became postmodernist.
  Moreover, if the main goal of poststructuralism was to question modernist ideology, then the postmodernist philosophy based on it had another task, that is, to form a new worldview.
 However, postmodernism is not a complete system, because only in philosophy it includes different ideologies.
  Moreover, each of these theories survives side by side in the entrails of postmodernism, they do not deny each other.
  Vladimir Novikov notes. "There are as many postmodernist concepts as there are universities in the world, or perhaps as many as there are professors working there."
When referring to postmodernist philosophy, it is necessary to speak about the activities of Jean-François Liotar.
  1979 In his work "The State of Postmodernism" published, Lyotard writes: The subject of this study is the knowledge in the most developed modern societies, which we decided to call "postmodern".
  This word refers to the culture that changed in science, art and literature at the end of the 19th century ”2.
  According to Lyotard, the distinguishing feature of the postmodernist era is the idea of ​​progress, which gives knowledge an enlightening nature, the latter should become the source of universal happiness.
  Lyotard connects the spread of postmodernism with the general spread of information, which causes the essence of mutual knowledge to begin a new, postmodernist perception of the world.
However, postmodern philosophy can not be considered as a separate philosophical direction with a unique perceptual system.
  It is, first of all, a state of development of Western thinking, which is distinguished first of all by its nihilistic critical position.
  The main idea is the critique of the intellect և its possibilities.
  Unlike modernism, postmodernism has a more negative nature.
  First of all, it does not create any new idea instead of the already denied ones, because according to postmodernist philosophy, truth is impossible, and its search is an old philosophical illusion, and therefore a new bio-creative culture must be created, which will establish complete freedom, human freedom. in what և everywhere.
 In a broad sense, postmodernism is the establishment of chaos; chaos must replace order not only in language but also in other spheres of culture and society.
 Based on all this, let us mention that the main ideas used by postmodernism are "freedom", "uncertainty", "deconstruction", "game", "irony", "coincidence", etc.
 These ideas also found expression in various branches of 20th century art.
1 Новиков В., В поисках предделения // Постмодернизм и культура.
 Materials of the "Round Table" // Questions of Philosophy ", the snow of the modernist thinking of art has already exhausted itself and someone else will come to replace it.
 Postmodernism is the situation of the historical period itself, which followed postmodernism և aimed to surpass the latter.
  However, one should not think that postmodernism is a mere denial of modernism, as it would mean, first of all, that postmodernism is not just a critical theory aimed at discovering the world of modern times, but trying to classify the world through theoretical structures. the denial of general ideas և metaphysical structures.
Researchers emphasize the duality of postmodernist art.
 On the one hand, it loses touch with modernist customs, and on the other hand, it raises sharp questions, demands no less sharp answers, because it touches on the darkest aspects of morality, which completely coincides with the real goals of art.
  It is also noteworthy that postmodernist art abandoned the idea of ​​creating an artistic system with clear rules.
 The only irreplaceable value is the free self-expression of the author, which is not limited by anything, which is based on the slogan "everything is possible".
  All other aesthetic values ​​are relative, conditional չեն not necessary to create a work of art.
 All this allows the postmodernist to include the versatility of life in his work, but at the same time leads to the absurdity, "art adapts to the author's creative imagination, blurring the boundaries between art and the other spheres of life."
  Postmodernism looks back on the ready-made past, striving to fill the gaps of its own content.
 In other words, the author of our days does not create, but privatizes, transforms, transfers the achievements of the past to a new field.
Postmodernist art is characterized by a paradoxical mix of styles.
 In this respect, we can say that there is a breath of surrealism, but if the latter retains their essence և all the features in the synthesis of a number of styles, then the new postmodernism is the new use of the old that is obsolete.
 Nadezhda Mankovskaya says. "If realism is truth about truth, surrealism is a delusion about truth, then postmodernism is the truth about delusion, and thus the end of artistic imagery."
 It is the end point, because, according to postmodernists, there is no other reality, an arbitrary text that gives an idea of ​​that reality, the change of which changes the idea of ​​reality as well.
  Postmodernists believe that the author opens before us not the world as it is, but its dark subconscious aspects, which are hidden in the secrets of the individual soul.
  That is, the goal is to reveal the inner world of the subject, not the meaning of its existence.
  The essence becomes the slogan "everything is doubtful".
 At the same time, it is impossible to deny that postmodernism is not at all the invention of art theorists or philosophers, but of our world whose reality has become postmodernism.
However, as mentioned above, the main target of postmodernism was modernist ideology, which was especially evident in the field of literature.
 Postmodernist literature, the existence of which is still questioned by some literary critics, began its triumph in the 1960s and 1970s thanks to philosophers and writers opposed to the basic principles of modern literature: Jean-François Lyotard, Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, and others.
 During those years a number of changes took place in art, the most obvious being the change of previously existing forms.
  1960s Authors such as Vladimir Nabokov, John Bart, Julio Cortasar, etc., presented a completely new approach in their works.
First of all, the combination of different genres was typical, the lack of a clear structure, irony or so-called pastiche, as well as intertextuality.
  The existence of such other features is also considered in the literary work outside of postmodernism.
  However, it should be noted that literary postmodernism, like postmodernism in general, is not fully defined, there is no clear opinion about the limits of their significance.
  Much attention is paid to the factor of chance, even the author's authority over the text is questioned.
  As a rule, postmodernism և generally creates postmodernist literature և presents to the reader a reality fragmented, modular, coded և implying several interpretations, or rather a fiction of reality, in which the only unit of time is the present moment.
Postmodernist culture, especially literature, is based on the following key factors: the idea of ​​the author's death, irony, parody, playfulness, chaos, fear of world destruction, real-imaginary inseparability, absurdity, spatial-temporality, etc.
 All of this is at the heart of literary phenomena such as the theater of the absurd, the bitcoin direction, and magical realism.
 For example, in magical realism, the real and the unreal, the real and the imaginary, the mysterious, which is one of the characteristic features of postmodernism, are organically combined.
 For example, bitcoin literature is characterized by absolute freedom of choice of creative thought, imagination, structural forms, which occupies a special place in postmodernist literature.
 From this point of view, it is not accidental that these literary phenomena are often classified as postmodernism, as their prominent representatives, namely, Samuel Beckett, Jorge Luis Borges, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Julio Cortasar, ստեղծագործ William Burroughs are considered to be the transition between modernism and postmodernism.
  He was close to James Joyce, he was very close to modernism, but it was his creations that contributed to the transition from modernism to postmodernism.
  Especially Beckett's late works stand out with their characters who do not understand each other, who remain in desperate situations, the best they can do is play.
 Based on all this, we can say that the characteristic features of postmodernism are: • irony, parody, playful nature, humor, • intertextuality, citation literature, • tendency to myths-tales, • temporal distortion, • pastiche as in-text elements, interweaving, • the idea of ​​the author's death, the reader is equal to the author, • the separation of reality, fiction, fantasy, the use of dreams.
However, postmodernism is not an organized movement in the literature with its leaders, so it is difficult to say whether it is over or whether it will end at all.
It is possible that it has already reached its peak in 1960-1970.
  Many theorists believe that postmodernism has exhausted itself, but despite the fact that the classic examples of postmodernism have already been created, the real phenomenon still exists.
  Trying to define postmodernism, it should be noted that it is a unique worldview, which became more widespread in the second half of the 20th century, but it has had principles at all times, they mainly arise in the period when there is a transition from old to new.
 In a broad sense, postmodernism is not new, but the end of the old.
It can not be considered as a complete system, as it always expresses the worldview of the present period, therefore it should not be associated with any exact period, features characteristic of postmodernism can be found long before its establishment.
  Umberto Eco writes: "Postmodernism is a clearly defined temporal phenomenon, but a state of mind, in that sense it is appropriate to say that each period has its own postmodernism."
Diana Mnatsakanyan THEORETICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS OF POSTMODERNISM Keywords: poststructuralism, chaos, deconstruction, denial of modernism, irony, game, absurdity, reality
