THE PROBLEM OF IDENTITY IN THE WORKS OF GERMAN TURKISH WRITERS IN 1990-2000 Around four million Turks live in Germany today.
 According to the German Federal Statistical Office, the average Turk has lived in Germany for 24 years.
This is a very serious time for the formation of identity.
  In other words, the young Turks have spent the whole stage of their social development in the German cultural field.
  Contrary to this fact, most Turks are not completely adapted to either the German or Turkish environment.
  Not belonging to any group leads to a constant search for one's own self.
For the last twenty years, the issues of identity change and preservation have occupied a central place in the works of Turkish writers living in Germany.
  In the search for identity, Turkish writers from time to time refer to the past, praise the Ottoman state, and raise pan-Turkic ideas. "My father is angry," says the hero of the young Turkish writer Kara Yade's best-selling novel "Salam Berlin". "Do not be fooled.
 It is impossible to colonize the Turks.
 To the Indian, to the African, yes.
 But never to the Turks.
 It's impossible.
 No one can rule and assimilate the Turks.
 Otherwise, one billion Chinese would have successfully assimilated one million Uyghur-Turks long ago.
 There is no such thing.
 There are still Turks in the north of China, they do not speak Chinese, but Turkish, just like me, just like you.
Do you understand? ”1.
 We see a similar tendency in the following lines with another famous German-Turkish woman writer Emine Sgi Ozdamar. "How good, how nice that the Bulgarians are no longer offended by the centuries-old Ottoman rule!
 Now the Bulgarians are in the EU, and the Turks are still asking at the entrance.
  It should be a small consolation for them.
  For the same reason, years ago I was happy for Greece, which joined the EU ”2.
Turkish writers obsessed with nationalist ideas have a desire to revolutionize German society.
  Writer Hatice Akyun ends her novel "A Look at the Future from the Past" this way. "Merven [the main heroine of the book," N. P.] let the difference between a piece of hand and a sausage grow without understanding.
 Merven will not wear a headscarf and will not have to guard.
  In the future, Santa Claus and St. Nicholas will start coming and going to our house for Easter.
  My daughter and I will sing a Turkish song or dance to Turkish music before opening the gift packages.
 Maybe one day, as our German friends ask, how we celebrate the New Year, we will ask them how they prepare for Sheker Bayram. ”
Ali, one of the heroes of Turkish writer Zafer ոջenojak's novel "Dangerous Friendship", says: "Sick.
  The Germans are sick.
  You live in one of the best countries ... you are one of the richest ... Where does that anxiety come from ... Take a good look at us because we are coming .... We are the new patriots of Germany ... We were born in a distant country in this country We have been working for 30 years ... Do not be afraid, we will not suffocate you, because we do not touch the forbidden meat ... We are the Germans of tomorrow ... You can learn the feeling of honor, shame and shame from us ”3.
Nationalism, however, does not always satisfy Turkish authors.
 Reaching the opposite extreme, a number of writers begin to completely refuse, furiously denying everything Turkish.
  For example, Ali Yildiz, the hero of Al-Tekina's story "Ali Stern", is trying to dissolve and join the German society at any cost.
 Renames, replacing the word Yildiz with the German equivalent of "stern" 1.
 He speaks exclusively German with familiar Turks.
  He agrees to be contemptuous of foreigners.
 As a result, he becomes culturally paralyzed among foreigners.
The identity crisis is becoming a unique challenge for some writers to completely abandon the topic of immigration.
 For example, the hero of Akif Pirincchi's detective novels becomes Francis the Cat 2, and Zehra Chirak states that he does not want to be locked in a Turkish box.
 Authors such as Ergin Ozgen, Dilek Zaptidjoglu, Selim Ozdogan, who have been published in recent years, hardly touch upon the migrant issue3.
  And some Turkish writers, trying to get rid of the constant struggle of Turkish-German values, seem to be deliberately expelling their heroes from Germany, forcing them to settle in a third country.
The issue of Turkish-German identity is interpreted differently in the works of famous writer Feridun Zaimoglu.
 Literary critic T. Chizman writes: "Feridun represents this mixed Turkish-German identity.
 Unlike some of his colleagues, he has no problem with being German in the first place.
 He calmly declares himself to be a non-Orthodox Muslim.
  He professes Islam with his unique way, he is not afraid to become a subject of discussion. "
  In each of his works, he presents a specific aspect of the identity issue, a way of overcoming and combining Turkish-German cultural contradictions.
  The protagonists of the book "Qanaq աքprak" are the Turks at the lowest level of the social ladder: thieves, pimps, male prostitutes, drug addicts, psychiatric patients, transsexuals, garbage collectors, a few unemployed, etc. 4, ie people whose voice is not traditionally heard in society .
  The book published on the basis of the interviews conducted with them, according to T. It is a real "ghetto conversation" of Chizmann, moreover, with a lot of original German hip-hop rhythms and folklore elements5.
 F. himself. Zaimoglu says. "It was the beginning story.
 I refer to the environment of my childhood… We were called Negroes of Germany.
 The Germans always treated this migration as a technical matter, they fell into a trap.
 A teacher once answered my sentence "I want to become an artist." "You soar in the air, become a human mechanic, that is enough for a Turk" 6.
In the correspondence novel "Liebesmale, Scharlachrot" F. Zaimoglu shows the problems of the Turks who are already at both ends of the social sphere.
  One of his heroes is a member of the Hakan gangster gang, a typical Kanaker, and Serdar is a character assimilated to German culture and lifestyle as much as possible.
  In contrast to the two heroes, F. Zaimoglu points to the duality of Turkish youth in Germany.
  At the same time, despite the differences, their strong friendship, however, is a unique symbol of Turkish unity. In the face of German resistance, they are always ready to act united.
 Showing two extremes, F. Zaimoglu does not give an obvious preference to anyone.
 He wants to show that there is no one-size-fits-all solution to the problem, not just the group approach.
 The heroes call themselves Anatolians, Germany - Almanya, as if maintaining ties with the homeland, opposing the inevitability of assimilation, showing that the role of Turks in German culture in history is undeniable.
 The author tries to show that these people have a unique intercultural identity, which is higher than both Turkish and German stereotypes.
 In the context of the story of a German artist living in Germany in the novel "German Madness", F. Zaimoglu presents German culture as far from perfect, but the Germans try to impose it on all minorities.
 Criticizing German culture as a foreign immigrant was a real challenge.
  Especially that F. sciences and education, № 3, 2009, p. 126-127, http.
//www.science-education.ru/download/2009/03/2009_03_099.pdf.2 Ekiz T., European Turkish literature and representation.
 Emine Sevgi Ozdamar, Journal of Arts and Science, Çankaya ,niversitesi, № 7, 2007, ss.Dergisi, № 12, 2010, ss. 329-349, http.
//hutad.hacettepe.edu.tr/index.php/hutad/article/viewFile/121/87.4 Adelson L., The Turkish Turn in Contemporary German Literature.
  Toward a New Critical Grammar of Migration, Palgrave Macmillan, 5 Ibid., P. 97.
Zaimoglu presents his opinion without asking or discussing it as absolute truth.
  Applying elements of expressionism և naturalism, he creates such images and descriptions, grotesque episodes that the reader is amazed.
 According to the famous literary critic L. A. In this way, Zaimoglu paves the way for new realism for Andersen.
  By showing that both the marginalized and the people living at the highest level of society are guided by the same instincts and desires, show the same thoughts and beliefs, the author tries to prove that a person is a person regardless of social status, education, nationality.
 In the book "German Madness" F. Zaimoglu emphasizes that sexual desires and pleasures shape behavior for members of all societies and social strata.
 F. Zaimoglu rejects many traditional approaches to German-Turkish literature.
  He opposes the notion of intercultural society.
 F. Zaimoglu thinks that the exaggeration of all these problems is aimed at diverting attention from real problems, social and political injustices.
Turkish writers also try to criticize Western values.
 In a series of theatrical monologues "Virgins" co-published by German writer Feridun Zaimolu and German writer Gunter Schenkel, which have gained serious recognition in recent years, Muslim women say that the headscarf becomes an obstacle for young people.
 In this work F. Zaimoglu tries to show that Muslims are not far from the pleasures of life, and Western societies have more complexes.
Thus, from the mid-1990s to the present day, the issue of identity has played a key role in the works of German Turkish writers in various expressions.
  In their search for their own "self", they sometimes deny Turkishness, sometimes find themselves in the clutches of nationalism, sometimes try to refuse to discuss this topic at all.
Naira Poghosyan THE PROBLEM OF IDENTITY IN THE WORKS OF GERMAN TURKISH WRITERS 1990-2000. Keywords: Turkish community in Germany, Turkish literature, identity issue, cultural crisis, guest workers.
