COOPERATION INTRODUCTION PROSPECTS IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA At present the Republic of Armenia is in the stage of judicial reforms.
  The criminal justice sector has not been spared from innovations and changes.
  An active process of extrajudicial reforms is underway in Armenia.
 The draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) was developed, which, containing a number of fundamental changes and innovations, is aimed at significantly improving the criminal procedure system and ensuring the effective administration of justice.
 The draft envisages, among other innovations, a certain version of the judicial system through the introduction of special proceedings.
 As special proceedings, the draft envisages proceedings on private charges, conciliation proceedings, pre-trial cooperation agreement (cooperation proceedings).
There are many contradictory positions in the legal literature on the effectiveness of these institutions.
Some advocates of the differentiation of the trial horse have strongly criticized the idea of ​​simplifying the trial horse, considering it vulnerable in terms of revealing the truth, ensuring a full, objective, comprehensive investigation, and protecting the rights of trial participants.
 According to the latter, the differentiation of the judicial horse should be aimed at complicating it, providing additional guarantees in cases of crimes of a separate category.
  Others, on the other hand, see the simplification of litigation in theoretical approaches as an objectively mature issue due to the requirements of practice1.
1 See Ghukasyan H., Melkonyan D., The Differentiated Trial և Its Peculiarities, "State և Law", № 1, 2007, p. 33.
There is also no common approach in the legal literature on the concept of "litigation".
  Some theorists equate the differentiation of litigation with the simplification of legal proceedings2.
 Another group of theorists considers the differentiation as the existence of separate, different proceedings in criminal proceedings3.
 Without prejudice to the differences and disagreements between theorists over differentiated cases, we believe that a differentiated egg exists when in the criminal proceedings system, based on certain criteria, differentiated cases are distinguished based on general procedural principles and the protection of the rights of the participants.
 In line with the requirements of the time, the approach that presupposes the existence of a differentiated trial egg, together with a common trial egg, is in line with the requirements of the time.
  Their close connection is expressed in the fact that on the one hand it does not only exclude a common form of trial, but in some cases even presupposes a certain difference.
  On the other hand, the differentiation of the judicial horse does not undermine its unity.
 This is primarily due to the fact that: • the differentiated procedure of criminal cases does not differ significantly from the general procedure, but has certain features, • the unified procedure of criminal proceedings refers to the investigation of all crimes, while the differentiated one applies to separate categories of crimes; The primary nature of the procedural horse և the primary significance of the criminal proceedings, the underlying principles and the guarantees for the protection of the rights of the participants in the proceedings4.
The elaboration of simplified procedures for the examination of a separate category of cases is a conceptual problem, the solution of which must be 2 See Strogovich M.
3 See Tsikimovich Ts. K., Additional and special productions in the lead process Russia, Tomsk, 1994.
4 See Ghukasyan H., Melkonyan D., The Differentiated Trial և Its Peculiarities, "State և Law", № 1, 2007, p. 34.
Ensure justified saving of human resources, resources և time.
 The legislative regulation of the institutions establishing a differentiated procedure for criminal investigation inevitably follows from the current trends in the development of criminal proceedings, but their effective implementation requires a high degree of elaboration of relevant criminal procedure norms.
Given the fact that there are similarities between conciliation and cooperation proceedings, the question arises as to the need to differentiate between them.
 Article 454 of the draft states the grounds for applying cooperation proceedings. It is noted that co-operation proceedings can be initiated only by the accused in the case of submitting a written motion to conclude a pre-trial co-operation agreement addressed to the prosecutor supervising the legality of the investigation, and the motion must be signed by the defendant's lawyer.
 Article 447 sets out the grounds for the application of conciliation proceedings, according to which the court conducts an investigation under the conciliation procedure for petty and medium-gravity crimes based on the motion initiated by the accused, and Article 448 states that the court upholds the conciliation motion.
  It follows from the above that in the cooperation proceedings the mediation is addressed to the prosecutor, and in the conciliation proceedings to the court.
 There is also a difference in the procedural stages of the application of these two proceedings.
  In particular, if a motion for co-operation can be filed from the moment the criminal prosecution is brought against the defendant until the announcement of the end of the investigation, then the conciliation procedure is applied by submitting a motion to the judge during the preliminary hearing, as opposed to a co-motion addressed to the supervising prosecutor.
 The consequences of applying these proceedings to the accused in terms of punishment are different.
 The draft states that as a result of the agreement, no punishment may be imposed that exceeds half of the maximum punishment for the given crime (Article 452), and in the case of cooperation, a milder punishment is imposed than provided by law, or the imposed punishment is not applied conditionally (Article 463).
 In conclusion, we can say that if the purpose of the co-operation proceedings is to obtain information about the crime from the accused, then the conciliation proceedings are based on the defendant's admission of guilt.
We consider it necessary to pay special attention to the judicial institute called "cooperation proceedings".
  It should be noted that the concept of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code at least referred to the cooperation proceedings.
  The concept was merely limited to the idea of ​​introducing the institution of instituting a judicial act in a special manner related to the pre-trial agreement on cooperation with the accused in the interest of justice5.
 Cooperation proceedings, despite the peculiarities of its legal regulation and application in different countries, have been established as a flexible means of combating organized crime.
 A number of theorists in the legal literature point to its focus on combating manslaughter, banditry, corruption, and drug trafficking.
  The essence of co-operation proceedings is that if the prosecutor supervising the co-operation of a person accused of supporting a minor or medium-gravity crime, such as a serious or particularly serious crime, approves a co-operation agreement between the prosecutor and the defendant, which mentions co-operation and co-operation. as a result, the favorable consequences for the accused.
  It can be said that the preliminary investigation of the cooperation proceedings has no peculiarities in terms of litigation.
 The proceedings against the accused who entered into a cooperation agreement during the preliminary investigation shall be terminated, as the prosecutor has the right to suspend the criminal prosecution against the accused.
 Through the mediation of the supervising prosecutor, a special procedure of judicial examination may be applied to the accused, within the framework of which the nature of cooperation, the circumstances related to the fulfillment of the obligations assumed by the accused, are studied.
 As a result of the application of a special procedure to the accused 5 See "Concept of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code", Yerevan, 2011.
6 See Smirnov A. В., Обыя порядок принятия судебного развеяя за заключении досудебСанкт-Петербург.
a milder punishment than the one prescribed by law is imposed, or the imposed punishment is not applied conditionally.
The agreement on cooperation with the accused is now widespread in a number of foreign countries.
  A co-operation agreement or proceeding called a "justice deal" was applicable in medieval English law.
  However, it was a reprehensible act because the person was testifying against his relatives.
 It was known at that time as the "review of the sinner's case."
 Thus, the offender could have escaped the death penalty if he had provided information to the authorities about the crimes committed by other persons.
 However, with this revelation, this institution soon ceased to exist.
A legal institution called the Justice Deal became widespread in the United States, where it was called the plea bargaining.
 About 90% of convictions are made in the United States through a plea deal.
  In case of admission of guilt, the prosecutor removes some of the crimes to be charged or reclassifies the most severely punished crime as more lenient.
  The transaction significantly reduces the length of the case. It is carried out in two stages, if the accused has pleaded guilty, then the indictment is presented, դատ a verdict is made.
  At the heart of the Anglo-American system of law enforcement is the approach that criminal proceedings are a dispute over the fact that a person has committed a crime, in which one of the parties (the accused) pleads guilty, and that such a dispute is meaningless in itself7.
 The transaction can be offered by either party, which is later approved by the court through a public hearing.
 The transaction allows the parties to refrain from trial, as the admission of guilt presupposes a special form of trial.
 The transaction satisfies the interests of all the participants, even the victim, who, although not participating in the transaction, receives compensation for the damage caused to him.
This institution, typical of the Anglo-American legal system, became applicable over time by continental legal systems.
 The institute of the transaction also found its special place in the RF Criminal Procedure Code, according to which, for cooperation up to 7 See Ghukasyan H., Melkonyan D., ibid., P. 34.
A court agreement is a transaction between defense and prosecution parties, where those parties agree on the terms of liability of the suspect or accused, based on the actions taken following the initiation of a criminal case or indictment8.
Let's move from the analysis of international experience to the issues of regulation of domestic legislation.
  The draft clearly defines the purpose of the cooperation proceedings, that is, the detection of serious, especially serious crimes, ensuring the inevitability of the responsibility of those who committed them.
 Cooperation proceedings may be initiated not only in the case of a minor or medium-gravity crime, but also in the case of a petition for cooperation by a person accused of aiding a serious or particularly serious crime.
  A motion for co-operation must relate to an offense against that person under investigation in the same or another proceeding (Article 454).
  Therefore, all the cases when the person wants to reach a cooperation agreement by assisting in the detection of a crime that is not related to his / her accusation are excluded from the cooperation proceedings.
  For example, when a person who is a member of an organized criminal group is arrested for a non-serious crime that is not related to the activities of the organization, the law enforcement agencies, knowing that the person is a member of the organization, will not be able to apply for co-operation. the crime related to the accusation.
  Taking into account the fact that one of the main goals of the cooperation proceedings is the fight against organized crime, we believe that such a restriction is not justified, there is a need to amend the draft, to expand the scope of cooperation, to enable the parties to conclude an agreement in the above situations.
Referring to the scope of application of the cooperation proceedings, we think that it is necessary to extend it to the convicts as well.
 In this regard, it will be necessary to expand the scope of grounds for review of judicial acts by virtue of new circumstances.
8 See Code of Procedural Code of the Russian Federation from 18.12.2001 N 174-FZ (order 31.12.2017), p. 5, p. 61.
In particular, as a basis for reviewing previously rendered judgments (ie, final judicial acts on punishment), it is necessary to provide for the fact that information revealing a serious or particularly serious crime or the testimony of a person guilty of committing it.
 The goal is for the person who has committed the most dangerous crime not to rest after the person who is able to expose himself or reveal the crime he has committed has already been convicted.
 We believe that the convicts, who have not used the opportunity of cooperation before, can make their right a reality through mediation.
  According to the penitentiary legislation, convicts have the right to apply for violations of their rights, freedoms, complaints, both in person and through a mediated form, court, prosecutor's office, ombudsman, state and local government bodies, public associations, public associations, parties. The media, as well as international human rights and freedoms organizations or organizations.
 Taking into account the rights of convicts defined by the above-mentioned provision, we can confidently state that by establishing relevant legal norms, cooperation with convicts will be ensured.
 We think that the mediation can be handed over to the prosecutor in the same way, but in this case through the penitentiary administration.
 For example, members of organized groups who are at large, continue their chain of crimes, endangering society, can easily be neutralized in this way, thus it will be possible to achieve the goals of co-operation proceedings, which are defined by law.
According to the draft, the motion for cooperation is addressed to the supervising prosecutor and is signed by the accused and his lawyer.
 The motion for cooperation may be filed from the moment of initiating criminal prosecution against the accused until the announcement of the end of the preliminary investigation.
 The co-operation petition shall specify the nature of the defendant's co-operation, as well as the actions that the defendant is required to take to assist in identifying the crime or ensuring the inevitability of the perpetrator.
  The mediation of cooperation is handed over to the supervising prosecutor by the guilty party or his / her lawyer through the investigator.
 If the accused does not have a lawyer at the time of submitting the motion, the investigator shall take measures to ensure the participation of the lawyer in the proceedings; the accused shall have the opportunity to discuss the motion with the lawyer.
  Within three days after receiving the motion signed by the accused և defense counsel, the investigator shall submit it to the supervising prosecutor, attaching his / her written opinion on its satisfaction or rejection.
 In contrast to a number of foreign countries, particularly the RF Criminal Procedure Code, where the investigator may either refer the motion to the prosecutor or refuse to co-operate (Article 317.1 (3) of the RF Code of Criminal Procedure), the draft does not give the investigator any authority other than the opportunity to express an opinion.
 Co-operation mediation ընթացքում Within three days after receiving the investigator's opinion on this, the supervising prosecutor makes a decision on approving or rejecting the co-operation mediation.
  If the mediation of the cooperation is satisfied, the supervising prosecutor draws up a cooperation agreement with the participation of the investigator, the accused and his / her lawyer.
  By the way, the investigator, although participating in the signing of the cooperation agreement, unlike other subjects, does not sign it.
  Here we consider it necessary to refer to the fact that the Draft does not set a clear deadline for drawing up a cooperation agreement by the prosecutor after satisfying the motion of the accused և defense counsel.
 It is true that in any case the prosecutor is constrained by the terms of the preliminary investigation, but we think that it is necessary to set a specific deadline in order to ensure clarity, we suggest a one-week period for the prosecutor to draw up a cooperation agreement.
In general, we can state that despite the shortcomings, the cooperation proceedings can have serious prospects for development in the criminal proceedings of the Republic of Armenia.
 It is also necessary to take into account the fact that this institution is established to ensure the effective fight against organized crime, and the study of international experience has shown that there are no more effective structures to protect the society and the state from such crimes.
Ruzanna Khudaverdyan PROSPECTS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF COOPERATION PROCEDURE IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: cooperation proceedings, conciliation proceedings, deal with justice, plea deal, prosecutor, defendant.
