LINGUISTIC FEATURES OF ARMENIAN FACEBOOK COMMENTS Being the most popular of social networks, "Facebook" provides the widest opportunities for communication.
  It is a connection not only with close people, which the network promises on its home page, but also communicates at various levels: interpersonal, intergroup, public (interstate, interstate), intercultural.
With this work we aim to draw attention to public commentaries in Armenian, examining their linguistic side.
  The language of our research (353 copies) was taken from the pages of two electronic newspapers, Blognews.am և Tert.am, by the principle of random separation.
  These are the comments of visitors to the Facebook post accompanying the public news, which sometimes have more readers than the article being commented on.
 This can be evidenced by the assessments given to the comments or second-rate comments, which sometimes turn into heated debates.
 This says that despite the many linguistic sins, Facebook comments are a reflection of any language, including the modern state of Armenian, its written episodes, and therefore have the right to become the subject of linguistic research.
  We think that such studies can serve to solve such problems.1. drawing public attention to linguistic errors, to form a negative attitude towards illiterate publications; 2. to identify the characteristic features of everyday-spoken language, 3. to outline the tendencies of language development և the reasons for mistakes, 4. to develop ways to raise the level of linguistic culture.
The experience of examining non-exemplary linguistics has set precedents in general linguistics, the most famous of which is the work "Grammar of Errors" by Henry Frey, a representative of the Geneva Linguistic School.
  Based on the language of the writings of French soldiers during the First World War, H. For the first time in linguistics, Frey examined verbal errors by attributing them to the functions of language, seeing in them the tendencies of language development (in his case, French).
 Our examination, however, is mostly of a negative nature, as the problem of the writing system is added to the errors specific to the spoken language in the chosen linguistic material, which completely distorts the general picture of the language, basically identifying the so-called "linguistic features" with the concept of "linguistic sins".
 Highlighting the negative aspects of the examined linguistic material, we will try, nevertheless, to outline the linguistic features typical of this style of Armenian publications.
We analyzed the selected language material according to phonetic, lexical, lexical, syntactic, punctuation, emotional-expressive-textual features.
  Let's refer to them below, according to the relevant subheadings.
I - Phonological features.
  From the features of this level we have noticed the following.1. The writing system is mostly foreign (79.6% - Latin letters, 17.5% - Armenian letters, 1.4% - Russian letters).
 Letter matching is done more often by transliteration than by transliteration (see Table 1 for Latin letters).
Table 1 abgdeze (83%), y (10%), e (6%), voicemail [vo], vo (100%), [o], o (100%). - in the last name, having a passport basis.
 Sometimes there are examples in which the letter of the alphabet used less (or inconvenient) is filled in or replaced with the equivalent of another alphabet.1 The comments we researched are taken from Blognews.am և Tert.am 2014. From the March 15-31 publications.
2. Spelling mistakes abound և refer to all rules (vowels, consonants, consonants, uppercase letters, together-separate-hyphenation), but the main tendency associated with this type of text is attachment. Narek Ayvazyan Nothing more absurd is possible He did not listen, in any case Nikol Pashinyan does not force him to close the small newspapers he has, he does not demolish a closed market of historical and cultural value to build a supermarket և after the New Year and does not sell spoiled goods to the people Arevik Mkrtchyan)))))))) spasenk apreli 22 in .....
) (Tert.am) It is interesting that in contrast to the widespread tendency of attachment, sometimes there are illogical և wrong combinations ստեղs. It should be noted here that sentences rarely start with a capital letter.
3. There are a lot of mistakes.
4. The law of economy deals with both spelling and transliteration manifestations, giving interesting examples of non-literary or extraordinary phonetics: Susanna Davtyan shat lav cen (= voice: FA) uni u lav erqa (Blognews.am) Aren Babayan .. ..100 000 dram ashtavardz (= salary: FA) stacoxnela (attachment of 3 components: FA) businessman (Blognews.am) Susik Husikyan hrush (= Hranush: FA) qez vonc bacatrenq .... (Tert.am) II - Vocabulary features .
 The vocabulary of Facebook Armenian-language comments is a reflection of the everyday-conversational vocabulary.
 The use of high-class professional words in it, as expected, is rare.
 If we try to arrange the most frequent observed word layers with decreasing indexes, we will have such a picture.1. everyday-colloquial words, 2. Foreign languages:
3. vulgarities և curses (eg djoxqi servaca et anasuny, akanj4. Dialect words խոս words (eg esiii, eti, ute, xi, etanq, tpenq, why, us ...), 5. (eg, vice versa, bantaja-tumbanaxarn ...).
Examining the mentioned word layers, we noticed that foreign languages ​​are used instead of linguistic innovations; 2) in some cases, the next one of the users included in the chain comments, showing the advantages of his linguistic knowledge, replaces the foreign language with a literary equivalent. Particular deficiencies of the lexical level were also observed, such as the confusion of pronouns փոխարին the replacement of the article with the letter o. Vardan Vardanyan .... which have their own energy system .... (Tert.am) III - Psychological features.
 Explanations of a grammatical nature, expressing all the shortcomings of everyday-spoken language, often supplement this series with new types of errors.
 Features at this level are recorded only by defects.
  The picture of frequent errors with decreasing indicators is as follows.1. eloquence, moreover, in the form of an appendix (see the examples in the spelling section), 2. Applications of colloquial pronouns (eg, ed, es, en, tenc, tents, etenc, enenc ...), 3. Misuse of pronouns (eg qo mot, qo nmaneri, iranq, ira, iranic, ira ...), 4. Wrong choices of verb bases or verbs (eg, there is no flight, tenum enq, asecin, чтохен, vaxum em, they said, tenan, chen kara kofei het kanfet uten, կարամ ասեմ ...), 5. Negative change of the negative forms of the compound subjunctive "I am" (eg ete djvar chi, but did not work better?), 6. non-literary or erroneous plural forms (eg children ...), 7. Absence of a joint, for example, It's a pity,
 Thus, in the case of Lilit Avetikyan "Grand Candy", the remark was correct, while in the case of, to be honest, the author definitely wrote correctly.
  He said - to say the third person of the verb, it is a unique number և the word is not used in that sense in the article, and to say - to say it is the adjunct verb of the verb - has become a verb and is used appropriately.
 Thank you (Blognews.am) IV - From the syntactic-textual peculiarities we have recorded the following.1. The examined texts, in their verbal role, are mainly of a perlocutive nature, that is, they are persuasive, aiming to have a certain influence on the audience's behavior, for example: 2. In terms of volume, they stand out with their compression.
3. Of the tonal types of sentences, the narrative is inferior to the exclamatory, the imperative և the question mark.
4. The manifestations of discount, short-sightedness, erroneous syntax are frequent.
5. Unstable punctuation leaves the question of structural types of sentences suspended.
V- Punctuation features.
  We have registered such shortcomings in the punctuation of the examined texts.1. Use of multipoints (in the non-term sense of the word) for any type of pause, 2. Rare use of endings, 3. foreign punctuation, 4. Lack of punctuation, 5. Accidental or non-accidental punctuation, 6. In Armenian letters, bypassing the basic rules, 7. Common use of punctuation marks (eg!?!??) as a sign of mixed emotions.
It is noteworthy that if exemplary interpretations could be found from the orthographic point of view, then from the point of view of punctuation the picture is extreme. We have not found at least one comment in the whole language that was free of punctuation errors.
Trying to notice any general system of random punctuation in the comments, we have summarized the observed signs in Table 2.
As for the use of the letters ch or j instead of parentheses, we see the origin of the appendages in the fact that the keys of the brackets are identical with the keys of the corresponding letters of the Armenian alphabet keyboard.
1 See "Linguistic Encyclopedic Dictionary", Moscow, 1990, p. 412.
A different number of points were recorded as the most frequent sign, replaced by any type of pause.
 Hanging points և Multipoint points are not differentiated.
Table 2 a) Frequently used instead of? B) Rarely in exclamatory sentences with? 37 times (often multiple) instead of quotation marks, frequently used 17 times (end), c) Intermediate) b) Multiple-use, multi-point value, 9-point value, 5-time. The dashes of the նջ disconnection union are indistinguishable, and there is no sub-use, that is, line break.
in the original meaning - 5 times. It is used instead of brackets և quotation marks.
in order to separate the direct word from the author 's word, but incorrectly used with the meaning of 1 ounce instead of 2 times () as a grammatical error or alternative means.
ճճ VI - Emotional-expressive features.
  If one can see peculiarities in the Armenian-language comments on Facebook in the non-negative sense of the word, then it is only connected with the emotional expression system.
 The following tricks serve the mentioned role.1. repetition, moreover, in the form of vowels, in the form of consonants, for example: 2. Use of capital letters, often in repetition.3. The use of a symbol called "smiley" in colloquial means, often replaced by corresponding dots, parentheses, and letters (D,).
D, ճ), 4. with multiple uses!,?, /,.
 signs, which sometimes give the punctuation mark a very arbitrary nature (see the last example of this point). Karine Vanyan.
/////////////////////////////////// ......... ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, He was waiting to condole with this.
 (Tert.am) 5. pictorial expressions, often with direct or variable passages from well-known authorial or folklore sayings: Suren Petrosyan That is why the bottom of this people does not become a washing machine.
As for the repetition, the linguistic material we have studied gives grounds to believe that the positive emotions are expressed by the repetition of vowels, and the negative ones by the consonants.
Summing up, we come to the following conclusions: 1. The current level of Facebook comments in Armenian is a serious threat to the level of literacy.
2. Linguistic features are manifested in them mainly through mistakes.
3. In addition to the low level of literacy, the main reasons for the shortcomings are the speed of speech օրենք the law of saving the language.
4. Studying such texts can help to identify and correct the shortcomings of spoken language.
5. The number one shortcoming of Armenian commentaries is the spelling, which distorts the Armenian word, causes inconvenience to comprehension, so we think that such public publications should be presented exclusively using the rules of Mesropatar։.
Literature 1. Abrahamyan S., Armenian punctuation, Yerevan, 1999, 64 pages.
2. Asatryan M., Modern Armenian language. Psychology, Yerevan, 2004, 432 pages.
3. Santoyan A., The punctuation system of modern Armenian, Yerevan, 2004, 104 pages.
4. Sukiasyan A. Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2004, 352 pages.
Flora AmirkhanyanFACEBOOK LANGUAGE FEATURES OF ARMENIAN COMMENTS Keywords: Facebook, Armenian-language comments, linguistic features, mesropatar comments, Latin letters in Armenian
.
