ARMENIANS IN ANCIENT RUSSIA The Armenian people have come a long and difficult way during the millennia of their existence.
 Even in the era of slavery, feudalism, Armenia became a arena of world powers, a arena of destructive clashes, continuous raids, where large masses of the population were subjected to physical destruction and deportation, cities and villages were burned and destroyed, cultural monuments and cultural monuments were destroyed.
  After all this, the only thing left for the Armenian people was to emigrate.
 The Armenian masses who took refuge in other continents found themselves in different situations, crossed different paths due to the opportunities provided by the country and the historical period.
  The Armenian masses in the colonies communicated, interacted with the host peoples, and bore their influence.
  Interactions of customs, behaviors and cultures և mutual enrichment took place.
 Therefore, the existence of colonies is not just the history of separate Armenian masses.
 It is at the same time a story of the Armenian people, contacts with foreign peoples, historical ties.
  Many questions concerning the conditions of Armenian emigration, the origin, formation and survival of the Armenian diaspora, as well as their internal life, concerned the Armenian historians of the Middle Ages, such as Jond, Sebeos, Asoghik, Aristakes Lastivertsi, Matteos Urhayetsi, Arvakz, Samroel, Samovel Grigor Daranaghtsi, Simeon Lehatsi և other authors 1.
From the point of view of the rich factual material, the Armenian manuscript monuments and especially their memoirs are incomparably more important.
 The information of the manuscripts and their memoirs that were created in the world of migration itself is especially invaluable for the coverage of the Armenian history of the colony2.
The Armenians had information about the peoples of the north since ancient times, when the ancestral tribes of the Russians, the Slavs, and then the "Old Russian state" were formed.
The ties of the Armenians with Ancient Russia կապ The ties of Old Russia with the Armenians are confirmed by documents, starting from the written sources of the 10th century.
  However, in fact, they started much earlier, in ancient times, they are reflected in archeological and folklore materials, architectural monuments, chronicles, stories, myths.
 There are grounds to talk about the ancient ties of the Armenians with the Eastern Slavs, Kian Russia, during the period of its formation and development.
 These connections are observed from the so-called Scythian-Sarmatian period in the history of Russia, which coincides with the history of the Urartian period of Armenia, up to the ministerial period.
  The oldest surviving story from the so-called Scythian-Sarmatian era of ancient Russia is the myth of the founding of the town of Kuarak by three brothers, Kuar, Melte and Khorian, mentioned by the Armenian historian Zenob Glak (7th Century John, History, St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, 1987 History, Yerevan, 1979, Asoghik, History of space, St. Petersburg, 1885, Lastivertsi A., History of Yerevan, 1963, Urhayetsi M., chronology, Vagharshapat, 1989, Anetsi S., Collection of historians, Vaghpat, 1893, Artsruni T., History of the House of Artsrunians, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1917, Gandzaketsi K., Armenian History, Yerevan, 1961, Davrizheci A., History, Vaghpat, 1896, Daranaghtsi G., Chronology, Jerusalem, 1915, Polish S., Travelogue Memoirs, Vienna, 1936.
2 Khachikyan L., Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts of the 14th Century, Yerevan, 1950.
 Memoirs of the same, Armenian manuscripts of the 17th century, part A և B, Yerevan 1955.
 Hovhannisyan A., Memoirs of the 17th century of Armenian manuscripts (1601-1620) AD, Yerevan, 1974 և h. B. (1621-1640) Yerevan, 1981, Hakobyan V., Minor Chronicles, 13-18th centuries, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1951, vol. 2, Yerevan, 1956.
 Matthosyan A., Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts, 13th Century, Yerevan, 1984.
end - beginning of the 8th century).
  This myth is similar to the myth in Russia about the founding of the city of Ki by three brothers, Ki, Shchek "Khoriv".
 Academician N. Marn paid attention to the content of those myths, the similarity of the heroes, the brothers, the historical situation and other circumstances.
 The story about the construction of the city of Ki in the Russian chronicle finds its parallel in "Armenia in the stories of the 4th-5th centuries on the shores of Lake Van" 1.
  He also referred in detail to those parallels of Armenian-Russian myths. Rybakov.
 Academician Rybakov considers the most probable time to live in Kiev to be the time of the Byzantine emperor Justinian I և his descendants, as it was then that the Slavs first came into contact with the empire.
  According to Rybakov, the Armenian record allows us to trace the date of Ki's founding to the pre-7-8th century.
 The existence of parallels between the ancient Russian myth and the "Armenian source" is the earliest evidence of the existence of Armenian-Slavonic ties before the formation of Kian Russia.
Armenian historical sources have preserved remarkable information not only about the Russians, but also about the Slavs and their predecessors.
  Historian Movses Khorenatsi in his book "Armenian History" talks about the contacts of the inhabitants of the northern countries and the Armenians with them.
 7th century Armenian scholar Anania Shirakatsi left valuable evidence about the Slavic tribes living in the Don River region2.
At the initial stage, the Armenian-Slavic relations were incidental.
  The distance of Armenia from the countries of the Slavic tribes of Old Russia, the lack of direct ties, was the reason for the fact that the initial contacts between the Armenians and the Slavs took place in the territory of the neighboring states.
 One such state is Byzantium, whose Slavic colonization was not limited to the Balkans.
  The settlers penetrated to the south of the Balkan Peninsula, then to Asia Minor, even to Syria.
 The Slavs settled in Asia Minor and other regions of Byzantium had the most direct contacts with the Armenians.
  So, the beginning of the Armenian-Slavic relations should be considered not much the period of Kian Russia, but much earlier.
Armenians, like the other peoples of the Caucasus, established relations with the Slavs over the Volga, the Caspian, the Mediterranean, the Black Sea, the Don, and the Crimea.
  Around the middle of the 8th century, the Khazars, the Volga Bulgarians and other peoples took an active role as mediators in the active trade exchange between the Baltic East and the East.
Information about their relations with the Russians, Byzantines, Bulgarians and Armenians living in the Balkan Peninsula was reflected in the work "Space History" by the Armenian historian Stepanos Taronetsi from the 10th century to the beginning of the 11th century.
He also writes about important events such as the "Baptism of Russia" և The marriage of Prince Vladimir Svyatoslavich of Ki to the Armenian sister of Princess Vasil II, Princess Anna.
The conversion of Christianity in Russia, the rapprochement of Kian Russia with the establishment of dynastic ties with the Byzantines, the Balkan Peninsula, Europe, the Caucasus, and Armenians and Georgians contributed to the economic, political, and cultural development of those countries, as well as the joint struggle against Arab domination.
  Byzantine interests demanded closer relations with both Russia and the Caucasus.
The excavations carried out by Russian scientists revealed the ancient and significant Armenian colony 90 km away from Kazan, in the city of Greater Bulgaria.
 Bolgar was a large center known for its advanced crafts and trade, of which the Armenian colony is of great interest3.
  It is worth mentioning the fact that Peter the Great was the first to be interested in the ruins of Greater Bulgaria.
 He died in 1712. From Moscow to Kazan he sent Ivan Vasil, an Armenian, to decipher the inscriptions on the tombstones.
 Armenian tombs and tombstones were found here: Armenian statue 2 Barkhudaryan V., Voskanyan K., Armenian-Russian historical ties և Arjelyan Armenia's accession to Russia, Yerevan, 1978, p. 10.
ruths.
  It turned out that there was an Armenian settlement outside the city walls.
  The oldest of the Armenian tombstones (1121) was found near the "Greek Palace".
  Excavations of tombs, studies of inscriptions, the so-called "Greek Palace" prof. Smirnov was brought to the conclusion that there was an Armenian colony in Greater Bulgaria, he named his church, that the "Greek Palace" was an Armenian sanctuary1.
The 11th century Armenian historian Aristakes Lastivertsi testifies that in 1054, when the Seljuk Turks invaded Armenia, a regiment of Varangians (that is, savages, not Franks) came out against them.
 K. Yuzbashyan proved that "varang" was synonymous with the word "Russian", that in Greek-Armenian sources of that time they were used as equivalent terms.
Many Armenians settled in Russia in the second half of the 11th century.
 1062 The Prince of Galicia Fyodor Dmitric sent an invitation to the Armenians of Kosokh to fight together.
 The prince promised them many privileges, 3 years of tax exemption from food, after which they could stay or leave.
 That proclamation or patent was temporarily translated from Russian into Armenian, and in 1641. It was approved by King Vladislav IV of Poland.
  The proclamation mentions that the Armenians settled in Ki at that time.
10-11th centuries in Armenia A political-economic situation was created, which caused a mass emigration of the population from the homeland, resettlement in other countries.
The emigration of Armenians is connected with the anti-Armenian policy pursued by Byzantium in the East, as well as with the invasions of the Seljuk Turks.
 The desolation of Armenia անկ the decline of the Armenian statehood in the second half of the 11th century with the Seljuk invasions forced the population to emigrate from their native lands.
  Thus, emigration was a logical continuation of the economic downturn that reached its peak after the loss of independence.
In Galicia, in order to find out the time of the arrival of Armenians in the south of Russia in general, the monument of the old Russian school, which is known as "The Behavior of Our Holy Father Agapit, an unpaid doctor, who treated the weak with prayer and gave them medicine from his food. he saved. "
"Behavior" is included in the so-called "Behavior of Saints of Kio-Pechoryan Monastery" collection, which is based on stories about the 11th-12th centuries, which was created and made from ready-made materials in the 12th century.
  And the data of the "Behavior" are connected with the period of the rule of Vsevolod Yaroslavich (1077-1078-1093) and especially Vladimir Vsevolodovich Monomakh (1113-1125).
"Varkum" tells that Ki lived in Ki "a highly skilled physician in" treatment "from Armenia, who was very experienced in medicine, which had never happened before.
The Armenian doctor diagnosed and predicted this or that outcome of the disease.
  It is very possible that this doctor was not alone in Ki, some of his compatriots were grouped around him, who are referred to in "Vark" as "believers" or simply "their own".
 His fame was so great that the Armenian doctor was invited to Chernigov, to Prince Vladimir Monomakh, who was seriously ill.
 On the basis of that "Behavior" more or less is determined the 11th century. The year of the formation of the Armenian colony in Ki from the second half of the 19th century.
President of the Church in 1037 The large marble sarcophagus of the tomb of Yaroslav the Wise (1019-1054), built in the 11th-12th centuries, is still preserved in the famous Church of St. Sophia.
  There are inscriptions, including in Armenian, on the north side of the cover covered with the ornaments of Karadagagh.
  Poor preservation of the inscriptions does not allow reading its contents.
 In some places they are clearly differentiated from the Armenian AGNP. letters 2.
  The decorative decoration of the sarcophagus is reminiscent of the decoration of the 4-7th century architectural monuments of Armenia.
  Thus, the ornament decorated around the cross, which depicts a stylized vine with lords and a cluster, is present in the Arshakunys' rest house in Akhts (4th century), in the Kasakh basilica of Aparan (4th century), and is especially widely represented in the Zvartnots temple (7 -rd.).
  Yaroslav Imastuni 2 Harutyunyan V., On an Armenian letter inscription, "Bulletin" of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1956, №5, p. 119.
The similarity of the ways of decorative decoration of the sarcophagus, the presence of Georgian inscriptions on the sarcophagus cover are the proof of the fact that in the 11-12th centuries. Well-known Armenian craftsmen lived in Ki, who left their mark on the monuments of architecture and applied art.
Near the old town of Galich in Volyn, in the village of Krylos, there is a 13th century. The church of St. Panteleimon, which dates back to the beginning of the 20th century, which has preserved traces of features characteristic of Armenian architecture.
 There are Armenian lithographs on its walls և images - traditional "Flowering Cross" silhouettes for Armenian ornaments եր sketches of temples.
 The motif of the "Flowering Cross" is widely used in the frescoes of the Cyrillic Church.
 These realities vividly reflect the Russian-Armenian relations in the fields of architecture and applied arts.
There are other evidences about the interactions of Russian-Armenian cultural ties.
 The Russian Church has preserved the cult of և 37 virgins of Gregory the Illuminator.
 The 30th agenda of the Russian "Haysmavurk" in September states: "The martyrdom of St. Gregory, the bishop of Greater Armenia, the behavior of thirty-seven virgins with him."
  In ancient Russia there were temples dedicated to the Armenian St. Gregory, such as near Ki, the famous Novgorod Nerditsa was preserved (before its barbaric destruction by the Nazis), among others, not only St. Gregory, but also St. Hripsimeupanor soon similar to similar monuments in Georgia and Armenia (Akhtala, Butania, Arteni, Tigran Honetsi Church in Ani, etc.).
  And in the 15th century. A church was also built in Novgorod, in honor of Gregory the Illuminator, a church whose architecture shows traces of ancient Armenian architecture.
An eloquent document attesting to the existence of cultural ties between Russia and Armenia is the Armenian translation of one of the oldest monuments of Russian literature, "Boris և Gleb Behavior", which was made in 1173. մեջ entered the Armenian "Haysmavurk" edited by Lord Israel.
  The editing was done by the order of the monk և it was completed before 1251.
 There are the following lines in the translation of "Behavior". "There are other miracles of the saints, which are described in their vast history, and to this day they perform signs about which many witnesses from our country tell us."
 In other words, many Armenians came to Ki լինում to tell the editor or translator the myths they had heard in Ki և about the Boris և Gleb miracles3.
The very fact of the Armenian translation of the story about Boris և Gleb testifies to the interest shown by the 12-13th centuries. Armenian politicians towards this arbitrary aspect of Russian life.
 Analyzing the story of Boris և Gleb, where Prince Yaroslav Vladimirovich mentions the construction of the magnificent five-domed church of Saints Boris և Gleb, L. Melikset-Beck puts forward the problem of the structure of five-domed churches in Russia and Armenia.
  In Russia, five-domed temples were common in the late period, while in Georgia there were none at all.
  And in Armenia such a structure appeared quite early, the church of Avan village near Yerevan, the Church of the Apostles in Ani in the 10th century. և other churches4.
  Probably, Armenian masters also worked with Russian masters in the structures, just as Russian masters in the Ice Caucasus worked with local masters.
12th century From the second half, a new phase begins in the relations between the Armenians and Russia, when there is a more active and mass emigration of Armenians to Russia.
 It is connected with the difficult situation of the Armenians, who fell under the yoke of the Seljuk Turks who occupied Armenia.
 At that time, certain political and economic changes took place in Eastern Europe as well.
  Ancient Russia, once a powerful state, 11th century shrinking from avant-garde divisions in the 12th century. In the second half, it was divided into separate authorities.
  The former trade route from the savages to the Greeks lost its occasional significance, and was replaced by a new trade route connecting the North and Baltic Seas: 1 Zhamkochyan A., Historical-Philological Journal, Yerevan, 1978, № 3, p. 209.
2 Hachikyan S., Armenian columns of Ukraine in 16-17 BC. Great friendship, Yerevan, 1954, p. 196.
3 Mikaelyan V., History of the Armenian Diaspora, vol. 1, Yerevan, 2003, pp. 48-49.
Over Vistula, West Bug, Transnistria.
  Armenians who left their country emigrated to southwestern Russia, Galicia, Poland, Povolzhie, Crimea, where they found more tolerable living conditions.
 There they establish their settlements, churches.
 Prof. I. According to A. Linnichenko, the most important centers of Southern Russia, Lvov, Lutsk, Kamenets-Podolsk, where Armenian immigrants lived, owed a great deal to the Armenians with their wealth, splendor and luxury.
  Due to them, the trade centers of Southern Russia played the role of mediator in the trade between the East and the West.
 The trade of Oriental goods in Southern Russia and Poland was exclusively in the hands of Armenians, so a number of Oriental goods were called "Armenian goods" 1.
From ancient times the Armenians established a colony in the large city of Volyn Lutsk, which in the 12th century. Lucesk was the ruling capital.
 17th century In his "Voyage", the Armenian author Simeon Lehatsi mentions that in the past the city of Lutsk had 800 houses, buildings, huts, many estates, and the first seat, the "bishopric", was located there.
 However, during Simeon's reign, "only two Armenian houses remained from the Armenian colony."
  According to Simeon, the episcopal see of Armenians who emigrated to Russia was located in Lutsk before Lviv (before the 14th century).
12th century Ki, the capital of the old Russian state, loses its former significance and ceases to be the residence of Russian princes.
  No information has been preserved about the number of Armenians in Ki.
  However, it is known that the Armenian population in the vicinity of Ki և և's neighborhood had grown so much at the time that there was a need to create a separate diocese there.
 The 17th century informs us about that. Catholic figure Alois Pidu in a memoir entitled "Brief information on the beginning and spread of the apostolic propaganda among the Armenians of Poland and Wallachia".
According to the information, we are able to supplement our knowledge about the number of Armenians in Ki, their occupations, their contribution to the defense of the country that has become their second homeland.
  If the Armenians of Ki were able to withdraw from their ranks during the prosperity of the colony 500 brave and powerful soldiers to defend the city, then their number should have been not less than three or four thousand people.
 Polish sources have preserved information that in 1410 At the Battle of Grunwald, Armenian soldiers, including those from Ki, also fought against the Knights of the Tontan Order as part of the Polish army.
In the 14th century, when the territories of the Galician government were occupied by Polish landowners, Ki came under the rule of the Great Lithuanian Government (1362-1471), and then, until 1654. Ukraine's reunification with Russia, along with other Ukrainian territories, was part of Poland.
  It was then, in the 14th century, after the fall of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, that the largest emigration of Armenians took place, first to the Crimea, and from there to Galicia-Podolia, which joined the local Armenian communities.
Ruzanna Melkonyan ARMENIANS IN OLD RUSSIA Keywords: emigration, Kian Russia, emigration,
Armenian-Slavic ties, Russian-Armenian cultural ties
.
