H. PRINCIPLES AND STRUCTURAL STRUCTURES OF THE LANGUAGE COMPOSITION OF SHIRAZ'S POEM "SIAMANTO AND KHEZHARE" The significance of a writer's work for the national culture is determined by the word and its influence on the language.
H. Shiraz is a bold, easy-going innovator, skillfully uses the internal, flexible and rich possibilities of word formation in our language, creates new words with completely new ways and means.
He left a rich literary legacy, which deserves not only literary but also linguistic extensive study.
 The works that have been published for decades have already been the subject of linguistic attention.
The aim of the study is to present a complete and exhaustive vocabulary of the poem, in particular its novelties.
Shiraz's poem "Siamanto ջ Khjezare" was published in several versions during the author's lifetime, where the author made various changes.
  We have reviewed the first and last editions1 to highlight the changes, particularly the increase in the number of innovations.
The work is done by a combination of complete (complex) examination, statistical research and simultaneous description methods.
 Moreover, the comparison և combination ական of linguistic facts, in particular verbal innovations, the methodology of linguistic analysis, lexical definition և definition և of a separate original can play a role.
 The author's creative, word-creation laboratory was the subject of general attention, for which it was necessary to solve the following problems: a) to separate possible vocabulary innovations, b) to compare them with the data of modern Armenian dictionaries, c) to exclude words from other authors' works; compare the data of existing dictionaries with each other, e) group new words according to structural types, f) refer to the composition of newly formed words, g) compare the innovations in the first and last versions.
Separating new words is one of the most difficult areas of the vocabulary test of the author's language, as each new word may not be so if it turns out that there is another usage that precedes the given usage.
 New words used in the author's vocabulary, such as neoplasm, are usually distinguished not in an absolute but in a relative sense.
 In the absolute sense, the word is new if it is verified by the facts of all kinds of written sources that precede it, which is almost impossible.
  Therefore, in case of separation of new words, one should be guided by relative chronology, checking the given word with the condition of the most extensive dictionaries 2, computer programs 3 ել to confirm that it has not been used in the written literature before.
  In this case, it is assumed that if it had been used, it would have been included in those extensive dictionaries.
The word structure is supplemented and enriched by the formation of new words through the word formations in the language, using roots or roots and suffixes.
  S. Abrahamyan noted that "the stability of word-formation patterns is not absolute.1 Shiraz H., Siamanto-Khjezare, Yerevan, 1935.
 Collection of works in 5 volumes, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1984, page 194.
2 See http.
//www.nayiri.com/.
3 See http.
//www.eanc.net/EANC/search/?interface_language=am.
In recent decades, there have been some changes in the word formation of the Armenian language, which are not widely covered, but deserve attention. ”1
 He summarizes all the studies of the Armenian word formation in two groups: a) transfer formations և b) template formations.
 In the modern word formation, the template formations dominate, the transmission phenomenon does not play a significant role2.
The widespread use of the newly formed word as a linguistic unit is largely due to its word-formation features. Novelties are formed by the word-formation laws of our language.
  Thus, the syntactic relation of the components of complexity is of two types: class-subordinate.
M. referred to this issue in detail. Abeghyan.
  Noting the relationship between the two categories of components of compound words, he considers the most common type of complexity to be subordinate 3.
Along with other features of linguistic innovations, it is necessary to examine the principles and structural types of their composition.
  If in word-formation analysis we are limited only to the direct components of complexity, word-formation units, then in the field analysis we take into account all the meaning-making units in the word.
H. Let us examine the 4 linguistic novelties taken from Shiraz's poem "Siamanto ջ Khjezare" in terms of lexicography, then, let us limit ourselves to the analysis of the patterns of their word-formation principles.
Linguistic innovations, like նոր any newly formed word, certainly have a composite structure.
  And compound words differ both in their composition, in their means, and in their structure.
According to G. Jahukyan: "The central concept of word formation is the word, the main subject of study is the compound word" 5.
Complications in both existing and new words are numerous.
 This does not mean that the suffix, as a type of word formation, is common in non-Armenian.
Structural analysis of linguistic innovations shows that almost all types of modern Armenian word formation are complex, with complexity in its various subtypes, as well as suffixes in its various forms.
 The complexity of the word types, according to the number of the main sounds in them, can be two-rooted, three-rooted or four-rooted.
  These different patterns exist in linguistic innovations, but the predominant ones are the two-component formations, that is, the "root-joint-root" (A-h-A) or "root-art" (A-A) template.
Speaking about the ways of word formation in modern Armenian, G. Jahukyan notes that two-component, rarely three-component complications are typical for Armenian.
  At the same time, he notes that in two-component complications, the second component usually has a basic value, in three-component complications, the third component, that is, the last component acts as a basis for the complexity (complementary) 6.
Linguistic innovations, as compound words, are composed of different combinations of different parts of speech, different syntactic relations of word-building components and different value of speech.
  Let's present them according to word-formation templates.
LONG COMPLICATIONS.
 Long-term complications predominate, which are: a) compounds with the verbal mass value of the noun.
 These are formed by A-h-A or A-A templates, and the components are nouns, but can have different mass values, such as In the distance, a star and a series of springs 7 on its chest (238) 8, This, that 1 See Abrahamyan S., Trends in the development of modern Armenian word formation (Theses of Scientific Session Reporting), Yerevan, 1998, p. 3.
2 In the same place.
3 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1965, page 20.
4 Shiraz H., Collection of poems in 5 volumes, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1984, page 194.
5 Jahukyan G., Semantics of the modern Armenian language և word formation, Yerevan, 1989, p. 158.
6 See ibid., Pp. 219-220.
7 All the emphasis is on MH.
8 Here հետո In the following statement, after the examples given to substantiate the theoretical material, in parentheses, we will mark the page of the original where the given example occurs.
The mountain is his patriarch, his patriarchal mountain is sacred (230), The pool of seven thousand flowers of Emuron (234), And the lover rose up, still a young man with a beard (234), And the snow crown of His Sipan did not even seem like sugar (212), Astganektar , honey and gazpe, brings down manna (234).
Noun-Noun Complications of Identical Value Jahukyan calls it cooperative or stereotyped, because the complexity has the same literal value as its basic, that is, the last component.
Noun-bayarmat, with the verbal-mass value of the noun:
b) Long-term complications of adjective's verbal-mass value և stand out in the structural types of linguistic innovations.
 These are composed of components with different lexical value: noun-noun, noun-bayarmat, noun-adjective, noun-makbay և etc.
  Combining different parts of speech, they form a new complex word with an adjective-mass value. as: And Siamanto ascended with his flock to the lamb (196), Those milky pastures, they are clean with dew and sprinkling (197), Mount Sipan seemed like a huge meadow (197), Eternal smoke asks God for the golden Armenian incense (200), No ... down the shore, the swallowing girls were naked (201), And Siamanto was looking down with suspicion in love (212), As if the bodies were melting in the sea with light (201), Whose flame was still floating in the sea… beloved (202) ), While it smells of flowers on its slopes (219), God was sunk by the bridge, the humble slaves were wolves (221), He remembered the dark love lamp (227), A white rock, as if it fell from the shoulders of the heart (233), And the lover stood still (234), And the fish-sea is also Van (258) (noun-noun),
c) Long-term complications of Macba's verbal mass value. Sometimes he appeared and ran like a swan, attacking (202), And cursed at night, slept on the mountain Sipana (221), But it seemed that he felt that he had died (230) (noun-bayarmat), The missing one was still waiting for each other in secret (222) ) (adjective-bayarmat), Sometimes a lover doubts: "Why is there no news?" (252) (noun-adjective), They entered the sea ... the sea foamed white-skinned, woven "(201) (noun-adjective).
NETWORKING COMPOSITIONS.
 Among the structural types of linguistic neologisms we find derivative formations, but the suffix as a form of word formation is not typical of linguistic neoliberals; it does not play as active a role in word formation as complexity.
  In the original we have studied, there are novelties with - (a) vet, -uhi, -s suffixes, such as on the air in competition with Paradise Bingyol (234), He - bekuhi, I - a shepherd, father - armed, I - unarmed (252), I am the innocent of your dream (210).
There are also complicated derivative formations, such as: And they ate bread from a bowl, milk millet (248), The virgins of the virgin were tortured, ashamed (201).
The word-formation patterns of the language are stable, but at some stage in the development of the language there may be some new tendencies, which extend to new word-structures, including linguistic innovations.
The new constructions of the writer are in their place in the environment, irreplaceable, because they have their stylistic role in the given original.
 These words are sometimes figurative, components consisting of synonyms or antonyms լավագույն the best way to express speech.
 Thus, Panicked women, brides were scattered here and there. (269).
There are many compound words composed and used by the author, in which the grammatical complications take a big and powerful place.
  "These, as independent and independent semantic units, are closely and directly related to the grammatical structure of the language, in particular, to the usual syntactic connections of words, deriving from them, expressing complex and varied relations" 1.
1 Margaryan Al., The syntactic complexities of Armenian, Yerevan, 1986, p. 3.
Linguistic-stylistic means are not so close to the combination of synonymous synonyms նույնիսկ in the sense of synonyms նույնիսկ, even composed of antonyms.
  These are mostly close, harmonious and harmonious lexical units, which the author uses to create a nuance of images and meanings.
 H. Shiraz, opening the folds of centuries-old folk experience, revealing its nuances, adds his new experience of his time.
 This snow of word formation brings about quick and correct perceptions of condensed images - figurative, pronouns.
Here are some of the nominative expressions expressing these various relations: a) the components are synonyms, in the sense that Our age has arrived, the nomadic life of the Kurd has passed (259), And while grazing sweetly, it has climbed gently up the mountain (197), b) the components are contraindications. Folk words acquire the value of semantic novelty as they become artistic, like Light and Darkness on its peak spring-winter (219), One day you will not see an Armenian no matter where you come from (214), destroying a girl-boy business is more than destroying a monastery (237). c) the components are equal, or the first part becomes the descriptive complement of the second, revealing the internal features of the subject, the writer's impression of the subject: The main rivers are the veins of the eagle-earth nair (199), cursing the tiger rose-girl (243) like a shepherd. And keeping a glittering ring in the raisins with hope (256), And from the old woman, he asked his hopeful mother again to be stubborn (267). That love is to free the snow-girl from the fire (267), The murmur kisses their longing for the covenant-spring (208). They would descend to the sea from Akhtamara Island, with a sweet tremor, to bathe in the lagoon, to be baptized with love-dew (201), As if shouting, "Where have you slept, do you not care about the wind? You have an innocent lamb, a thousand wolf-enemies. (264), I am the seven-starry star (204), d) one of the components is dialectal, vernacular, the other is literary: And the horses are in the weeping of the bride (269).
There are relationships that are based on metaphor, reciprocity, causation, etc., for example, the eagle-earth complexity is based on comparison (the earth is like an eagle).
H. Shiraz has enriched his poetry with verbal repetitions, which are especially peculiar to the spoken vernacular.
 Uses duplicates for stylistic purposes, creates intensity of meaning.
  Sometimes the repetitive components undergo some sound changes արտահայտ express semantic subtlety. For example, And whispering and blushing, he descended into the gorge with a sigh (210), They entered the sea with foam, foam with visions (201).
 Comparative formations will also meet. Yar, do not throw me a yar (243), Do not throw a rose at me (243), A source from the garbage and a nomad, ask a news from the yar (254).
The writer uses numerous verbs that form an integral part of the vernacular.
 They are linguistic and stylistic means that give a folk breath to music.
  Uses compounds composed of a combination of two main verbs, which, according to G. According to Jahukyan, "Either they express a new, figurative meaning of the verb, or they act as a connection of the original characteristic verb, which has a figurative value, or they grade-strengthen the same meaning" 1.
  He mainly writes them with a union line, like this: The virgin's heart fell and changed the girl (210), The shepherd's heart fluttered and fell in love (210), The hunter left the scorpion lost in the scratches (205), Mother Araks also passed. Khudaper with a bridge (221), He fell on his feet, but pulled cunningly from his feet (240).
H. Shiraz forms verbs with the suffix nav, which are not so useful in literary Armenian, so that a star fell on a star with a prediction (239), whose cry was repeated: "My land, you are mine again, Weiss did not vote մնալ to remain Armenian He brought me back to your arms ”(232), The shepherd's heart flew and shone with love (210), That my love and my soul's soul were enshrined in my eyes (252), He died (244), Hell died for a moment, he died breathless… happy (233).
There are also many verbal (with different temporal expressions) neologisms, which are composed of nouns, such as: The white pomegranate chest was saying, "The sea will not extinguish my fire either" (203), He shared his longing, his eagle's heart was meek. Fundamentals of Armenian Theory, Yerevan, 1974, p. 413.
(230), Jealousy roared in the deer's heart, no, they will not be lucky (253), Down the mountain is the messenger to all my springs (250).
H. The above-mentioned innovations used by Shiraz do not exist in St. In Malkhasyants's "Explanatory Dictionary" 1, there is only the word sky-turquoise, with the following interpretation: "A kind of chalcedony stone (mine) with a light green color is also called gold-plated, presp. precious stone ”2.
In the first version of the poem, the novelties have the following principles of formation of structural types. There are no derivative formations, they are long-lived complications, formed by the A-h-A pattern, such as:… Gurgur's face was a newborn in his extravagant arp (5), Surb is called with a bell-ringing light source (6), With them was Khjezaren, the backdrop hairdresser ( 8), He entered the field of the fiery heart of a young shepherd laden with flowers (8), Hover came from Mount Sipan, a sheet of flowers from the flowers (11).
There are also AA-A-shaped formations, such as Again, his mind wandered to the carpet (15), And the shepherd was thinking, thoughts to the ark (16).
New formations with the verbal mass value of the adjective, with the following component composition: Noun: Underneath which the eyes shine brightly, dawn (5), The horses that have become sparks fly every bridle (23), Noun + noun: Swallowed away in the meg, the snow-capped peaks (33), The lily and bright spring dream (11) + noun: I must give Imaghjik to the young bey's brave (13), adjective + verb: As if the wind blows with the waves of a passerby (17).
 There are new word-formation formations of the noun և macba, such as Sari's night,'s night of love, the needle on the forehead (28), and the girl fell into the old woman's arms (16).
There are no newly formed verbs.
Thus, comparing the innovations in the first and last versions of the poem, the fact is recorded that in the first version there are about 30 innovations, in the last version they have not been preserved,-more than 80 innovations have been created.
  The author has used 4 novelties in the first and last versions: asghashar, bridesmaid, lover, girl-boy.
Mariam Hakobjanyan H. PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURE AND STRUCTURAL TYPES OF SHIRAZ'S POEM OF "SIAMANTO AND KHEZHARE" POEM Keywords: neoplasm, structural features, word structure: word structure
