HAMIDIE CORRUPTION REGIONS: GENOCIDE TOOLAbd Hamidieh cavalry regiments played a big role in Hamid's anti-Armenian policy.
 On the initiative of the Sultan, irregular cavalry regiments were formed from the Kurds.
 The Sultan set up a commission headed by Shakir to develop a plan to organize 20 irregular cavalry regiments.
 Shakir was an anti-Armenian figure, he was the ambassador of the Ottoman Empire in St. Petersburg, being well aware of the structure of the Cossack forces.
  The commission in 1891 presented the program.
  And already in 1890 In the second half of the 19th century, Mehmet Zeki, the commander of the 4th Army, toured the Kurdish-populated provinces, visited the clans, and was able to obtain the consent of the tribal chiefs to form irregular cavalry regiments along the Russian border.
 In September of the same year, the conscription of the Hamidiye regiments was held.
"Hnchak" writes. "Kurdish tribes came to the Armenian villages from all sides, the enlistment lasted for a month.
  During that time, they all lived at the expense of the villagers, whose expenses amounted to 15 thousand. դահեկան »1.
Hamidiye was created through the tribes of the Kurdish tribes, or rather those tribes and clans simply turned into cavalry regiments, and their leaders into the command staff of the regiments.
  They were formed in different parts of Western Armenia in order to be able to control the Armenian population.
  Every Kurdish family was obliged to provide the Hamidiye regiments with at least one person over the age of 17, on horseback and in uniform2.
 In honor of the sultan, these regiments were called "hamidiye" whose militants wore a tin badge on their hats with the inscription "Sultan Abdul Hamid".
1 "Hnchak", 1895, number 7.
2 Kirakosyan J., Bourgeois diplomacy և Armenia, Yerevan, 1980, p. 417.
To better understand the created system, let us present the testimony of the Irish professor Emil Dillon. "Registrants in the army have been left in their native places, have been exempted from service, are supplied with weapons, are endowed with diplomatic immunity, are provided with a stipend.
 They carried out their instructions accurately, plundered the rich Armenians, destroyed the villages, killed all those who resisted. ”3
The process of creating Hamidiye regiments was a great success. Instead of 20, their number reached 73, in each of which 400-600 people.
 The total number of Hamidians reached 100 thousand.
 Such success was first of all explained by the fact that they were not allowed to take care of their daily needs at the expense of the Armenians, but to take possession of their lands.
 The Hamidians are exempt from taxes.
Regarding the creation of Hamidiye regiments, Emil Dillon wrote that in 1891 B. Door, fearing that the implementation of reforms in Armenia might create serious difficulties for him, organized the so-called Hamidian cavalry regiments, which consisted exclusively of Kurds, to drive Armenians out of the border regions, replaced them with Muslims, It decreased so much that there was no need to carry out special reforms for the other Armenian population4.
 1891 In the spring, the commanders of the Hamidiye regiments, that is, the tribal leaders, were invited to K. Constantinople.
  When they arrived in Trabzon, the sultan again and again instructed them to bring them to Constantinople in a special steamer, to take care of all their needs for clothes, food, and to spare nothing.
 The imperial bodyguards were sent to meet the steamer "Diana" to pay tribute to the grateful tribal chiefs, who at one time drank the blood of the Armenian people, were ready to do the same in the future, with even greater vigor.
 "They have been coming to the capital for more than a week, walking around with all their pride.
  Those cavalrymen dressed in Kurdish costumes and armed with a single sword ”6.
  The Sultan received them personally and awarded them military ranks.
3 Brotherly helper in Turkey, Armenia, 1897, p. 13.
4 Brotherly helper in Turkey with Armenians, Moscow, 1897, p. 13.
5 Irade is a decree issued by the sultan.
6 "Hnchak", 1891, number 6.
In 1892, in order to improve the military training of the Hamidiye regiments, to supplement them with a qualified command staff. K. "Schools for the tribes" were established in Constantinople and Baghdad.
 The Sultan allocated 8 million liras from those personal funds to those schools7.
K. On their way back from Constantinople, they completely robbed the Armenians who had returned from work abroad in the Bayburt region.
  The latter complained, but to no avail. Punishing Hamid commanders is beyond the authority of the civil authorities.
 McCall writes: "The Kurds strictly maintained the tribal organization, remaining subject to their sheikhs.
  If the Ottoman government decides to overthrow and disarm the Kurdish sheikhs, they can oppose it for a minute, but the sultan invited the Kurdish chief to the capital.
  In the end, the sultan was pleased that the created regiments were called Hamidiye. ”8
The creation of the mentioned regiments created privileges given to the tribal chiefs in the confrontation, which greatly hindered the implementation of the sultan's plan to exterminate the Armenians through the Kurds.
  After the organization of the regiments, the Kurds became more aggressive.
The Armenians were well aware that the Hamidiye regiments were created to defeat them.
  After finishing the formation of the regiments of Zeki Pasha, he organized a military parade in the village of Kusharyan.
  They swore by the Koran, received instructions about the Armenians, and their lives became a real hell, and their further existence was impossible.
 The situation of the Armenians became worse when the right to collect taxes was handed over to the Hamidians.
  Before the beastly greed of the latter, looted doors opened, and they, with their arms raised, went to work.
  The courts were instructed not to consider the complaints of the Armenian population about the atrocities of the Hamidians 9.
 Hamidiye cavalry was committing unspeakable, unheard of atrocities in Mush, Van and other regions.
 After this, the situation of the Armenian people worsened, as in the Armenian-populated provinces the Armenians were deprived of the right to security of person, property, honor, the road to Karin and Alashkert was closed.
 There was no communication between the villages.
 The people were devastated and in misery because of the Hamidian regiments10.
7 Poghosyan S., From the history of the Armenian Genocide, Yerevan, 2000, p. 348.
8 Position of an Armenian in Turkey to intervening in the state in 1895, M., 1896, p. 256.
9 Arzumanyan M., Century-long struggle for survival, Yerevan, 1989, p. 197.
10 "Flag", 1893, number 5.
The mentioned information is confirmed by Emil Dillon through the interrogation of one of the Kurdish tribesmen, Mostigo, which completely reveals the atrocities of the Hamidians.
 During that interrogation, Dillon asked Mostigo if he knew that the Kurds had killed many Armenians, looted their villages, and then raised the next question, whether it was possible that Mostigo's arrest was connected with that.
 Mostigo denies the possibility, noting that if arrested, they will do so for attacking and looting a Turkish checkpoint.
  Then Dillon offers to tell more stories about their so-called great deeds, but Mostigon answers that it is not possible, because they have done 1000 such great deeds.
 Thus, as Dillon concludes, all the reforms and laws in the Ottoman Empire, no matter how correct and literate they may seem, were only on paper… 11.
 Like thousands of testimonies, this one proves that the Kurds acted without any obstacles from the government.
There were 36 Hamidian regiments in Mush Sanjak and 4 regiments in Manazkert.
  The Kurds of Hasnants had formed 5 Hamidian regiments.
  Every April, a training camp was organized for those regiments.
  The large plain at Lake Van was being destroyed by Kurdish bandits, and they appealed to the government for help, although they did not dare to call the robbers Kurds, but simply called them bandits.
 It was well known that the leaders of these bandits were Hamidian officers, who were called naten-kelis (tin men) for the copper badges attached to their hats12.
The Kurds justified the attacks on the Armenian villages with their right to ostracize.
  They considered their neighbors, the Armenians, to be the most dangerous enemies.
  The reality was that the armed Kurds were attacking the Armenians, although the latter were deprived of the right to bear arms by the decision of the government.
 When the Kurds were caught at the crime scene, they contemptuously refused to appear in a civil court, demanding that their own commanders try them as ordinary Hamidians.
  Of course, the government could have punished them through the police, but for obvious reasons it did not take any steps.
11 Brotherly help, p. 26-27.
12 Poghosyan S., In the four ways of the struggle for survival, Yerevan, 1989, p. 160.
One observation can be made from all this, that is, through the Hamidian military units, the Kurdish tribes became a blind tool to implement the sultan's anti-Armenian policy.
 According to Emil Dillon, this policy pursued by the Sultan's Hamidian regiments և through other forces can be seen as organized robbery, legalized slaughter, and paid immorality13.
Nevertheless, one important fact must be recorded. The Hamidian regiments, acting in favor of the sultan's policy at the same time, marked the strengthening of the local autonomy of the Kurds by the fact of their existence.
 Many Kurdish tribes, relying on Hamidian military units, kept themselves independent of the sultanate and refused to pay taxes.
  In any case, not all tribes agreed to join the ranks of the Hamidian regiments.
  The policy of encouraging and giving privileges did not apply to all Kurds.
  In order to prevent the growing threat to Kurdish autonomy, the Sultanate government used various means to weaken and fragment large Kurdish unions, as large tribes and clans first embodied the Kurdish desire for a strong state.
  The appointment of the commanders of the Na-Hamidian regiments, not from the representatives of large but small tribes, served that purpose.
 Of course, the results of that policy were not great, as Hamidiye himself was leading to the strengthening of local autonomy.
  It should be noted, however, that contradictions arose among the Hamidians.
  In Khnus, bloody battles took place for their leadership position.
  The Kurds of Alashkert, Manzkert, Bulanukh, Vardo Hasnants, Gibranants were fighting for a leading role in the Hamidian system.
 The authorities even collected their weapons, but not long after, they called the Kurdish leaders "to work" again, instructing them to allocate their salaries.
 After that, the activity of the Hamidiye regiments became active again. New regiments were organized.
 3 regiments were formed in Khnus with 300 horsemen14.
Thus, Abdul Hamid successfully used the Kurds against the Armenians, turning them into a blind tool in the hands of the government.
  Created for the implementation of the policy of extermination of the Armenians 13 Bratskaya pomoy щь, pp. 14-15.
14 Arzumanyan M., op. Cit., P. 198.
The Median regiments fully complied with the government's demands, although the government soon faced a new challenge: the immediate threat of an independent Kurdish government.
Anna TadjosyanHAMIDIE REVOLUTIONARY BALLS: GENOCIDE TOOL Keywords: 20th century, Abdul Hamid II, Shakir Bey, Hamidiye regiments, tin men, Kurdish nomads, organized genocide, Armenian-dominated politics.
