ARMENIAN GENOCIDE ISSUE REPRESENTED IN BOGDA GEMBARSKY'S LETTERSPolish public figure, publicist, scholar, writer and translator Bogdan (Alexander) Anthony Gembarski.
He wrote articles on the Armenian Genocide, the future of the Armenian people, and the need to restore the rights of Armenians to Western Armenia ("Letter to a Turkish acquaintance", "Letter to Turkish intellectuals", "Open letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. W. Tan" , "Open letter to the President of India, His Excellency Mr. Sarvapali Radhakrishnan", "Letter to my Armenian readers", "Three letters to the readers of the world", "You had the solution to the Armenian square of the region" (letter to Catholicos of All Armenians Vazgen I, 1977).
 In his articles he condemns the Armenian Genocide, proves by universal moral and legal standards that the rights of the Armenian people must be restored within certain borders of their historical homeland, leading to the Black Sea.
  Facing significant obstacles from Turkey, Gembarski, however, did not stop and continued his pro-Armenian activities.
B. Gembarski had correspondence with Armenian writers and cultural figures in the Diaspora.
 He wrote the novel "Moritur" (Latin: "Death row inmates"), which is dedicated to the Great Genocide.
  He also translated and published the works of Armenian writers in two volumes.
1964 B. The manuscript of the Armenian translation of Gembarski's article "Letter to my old Turkish acquaintance" was widely demanded in Yerevan higher education institutions.
Later, in 1980-90, his articles were already published in the Armenian press, and in 1989-1990. were published by A. Madoyan և H. Karchikyan's articles, which were dedicated to 1978. B., who died in March In memory of Gembarsky.
H. Through the efforts of Karchikyan in 1990 The collection "Letters to the World" was published in Yerevan, which summarizes a number of Gembarski's articles dedicated to the defense of the Armenian Cause.
Historian, prof. P. Hovhannisyan published in the first issue of "Banber Armenia Archives" magazine in 2004 the Armenian translation of several letters by Bogdan Gembarski provided to him by Diaspora Armenian writer Vahe Vahyan.
V. In his letter to Vahyan (dated August 16, 1962), Gembarski wrote that he intended to make changes to his famous "Letter to My Old Turkish Acquaintance" open letter, adding a preface and an epilogue, and that the article should be published in five languages ​​after approval by prominent figures. "Open letter to Turkish intellectuals" under 2 changed titles.
  In this letter, Gembarski is empowered by British, French, Italian and Polish Catholic writers to negotiate on their behalf with representatives of individual powers in order to benefit the just desire of the Armenians to return to their homeland peacefully3.
He was making efforts for UNESCO to recognize 1965 as the Armenian Year on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Genocide.
  The argument for this proposal was contained in an open letter addressed to "Turkish intellectuals".
 The article "Letter to My Old Turkish Acquaintance" was first published in Polish in the 1961 issue of the Warsaw-based weekly Kironki. in the November 20 issue.
  It was first published in Armenian in the December 13, 1989 issue of "Avangard" daily.
2 "Open letter to Turkish intellectuals" is a new, extensive version of the article "Letter to my old Turkish acquaintance".
3 "Bulletin of the Archives of Armenia", № 1, "The light of a distant star. Bogdan Gembarski ", Yerevan, 2004, p. 121.
Before that it needed to be officially approved by several states.
  In this way, Gembarski considered that one should not rely on the socialist-capitalist countries, as the latter would not want to cause dissatisfaction in Turkey.
  According to him, it is necessary to include several neutral countries in this operation, which will not have political ties with Turkey.
 Gembarski, in particular, pinned his hopes on India as a large, influential, yet neutral country.
In the mentioned letter, Gembarski describes the fact that the Armenian Genocide went unpunished as "a grave problem that has tormented the conscience of all civilized humanity for fifty years. Being a fact against God and all the laws of humanity, however, has not yet received a just solution."
1961 On November 20, the Warsaw weekly "Korunk" published B. Gembarsky's article "Letter to my old Turkish acquaintance", which quickly spread in the Armenian reality, with Armenian-Russian translation2.
  Reading the letter, we understand that the addressee of the letter is known since his student years, they were good friends, they were interested in each other's history and cultural values.
  They met in 1936, when they started talking about the massacre of Armenians by the Turks, after which the letter revealed that the Turkish acquaintance was already avoiding the author of the letter. The Turk tries to bypass in every way.
In his letter, Gembarski states that his Turkish acquaintance considers the atrocities committed against the Jews to be a crime, while the Germans were in this respect the "vigilantees" of the Turks. to the Armenians back in 1915.
"1915 During the massacres, the elimination of all points of resistance by the Armenians continued for the next five years. They were located in Cilicia, Anatolia, around Lake Van, Syria, Russian Azerbaijan, Kars region.
 A total of three million Armenians, or 60 percent of the population, were killed during the massacre.
  At that time, only those who were outside your power avoided massacres.
  Going back to the present, taking into account the political situation in 1911, as well as the percentage of their natural growth during the last 50 years, in the current 1961 they should have reached 10 million, but in reality they are barely four million ”3.
According to Gembarsky, by killing a man, his unborn offspring are being killed for hundreds and thousands of years, and the organizers of the massacres were pursuing this goal first and foremost.
Gembarski writes about the massacres of Armenians by the Turks, raising the issue of responsibility and compensation.
 He emphasizes that the Turks appropriated the Armenian lands "as a special gift for genocide."
  Gembarski wonders, "Why should the martyrdom of Armenians be rewarded when the same massacre of Poles and Jews is officially recognized as a crime against humanity?"
"I can not understand," Gembarski wrote in the letter, "your indifference to the crime that has weighed on you for 46 years.
 I do not understand how a nation can live in these conditions, love its homeland, laugh, rejoice, read humanistic books, visit abroad, host foreigners.
I think this is exactly what German society would have looked like if Hitler had won World War II.
  But then the whole world would be mad.
 And you, in spite of everything, live in a normal world. ”6
I just can't imagine any Armenian "Anne Frank Notebook" being published in your language, even though you killed at least one million adult girls during those terrible years. Bogdan Gembarski ", Yerevan, 2004, p. 121.
The translation was done by Maria Grocholska, a Polish woman living in Yerevan.
3 Gembarski B., "LETTER TO MY OLD TURKISH ACQUAINTANCE" ("Letters to the World" collection, compiled, edited, annotated by H. Karchikyan), Yerevan, 1990, p.
4 Ibid., P.
5 In the same place.
6 Gembarski B., "LETTER TO MY OLD TURKISH ACQUAINTANCE" ("Letters to the World" collection, compiled, edited, annotated by H. Karchikyan), Yerevan, 1990, p.
and young women who were educated enough for the East at that time.
 Even Franz Werfel's classic book, as far as I know, is on your list of banned literature. ”1
Gembarski mentions that his letter is no longer addressed to his Turkish acquaintance, because he did not justify the hopes placed on him, did not find the strength and courage to raise his voice in his homeland in defense of the martyred people.
 This letter is addressed to those who are the true conscience of the Turkish people - its literary critics, artists, teachers, world-famous Turkish scholars, educators and friends of the youth.
Gembarski, aiming to make the world hear the Armenian issue, which has not yet found a just solution, addresses an open letter to the UN Secretary General, sincerely expressing his thoughts on the most painful issue of the century, which still torments the conscience of all mankind.
  In the letter, he states his thesis on the settlement of the Armenian issue, which must be provided to the Turkish representative so that he can present it to his government, and then inform whether the Turkish government is inclined to hold substantive negotiations on this topic.
At the beginning of the letter, Gembarski considers it necessary to emphasize that he is not an Armenian, his letter is not dictated by the government.
  His letter is, first of all, the expression of the conscience of all mankind, the conscience that can not find peace, ignoring the facts of 60% destruction of the Armenian people and 90% loss of its historical homeland2.
 And if he was not a teleh, but a Turk, he would not hesitate to hand over this letter either, as it is not a hostile act against the Turkish government of the Turkish people at all.
  The whole issue that he raises in his letter is dictated by the desire to save the honor of Turkey, the honor that the Turks subtly trampled on.
He emphasizes that the decisions of the international tribunal are binding not only for the present and the future, but also for the past.
  All the crimes of the Hitler regime condemned in the decisions of the Nuremberg International Court took place before the first session of the court.
  However, it was on the basis of those decisions that the main organizers of the crime were punished.
 Such crimes should not go unpunished due to antiquity3.
 Speaking about the issue of compensation of the Armenian people, it should be noted that in this case it is too late to impose a separate punishment on certain individuals.
  Now the Turkish state, the Turkish people as a whole, must accept responsibility for the crime committed by their fathers, if any compensation can be found for the massacres of large numbers of Armenians and their unborn children, it could be the return of Armenians to their ancestral lands.
 Moreover, their borders must be determined by mutual agreement.
The Turks do not have the right to use the Armenian lands, because they seized them, in fact, through murder, that is, committing a crime against humanity.
 The fact that they still use those lands contradicts the basic principles of justice. Is not a son a reward for murder?
According to Gembarski, the only logical solution to the Armenian question is the independence of Western Armenia, "both the decisions of the Nuremberg tribunal and the 1960 UN General Assembly resolution. in the light of the complete abolition of the colony of December 14 (27 November 27, 1961) ”4.
Gembarski mentions other documents in favor of the liberation of Armenia.
  First of all, it is the Treaty of the Peace of the Sword, under which the signatures of most European states are placed.
To the possible counter-arguments by the Turks that Soviet Armenia already exists as an Armenian state, there is no need to create a second Armenian state, as well as the fact that the number of Armenian immigrants is not large enough to be entitled to 1 Ibid., P. 18.
2 See Gembarski B., "OPEN LETTER TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS, NEW GREETING MR. TANIN "(" Letters to the World "collection, compiled, edited, annotated by H. Karchikyan), Yerevan, 1990, pp. 19-20.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., Pp. 19-20.
Speaking on behalf of the whole nation, Gembarski responds in advance that the Armenian SSR is a small, non-productive mountainous country (28.8 thousand km2), which is unable to accommodate more inhabitants than it currently has (1.9 million, of which about 1.5 million Armenians) .
 There is not a single Armenian in the whole world who would not long for the liberation of historical Armenian lands.
  From that point of view, the aspiration of all Armenians is united.
Gembarski offers his version of the solution of the Armenian question, which should be beneficial for both sides through mutual concessions.
 He sees the solution to the Armenian question as follows. Despite the fact that the Armenians are the injured party, they are not obliged to pay for the return of their lands illegally appropriated by Turkey, and in case of mutual understanding, the Armenians are ready to pay Turkey for the land or other real estate.
Gembarski considers the issue of full territorial independence indisputable. Western Armenia should not be politically dependent on either Turkey or the Soviet Union.
In case of mutual understanding, the territorial claims of the Armenians will be limited to a minimum.
  The area they demand is equal to about 50 thousand km2.
  In order for a state to be able to provide all the basic guarantees necessary for independence, it must have at least a symbolic access to the sea, as well as a common border with a state (Iran) that is friendly to it and will allow it to communicate with the whole world through its territory.
At the end of the letter, Gembarski writes that with this letter he hands over to the UN Secretary General this issue, which is of the greatest importance for all mankind, and deeply believes that it will be a turning point in the history of the Armenian people1.
In the article "Letter to my Armenian readers" B. Gembarsky addresses the Armenians, proposing his program for the solution of the Armenian question, for the implementation of which he presents the following steps: In order to liberate at least a part of the historical homeland of the Armenians, it is necessary to send open letters to the heads of state and private letters to all world celebrities. attaching relevant literature.
  Gembarski had already started working in this direction, writing his two letters to the "UN Secretary General" and the "President of India".
 He especially emphasizes the importance of their publication in authoritative European newspapers.
- It is necessary to establish local companies of friends of the Armenian people all over the world, mainly in Western European countries and the USA.
 To this end, Gembarski wrote "Three Letters to His Unknown Readers", which, like the previously mentioned letters, were written for a foreign language press.
Work needs to be done to gain political allies, but it would be more effective to look for allies in African countries that are particularly sensitive to colonial issues.
  It is necessary to find the edges of cooperation in the territory of the Arab countries, in some countries of Asia, Latin America and Southern Europe, that is, where there would be an opportunity to defend the demands of the Armenians.
It is very possible to cooperate with various international organizations, try to get their support in the conferences of the UN and its branches.
The Armenian question should be raised in international conferences, the UN declaration on the abolition of colonization should be used, and the decisions of the Nuremberg International Court should be linked to the Armenian Genocide.
As a result of this work, Gembarski saw two possible solutions: the Turkish government would agree to conclude a bilateral agreement with the Armenian migrants through mutual concessions.
- The Turkish government does not want to negotiate.
 In this case, after the appropriate preparation of public opinion, after obtaining the support of a number of countries, it will be necessary to apply to an international court, where a request will be made: 1 See Gembarski B. AT HOME, ”page 32.
to cover the huge material and moral losses, to return the plundered Armenian lands.
Gembarski considered the first option more acceptable, being sure that there would be no need to go to court, և if the Armenians really aspire to it, then the plan to liberate their historical homeland in a peaceful way will be quite feasible.
B. Gembarski has carried out large-scale work on raising the Armenian issue at the UN, UNESCO, and the highest state bodies of different countries.
These are jobs that required not only time, effort, energy, love and devotion, but also significant financial resources.
Speaking in 1960-1970, Gembarski condemned the 1915 The Armenian Genocide, the world's indifference to the sad fate of the Armenian people ժողովրդի to prove that the rights of Armenians must be restored on their native land.
 Through his activities, he started the implementation of the program for the liberation of Western Armenia, hoping that a committee for the struggle for the peaceful liberation of Western Armenia would be established, which would continue the work it had begun.
Bogdan Gembarski, being a great philanthropist, believed in the victory of justice, hoping that the Turks, in order to remove the world shame from their faces, would return the historical homeland that the Armenians had illegally appropriated.
Tsovinar Yolchyan THE ARMENIAN ISSUE AND THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN BOGDAN GEMBARSKY'S LETTERS Keywords: Bogdan Gembarski, Armenian Question, Armenian Genocide.
