SINGAPORE. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO STATE BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT IN ARMENIA The study of foreign experience in state-building allows to confirm the possibility of its enforceability in the Republic of Armenia as well, which will contribute not only to the socio-economic development of the country, but also to progressive military-political.
 Below are the basic provisions of Singapore's development in the field of state-building, which are also applicable in Armenia.
  Comparing all these provisions with Singapore, as an established state with a high standard of living, will allow us to highlight the need and expediency of reforms in this area.
Much has been said about the rapid development of the Republic of Singapore (hereinafter referred to as Singapore) to this day.
 Only 650 sq.m. This city-state model of economic development with an area of ​​km has become the subject of study of many economists, a guideline for state building for a number of countries.
 Having gained independence not far from 1965, Singapore was able to become one of the most prosperous and powerful economies in the world in a very short period of time.
  Improving the financial situation of the newly independent state and improving the living conditions of the people were the priority issues, but the government of Singapore realized that without the established statehood and system of government, their implementation would become almost impossible.
  Therefore, the Government of Singapore, against Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, set out to address fundamental issues from the point of view of state-building, such as choosing the best government horse that would be in line with the non-homogeneous mentality, legal consciousness, and more effective way out of , which was a guarantee for both economic growth and the welfare of the people.
These two principles will be discussed, which had a great impact on the development of Singapore as a powerful state.
The experience of Singapore, which surprised even the countries with developed statehood, was instructive for many other transition countries, we think it can be an example of research, "learning lessons" for the Republic of Armenia.
  Therefore, we consider it necessary to refer to separate examples of that experience in the work, to try their practical application, to substantiate the expediency of its introduction in the Republic of Armenia in the context of solving the problems facing our statehood, the development of the country.
Before discussing the above points in detail, let us turn to a number of remarkable historical facts.
 Throughout most of its history, Singapore has been part of various state unions.
  It was mainly the commercial and strategic base of the British Empire in Southeast Asia.
 During World War II, the island was occupied by Japanese troops (1942-1945).
1959 After the Anglo-Singapore negotiations, it became a self-governing state within the British Commonwealth, but in 1963, after gaining independence from Great Britain, became a member of the Federation of Malaysia.
 As early as 1965, however, it was declared an independent republic1.
After independence, the state faced the following problems. First of all, it was necessary for Singapore to have international recognition, including the need for 1 Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, vol. 10, Yerevan, 1984, p. 388.
accession to the UN.
 Second, having an armed force was a precondition for Singapore.
 There was no army at all, and the two battalions were under the control of Malaysia.
 The third important issue was the definition of guarantees of public order.
 And finally, the most serious task was to raise the living standards of the people and ensure economic growth1.
 However, giving possible solutions to the problems faced was largely conditioned by the choice of the right management horse.
Democratic order in Singapore.
  The Constitution of Singapore was adopted in 1963.
  According to it, "Singapore is a sovereign republic" 2.
  Both the constitutional rights of the state to its citizens, in particular freedom of speech, freedom of movement, conscience, freedom of thought and religion, prove that Singapore is a democracy, yet it must never be sincerely acknowledged. did not strive for democracy.
  But Singapore had its reasons for choosing a democratic form of government.
First of all, both Malaysia and China were communist states, and the adoption of communism would cause Singapore to merge with these countries.
  Thus, the preaching of communism was strictly forbidden in Singapore, which was later strengthened by the fact that those who preached communism would be prosecuted3.
 "The 'golden rules' of democracy in the East have long since become an ordinary stamp; they do not correspond to reality.
  Representatives of dictatorial regimes come to an agreement with the society that by restricting their rights, they will ensure prosperity.
 "Singapore is one of those countries," wrote John Kampfner in his work 4.
It is difficult to disagree with this opinion, because in fact the laws published by the Government of Singapore restrict a number of human rights and ethical rights.
 At the same time, in return for restrictions on rights, the government undertook to develop programs aimed at improving people's living standards.
 The establishment of various innovation centers, factories and organizations in Singapore has not only significantly reduced the unemployment rate to 5%, but has also greatly contributed to the replenishment of the state budget5.
We think that the "balanced" restrictions of democracy are applicable in Armenia, because in 1920 After the sovietization of Armenia until 1991 The Armenian people were subjected to the socialist ideology, at the same time to the barriers and restrictions that were established throughout the Soviet Union.
  Although de jure people were endowed with a number of fundamental rights - freedoms, in fact they were of a figurative nature - under the control of state bodies (in particular, a number of other rights to free movement, freedom of speech).
 We believe that the immediate transition from a socialist system to a democratic one after 71 years of restrictions carries a great risk of becoming permissive.
  Democracy is typical of states with a society with high legal awareness, and it takes time to sow democracy.
Right to freedom of speech.
  One of the possible preconditions of a democratic state is the right to freedom of speech and the media.
 The press greatly contributes to the formation of public opinion, distorting it from time to time.
 Through misinformation, a false opinion is formed by the society - distrust of state governing bodies, which in turn turns into rebellion - conflict.
 The press in Singapore is subject to censorship.
 It is forbidden to publish news about both domestic and foreign policy.
 Because of this restriction, according to the statistics of Reporters Without Borders, Singapore is in the 140th place in the list of 167 countries 6.
 At the same time, this can be considered a precondition for the people's trust in the state and the government.
In other words, the private opinion of journalists does not distort the public perception of politics, regardless of whether the opinion is grounded or not.
  Press in the Republic of Armenia 2 Constitution of the Republic of Singapore (adopted in 1963), Article 3.
6 See http.
//en.rsf.org/press-freedom-index-2013,1054.html.
It is not censored, but only edited and handed over to the public.
 Particularly noticeable are the cases when unsubstantiated articles with erroneous legal interpretations cause people to have a stereotypical mentality and distrust.
 One can point to the misconception of the judiciary as an example, based on the lack of specialization of journalists and the lack of knowledge of the laws, as a result of the court proceedings.
 These և a number of other examples prove that both in Singapore and in Armenia, the right to freedom of speech must be restricted.
 However, this restriction will be considered unconstitutional, contradictory to a number of international treaties, which are the constituent elements of the RA legal system1.
  To avoid this controversy, the media can be controlled, following the example of Singapore, which is controlled by special agencies that will monitor the relevance of the material being published or released, and in the event of embezzlement will be held accountable under existing law2.
The introduction of this mechanism will first of all stimulate the raising of the legal awareness of the society, at the same time it will increase the level of specialization of the mass media.
  Therefore, in order to avoid the unconstitutionality of the restrictions, it is necessary to establish control.
Fight against corruption.
 From the very first day of coming to power, the Singaporean government began to insist that every dollar that entered the state budget be controlled until it reaches its addressee until the last penny, without any mediation.
 From the very beginning, special attention was paid to the types of activities where the authorities could be used for their own benefit.
 In this regard, the control was tightened, the government decided to focus on the civil servants և higher classes, as the fight against corruption in the society was carried out by eliminating the ambiguity of the laws և by clarifying.
 As long as there were cases of corruption crimes in the courts, the laws continued to be tightened.
  1960 The previous law was changed, expanding the concept of "bribery".
 This change gave greater powers to those who were fighting corruption: intelligence, arrest, checking the bank accounts of the person տվյալ his / her family members, etc.3.
Still in 1952 There is a Corruption Bureau (CPIB) in Singapore4.
This structure was obliged to carry out control and investigation to identify those whose property did not correspond to the salary.
  That person was handed over to the police or the Bureau of Corruption Investigation, where a criminal case was initiated after a thorough investigation of the circumstances5.
The Bureau of Corruption (CPIB) was an independent body, reporting directly to the President and reporting to him.
 This anti-corruption method allowed Singapore to get rid of it once and for all, according to a 2013 Transparency International report. According to the published data, Singapore ranks fifth among the least corrupt countries6.
  Unlike Singapore, Armenia, according to the data published by the same organization, ranks 94th out of 175 countries.
Based on the results of the anti-corruption strategy of the Republic of Armenia and its implementation program for 2003-2007, as well as the international indicators for assessing the level of corruption and the analysis of their tendencies, it can be concluded that the level of corruption in Armenia remains high. it is systemic.
  In addition, ACSDP8 did not include a clear, measurable, achievable goal in the fight against corruption. 1 Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (adopted in 1995, amended in 2005), Article 6.
2 RA Criminal Code, Article 135, RA Civil Code, Article 1087.1.
4 English: Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau.
5 See http.
//app.cpib.gov.sg/cpib_new/user/default.aspx?pgID=21.
6 See http.
//cpi.transparency.org/cpi2013/results/.
7 The decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia on approving the anti-corruption strategy of the Republic of Armenia ծրագիրը the program of measures for its implementation, 06.11.2003, N 1522-N.
8 CRIM - Anti-Corruption Strategy - Action Plan.
and was not oriented towards obtaining concrete results, did not complete the results of the implementation of measures in the solution of the problems.
The Government of the Republic of Armenia has recognized the fight against corruption as one of the key issues of its activity.
  2000 In May, the main directions of the anti-corruption policy were defined for the first time, enabling the implementation of effective, balanced personnel policy, provision of state guarantees of social and legal protection of civil servants, declaration of incomes of high-ranking officials, application of legislation regulating public procurement, registration of enterprises. The fight against shadowing և criminalization.
 The fight against corruption has also been recognized as one of the priorities of the RA National Security Strategy1.
2009-2012 Anti-Corruption Strategy of the Republic of Armenia միջ Measures for its Implementation The program clearly outlines the list of bodies that carry out the fight against corruption.
 In particular, the National Security Bodies, the bodies of the Special Investigation Service, the Department for Corruption and Organized Crime.
  The activities of the mentioned bodies are directly under the control of the Prosecutor's Office.
 In order to ensure the full and effective implementation of the anti-corruption policy of the Republic of Armenia, the Anti-Corruption Council (CCC) was established by the decree of the President of the Republic of Armenia under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia to coordinate the activities of state authorized bodies, eliminate the causes of corruption and prevent them.
  According to the regulations, an Anti-Corruption Strategy Implementation Monitoring Committee was established.
The Anti-Corruption Council supports the implementation of the anti-corruption state policy of the Republic of Armenia, guided by the RA Constitution, other legal acts and regulations.
  An Anti-Corruption Implementation Monitoring Center is being set up under the Council.
  Unlike other anti-corruption bodies, the CPC has broader powers3.
Armenia is also a member of a number of international anti-corruption organizations.
 In January 2004, Armenia joined GRECO. The Council of Europe's Criminal Law Convention on Corruption was signed by the Council of Europe in June and December, respectively. քաղաքացի The Civil Law Convention on Corruption.
  GRECO supports proposals for the adoption of rules of conduct for MPs, which will more effectively regulate issues such as gifts given to MPs, conflicts of interest and income declaration.
 GRECO, in turn, is the body of the Council of Europe, which aims to improve the capacity of its member states through the fight against corruption4.
 Armenia is also involved in the "Istanbul Anti-Corruption Action Plan" program initiated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, in particular for the eight former Soviet countries.
  It is called to improve the anti-corruption policy of the mentioned countries through the proposals developed by international experts.
 Recommendations on Armenia were developed and adopted in 2004.5.
 In addition to joining a number of other international anti-corruption organizations, the Transparency International Anti-Corruption Center also operates in Armenia, which is a non-governmental organization that conducts its activities through public oversight and awareness raising.
Finally, summarizing the above, we can come to the following conclusion. whether a number of bodies in the Republic of Armenia carry out anti-corruption measures through control, awareness or other means, the same bodies are not independent.
 That is, they, in turn, are under the direct control of another body.
 At the same time, the RA Government's decision on approving the RA anti-corruption strategy and the program of measures for its implementation, 06.11.2003, N 1522-N.
2 RA Presidential Decree on Establishing an Anti-Corruption Council, 01.06.2004, NH-100-N.
3 See the charter of the RA Anti-Corruption Council http.
//www.gov.am/files/councils/2.pdf.
4 See http.
//aysor.am/en/news/2013/07/02/greco-corruption/.
5 See http.
//www.oecd.org/corruption/acn/istanbulactionplan/.
There are corrupt bodies that have wide powers. in particular, in addition to control, take action to detect corruption.
Although the RA Criminal Code provides a whole list of corruption crimes, fixes the appropriate sanction for giving or receiving bribes, but due to incomplete regulation of legislative gaps, the number of corruption crimes in Armenia does not decrease1.
Therefore, we think that in the Republic of Armenia it is necessary to first of all form a body with an anti-corruption mission, which will be independent, without any direct control of a state body, but at the same time will be accountable for its actions exclusively to the President of the Republic of Armenia.
  Unlike the already functioning bodies, this structure, according to the charter, will be endowed with a number of powers.
 First, it will have the right to visit the institutions where there is a corruption risk.
 Second, the body will be given the opportunity to get directly acquainted with the affairs of the government, and to identify and eliminate cases of bribery.
  And the most powerful authority that the body should have is the control over the bank accounts or financial resources of any suspect, regardless of official position or status.
 It will give an opportunity to stop the illegal և corrupt behavior.
 Legislative reforms are also possible. In particular, the powers of state bodies should be further clarified, and discretionary behavior that may be exercised by that body should be ruled out as much as possible.
Awareness is very important in the society, which will be implemented not only through educational programs, but also through the mass media.
 First of all, every case revealed, being in the center of public և media attention, builds confidence in the law ցանկացած that any illegal act is eventually revealed բացահայտ is held accountable.
 The factor of public reproach is also of great importance here, which is especially typical of the mental structure of our people and has a great influence.
We think that the introduction of these funds in Armenia will first of all prevent the growth of corruption risk.
 However, the struggle should start not from the private sector, but from the public sector, as the latter itself serves as an example - it controls the private sector.
  Summing up, the example of the development of Singapore is instructive, applicable for the development of state building in the Republic of Armenia.
 We just need to bring them in line with the legal consciousness of our people - not to imitate, but to imitate those principles, to integrate into our society not through changes, but through improvements.
  "It does not matter whether those reforms take place gradually or immediately.
 "The important goal is to improve life through reforms," ​​said Lee Kuan Yew during his four-day official visit to Armenia at the invitation of Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan.
Anna MkrtchyanSINGAPORE. PROVISIONS OF STATE BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT APPLICABLE IN ARMENIA Keywords: Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, democracy, development model, localization of experience.
