ABOUT CERTAIN FEATURES OF OTTOMAN LITERATURE OF THE 15-16TH CENTURIES In the context of different divisions of Ottoman literature presented by European, Russian and Turkish literary critics, the 15th-16th centuries are considered as a separate period of literary development.
 It coincides with the period of the greatest rise of the Ottoman Empire [1], when along with political and economic achievements, the scientific-cultural, particularly literary life developed.
  Famous geologist E. Ջ. Gibb considers 1453-1600 as a separate period for the development of Ottoman culture, particularly literature.
 1453 The conquest of Constantinople was a turning point for the further development of the sultanate.
  In this way, the Ottomans acquired a strategically important cultural center, the "golden bridge" between the west and the east.
 This phenomenon had its impact on the scientific and cultural life of the sultanate.
  Science, various branches of art and culture began to develop rapidly.
 Numerous Ottoman works were created on astronomy, mathematics, architecture, aesthetics, theology, law, medicine, chemistry, geography, history, biography, and all the sciences studied in the Islamic East.
 The Ottoman state, being spread over three continents, was able to unite many famous scientists and artists of the East.
Apparently, Gibb's period coincides with the Renaissance in Europe.
 It is assumed that the processes taking place in world science and art would have an impact on Ottoman culture, while studies in this field prove otherwise.
 As Gibb mentions. "The Renaissance, which brought about changes in the scientific and moral life of the West, did not reach the shores of Islam.
  East-West, which had previously followed the same path, were divided.
 The west went to the right, and the east continued on the old road. "
  Many Soviet archaeologists agree.
In particular, the famous Turkologist A. "The ideas of the European Renaissance had no effect on Ottoman literary thought," Krimsky said.
 That is why there is no golden age of Ottoman literature. "[5]
 Contrary to Krimsky's opinion, it should not be overlooked that the Arian Renaissance, which developed in a wide way in Arabic-Persian literature from the 7th to the 8th centuries, left its deep imprint on the development of the literary thought of the Ottoman Empire.
 One of the Armenologists A. Sargsyan writes about that. "In the 16th century, observations on Ottoman culture, particularly literature, contradicted each other, but it can be said unequivocally that the tendencies of the so-called" Eastern Renaissance "were not adequate to the European Renaissance."
 In this respect, the Soviet archaeologist R. is especially remarkable. The principle of the division of Molov into the stages of Ottoman poetry.
 The latter, conditioned by the influence of the Eastern Renaissance on the Ottoman culture, divides the literature into two periods of development: a. prenatal period (12-15th centuries). The Iranian Renaissance, as a cultural heritage, played a significant role in the formation of the literature of the Seljuk government, the Asia Minor states վաղ in the early period of the Ottoman state 1 the culture and literature of Asia Minor.
b. Renaissance period (16-17th centuries). The already widespread renaissance tendencies are manifested in the initial stage of the development of the Ottoman state and its collapse [7].
Both the Ottoman civilization and the literature were borrowed from the Persians by the Seljuks, so it is quite natural that there are a number of similarities in the works of the Ottoman Persian writers.
 In particular, in the poetry of these two peoples we encounter the same sound, sensuality, forms of speech and the poetic structure.
  That is why Ottoman poetry is considered a purely Persian branch of literature.
 When the Seljuks invaded Asia Minor, they established a sultanate here, received their education from the Persians, and became acquainted with Persian literature.
 From its inception, both Seljuk and Ottoman literature were influenced by the "Golden Age of Iran" classics.
 In the 13th and 14th centuries, Jalaluddin Rumi had the greatest influence on the Ottoman scientific and literary thought.
 After the conquest of Asia Minor by Timur (1402), a number of Persian Soviet archaeologists, including R. Mollow's works often refer to Ottoman culture and literature as "Turkish", which, however, is unacceptable; It is more expedient to use the terms "Turk" and "Turkish" correctly to define the terms referring not to the Ottoman, but to the region of the Republic of Turkey.
A new stage of ideological and literary influence.
  Nizami, Saad, Hafez, etc. had a great influence on literature in the Ottoman Empire.
  The Persian school of literature had the greatest influence on Ottoman poetry in the second half of the 15th century.
Persian literature on Ottoman literature was finally strengthened by Jami (1414-1492).
 He had an allegorical language and wrote within the framework of mysticism.
 Even E. Gibb considers Ottoman poetry to be one of the branches of the Iraqi school of Persian literature, which has improved slightly over time and gained some independence.
 This view is shared by Russian archaeologist V. Smirnov [13].
  On the thematic-genre peculiarities of the Ottoman poetry of the time A. Sargsyan writes. "Ottoman literature in this period was in search of new content.
  Turkish writers imitated Arabic-Persian literary genres, methods, and themes, often "adapting" to the Ottoman environment.
 Literary genres were borrowed from Ottoman-Arab-Persian literature.
  For this reason, Ottoman authors wrote their works using Arabic-Persian poetic dimensions.
  The traditions of Arabic orthography entered Persian literature and became widespread in Indo-Ottoman poetry.
 Later, a new poetic dimension began to be used - aruz, which was constructed using long, short vowels.
 Since this system does not exist in Turkish, Ottoman poets had to use Arabic և Persian words.
 In the 16th century, Turkish words were already missing in Ottoman works, only some authors sometimes used Turkish verbs.
Ottoman authors in this period began to emphasize not content but various tricks of confusing foreign words.
  Complex words were used, religious terms that were completely foreign.
This marked the beginning of "technical poetry."
 Works based on word games began to be written, in particular puzzles, chronicles (tarih), and riddles (muamma).
 It should be noted that despite some of the positive tendencies observed in Turkish literature of the period, there were also a large number of negative ones.
 In particular, it should be noted that, due to foreign influences, Turkish poets clung to foreign language borrowings in every way.
  As Persian poetry was very popular at that time, in order for Turkish poets to be considered "genius", they had to compose in accordance with the traditions of Persian poetry.
  Poets used complex Arabic and Persian words and grammatical structures.
 The meaning and idea expressed in the work was pushed to the background.
 In many cases, the different word tricks and their entanglement made the meaning of the work incomprehensible.
 This led to a crisis in Ottoman literature.
In both Ottoman and Persian literature, poetry surpassed prose in this period.
 These poems are marked by extreme elegance, elegant vocabulary and beautiful harmony.
 But on the other hand, they are very artificial, the feeling is often extreme, the thoughts are clear, the language is distorted with many luxurious expressions.
Famous archaeologist S. Lane-Poole mentions that the main theme of the poems written in this period was love, with its pleasures and sufferings, as well as the description of spring charms, the sweet song of the onion, the beauty of flowers, and other wonderful phenomena of nature.
 All this had a context of religious mysticism 2.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, in addition to the most popular love and philosophical themes, poetry of a poetic nature was widespread, flourishing in the palace of the Ottoman sultans.
  Mostly in the Qasid genre, the divan poets praised the victories, success, power of arms, sultan's generosity and mercy of the Ottoman army.
 Despite the ideological and thematic limitations, new literary genres were developing and new characters were being formed during this period.
  In particular, in the 15th century, a new literary form appeared in Ottoman literature, the rind, and already in the 16th century, the genre of romantic-romantic classes began to develop.
  In the 16th and 17th centuries, Ottoman literature took on a new content, which testifies to the change of new social and aesthetic perceptions, the antagonism in art. [7]
 Particularly in literary works, a critical approach begins to take shape: 2 Mysticism (Sufism) as a religious-philosophical worldview, with ancient, deep roots.
 It has always accompanied the world religions, adapting to them and changing.
This, perhaps, is due to the ideological complexity of Sufism, as this ascetic movement in the Arab East, inclined to orthodox Islam, includes philosophical categories such as Neoplatonism and Gnosticism.
  However, despite the different forms of ideological manifestation, the basic idea of ​​mysticism is irrational communication with God through the enlightenment of the soul.
  Mysticism is one of the edges that brings East and West closer to the Islamic and Christian worlds.
See A. Kozmoyan, Comparative Poetics of Armenian-Persian Medieval Poetry (1016th Centuries), Yerevan, 1997, p. 64, From Old Turkish Poetry, Composition I. Borolino, s. 262, հանդեպ towards social events.
 Poetry acquires a gloomy and pessimistic nature.
 Such moods were expressed by Nixar, Usuli, Shohret, Riyaz, Rouhi, Nefi and other poets in their works.
  Within the framework of the theme of love, the ideas of the individual's self-consciousness, the right to love and the earthly happiness of a person develop.
  Nevertheless, as noted by R. According to Molov, the ideas of the Renaissance on the culture of Ottoman literature could not be fully developed and fully manifested, which had happened in the West.
 In this respect, medieval Turkey in particular remained halfway.
The 16th century is considered to be the period of the rise of the empire, the "golden age" of literature, [18] but it is also the period when the alienation of the people from the Ottoman elite deepened.
  This is especially true in the language, because in the 16th century the Ottoman language was so far removed from its Turkic origin, the colloquial language, that it was simply incomprehensible to the common people.
 It seems from the literary works created in the 15th century that due to social differences, linguistic levels begin to appear.
  However, such a development of the Ottoman language had not only social, but also political and cultural reasons.
 This was a period when Persian was considered the main language of the region, and Arabic, as it is known, was the language of Islam.
 Famous Turkish literary critic S. In his History of Ottoman Literature, Shahab al-Din describes the history and reasons for the development of different levels of language, noting that the Ottomans first purified their language of harsh words through Persian and then Arabic, beautifying it to perfection.
 As a result, in the 16th century, three levels of language were formed: 1. beautiful Turkish - Ottoman (Fasıh Türkçe, Sâde Türkçe, Lisan-iOsmaniye), which was the language of classical literature (divan edebiyatı); language (Orta Türkçe), which was accessible to ordinary people, 3. Rude or vulgar Turkish (Kaba Türkçesi) [21].
As mentioned by M. F. Kyoprulu, the language in that period was divided into two parts. One was the language of ordinary people, and the other was the language of the palace.
 The latter, the Ottoman language, acted as a state-public, at the same time highly secular literary language, becoming the main language of Ottoman literature in the 15th-16th centuries.
  According to linguist A. Ն. According to Kononov, Ottoman as a language was finally developed in the 15th and 16th centuries.
  This period is considered to be the early period of the classical Ottoman language (Klasik Osmanlı Türkçesi) [23].
It is a synthesis of Ottoman Arabic, Persian and Turkish.
 Most of the vocabulary of this language was Arabic և Persian borrowings [9, 20].
 As early as the 16th century, foreign language words and grammatical forms were used more extensively in the language than the original Turkic forms, although the basis of the Ottoman language is itself Turkic.
  It reached perfection due to Arabic և Persian borrowings (zirve-i tekamülle).
  As it is known, the most important means of language development and dissemination is literature.
 However, the literature not only did not solve this problem, but also deepened it.
Foreign influences on Ottoman literature are great.
  It was particularly influenced by Persian and Arabic literature, especially poetry.
 It is believed that Ottoman literature in the 15th century was influenced by Chagatai literature, [12] in particular Alisher Navoi, which lasted until the beginning of the 16th century.
  Foreign influences, such as the complexity of the Ottoman language, caused diplomacy, which, from the 15th century onwards, gradually moved away from popular culture to be understood only by the elite.
  For this reason, the 15th century is considered a transitional period of Ottoman literature.
 This caused the folk literature and the palace diplomacy to separate and develop independently of each other.
Thus, it should be noted that in the 15th and 16th centuries, Ottoman poetry achieved some success, especially in verse genres, but in thematic, genre-linguistic terms, it was greatly influenced by foreign, especially Persian poetry.
 Despite the claims that the literature of the Divan was experiencing a great development in this period, nevertheless, we see crisis phenomena here in connection with the development of the widespread use of technical poetry.
 Besides, it can be considered a negative phenomenon that the literature of the divan was not accessible to the general public.
LITERATURE Kadlümüne Kadar, Ankara, Türk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi, 1988s. 474, Bayburdyan V. A., History of the Ottoman Empire, Yerevan, YSU, 2011, p. 242.
Gazis.
 The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire (1280-1808), Cambridge, Cambridge [6] Sargsyan A. H., Peculiarities of the Development of 16th Century Ottoman Poetry in the Baku Divan, Issues of Archeology, Yerevan, 2014, p. 178, URL.
 http:
//publications.ysu.am/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Sargsyan-A.pdf.[9] Inalcık H., The Origins of Classical Ottoman Literature.
  Persian Tradition, Court5-75. URL.
http:
//www.inalcik.com/images/pdfs/792062ORiGiNSOFCLASSiCALOTTOMANLiTERATUR
E.pdf (Accessed.
 13.10.2017). [15] Deo A., Kiparsky P., Poetries in Contact.
  Arabic, Persian, and Urdu, p.1. URL.
http:
//www.stanford.edu/~kiparsky/Papers/tartu.pdf (Accessed.
 26.09.2017). [17] Andrews WG, Stepping Aside.
 Ottoman Literature in Modern Turkey, Journal of Ankara, pp. 12-13, URL.
  http:
//faculty.washington.edu/walter/aside.pdf(Accessed.
[18] Sargsyan A., On Some Peculiarities of 16th Century Ottoman Poetry, Issues of Archeology, Volume 7, Yerevan, 2014, p. 176, URL.
http:
//publications.ysu.am/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Sargsyan-A.pdf (Accessed.
 19.10.2017). [21] Sargsyan A., On the Peculiarities of the Language of the 16th Century Turkish Poet Baku's Divan, Iran Name, Archaeological Journal, p. 87.
[25] Solmaz S., Factors in the selection of words in Divan poetry, p. 42, URL.
http:
//www.turkiyat.selcuk.edu.tr/pdfdergi/s15/solmaz.pdf (Accessed.
 15.09.2017) .http.
//www.isam.org.tr/documents/_dosyalar/_pdfler/osmanli_arastirmalari_dergisi/osman
l% C4% B1_sy26 / 2005_26_BATIISLAMHD.pdf (Accessed:
  22.09.2017), Kolçak O., Divan Melkonyan Mariam ABOUT CERTAIN FEATURES OF OTTOMAN LITERATURE OF THE 15-16TH CENTURIES Keywords: Ottoman poetry, renaissance, literary genre, theme, literary thought.
