RELATIONSHIPS THE WORDS SHOWING IN ARMENIAN AND THEIR CHANGES The words for kinship have preserved their Indo-European roots quite purely, and if there are borrowed words, they are basically parallel.
 Hrachya Acharyan, in separating thematic groups in "History of the Armenian Language", allocates the following words to the Indo-European word layer in the family group: "Husband, husband, wife, father, mother, father, mother-in-law, mother, chicken, brother, grandson, sister, son, husband, daughter, etc."
In his work dedicated to the draft period of the history of the Armenian language. Jahukyan brings the following words in the thematic group "Humanity, gender, age, family relations". "Man, man, woman, manch, dude (girl), husband, father, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, brother-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law
The words indicating kinship are included in the following groups: 1. Real kin names (mother, father, child, boy, girl, sister, brother, child, daughter, oyster, son), 2. Names of mediated blood-kinship relations (grandmother, grandfather, uncle, aunt, aunt, uncle, grandson), 3. Names of acquired kinship relations (husband, wife, widow, mother-in-law, father-in-law, tiger, give, father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law).
Mother - is a native Armenian word that originates from hnkh. mate'r from the beginning.
  This vocabulary is also used in Indo-European sister languages ​​(for example, Russian: мать, English: mather, German: mutter, etc.).
It is a word handed down from Grabar, it had the following sounds: mar, mer.
  The modified version of Mar (ay> a) is most common in the dialects of the Western faction (Marash, Sebastia, Constantinople, Kharberd, Arabkir).
 Our (ay> e) transliterated version is used in the dialects of the Armenian և´ Eastern, Western faction.
We have the word mam, which Acharyan considers borrowing from the Greek word mamme, grandmother.
 In his opinion, mam could be a form of a noun consisting of the mother word, but since there is a suffix of the word father in parallel with the abbreviation of the mother word, which is derived from the word father, it is borrowed, so he concludes that mam և should to borrow from Greek.
Academician G. Jahukyan "History of the Armenian language. In the work "Periodic Period" he mentions that Indo-European radical forms are preserved in the dialects, which, however, are absent in the written monuments of the Armenian language.
 Among the words expressing kinship, he includes the dialect words api, dado, atta, ma, mam, nan, which he considers to be predominantly childish or short.
The dialectal versions of the mother word are: mam, nan, azi, ade, dade, aba, ana, aya, deya, ava, na-ars, harsa, harsi, which have an imperative usage.
  There is an Indo-European root word nan in Armenian dialects, which is not deposited in written monuments.
 H. Khachatryan states in his work "Words expressing kinship relations in Armenian dialects". "This is related to the name of the goddess Nane.
 The mother could be a symbol of common sense, wisdom, motherhood. ”3
Father-native is an Armenian word that originated from the Indo-European pater initiative4.
  The father with a suffix is ​​more used as a calligraphy և.
  The dialect versions are: Har, Her 1 Acharyan H., History of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1940, vol. 1, p. 109.
2 Jahukyan G., History of the Armenian language. Preliminary period, Yerevan, 1987, p. 259.
3 Khachatryan H., Words expressing kinship relations in Armenian dialects, Yerevan, 2009, p. 20.
4 Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, Yerevan, 1926, page 31.
(Karabakh, Shamakhi), kher (Van, Mush), hari, harik, bab (Mush, Cilicia, Constantinople), then, api, dado, dada (Khoy, Van, Maragha), ada, afo, biji, kher (Aragats in Vardaplur of the region), Tayu (Bezhano-Kzlchakhchakh villages of Kars, Akhalkalaki).
  In some Armenian dialects, Tayu means uncle, a respectful way of addressing a great man, for example, in the Poka-Olaverd villages of Akhalkalaki.
  The version of the owl, which means uncle in Georgian, has been preserved only in the monologue in the village of Shamut, Lori.
 The word "pap" is used in Armenian dialects in two senses: grandfather (grandfather) և father.
  Acharyan considers papa to be borrowed from Pahlavi in ​​the sense of grandfather, and papa considers it a new word in the sense of father.
Child - first of all, means a minor, a girl or a boy who has not reached the age of adolescence.
In kinship relations, the child has the meaning.
  In the Armenian dialects, the literary words of the daughter of the child chain, the oust և son are absent, the names of child, boy, girl are used instead.
 The dialectal forms of this concept are: erkheca, chizh (which already existed in Middle Armenian), boy, chagha, chojugh, zushagh (from Turkish), khizan, bulluz, pluz, tikhmar, bizdik, kokha (Acharyan considers it a borrowed word from Turkish).
The word pluz is given by Acharyan ում it is connected with the Arabic biliz (short) root.
 In some dialects (Sasun, Mush, Van) the word for child is called the word glalao, which is a Kurdish loanword.
  In parallel, the words jizhbala (Yeghegnia village of Yeghegnadzor) and jizh korp (Vernashen village of Yeghegnadzor) work in front of the concept of a child.
 In NHB, the word boy is interpreted as a child, a small child.
 In the dialects of Tigranakert and Akni, the stupid word for child is used.
 In the NBU, it is considered to be a word composed of a scientifically rooted negative suffix.
The son-son got the meaning in Eastern Armenian.
  Acharyan considers it a word borrowed from Assyrian, which means little child, child, adolescent, in Hebrew it means a young lamb.
 The linguist mentions that in the Holy Book, he also used the word with Yeghishe in a simple, ignorant sense.
 In Eastern literature it is specific only to males, but in Western literature, in Old Armenian, in Middle Armenian it is specific to both males and females.
 The following word coincidences are registered in the Armenian dialects opposite to the concept of a male child: tigha, lach, manch, poluz, gyada, tigha kokha, etc.
  Lach considers cartilage to be a Middle Armenian word meaning ustr, manch, boy.
  Manch, in the sense of a male boy, considers it a Middle Armenian word, which originates from Hnkh. mas - from the root of the boy.
The feminine term for a girl-child relationship is expressed by the word girl.
 Acharyan leaves this word unexplained.
  Antoine Maye connects the origin of the word girl with the verb aghal.
Arakel Syunetsi interprets it from the word chik.
  According to Pontic folk etymology, the word։ ~ արտահայտ արտահայտ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 He also referred to the investigation of the origin of this word. Hambardzumyan, who considers the initial snow of the word to be a girl, which originates from the Indo-European root at.
  He thinks that the root salt of the word girl in the most primitive sense meant a hard-working housewife.
 Nachon is a variant of this word.
 In Armenian dialects, the term girl is expressed by the word nabulig, which exists in the Hamshen dialect.
 In the Lori dialect, the word "khizan" is considered to be outside the meaning of this concept.
 Tumanyan uses this word in the poem "Maro". A khizan in a red cloth fell into the gorge, a path… .1.
Sister-native is an Armenian word.
  Acharyan mentions the words consisting of the sexual stem of this word: cousin, uncle, cousin, cousin.
  The word had the following phonetic variants in the dialects: kur, kor, ker, kiy, kir, kayr, etc.
 The word "sister" is used in the word "sister", which is found in the word group Khoy-Maragha.
  In Armenian dialects it is found in the sense of և´ father, և´ mother,։ sister.
 The word Baji, which is a borrowed word from Turkish, is used in the dialects of Martakert and Nakhichevan in exchange for the concept of sister.
Brother-native Armenian word: հնխ. bhrater caused by the initiator.
 The concept of "brother" in "literary Armenian" and "dialects" is expressed only by the word "brother", in contrast to which no word is used.
  Acharyan brings a number of phonetic versions of this concept in dialects: akhbar, akhper, abar, abarik, aper, api, apin, babar, 1 Tumanyan H., Selected works, h. 1, Yerevan, 1985, p. 171.
apar, apu, apun, և mentions that they passed from the original brother to the meaning of big brother, father, uncle և became the title of giving to the elders.
Thus, the words that express the kinship relationship have not been revived over the centuries, but, on the contrary, have been enriched by means borrowed from other languages.
 The words that were not evidenced in ancient literary Armenian have preserved Indo-European root forms in dialects.
The other group is the words indicating mediated blood-kinship relations (grandmother, grandfather, uncle, aunt, aunt, uncle, grandson).
Tat-Acharyan explains this word as a grandmother, hence the meaning of grandmother, grandmother.
He mentions the meanings of natata, grandmother, uncle, uncle's wife.
  The linguist considers grandma to be a natural word, which is specific to children's language, it exists in both Indo-European and other language groups.
 In Armenian dialects, the phonetic forms of this word are tadi, tato, tata, which have a summative value.
 This concept is expressed by the words na և mam ան nan, which are used in Armenian dialects with the meanings և´ mother, և´ grandmother.
 In some dialects, mothers's parents are given different names.
  For example, in the village of Tsoku in Karin, the mother is the father of the mother, and the grandmother is the mother of the mother.
 Since in some dialects (Goris, Shamakh, Hadrut, etc.) the words mam, nan, ana, aba, ada, aya had the main meaning, therefore, they got the meaning of grandmother with a big adjective: big mam, big nan, menz ana և etc. .
 Among the verbal expressions of the concept of grandmother stands out the name babo, which is used in some dialects of Karabakh-Shamakhi.
 Dadoh-European root has limited use in the dialects of Mush, Alashkert, Sasun.
 The use of the word hazi in the grandmother sense is found in Goris, Nakhichevan and Karabakh dialects.
Pap-Acharyan considered the grandfather meaning of this word to be a loan from the Pahlavi pap dz, and the NHB considered the pope to be a Greek loan.
 This word is manifested by the addition of a small diminutive particle - grandfather.
 The dialectal phonetic versions of the word Pap are: papka (Berkri), baba (Martakert), paba (Nakhichan), menz bob (Hachn) և etc.
  The terms apu, apo, api of this notion are evidenced in the Kapan dialect.
Uncle-Acharyan leaves this word unexplained, or thinks that it is necessary to attach it to the sister's sex horse, uncle.
 Jahukyan considers his uncle to be independent of his sister.
 Uncle's root connects the Indo-European su-esor with his own blood.
 Unlike other related names, the word uncle has few word equivalents in Armenian dialects: uncle, dai (Goris, Shamakh), khalo (Mush, Sasun), daijan (Marasha), daday (Goris).
 Acharyan brings a group of words consisting of this: quartet, cousin, cousin, great-grandfather.
 The descriptive word uncle is not registered in almost any of the Armenian dialects.
  Acharyan mentions that there is no evidence in the old bibliography, but he considers it accidental, because the word of his cousin is used in the chronicle.
It is a word derived from the aunt-descriptive egg, like the words aunt, uncle.
  The dialectal words are: morkur, muykiy, mochir, makir, baji, bibi, mraker.
  In some dialects of Bibi's Armenian, Bibi acts as an aunt, in others as an aunt.
  Baji, which means sister in Turkish, in Maragha dialect ույր means sister, և´ aunt.
It is a word derived from the aunt-descriptive egg.
 The dialectal words are horkur, khurkur, kherkur, hrakir, hirakir, hakur, hokir, haku, bibi, baji, etc.
 In the Krzen dialect, the concept of aunt is expressed by the word grandmother, and the concept of grandmother by the capital word.
Uncle - this is a "descriptive word".
 Appoints his father's brother.
The dialect variants are: horokhper, hopar, herbar (Meghri), khorper (Goris), ghorper (Karabakh).
 Some dialects use the words borrowed from Turkish and borrowed from Georgian.
Grandson is a native Armenian word, hnkh. tor from the root.
  One of the related tribes is the Sanskrit word taruna - a young, childish woman or girl.
 This word is manifested by the addition of a small diminutive particle - grandson, during which the Grabarian n is restored.
The dialectal phonetic forms are: theor, tor, tur, tar, turn, etc.
The words that call for acquired kinship relations are: husband, wife, widow, mother-in-law, father-in-law, tiger, give, father-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law.
Husband - this was the generalized term for male and female words in both ancient Armenian and modern literary Armenian.
  Acharyan considers it to be a native Armenian word և in the verbs like this: am-together + ous-to-learn + (suffix).
  Expresses the meaning used to each other.
The original meaning of this word was peer, modern, which over time has been pushed into the background, և it has been replaced by the meanings of male and female.
  This name does not differentiate between the sexes.
  It is used equally instead of the words և´ man, և´ woman.
Over time, this word has become the absolute name of the term male, while the compounds refer to the two pairs: husband, to marry, marriage.
  The concept of husband in Armenian dialects stands out with its synonymous variety: man, eric, engaged.
  The word "man" meaning "husband" has not been handed down to us from the Old Armenian.
  It has been used as a husband since Middle Armenian.
  The idiom used for the concept of husband includes both Eastern and Western dialects of dialects.
  Acharyan writes about this. "The family organization was patriarchal. The husband was the landlord, the commander և the manager. For this reason, the word potis, the word husband, means leader in the Indo-European language.
Ayr is a native Armenian word.
 Modern literary Eastern Armenian almost does not use the word husband in the sense of husband.
 E. Aghayan considers his main meaning to be a man, and the secondary - his husband.
 In some dialects it appears with the combination of -ik suffix in the meaning of husband (male + ik), which in the western group of dialects has become ay with the sound change.
  Acharyan brings the words we take, take, take, which have the meaning of relatives on her husband's side.
 From the word man we have the word naaramb, which means married woman.
Kin-Acharyan considers this a native Armenian word, which originates from hnkh. gen from you.
  This is the second root of the egg, from which the following words are formed: kanambi, kanani, kananots, feminine, etc.
  Acharyan also mentions that only the Swedish dialect, the gene, holds the root root.
  Wife is the name that expresses the feminine term of the concept of husband.
  The masculine version is found in Eastern and Western dialects.
Mother-in-law is a native Armenian word, which has the main meaning of a wife's husband.
 The forefinger distinguished between male and female.
  In Armenian, the male is lost, then a cesarean, the "cesarean" egg, is formed.
  The dialectal forms are: isgesur, osgosur, kisur, iskesor.
  In the dialects of Maragha և Hachn, the words barma, bymay are used against this notion.
 The concept of father-in-law is expressed in dialects with the following forms: kesrar, kersar, patron, agha, gesar Tsayl.
Tegr is a native Armenian word. daiver caused by you.
  Acharyan considers the tiger an old egg.
 The meaning of this word is husband's brother.
 The dialectal words are: tekr, dekr, dakr, takir ևayl.
  Both in literary Armenian and in dialects, the concept of husband's brother is expressed almost exclusively in the word teg.
Tal-Acharyan considers it a native Armenian word. de, do caused by you.
 It assumes that first there must have been a fold, then under the influence of the word tagr, to give.
  Like the ancient Armenian word for "tiger", "give" has no synonymous field in Armenian dialects.
The phonetic variants are: dal, dal, dul, dol.
Tegerkin is a descriptive word.
  The phonetic variants found in dialects are: tegorkin, tikiraken, tekerknik, tagerkin, etc.
Tegerkin literally expresses the word ner, which is found in dialects, which Acharyan considers a native Armenian word, and explains in the following way: the wife of the wife's husband's brother.
In NHB, the word is considered nu + er - nuer, nuank derived from dz.
Zokanch-Acharyan leaves it unverified in his "Radical Dictionary of Armenian".
Later, in his work "History of the Armenian Language", he mentions that it is of Urartian origin.
  This opinion is also found in Jahukyan.
  In the dialects of the Eastern faction the word zankach is found, there is also the variant version - zonkach.
 The literal meaning of this notion is the word nahas, which exists in the village of Khotana in Kapan.
Aner - this word is not checked.
  In ancient Armenian it was used in two meanings: a woman's father and a woman's brother.
 The word aner, which has been attested since the 5th century, has been preserved and used in both modern literary Armenian and dialects.
It is an indefinite, descriptive-descriptive word, which has the meaning of a woman's brother.
 The horses found in dialects are: barren, uneducated boy, unmarried boy, cynic (Trabzon, Ordu), mirzam (Ashtarak, Kanaker, Lori).
1 Acharyan H., History of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1940, vol. 1, pp. 17-18.
Kenny is a native Armenian word, which means woman's sister.
  In literary Armenian there are kenakal, kenekal words, which are not proved in Armenian dialects.
 Later, the word bajanagh was borrowed from Turkish, which is used in Armenian dialects.
Bride is a native Armenian word.
  Acharyan refers to Tervishyan in the "Radical Dictionary of Armenian", who considers the word "bride" the native Armenian word of the word "borrowed".
Pesa-Acharyan considers this word unverified; he brings a number of words derived from it: groom, groom, groom, groom, etc.
  In front of this notion, King Einishta, the secret words, meet in Marashibar.
Liana Hakobyan ETHNIC RELATIONS THE WORDS SHOWING IN ARMENIAN AND THEIR CHANGES Keywords: kinship, Indo-European, borrowed words, native Armenian words, vocabulary, vocabulary, descriptive method.
