Martirosyan Nona PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT IN HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS The education sector in the Republic of Armenia is used as one of the preconditions for sustainable progress, reproduction and development of human capital.
 At the current stage of socio-economic development of the Republic of Armenia, it is important to increase the quality of professional education, the efficiency of the activities of higher education institutions and their compliance with modern international standards [1].
The staff, knowledge, abilities and skills of the higher education institution play a key role in the quality assurance process of higher education, the management of which is one of the most important tasks of strategic planning.
 From this point of view, any higher education institution should have full information about its own human potential, its knowledge system, abilities, complete system of skills, personal, professional, organizational qualities, competencies, as many conditions determine the success of any public or private higher education institution. The issue of effective staff management occupies a special place among the factors.
The staff is the most important force of any higher education institution, its fundamental and valuable asset, so it should be governed by procedures and structures that will not only ensure the stability and normal operation of the university, but also outline ways to develop and further improve its activities.
Staff management is defined as a targeted activity, which includes the development of personnel policy concepts and strategies, management principles and methods, personnel planning, development of a strategic human resource plan, definition of personnel potential and the requirements of the institution [2].
  In other words, today the task of each university is to create an effective system of human resource management, which will include forecasting new jobs, staffing, continuous professional development and training of administrative staff, organizational discipline, development of motivational systems that enhance employee satisfaction.
 In order to achieve all this, we believe, first of all, it is necessary to correctly assess and meet the individual needs of employees in accordance with the needs of the institution, և second, to continuously develop the skills of employees, to ensure that .
 The most important thing in this whole system is that the person is at the center, with his / her abilities and skills, as a guarantee of the success of the higher educational institution.
In the higher state educational institutions of the Republic of Armenia, administrative, professorial (scientific-pedagogical-lecturer), teaching auxiliary staff, scientific staff, administrative, production, engineering and other staff [3] are established, one of which is because it is the intellectual potential, personal qualities and professional abilities of the employees that are the continuous development and improvement of the quality of the insurance company.
Thus, staff management, which is a set of interrelated functions of managing people, directly affects the motivation of people on an ongoing basis, their performance and the effectiveness of the university.
 The staff of the university, as one of the most valuable resources, has a decisive role in ensuring the high rating of the university, respectively, in ensuring its competitiveness in the international arena.
 Staff quality is the only significant strategic variable in the management system of any educational institution.
Diversity should be valued in the university system, that is, to create an educational environment based on mutual respect and trust, where everyone can play their full role, regardless of gender, race, age, etc.
 Staff management requires motivating employees, developing their skills, understanding their potential, developing performance, maximizing their input.
Performance management is the establishment of a "people-to-people" connection between organizational goals in higher education, where people are the ones who achieve those goals.
 Performance management is a strategic approach to people և team development that helps to increase the efficiency of the institution's activities.
 According to well-known human resource management expert Michael Armstrong, performance management can be called "performance management development".
There are many principles of performance management.
Here are some of them: [4] Effective performance needs effective management.
The efficiency of any organization, including a higher education institution, cannot be achieved without performance management.
 That is why it is necessary to unite the goals and values ​​of the employees of the given institution, to develop an organizational culture aimed at performance, to identify, to take care of individual growth, development needs, to recognize the deficient performers, to improve the quality of management.
Performance management refers to incomplete to excellent performance.
 According to this principle, performance management implies the definition of performance criteria չափ staff level determination.
  This does not mean that you should only work with low-performing employees or lay off disadvantaged employees.
Effective performance management depends on the ability of managers to manage.
  Managers should not only have an honest leadership style, but also support staff, guide them to the institution's strategy, understand that evaluation is not just about control, it also helps employees set specific strategic goals for themselves.
Performance management refers to the management of people.
 Performance management is one of the functions of staff management, through which the institution can achieve the desired performance - the end result.
Thus, having studied the modern professional literature on staff performance management to increase the latest efficiency, we have, as far as possible, singled out the following key components that ensure employee performance. self-development, self-improvement, creative potential, situational thinking, continuous professional development, application of ICT in the course of work, career growth գրավ attractive and promising development prospects, • favorable working conditions և environment: respect, support, tolerance, cooperation, teamwork, • fair և remuneration or compensation based on job advancement.
Considering the peculiarities of staff management in the university system, we can state that a key factor in improving performance is employee motivation, which may be due to adequate pay, improved living conditions (including loans, housing or dormitories), performance appraisal. Improving working conditions, purposeful incentive mechanisms, providing the necessary means for the scientific-methodological activity of the teacher, training-professional development systems and a number of other mechanisms, for the development of which it is necessary for each university to have effective staff management-performance evaluation systems.
 As noted by the famous economist E. Apelbaum. "People show good progress, high performance, when they have or can develop the necessary knowledge, skills, receive the right incentives, encouragement, have the opportunity to make joint decisions, to participate in the management of the institution." [6]
  That is to say, there are a number of different styles and ways of influencing employee behavior, but some of them, based on a rigid, authoritarian management style, can only lead to staff members simply following the instructions of management, while there are controllable styles that As a result, the mechanisms used can involve the staff in the work of the institution, becoming a stimulus for active participation and cooperation with other staff members, which in turn can contribute to the performance of each employee, as well as the efficiency of the institution as a whole.
 Now, in addition to a number of the above factors, we will present the peculiarities of the application of the following three factors in higher education institutions. Evaluation of the activity of the PD staff, encouragement-reward of the PD staff, training of the PD staff ագիտական ​​professional development.
  The implementation of these factors directly ensures both the competitive advantage of the efficiency of the university and the continuous improvement of the performance of each of its employees.
Evaluation of the activities of the teaching staff in the higher education institution is one of the main mechanisms of internal quality assurance and continuous improvement of the university, which aims to promote the professional development of the teaching staff, the quality of teaching, teaching, research and creative activities.
  The composition of the PD is evaluated in three main spheres: teaching-teaching-methodological activity, research-creative activity, public-administrative activity.
In each of them, based on the generalization of the results of the evaluation of the lecturer's performance, a complete evaluation of the lecturer's activity is performed.
 The evaluation of the PD staff is carried out with the participation of four main stakeholders involved in the educational process: students, evaluated lecturer, partner lecturers և with the direct supervisor, using the evaluation criteria set for each category (lecturer, senior lecturer, assistant, associate professor), the results of which are then summarized. is being discussed.
 The evaluation of the activity of the PD staff is carried out by including all the basic components of the multidimensional educational environment, և is aimed at promoting the objectivity and impartiality of the evaluation.
Both individual (self-assessment, assessment by the supervisor) and collective (peer assessment, by students) methods are used to obtain the most reliable assessment results [3].
The self-assessment scale includes the components of the lecturer analyzing the working conditions and the environment, as well as identifying the environmental factors that hinder the improvement of their educational activities.
The evaluation of the immediate supervisor (for example, head of the department, central director, etc.) is the evaluation of the lecturer's performance և efficiency, during which the lecturer's work discipline, ability to cooperate in the team, teaching methods և quality, individual work with students, research results, etc. are analyzed.
Peer assessment is carried out by the members of the educational subdivision (chair, faculty) of the PD, where the assessed lecturer teaches.
 The evaluation is carried out through mutual visits of partner lecturers, lessons learned by the immediate supervisor, a study of the documentation package substantiating the lecturer's performance.
 As we mentioned, one of the methods of collective assessment is enlightening surveys.
  Students conduct the assessment on a regular basis (semi-annually) through surveys that summarize the results of the courses they have attended.
 It can be done either by the central circles of the university or the relevant subdivision (for example, the career center) or in a decentralized way by the faculty or the chair.
  The set of questions included in the questionnaires gives an opportunity to assess both the level of professional knowledge of the lecturer, his / her ability to effectively transfer that knowledge to the students, as well as the analysis of the final results of the course.
YSU introduced the system of student inquiries on the quality and effectiveness of teaching in 2002 as a mechanism for assessing the scientific and pedagogical activities of the teaching staff և moral and psychological characteristics.
  The application of this mechanism contributed to the formation of new positions among the YSU teaching community, to the obvious improvement of the teaching staff, as well as the teaching process.
 The results of the student survey are used to: • Assist lecturers in analyzing and developing their teaching approaches և Methods used to promote, promote, and encourage lecturers [7].
The results of the multidisciplinary assessment are summarized in one general document, which gives a generalized (quantitative և qualitative) picture of the lecturer for the given assessment period.
 After the summary, the management of the university makes various administrative decisions based on these results; these results are the basis for the continuation or termination of the lecturer's employment contract, development or official growth, targeted training or improvement, as well as material incentives or rewards.
The aim of the incentive system of the University's staff is to promote the professional development of lecturers, the improvement of teaching skills, professional research activities, extracurricular consulting work with students, teaching-scientific-methodological work, active participation of the university in its effective activity and participation.
 In other words, the incentive system is entirely aimed at continuously improving the performance of the PD staff.
 The application of remuneration in the university as a stimulus for work activity is aimed at the implementation of the latter.
 Incentives differ in their types of effects and characteristics.
 The forms of stimulation are: moral, social-psychological, administrative, material stimulation forms - self-stimulation.
    Incentives are external stimuli to action, the cause of which is interest - material, moral, personal or group.
 Remuneration management is based on employee performance, professional qualifications, human resource development and targeted encouragement.
  The promotion of the PD of the higher education institution is conditioned by the existence of an effective remuneration system.
  In the current reward system in the field of higher education, incentives are applied to employees for exemplary performance of job responsibilities, effective performance of work, increase of efficiency, innovations in work, other achievements, as well as active participation in research and public works.
The encouragement in the RA universities is announced by the order of the rector, the staff of the university is informed about it.
  It should be noted that scientific councils also have the authority to reward the employee.
  The reward system in HEIs should be regulated by appropriate procedures, which will define the types of rewards, the grounds for awarding them, the powers and mechanisms of awarding.
 Every lecturer should realize that in practice he / she has the right to be rewarded for his / her effective work, to be appreciated by the leadership.
Thus, the existence of incentive և reward mechanisms կիրառ their application in the higher education system enables each staff member to develop their potential և to strive for higher performance.
  By creating such an environment, the educational institution not only gives its employees the opportunity for professional self-education, but also contributes to the quality and efficiency of education, strengthening its reputation in the competitive field.
In this context, the most important role and significance is the implementation of trainings և professional development in the university, as any higher education institution, not missing out on the current challenges, being able to compete in local and international labor markets, also faces the above-mentioned staff problems.
Professional development is a continuous dynamic process, which aims to ensure the progress of the employee's activity, the development and improvement of his knowledge, abilities, skills, as well as the stability of the higher education institution, the implementation of strategic goals and long-term programs.
 Self-training is defined as one of the components of professional development, which has a clearly defined term և a certain direction aimed at the development of specific knowledge, abilities և skills.
Training is the process of developing the skills of employees that are necessary for the implementation of current activities, and the professional development of the employee is aimed at the development and improvement of knowledge, skills for the implementation of current and future work.
 Science is evolving, և, as many scholars rightly state, "fifty percent of knowledge becomes obsolete in five years", so each higher education institution must constantly provide its employees with the opportunity to get acquainted with the latest knowledge in the field, updating and updating their own knowledge base.
 Training and professional development are of strategic importance to institutions that see human potential as the most valuable resource, the most powerful contribution to their ongoing performance improvement processes.
 The official growth of the staff of the higher education institution is directly connected with the effective implementation of the goals of the university, therefore, the university must take the initiative to pursue the continuous training of its staff, to provide a favorable environment and conditions for professional growth.
 It should adopt flexible employee incentive systems, which will motivate employees to discover their own potential and intellectual capital as much as possible, to make maximum efforts based on the need to meet both personal and university needs, and to further improve their activities.
  And finally, the universities expect the return of their human resources training and investments in professional development in the form of relevant theoretical and practical knowledge, the application of which will be aimed primarily at the effective solution of the strategic problems of the university.
Thus, to summarize, we should mention that one of the key components of ensuring the efficiency of the activities of higher education institutions is the management of staff performance.
 Accordingly, by assessing the human "professional potential" of its employees, as well as by introducing mechanisms to promote the professional development of its employees, the university can provide high performance indicators, outline new development prospects.
  Based on their own mission, HEIs should definitely link the continuous development of their activities with the staff management և development strategy, taking into account the ability to motivate employees, ensure their involvement in decision-making processes, to increase their interest as internal stakeholders, as the real potential of any university. The guarantee is the high-performance staff, which not only provides the solution of the problems set by the educational institution, the implementation of strategic goals, but also increases the prestige and competitiveness of the institution.
LITERATURE [1] Khachatryan R., Strategic Planning in Higher Education Institutions, Educational-Methodological Manual, Yerevan, Lingua, 2013, p. 7.
[2] Kibanov A., Personnel Management, 3rd ed., P.- Moscow.
 Knorus, 2011, p. 98. [3] Khachatryan R., Karabekyan S., Budaghyan A., Papoyan A., Asryan L., Virabyan A., Mazmanyan A., Shahinyan A., Human resource management in higher education institutions.
 Educational-methodical manual, Yerevan, Lingua, 2015, pp. 136, 151-156.
[4] McCaffery P., The Higher Education Manager's Handbook.
 Effective Leadership and Management in Universities and Colleges, 2nd ed., NY.
 Routledge, 2010, p. 161-163. [5] Armstrong M., The Practice of Managing Human Resources, 8th ed., Moscow.
[7] Regulation of Student Survey on the Quality and Effectiveness of Teaching at Yerevan State University, 2010.
Martirosyan NONA STAFF MANAGEMENT IN HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS Keywords: higher education institution, human resources, teaching staff, staff performance.
