DEVELOPMENT OF LEGAL CULTURE AS A MEANS OF LEGAL NICHILISM CONFLICT Article 1 of the Constitution is considered the basis of the Constitution and predetermines the path of development of the state.
 In order to overcome the circumstances hindering the establishment of a legal, democratic state, it is necessary to work together with the state government, the population, the civil society, and an atmosphere of trust.
 The role of law is a great role in the formation of the latter, which is the main link between these three forces.
  Therefore, the reduction of the role of law և manifestations of legal nihilism can be a basis for their miscommunication.
Currently, this problem is more fatal.
  First of all, the country is in the stage of constitutional-legal-serious political reforms, which is a complicated process, accompanied by a complete reconstruction of the existing system.
Moreover, in the modern world, when law has a certain effect on almost all social relations, it becomes an obstacle to the development of a given society in every aspect of legal nihilism.
 And if we take into account that in the conditions of globalization the borders between the states are gradually disappearing in their former sense, then the mass manifestations of legal nihilism in a particular society have an impact on other states, hindering various integration processes, leading to various global problems.
  Therefore, overcoming legal nihilism in the modern world should become one of the priority tasks of states.
In order to solve these problems, it is necessary for every part of the society to perceive the right as a social regulator.
 As mentioned by I. According to Kant, the law is the most important tool of civil society, which is called to protect the citizen from permissiveness, to ensure the limit of freedoms [1].
  And the latter depends on the level of legal awareness, as well as the level of legal culture of the society, the demand for law.
 The antithesis of these phenomena is legal nihilism.
One of the most important ways to solve this is to raise the legal culture in the individual և society.
 Its purpose is to explain the role of law in those subjects, its potential, problems and goals.
  In order to implement all this, the state must have a clear policy, it must be aimed at the above-mentioned problem-solving.
First of all, legal nihilism is a social phenomenon arising from the assessment of law, resulting from certain active or passive actions, which is a distortion of legal consciousness, underestimation or rejection of the value of law, և has its structure, bearers, levels, ways of expression increasing the volume of violations և hindering social development.
 It has different manifestations in our society.
  In order to complete the study, we consider it necessary to refer to them briefly.
1. The main manifestation of legal nihilism is the direct violations of the law of our society or the so-called active nihilism.
Numerous relations protected by law are violated.
  Moreover, these violations occur not only in criminal, but also in relation to the relations protected by administrative-civil law.
  It is typical for such violations to be committed with obvious contempt.
This event N. Matuzov calls it a "social boycott".
2. The low level of cooperation between the state անդամ members of the society, participation in the governance of the state in the society արտահայտ expressing their opinion.
3. Manifestations of corruption in the state apparatus, which leads to a lack of professionalism and public confidence in the latter.
4. Poor functioning of checks and balances mechanisms in the state, which also leads to distrust of the state apparatus.
5. The existence of socialist views that underestimate the role of law in science.
Legal nihilism is largely the result of a low level of morality, education and consciousness in society, which arises as a result of certain historical and political developments.
  The way to raise that level are actions aimed at developing respect for the right, knowing one's rights and responsibilities, and perceiving a person as the highest value.
  And they can be achieved through the formation of legal culture.
 In other words, it can be noted that legal nihilism and the proper level of legal culture are inversely proportional.
 Without underestimating the role of other means, it must be stated that worms can not give the necessary result if the level of legal culture in the society is low.
 Without it, the use of other means simply becomes a superficial struggle, it does not give a systemic solution to the problem.
The presence or level of legal culture is one of the main criteria for characterizing a society.
  As we have already mentioned, it is inversely proportional to legal nihilism, that is, they are opposite to each other.
 Can we agree with V. Nersisyants's assertion that "the crisis of modern legal consciousness is largely due to a low legal culture."
 In order to understand the interrelationship of legal culture of legal nihilism, one must first understand what legal culture is, its content and types.
First of all, it should be noted that legal culture can be considered as a link between law and culture, the boundaries of which are not clear from both sides [4], so first it is necessary to understand what culture is in general.
 There is generally no common definition of culture in science, but the most widely accepted view today is Edward Taylor's definition of culture as complex, which includes knowledge, faith, craft, art, laws, customs, habits, all that man has acquired. brings, becoming a member of society [5].
 From this definition we can assume that a person becomes a communicator only when he interacts with the society, becomes a part of it.
This applies to legal culture as well, as law is in its essence a tool for regulating relations between members of society.
  Legal culture is a part of the culture of the whole society, which is created through the gradual development of the society, the work passed down from generation to generation, and the completion of that work.
Legal culture, like culture in general, is a reflection of the historically shaped spiritual and cultural values ​​of a society, which predetermines its way of life and the interrelationship of its members.
  The level of legal culture is largely connected with the historical past of the society, the current political situation.
  Legal culture is often identified with legal consciousness, but it should be noted that legal culture is a broader concept.
  If the legal consciousness includes the ideological-psychological elements of the subject, the illegal culture includes the behavior of the subject.
 It is reflected in the behavior of both state bodies and members of society.
According to one view in the literature, legal culture includes three main elements.
 The first element is the legal consciousness of the society or a separate subject.
 This element presupposes the depth with which the public perceives such phenomena as human rights և freedoms, the legal version of dispute resolution, the public's emotional attitude towards the law, awareness և etc.
 The second element includes the development of the legal activity of the society, under which the theoretical (ie the development of law as a science) և practical (ie, legislator և law enforcement activity) is assumed.
 The third element presupposes the level of development of legal acts.
 By this we must understand the quality of legal equipment, the number of conflicting conflict norms նորմ Gail.
 However, it should be noted that the last two elements are identified և constitute the ideological element of the legal culture of the society, and the first point is considered the psychological element of the legal culture.
 In the case of legal cultural elements, the most relevant view is that, in addition to the latter, legal culture has a behavioral element [7], which is the expression of the existing legal culture in the daily behavior of the whole society or its individual member.
  Thus, it can be noted that legal culture is a qualitative state of the legal life of the society, which is conditioned by the social, caring, political-economic factors of the society, expressed in the level of legal awareness, legal acts, their implementation, basic human rights and freedoms by the state and civil society.
It is clear from the above conclusions that the existence or level of legal culture isolated or the presence or level of all elements are factors that shape the level of legal nihilism in society.
That is, if one of these elements of legal culture is suspended or at a low level in society, it can lead to the development of some kind of legal nihilism, and the development of that one horse can be the impetus for the development of other forms of legal nihilism, as legal nihilism It is essentially a whole organism և can easily adapt to any new situation.
  Therefore, it is a necessary condition that the legal culture be raised at all its levels.
 These levels are the public, group և legal culture of the individual.
The legal culture of the society is an inseparable part of the general culture of the society, which is the experience accumulated by the society in the field of law, the general level of legal awareness, the level of legality, the level of legislative practice.
The high level of social legal culture is an indicator of social progress.
Group legal culture is the level of legal awareness of a specific social group, of actually obeying and respecting legal acts.
  However, group legal culture is essentially the same as the legal culture of a society, so its analysis may be necessary only for a specific social group and not for the study of legal culture in general.
Of the three levels of legal culture, the study of non-legal culture is particularly important, as it is the basis of other levels.
  Each social group or whole society consists of one main cell, the individual.
 At the same time, legal culture refers to a certain set of values ​​and relations that unite people, determine the legal system in the general culture of society [8], therefore, for legal nihilization, it is a necessary condition that each individual understands that he / she is an integral part of society. Each step taken can have an impact on the whole group.
  Non-legal culture is the legal characteristics and qualities of an individual, especially the ideological-psychological legal world of an individual ն behavior in the legal field [9].
 An individual's legal culture is a multi-layered phenomenon.
  It presupposes the existence of legal knowledge (intellectual part), the transformation of existing knowledge into a habit of legal belief (ideological, emotional-psychological part), the willingness to be guided by those customs և beliefs, that is, to live և to act within the law and the law (behavioral part).
The legal culture of an individual has sub-layers, which depend on the circumstance of what legal knowledge the person possesses.
 According to it, illegitimate culture has three sub-layers. daily, professional Goodbye.
Under the daily sub-category is understood the legal framework of actions of individuals, which they use when dealing with legal issues in everyday life.
The professional sub-layer is formed by qualified legal specialists during their professional activity.
The theoretical sub-layer is the part of legal culture that is formed by legal scholars in the study of legal ideas and values ​​in society.
At all these levels, the low level of legal culture creates favorable conditions for the emergence of legal nihilism.
 In order to prevent ostidra, steps must be taken by the society to ensure the implementation of the basic functions of legal culture.
 These functions are as follows: 1. The purpose of the cognitive-transformational function is connected with the theoretical "organizational actions, the purpose of which is to build a civil society" governed by the rule of law.
 In this case, the provision of constitutionality and the development of constitutional culture in the country are especially important, as a constitutional state is formed only with a constitutional culture adequate to the society. [8]
 In addition, this function is connected with the creation of a legal basis for the strengthening of justice, goodness, morality, conscience, dignity, the values ​​of freedom of choice.
2. The purpose of the legal-regulatory function is aimed at the establishment of all legal elements of the society, their stable, effective and dynamic activity.
3. The purpose of the value-normative function is expressed by the description of value systems.
 It is expressed in the acquisition of a certain value of the facts contained in the actions of individuals.
  That is, these facts receive a certain assessment from the society or its individual individuals.
 Due to the completeness of these assessments, the legislative activity of the society, the quality of certain legal norms, the behavior of the citizens, the activity of the law enforcement bodies against law violations are regulated [10].
4. The purpose of the legal-social function is the development of legal qualities in a person.
  The main task of this is legal advocacy and education, which are greatly influenced by the current legal reality in society.
5. The purpose of the communication function is to create a legal connection between the members of the society during the legal relations, as well as to ensure and protect that connection.
Thus, it can be concluded that with the rise of legal culture, legal nihilism in the society is gradually decreasing.
  Legal nihilism cannot develop in a society where respect for the law and the grounds for using protection are firmly rooted.
 For the implementation of these actions it is necessary to mobilize the forces of all layers of the society.
 The state authorities have especially clients.
  In the hands of these bodies are the opportunities for the formation, strengthening and regulation of cultural values ​​in the state.
 They shape the cultural policy of the state and ensure its implementation.
 Therefore, this policy should be such that it is formed in the society towards respect for law.
 The elements of legal nihilism that harm the role of law should be gradually eliminated from the culture of the society.
The main tool of the state bodies in this should be the mass media.
 The materials in them (movies, TV series, shows, entertainment programs, news programs, etc.) should actively promote the law, gradually instill in the society the idea that each member is an integral part of this great organism և should contribute to its development to the best of its ability .
 It is necessary to remove from the mass culture or at least reduce the display of criminal elements, their romanticization, to show it as a phenomenon that destroys the basis of society.
  Of course, these steps must be taken in a way that does not cause censorship, because its existence will cause a reaction, which in itself is a cause of legal nihilism.
In addition, the main way to raise the legal culture should be the establishment of an appropriate level of legal education, the main methods of which should be to instill in a person from an early age respect for law, the rule of law, the state or the civil servant.
It is necessary to completely review the existing educational system, to introduce law classes in kindergartens, taking into account the age group criteria.
 To make the subject "Social Science" in the school curriculum simpler for people of school age, to train qualified, professional specialists for its teaching, to increase the teaching of law for the students of non-law faculties, secondary vocational educational institutions.
LITERATURE Criticism of pure reason, Ed. second, SPb.
  Published by "Science", 2005 (Series [6] Theory of government and rights.
 Textbook for vuzov, in order. prof. В. М. Корельского [8] Harutyunyan G. G., Lessons in the History of Constitutional Culture: Challenges of Time, Yerevan, Njar, 2005, pp. 21, 25.
[9] Vagharshyan A. G., Theory of State Law-2, YSU, Yerevan, 2011, p. 240.
DEVELOPMENT OF LEGAL CULTURE IN BULGADARIAN AS A MEANS OF LEGAL NICHILISM REJECTION Keywords: legal nihilism, legal culture, individual legal culture, private legal culture, legal legal culture, everyday legal legal culture
