MARSHALL'S PLAN IN THE CONTEXT OF AMERICAN AMBITIONS The end of World War II brought about significant changes in the international situation.
 The defeat of the fascist countries, the anti-fascist nature of the war, as well as the great role played by the Soviet Union in the defeat of Germany and its allies, changed the balance of power between the capitalist and socialist regimes in favor of the socialist.
  Of the capitalist camps, only the United States emerged from the war with a stronger economic, political, and military system.
The American monopolists had adopted a new model of world domination, one of which was the Marshall Plan.
 "This program came about when Wall Street financiers and economists realized that it was no longer possible to ensure the further economic growth and financial stability of the United States at the expense of the colonies alone."
 The representatives of the socialist countries think that this program testifies to the vulnerability of world imperialism, and not to its power, as they try to show the corresponding circles of the capitalist countries.
1947 In an interview with the New York Gerald Tribune on June 5, 2012, General Marshall stated that they were talking about a program all the time, but he did not have such a bang.
  The Americans simply wanted to provide economic assistance to Europe, to help it quickly recover in all possible areas and catch the path of development.
"The American imperialists aimed to solve two important problems. first of all, to avoid the economic crisis, by giving European countries the opportunity to continue to buy American-made goods,։ to support the maintenance of the imperialist system in Europe, while strengthening the establishment of democratic order ”2.
These two problems had to be solved by the representatives of the American financial system, by injecting them into the economies of European countries, which would eventually cause economic and political dependence on the United States.
  They managed to do all this as a result of the economic collapse of the countries, especially in the western part of Europe, because it was beyond their power to overcome the wars.
"Funding under the Marshall Plan enabled American governors to keep the European countries that joined the program permanently dependent on the United States."
  One of the goals of the program was that "Western European countries should be at a common economic level, which would not allow them to overcome obstacles on their own, to take the path of development."
The division of Europe, which was the result of this program, had severe consequences for the Western European countries.
 Before the war, these countries exported goods worth about 2 billion dollars to Eastern Europe, while now it has been reduced three times, reaching 788 million.
The exported goods mainly consisted of machines, production equipment and finished products.
  On the other hand, imports from Eastern Europe, which were mainly in the form of raw materials, during this period decreased from 21% to 7%.
The breakdown of economic ties between the West and the East had dealt a severe blow to the European economy.
 Naturally, the only winner in this situation was the United States, as its products were free from competition with the Europeans.
The Marshall Plan not only did not bring the expected economic prosperity to European countries, but also led them to a deadlock in some areas.
The implementation of this program was no less harmful for the United States.
  The resulting dollar deficit led to a reduction in exports of goods, as a result of which exports from the United States in 1948-1949. It fell from 26% to 17%, which was its share of the world market.
  The US foreign trade was also affected by the embargo imposed by politicians on relations with the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and China, which left 3 million Americans unemployed.
Studies show that one of the first steps in the preparation of the war outlined in the Anglo-American policy program was the Marshall Plan.
 This program was followed by the creation of the North Atlantic Alliance.
 It was one of the cornerstones of the Marshall Plan US military program, which enabled the monopolies to establish control over Western European countries, to adapt their economies to the demands of war, and to prepare those countries for the programs developed by the US General Staff.
 At the same time, the United States spent $ 47 billion on its foreign policy in the late 1940s and early 1950s, which included the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and the North Atlantic Alliance, of which went only to Western Europe.
"During the implementation of the Marshall Plan, deep contradictions arose between the countries that joined the program."
 "The contradictions were mainly conditioned by economic factors" 2.
 Britain deepened its relations with Argentina և Brazil աց threatened the United States to reduce the export of agricultural products from those countries to the United States, if the latter does not share the secret of making nuclear weapons.
 1949 The British government decided to reduce the purchase of British dollars by 25%.
 After some time, the British began to buy less American oil, due to which the US dollar aid to Great Britain ceased.
The relations between England and France were not smooth. Britain was trying to gain the same supremacy over weaker France as the United States had with Britain.
 The United States took advantage of this controversy between European countries. "At the 1949 Conference of European Economic Cooperation, the US imperialists promised to make concessions if the existing customs barriers between the countries were gradually removed."
  1949 At a conference in the French city of Annecy with the participation of 33 countries, it was decided to reduce customs tariffs by 50%.
 "1950 During one of the congresses, the idea of ​​creating a joint economic grouping was discussed, which included France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and later West Germany.
  England was absent from this list, the absence of which was the result of the efforts of the United States.
  "Britain tried to cooperate with the Scandinavian countries in order to maintain balance in Europe, but British political aspirations were not always successful."
"In order to understand all this in more depth, we must first refer to the events that preceded all this" 5.
After the end of the war, the American industry had strengthened its position, and "the volume of capital in this field had reached 49 billion to 75" 6.
 The level of introduction of the latest technologies in the industry reached 25%, at the same time the United States reached the point where it was already producing enough products that would meet the needs of 50 million people, while using 8% less human resources.
  The unemployment rate in the United States was 9 million people, which was a positive indicator, but "only the monopoly sector benefited from such growth in the American economy. together with their 250 large companies, they managed 65% of the country's production. "
The desire of the American capitalists to maintain and expand their own incomes, as President Truman noted, they can not give up world hegemony, because at that time there was no state more powerful than the United States.
  The defeats of Germany, Japan, Italy in the war, the economic collapse of France and England at the same time facilitated and complicated the implementation of that policy. facilitated in the sense that "the United States was the only country that could export enough goods, capital, which enabled it to strengthen its position, to conquer new markets, to increase its influence in Latin America, in Asia, in Africa."
 The implementation of the policy was difficult in the sense that European countries were trying to rebuild their dilapidated economies, to stay away from external influences.
 Besides, the role and influence of the USSR was growing in the world, which was an obstacle.
 Therefore, "the United States tried to implement its programs by degrading capitalist countries under the guise of spreading democracy in the world."
American financiers preferred direct investment, which allowed them to strengthen their position in the international market.
  In foreign markets, they were more interested in investing in the extractive industries than in the processing industry.
 In this situation, the latter preferred to export their country's finished products, to use the non-renewable resources of the USA sparingly.
  "From a financial point of view, it was more profitable to use the cheap labor of poorer countries."
  It is interesting that in 1947 Of the $ 736 million invested, only $ 661 million was made in the oil sector, particularly in Latin America (Caribbean) and the Middle East.
"China also had a prominent place in US economic programs with a market of 450 million."
 One of the first steps in entering that market was to establish a superior status over the Philippines.
  In World War II, the United States' goal was to weaken Britain in the Far East, to defeat Japan, and to increase its influence over China by using its human resources and minerals.
  1944 The American-Chinese Chamber of Commerce was established and chaired by Thomas Watson.
 1945 Donald Nilsson visited China, where he reached an agreement with the Chinese to build about 600 factories in Central and South China, which would employ 5 million Chinese.
 China was to replace economically weakened and ruined Japan in the East.
At the same time, it is clear that after the end of the war, the hostile relations between the two countries would be maintained for a long time, therefore, "it was necessary to create mechanisms of mutual cooperation" 6.
 Such a role was played by the World Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the IMF, the World Bank and other organizations.
  The establishment of these organizations was the best way to control the global economy, which was developed as a result of cooperation between US financial and political figures.
The American policy towards China completely failed when the national liberation movement that started in China overthrew the rule of Chan Qi Shi, the country collapsed into a socialist system, and Mao Zedong became the leader of the People's Republic of China.
The disruption of international trade caused great damage, first of all, to the United States, the structure of which was largely based on exports.
 Losing Asia և part 7 Ibid., 485-486.
In particular, China, whose large population and resources had raised hopes and long-term goals for the Americans, the latter turned their gaze to Europe.
However, the penetration into European economies was not so easy. First, American investors wanted to build and, in some places, rebuild huge production plants, while the shattered European economy could not provide the necessary turnover, and in that case the money invested might not live up to expectations1.
  Investors were interested in the political stability of the countries, which was to guarantee the security of the investments made.
The aspirations to conquer Europe faced serious obstacles, as the higher level of civilization of the European population could not allow it.
  The growing dependence on the Middle East and Central America was due to the weak or emerging capitalist relations of these countries, and in Europe the Americans were dealing with countries with strong economic traditions, for which economic dependence would mean refusing to make sovereign decisions on national currencies. , the economic course, social relations, and all this would eventually lead to the loss of national independence.
The implementation of the program gave its first results the following year, the export from the USA started to grow to Europe, as a result of which the negative trade balance for Europe in 1938 compared to $ 0.4 billion in 1946 $ 4.2 billion, and already in 1947 - $ 5.4 billion 2.
1945-47 During that time, France did not receive any large financial aid that would allow it to improve its own industry.
 France was constantly promised long-term loans, while doing the opposite.
 "France received the first loan in 1945. December 4, when the US Export-Import Bank allocated 550 million. of which $ 400 was spent by France to purchase goods from the United States. ”3
1946 The head of the French interim government, Leon Bloom, left for Washington to settle the existing problems, to try to get as much financial aid as was given to England.
  L. Bloom was trying to negotiate for 2.5-3 billion dollars, while the French daily "Le Monde" in its issue of that day questioned the adequacy of that amount4.
 L. Bloom managed to get no more than 650 million. US Secretary of the Treasury Vinson did not give any assurances that the World Bank would provide 5 550 million. $ 5 to receive assistance.
 1946 France applied to the World Bank for 500 million. However, the discussion was delayed for a year, after which it was approved not only 500 million, but only 250 million. dollar credits.
  "On October 25, US President Truman addressed Congress, asking for $ 650 million for France and Italy.
  "General Marshall offered 597 million, which was to be divided between three countries: France, Italy and Austria, but the Congress approved only 522 million, and France received $ 248 million."
Each allocated financial means was implemented by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in exchange for a certain loss of independence.
L. Bloom signed two possible contracts during his negotiations.
  First of all, it should be mentioned that the Minister of Aviation of France Charles Tion rejected the application of the "5th independence" of the USA, but in 1946 On March 22, 1945, Max Geemann signed a contract that not only approved the application but also authorized the establishment of 12 air bases7.
  The other contract was related to film production. These agreements dealt a major blow to the two most important sectors of the French economy: aviation and film production.
  It was these agreements that made France economically dependent on the United States.
There were some disagreements over the implementation of Europe's reconstruction policy.
  Initial calculations showed that $ 29.2 billion was needed for that, but the amount allocated was soon reduced to $ 21 billion.
 The amount of money հերթական the sequence of steps taken was constantly discussed in the committees appointed by Truman, chaired by Krug, Norse, Harriman.
  "Marshall initially offered to provide 7-5 billion. At the same time, he could not specify the specific amount that would be needed to complete the process, only setting a $ 16-20 billion budget for the overall project. ”2
Divided by the war, devastated France and other Western European countries would be able to quickly regain their productive capacity without losing their sovereignty if they acquired production equipment, machinery, and permanent sources of energy, primarily Ruhr coal but economic cooperation with Germany.
  On the other hand, countries needed long-term economic programs, machines, and production equipment to develop production, but the Marshall Plan ruled that out.
  Therefore, when developing their economic policy, the countries took into account the existing restrictions, which were placed on the branches of the economy.
  As a result of all this, the production of agricultural products, the extraction of raw metals and minerals, took precedence over the processing industry.
 Even if some industries were developing in those countries, they mainly provided the necessary equipment, which was used to get the final version of the product in the USA.
  In this way, American monopolies not only plundered European countries, but also helped to improve their economic situation, because "for Europe, the sale of goods, even in the form of raw materials, was the only way to organize trade."
It is already noticeable the impact of American financial resources on the policy towards Europe.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the conquest of Europe was not an end in itself for the capitalists of Wall Street, as it was only a means of capturing markets, European wealth, and industry.
  This was only the first part of their plans, they were not satisfied with that. Their plans went further.
  In the future, programs will be developed to facilitate the movement of capital in Europe, to eliminate internal and external border barriers, to regulate foreign exchange, the financial sector, and to ensure the movement of cheap labor in Europe.
The ruling regions of America have always tried to persuade European countries that it is necessary to remove trade barriers.
  The partition of Europe led to the emergence of several artificial barriers, on the overcoming of which the success of the Marshall Plan depended.
  This is when the idea of ​​creating a European Economic Union appears.
 The United States was well aware of its difficulties in establishing a common customs union, but in the current situation it was the only way out, and the obstacles would be overcome in time.
  This was the reason why the United States began to welcome the "support of the economic union created between Italy and France" Benelux ".
 During the second conference with the participation of 16 European countries in 1948. An agreement on economic cooperation was signed on March 15.
In emerging Europe, the Americans preferred investment in Germany, along with the Ruhr basin, to Italy, given its cheap labor.
 The Americans focused on the Ruhr Basin, which was considered the industrial center of Europe with its resources - human capital - could provide not only the Germans, but also Western Europe 200 million. the vital needs of the population.
The United States believed that Germany could play a key role in stabilizing Europe's economy and maintaining its overall balance.
  The Americans gave a prominent place in the implementation of their programs to the increase of influence in the weak European countries, which was one of the guarantees of coming up with bigger initiatives.
 From this point of view, the formation of the Austria-Hungary-Romania oil axis was possible, which would cut Poland from Bulgaria and force Czechoslovakia to turn to the West.
The forthcoming events in the Far East, particularly in China, soon led American political circles to believe that any success in the political and economic field was viable only in the presence of military force.
 Such a development gradually shifted the program from the economic component to the military component, և already in 1948. On February 27, Marshall asked the Congress for $ 275 million for military deliveries to Turkey-Greece. dollars.
This was followed by Truman's March 17 proposal to Congress to increase the US military budget.
  On March 18, France, England, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg signed a defensive military alliance in Brussels against the USSR.
 All these phenomena were included in the military program called "Help".
  During this period, the US 1.3 billion. He spent dollars to replenish his forces in Germany, Austria, Japan, and Korea.
1948 The issue of military union was discussed at the April 27 sitting of the US National Security Council.
 In his memoirs, Truman mentions that he proposed that in addition to the United States, Canada, the five countries of the Brussels Pact, including the three Scandinavian countries, such as Portugal, Spain, Austria, West Germany.
 According to Truman, without Germany, Europe's defense would not be complex, it would weaken its resistance against the threat coming from the East.
 In fact, the United States was entering a new phase with its military cooperation with Europe, which had previously existed only during the First and Second World Wars, while now there was no military threat to either the United States or Europe.
 Finally in 1949. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was formed in Washington on April 4, 2006 with the participation of the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Norway, Denmark, Iceland and Portugal, which played a key role in the transition to a new world.
Sergey Grigoryan MARSHAL PLAN ON THE CONTEXT OF AMERICAN AMBITIONS Keywords: USA, Marshall Plan, World War II, USSR, Germany, Europe.
