NEWS IN THE FINANCIAL AND BANKING SPHERE The last decade of the development of the vocabulary of the modern Armenian language is marked by the increasing pace of creating new words, conditioned by radical social changes and other related developments.
  Scientific and technological progress, the era of information technology development give rise to new concepts, and the concepts must acquire their names.
In the last decade, quite big changes have been made in various spheres of public life. Scientific and technological progress, the era of information technology development give rise to new concepts, and the concepts must acquire their names.
The process of terminology continues along with the development of various fields of science and technology.
"The problem of developing and enriching terminology is one of the most important problems in enriching and improving the vocabulary of languages. Without rich and developed terminology, there is no rich and developed language," said Acad. Ed. Aghayan 1.
Each scientific field creates its own terms, which are formed either by Armenian roots, or by borrowing foreign words, or on the basis of internal borrowings.
Borrowing terms from the requirements of this field of science is a useful "necessary phenomenon" because, first of all, in this or that field often arise ideas that can not be expressed by existing concepts or names.
Most of the financial and banking terms are loans.
Borrowing is not an individual matter. The element that is universally used in the language (or at least in a large part of the people bearing it) acquires the value of the loan.
The role of loans in the natural development of language was strongly emphasized by M. Abeghyan, who called it "the effects of languages".
 He considers that "the primary source of the origin of loans is individuals who speak both their national language and another language, or who understand another language, listen to those who speak that language" 2.
External borrowing, as a way of developing և enrichment of Armenian terminology, has different sizes and weight in terminology of different fields of science.
Like any term system, financial-banking terminology has had its development.
  In this system of terms one can distinguish the traditional modern layers of terms.
Traditional terms have not changed over time, they have played a big role in its further development.
 These terms include stock - stock, balance - balance, deposit - deposit, dividend - dividend, etc.
Due to the changes in public life, over time some of the traditional terms have lost their rationale.
 They have not been replaced by new terms, but have expressed new concepts through those terms.
  The concept of conformity of the term has taken place, for example, deflation - teralgum - deflation, license - permit - permit, dumping - deposit - inflation, aldo - balance - balance 3.
1 Aghayan Ed., General և Armenian lexicography, Yerevan, 1984, p. 310.
2 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1965, page 48.
3 See Avdalbekyan T., Dictionary of Russian-Armenian Economic Terms, Yerevan, 1964, p. 586.
Due to the development of the financial and banking system in recent decades, radical changes have taken place in terminology.
There has been a large increase in the number of terms.
 A large number of loans were made: a) on the semantic-content basis of the word: audit <English. audit - accountancy, hypothesis <hipotheke - Greek. pledge - pledge և etc., b) by way of copying or translation: transfer <lat. transfere - transfer – etc.
The emergence of neoplasms is mainly in the form of word formation, with the suffix և.
  The widespread use of the word newly formed as a linguistic unit is largely due to its word-formation peculiarities.
 Let us present the new structure - the terms that were created by Armenian word-formation means.
 Let us give examples: • subsidy - <subsidy <Latin. Subsidium - surcharge, surcharge - cash commodity benefit.
  The word benefit already expresses the meaning of the term subsidy - it means financial or material aid - support, therefore there is no need to use another newly created word instead.
• Tender - <tender <English tender <tend service - trade - the price offered by the enterprise, which in determining is based on the prices offered by competitors, and not on costs or the amount of demand for the product.
 The Armenian equivalent of this word հարմար fits into the notion of the word tender, or it can be expressed by the word և - a trade contest.
• Coupon - <coupon <fr. Coupon coupon - an integral part of a representative security that entitles you to receive a regularly payable interest on the security.
  For this purpose, the coupon is deactivated and sent to the agent who pays interest on the given security through the bank.
 Corresponds to the meaning of the word coupon, but in Armenian we have the word coupon, which in the financial sphere means the part of the interest-bearing security on which the interest is assigned.
  We think that since the coupon word is cooperative և corresponds to the meaning of the word coupon, therefore, the word coupon itself can be used instead of the borrowed word.
Other examples are the following: • alternat - <alternat <fr. <alternat <lat. alternis <սկազբնաղբյոըր - order, • akonto - <а- конто <itl. a conto - trade payment, • expansion - <expand <<lat. expansion - collection, • collection - <collection <itl. - stagflation, • stagflation - <stagflation <sta (inflation) + (in) fliation - stagnation.
The examples of the above new formations, such as recruitment, trade, valuation, money laundering, seizure, and embezzlement, are, as we see, long, and long words usually make pronunciation difficult and comprehension sometimes difficult.
  Therefore, we think we should avoid using long words, replacing them with meaningful word combinations.
 Thus;
Some of them are also expressed in words անգլերեն in English և Russian, let's present some examples: • cash market = cash market, similar loans, • exception list = exclusion list, • interest expense = interest expense = graduate ход etc.
Other examples: money issue, product display, discount rate, desk, cash payment, back office, payment slip, typeframe, discount window, slab, starter, flexible bond, etc.
It is obvious that many of the examples have an unusual composition։ little use.
Some terminology is still not accepted by the general public.
 About this Yu. Avetisyan writes. "Recently, Armenian often turns to European languages, especially to borrow professional words.
 Some of them, however, have just entered the language and have not yet acquired the so-called citizenship right.
 Therefore, in texts aimed at heterogeneous (non-professional) audiences, it is expedient to give an explanation of such words in parentheses ”1.
As we know, the use of foreign words (foreign languages) should be expedient, that is, conditioned by necessity.
"If a foreign word does not add anything compared to the Armenian equivalent, does not have subtleties, any advantages of the term meaning, then the use of that word is complete, inappropriate" 2 paper attached to securities for signing additional transfers 3.
Batch Armenian equivalent expresses the true meaning of the word block, that is, a batch of checks or checks and cash collected during operating hours, which are grouped for further processing.
  We think that the Armenian equivalent of this word used in the banking sector fully expresses the true meaning of the word.
The Armenian equivalent in the list և expresses the true meaning of the word listing / listing, that is, a special registration process to allow the sale of securities on a stock exchange according to certain criteria.
The Armenian terms-terms brought show that the Armenian language is surprisingly flexible. The possibilities for creating new, accurate, successful names with words are simply endless.
However, he can also take into account the following, about which R. writes. Ishkhanyan. "One of the most important problems in word building, in particular, in Armenian terminology, is the use and rooting of scientific names in the language.
 Finding or creating Armenian words and names for scientific concepts is only the beginning, it is much more important to make them usable, to root them in the language ”4.
As the facts show, people have a hard time getting used to the newly formed words and scientific names that are inserted into the language instead of the ones already used.
  For example, deportation - tyranny, safe - lock - the terms newly created for a number of other words sound false, so for those who use these words, foreign versions will be more preferable.
Of course, the easiest way to understand a new concept is to use an equivalent word from a foreign language, as is usually the case.
  However, the most difficult ային perspective is to create a word equivalent to the concept in the mother tongue, which will satisfy both phonetic and semantic requirements.
We believe that the translation or copying of foreign words, in particular terms և terminology, is not an unacceptable phenomenon, but in this way every step must strictly take into account the needs of the audience and the specifics of the material presented.
 About this Yu. Avetisyan writes. "One should not be seduced by the latest loans, foreign studies or the applications of new formations that have not yet experienced the use of language" 5.
Since both internal and external ways of enriching the vocabulary are viable, it is very common to use Armenian և borrowed words in parallel to express this or that concept, for the expression of the same concept, between which, naturally, there is competition, which leads to to the victory of one or the other.
 It often happens that for a while only the borrowed word is used, until the successful Armenian correspondence is formed, it's expelled.
  Here it would be appropriate to quote the following words with S. Abrahamyan. "Language is 'principled' and consistent in its principles, therefore, any interference in its internal affairs, if it does not follow from the internal logic of language, is" silently "rejected by it over time."
1 Avetisyan Yu .., Official Correspondence, Guide for Central Banks of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2001, p. 102.
2 Ibid., P. 105.
3 See Avetisyan D., Explanatory Dictionary of Financial and Banking, Yerevan, 2002.
4 Ishkhanyan R., Essay on Armenian terminology, Yerevan, 1981, p. 166.
5 See Avetisyan Yu., P. 105.
6 Issues of Terminology and Speech Culture, Yerevan, 1976, p. 7.
The final choice of innovations in the financial and banking sector must be made with specific applications, and time will tell.
  The language tends to accept uncreated innovations completely and indiscriminately.
  It is naive to think that they will be immediately used in practice և will find universal recognition.
On the other hand, it is undeniable that a part of the vocabulary may be a bitter word over time.
 In that case, the borrowed words can turn into a foreign language.
Elina KurkchyanNEWS IN THE FINANCIAL AND BANKING SPHERE Keywords: innovation, financial-banking sphere, term,
Terminology, borrowing, vocabulary, translation
.
