MECHANISMS OF SEASONALIZATION OF TOURISM OF THE TOURISM OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Today, tourism is one of the "largest branches" of the rapidly developing world economy, distinguished by its seasonality.
 Seasonality in international tourism is characterized by a sharp increase in tourist flows at certain times of the year, and a sharp decrease in other seasons.
  Tourism in the Republic of Armenia is characterized by seasonal fluctuations, the causes of which are characterized by external features.
 Raising a number of economic, socio-cultural and environmental problems, the issue of seasonal tourism management in our country is gaining priority.
The season of this or that tourist region is considered to be the period of the year when the monthly number of arriving tourists exceeds the average monthly number of the year.
  In case of two seasons (mainly summer-winter), inter-seasonal parts appear between them.
  The term "hot season" is used for the highest arrivals of the year (red, high), and the period of almost complete absence of tourists is commonly referred to as the "dead season" (blue, low).
Tourism, as an integrated part of world business, largely depends on climate change, economic activity, as well as human character, society and a number of other socio-economic factors.
  The causes of seasonality are most generally divided into the following groups: [6] 1. Natural causes - natural seasonality is associated with regular, recurring weather changes in the natural environment, in particular those related to climate և seasons.
  Natural seasonality affects the destinations, which are characterized by large temperature differences between the seasons.
2. Institutional reasons - institutional seasonality is complex in nature, as it is based on human consumer behavior.
  In this case, the emergence of seasonality stems from religious, social, cultural, national-organizational factors.
 Factors of institutional seasonality reflect social norms and the way society operates.
 Unlike natural seasonality, institutional seasonality is more accurate.
Reasons for the emergence of seasonality և their external features in the Republic of Armenia As a supplement to natural և institutional seasonality, additional other reasons may be, for example, tourist travel habits, traditions, inertia. Many people take vacations during the off-season, as they have always done.
 Such reasons can be the social pressure and fashion, in which case the principle "everyone goes to rest in summer, I will go too" works.
Seasonality is a situation that results in both negative and positive effects.
 The effects of seasonality and their effects have been studied by both supply and demand.
  The effects began to increase, especially with the growth of mass tourism, when the number of tourism enterprises began to grow sharply, and the tourism business became widespread.
In general, the effects of tourism due to the seasonality of tourism can be divided into the following groups: [6] 1. Economic impacts - these are mainly related to the problems of the dead season, in particular, the loss of profit due to incomplete, inefficient use of resources and conditions.
The negative consequences of economic impacts are the seasonal nature of incomes, low compensation of capital investments, the problems of covering the fixed annual expenses, etc.
2. Impacts of employment - seasonal employment affects the economy, employees և local population, therefore these impacts are considered in a separate context.
Negative consequences are, for example, the lack of demand for labor in the off-season, unstable and changeable labor market, seasonal fluctuations of employment, low specific weight of qualified staff, limited professional opportunities, etc.
On the other hand, as a positive consequence, we can mention the fact that the seasonality of tourism promotes the creation of a multidisciplinary workplace, when the same employee performs different functions depending on the seasonal characteristics.
  In addition, seasonal work benefits various segments of the population (eg students) as a source of additional income.
3. Environmental impacts - these are related to the negative effects that occur due to the accumulation of visitors in the destination during the peak season.
  These are: natural environmental overload, violation of the balance of wildlife, neglect of the ecological capacity of the area, air pollution, consumption of natural resources, etc.
On the positive side, we should not forget the fact that the high environmental burden caused by seasonality weakens during the off-season, allowing us to have the time needed to restore natural resources.
4. Socio-cultural impacts - these include the effects of seasonal fluctuations not only on the local population but also on visitors.
  Consider the effects on the local population.
One of the negative consequences is overcrowding: crowded streets, noise, slow traffic, lack of parking, queues, resulting in a decline in quality of life, significant increase in prices for the local population, increased risk of accidents, bad impact on local customs, customs, etc.
During the off-season, the natives move to a normal way of life, getting out of the stress of being overwhelmed.
 In addition, the amenities of the area are fully used only to meet the needs of the local population.
The negative consequences for the visitors are the reduction of the satisfaction with the overcrowded area, the lack of basic services during the off-season, the lack or quality of the service, the high prices, the overcrowding of the infrastructure, etc.
Seasonality coping strategies depend mainly on the geographical location of the destination and the characteristics of the climate.
  In addition, consumer awareness of the benefits ոչ of the benefits of off-season vacations may be needed to implement anti-seasonality mechanisms.
  There are a number of strategies for overcoming seasonality - Mechanisms.
  The three main strategies for regulating demand are: 1. Increasing demand during the off-season, 2. reduction of demand during the peak season, 3. demand redistribution [6].
As a mechanism for overcoming seasonality, it is necessary to consider the types of tourism that are less exposed to the effects of seasonality.
  These can be, for example, cultural-cognitive, religious, medical, business, educational tourism, trade tours, etc. [2].
Promoting tourism during the dead season, in turn, has dangers.
In particular, tourists may be disappointed with the bad weather of the destination at the moment, insufficient entertainment facilities, insufficient quality of services, etc.
 Therefore, in each case it is necessary to take into account the above factors [6].
Let us consider the peculiarities of the RA climate and the expression of the seasons of the year as a factor determining the seasonality of tourism.
 The territory of the Republic of Armenia is located in the northern part of the subtropical zone.
  The climate of the republic is conditioned by the geographical position, the rotation of air masses, local circulation processes, topographical features, as well as various anthropogenic activities, radiation intensity [1].
In the cold half of the year, temperate and sometimes Arctic air masses penetrate the territory of the republic.
 Among the local climatic factors, the mountain relief, the high position of the place and the internal depressions play an important role.
  In the warm half of the year, the hot, dry air of the tropics penetrates from the Iranian plateau to the Arabian desert.
 One of the important characteristics of the climate of the Republic of Armenia is the intensity of lightning, which is expressed by the sum of the hourly hours observed in the given place throughout the year.
 In the San basin (Martuni) it is equal to 2780 hours.
  The number of annual cloudy days here is only 18 days.
This number is the highest in the northern, northeastern regions of the republic, especially in Lorvadasht and Ijjan.
 For example, in Ijan it is 64 days.
Precipitation is unevenly distributed throughout the year.
  The most fall in spring and autumn, the least in winter.
 In winter, the precipitation in the territory of the republic falls mainly in the form of snow.
However, in the lowland zone, in Meghri, in the lower basin of Debed, in the Ararat valley, there is no stable snow cover.
 In the highlands the snow cover lasts until the middle of summer, and in the high mountains (Aragats, Kaputjugh) the snow spots are preserved all year round.
The division of the seasons into separate seasons equal to the time of year does not reflect the real lineage of those seasons in a mountainous country with such differences in heights as the Republic of Armenia.
  That is why climatologists divide the year into separate seasons, using indicators that introduce different conditional restrictions.
The beginning of spring is the average period of snow removal: the transition of the average daily air temperature to a stable positive temperature, the beginning of summer - a steady increase of the average air temperature - 15 °, the beginning of autumn - the decrease of the average air temperature - 15 °, the beginning of winter - air The transition from the average daily temperature to the formation of stable negative temperatures.
As Armenia is a mountainous country, depending on the absolute altitude of the place, the lines of the climatic seasons of the year are different [1].
In the high mountain zone, in areas higher than 2500 m, there is a severe snowy winter for 7-8 months, from October to May.
 In winter in the mountainous zone of medium altitude, the wintering is short for two months. It starts a month later and ends a month later.
  In the lowland zone (up to 1300-1500 m altitude) the winter is shorter. It starts in mid-December and ends in late February.
 The winter in the territory of Meghri settlement of the Republic of Armenia lasts for three weeks, very often there is not even stable snow cover.
  The picture is almost the same in the lowlands of the far north-northeast of the republic, in Noyemberyan and Ijjan.
 Stable snow cover does not form here every year, and the average temperature in January does not fall below -1 ° -5 °.
Spring, depending on the absolute altitude of the place, can last 1․5-8 months.
 This season is characterized by mild and humid, highly changeable weather. Arctic cold air intrusions are frequent.
Summer in the lowlands lasts from the second half of May to the beginning of October with average air temperatures of + 24 ° - + 26 °.
  This season is dominated by retrograde dry air masses.
  Mountain valley winds are active in the intermountain depressions.
Autumn is the most pleasant season in the lowland, partly in the middle mountainous part of the republic.
 Grassy, ​​moderately warm, windless weather are typical.
Occasionally there are frostbite.
Considering the peculiarities of the RA climate, we can conclude that Armenia stands out with such climatic conditions, which give additional tourist attractiveness to our country.
 In particular, the expression of all four seasons of the year, the mild spring-autumn climate, summer and snowy winters create appropriate conditions for the development of different types of tourism.
Studying the peculiarities of the RA climate, we can state that they are not the only reason for the seasonality of tourism.
 The tourist trips to Armenia are largely conditioned by other institutional and additional factors.
  In particular, tourists visiting Armenia prefer to visit the country in summer due to their vacation period.
  On the other hand, these very factors contribute to the leveling of seasonality.
  Thus, for example, the large influx of Iranian tourists to Armenia mainly takes place during the first quarter of the year, which is due to the holiday period during the Nowruz-Bayram celebrations.
Despite the large saturation of the area with tourist resources, the Republic of Armenia is not among the main tourist destinations in the world.
 The flow of tourists to Armenia has a relatively stable volume, which is conditioned by the large number of visits of the Armenian Diaspora to the homeland.
  Nevertheless, tourism in Armenia is characterized by a pronounced seasonal nature.
 According to the National Statistical Service (NSS), since 2000, there has been a continuous growth of tourism in Armenia.
 If we look at the data of the last five years, the tourism flows in Armenia by quarters of the year will have the following picture.
ի:
թ:
ի:
r:
e:
n:
k:
ի:
j:
r:
շ:
a
s:
o:
b:
f:
January-March
Apr-Jun
Jul-wed
Oct-Dec
Diagram 1. Number of incoming tourists to Armenia in 2014-2018 By looking at the data of Chart 1 according to the year-quarters, it becomes obvious that the hot season of inbound tourism of the Republic of Armenia for five years coincides with the period of July-September.
  At the same time, observing the rest of the year, it is noticeable that the seasonal fluctuations start to decrease significantly.
  The existence of a high season is conditioned both by natural factors and by the population հանգ rest periods.
1 The diagram was compiled by the author based on the NSS 2014-2018. data.
Analyzing the general characteristics of the RA climate, it can be concluded that Armenia stands out with the expression of all four seasons of the year.
    Upward zoning allows to see hot summers in the lowlands during the hot season, and even snow masses in the highlands (for example, Ararat Valley-Aragats).
  The long autumn and mild climate from the transitional seasons create favorable conditions for extending the traditional tourist season.
  The climate of the Republic of Armenia, with its peculiarities, gives additional tourist attraction to our country, creates minimal obstacles for the development of tourism.
Considering the mechanisms of overcoming the seasonality mentioned in the previous points in the context of RA tourism, it is possible to single out the following methods, which are perspective and feasible in our country. 1. Differentiated pricing policy - for example, the economies of the Armenian hotel industry demand higher amounts for the same number in the off-season than in the off-season.
  It is recommended to offer low prices to tourists in case of group booking (for example, a student group).
  Both high and low price policies have their target groups.
  For example, retirees are more interested in affordable vacations because they have more free time than business tourists or students.
 And, conversely, tourists traveling in the traditional peak seasons are willing to pay relatively high prices for services, even if they are significantly lower in other seasons.
  Price differentiation helps to increase demand during the dead season.
 The main purpose of this is to overcome the traditional seasonal fluctuations, not to try to get the maximum profit.
2. Diversification of attractions - this can be facilitated by the organization of the multi-use of resorts.
  The Jermuk sanatorium can be considered as an example.
 In recent years, it has started to be used not only as a sanatorium during the summer season, but also as a skiing center during the winter season, reducing the workload in Tsakhkadzor.
  Various festivals and events contribute to the diversification, which have the effect of extending the season.
  Among such festivals in our country are, for example, the Vayots Dzorigata festival, the Akhtala barbecue, Areni wine festivals, which have become annual.
  It is recommended to carry out some of the festivals that are not subject to seasonal fluctuations, different types of events during the period outside the hot season, to extend the duration of the season, to lighten the workload observed during the season.
3. Market diversification (statistics) - statistics show that Armenia is more attractive for middle-aged tourists.
  As the targeting of tour packages in our country is small, it will be purposeful to create packages aimed at separate market segments.
  For example, the development of extreme adventure tourism will increase the flow of relatively young tourists to our country.
 The development of scientific tourism will stimulate a large number of visits by scientists.
 The visits of the mentioned segments will at least be subject to seasonal fluctuations; they will provide stable incomes to the enterprises of the tourism industry during the off-season.
4. Selective types of tourism - in this group we will single out eco-agro tourism.
 Armenia has all the necessary conditions and resources for the development of these two types of tourism.
The diversity of natural resources and the way of life of rural areas allow to combine these types և to create tourist routes with a rich program.
5. Marketing tools - off-season commercials, lucrative offers are attractive factors for tourists to increase the number of visits during the off-season.
  Properly organized։ targeted advertising can increase the flow of tourists.
It is especially necessary to consider the development of types and directions of tourism in our country, which are not subject to seasonal influences.
 If we consider the main goals of the tourists who arrived in Armenia, then in the form of a diagram they can be presented in the following way. leisure և entertainment
practical
Other treatments:
Diagram 2. The main goals of incoming tourists in Armenia in 2018. (January-December) 2 From the obtained picture it can be concluded that a relatively large share of practical and medical tourism in our country, which are non-seasonal in nature.
  The types of cultural-cognitive-religious tourism in Armenia can be fully organized during the period outside the hot season.
 It will be purposeful to develop the educational and scientific tourism in Armenia, as our country has the necessary scientific base to present itself to the world community.
  An alternative type of seasonal tourism can be extreme shopping, which in some cases can be combined.
In our country, there is no need to reduce demand during the peak season, due to the number of tourist visits, which does not exceed the capacity of the area.
It should be noted that all the above methods and mechanisms need to be applied in a complex way, that is, to use one method not separately, but in combination with other methods.
  According to that, the problem of overcoming seasonality will be solved more effectively.
LITERATURE [1] Manasyan M., Sayadyan H., Geography of Armenia, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 62, 66.
2 The diagram was compiled by the author based on the NSS 2018. January-December data.
[5] Corluka G., Seasonality in tourism - causes, implications and strategies, URL.
https:
//www.academia.edu/8670280/SEASONALITY_IN_TOURISM_causes_implications_a
nd_strategies (link made on 02.05.2019).
[6] Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia, URL.
 http:
//www.armstat.am/am/ (the link was made on 02.05.2019).
Atlukyan Venus MECHANISMS OF SEASONALIZATION OF TOURISM OF THE TOURISM OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: tourism seasonality, hot եռ dead seasons, seasons, challenges, challenges, opportunities, victories, opportunities
