GREAT TWENTY (G20-2017) SUMMIT COVERAGE ON ARMENIA The G8, which has changed several times in terms of the number of participating countries since the 1990s, has been the subject of worldwide media attention since 2008.
  This was facilitated by the meetings held at the level of presidents at the summit to overcome the financial and economic crisis of 2008. Prior to that, the discussions were organized with the participation of the finance ministers of the represented countries.
  Meetings at the level of presidents become the number one topic of discussion of the news of the countries represented at the summit.
 Practice shows that in the G20 the economic-financial component of the discussions is gradually retreating, "giving way" to the political one.
  The latter covers a wider range of topics due to global interests.
 In this context, we can consider the joint fight against terrorism, the problems of global warming, the search for universal approaches to the stabilization of the so-called "hotbeds" in the world.
During G20-2017, local and world-renowned TV stations "kept on the news pulse" every gesture and expression of the US and Russian presidents, focusing on the changing political nuances of the events taking place at the summit.
 In fact, television is still a convenient, influential platform for political predictions and analysis related to the coverage of the G20 (as well as the previous and subsequent periods).
It is of great interest to study the international, local-regional approaches of the media, especially TV companies, to the summit.
The coverage of Armenian TV channels at the G20 summit differs from the international approaches to its coverage and its size.
  It is mainly promoted by local-regional interests, as well as the fact that our TV companies are in a transition phase.
As states are currently in an interconnected chain, financial and political shocks within a state cannot but affect the regional and regional climate of individual entities.
 These influences are more than felt when it comes to the superpowers and the development of their relations.
  Smaller countries with certain economic and political expectations related to the superpowers.
 This is the reason why the media of relatively small countries are interested in the developments taking place in or around large countries.
 This year, the focus of the G20 summit was the meeting of the presidents of Russia and the United States.
  Following the coverage of some Western media, one can be convinced of their political orientation.
  The "anti-Trump" propaganda line continued to be carried, for example, by CNN.
  The political commentators on the TV channel did not miss the opportunity to remind that the Republican Donald Trump has no experience in conducting negotiations, his Russian counterpart is more experienced in the political arena.
 Russian TV channels, for example, in Russia 1, within the framework of the "60 Minutes" program, welcomed the Trump-Putin meeting with great enthusiasm, analyzing their gestures, emphasizing the American side's readiness to normalize Russian-American relations.
 For the Russian side, the fact that the negotiations were already underway was a big step forward for resolving the Russian-American conflict.
 The urgency այնքան the expectations were so high that the Ukrainian political scientist Vadim Karasև said half seriously, half jokingly, that July 7 can be considered a holiday for Russia [1].
The main focus of Russian television coverage of the summit was the issue of Ukraine, the extinction of Syrian hotbeds (the fight against Islamic State), the development of the world economy, in the context of which the sanctions imposed by the United States on Russia were considered.
  In Russian official circles, this was considered one of the main reasons for the stagnation of the world economy, և Putin said this in an open text during a meeting with Trump.
 The Armenian media also reacted to the US sanctions against Russia.
 The reason was that Russia is Armenia's main economic partner.
 It turns out that the local economic market may suffer in the chain of US-Russia sanctions, especially since Armenia is a member of the EEU.
  During that period, the TV companies referred to the observations presented by political scientists and economists that Armenia should reconsider the priorities of its economic cooperation.
  For example, on Civilnet online TV, the director of the Center for Globalization and Regional Studies, political scientist Stepan Grigoryan, noted that the new US sanctions against Russia will affect Armenia, first and foremost in the energy sector.
 According to him, Armenia's participation in the NATO military exercises in Georgia is the right decision, և Armenia should draw red lines in its relations with Russia [2].
The "Big Twenty" և Armenian TV companies.
  Or that such conferences do not relate to Armenia itself, և Armenia is not represented at similar summits, but it is known that, for example, the 35th in the city of L'Aquila in 2009, the 35th, 2010. Within the framework of the 36th Muskoka Conference and the 37th Deauville Conference in 2011, the Presidents of the three OSCE Co-Chairs issued joint statements on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
  There were even louder statements on the settlement of the conflict at the level of presidents.
Thus, in 2011 The presidents of Russia, the United States and France issued a joint statement on the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict at the end of May 2010 in the French town of Deauville, France. .
 The leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan were also called to prepare the population of their countries for peace, not war.
 A joint statement by Barack Obama, Dmitry Medvedev and Nicolas Sarkozy said that further delays would only call into question the parties' commitment to reaching an agreement.
This means that in addition to the actual political propaganda processes carried out by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the media must also actively cover such summits and even set the agenda.
The coverage of Armenian TV companies in connection with the Hamburg summit was generally natural.
 It is noticeable that the worms were trying to bring the events taking place in the G20 as close as possible to the interests of their audience.
  This approach, as demonstrated during the summit, was in some cases artificial.
  In order to keep the audience close to the TV screens, some TV stations connected the summit with topics that were very relevant in the local media (for example, border tensions).
 Calling these ties artificial, of course, is relative, because at that time the media was more expressing the expectations related to the regional situation.
From the firing point located in Alkhanlu village on July 4, the enemy
One of the 107 volley rocket launchers opened fire on one of the military units of the Defense Army located in the southern direction.
 Azerbaijan, according to the custom, deployed the firing point in the settlement, using the civilian population as a living shield.
 A two-year-old girl and her grandmother were killed during the shelling in Azerbaijan.
  The Armenian expert circles connected the border tensions with the G20 summit starting on July 7 in Hamburg.
 If we analyze the chronology of holding such large conferences և border tensions, we will see that the adversary provokes before the meetings of world importance.
 Besides, the practice shows that Azerbaijan aggravates the situation, for example, during the visit of the co-chairs to the conflict zone.
 This incident related to the border tension was widely covered by the media, including TV channels.
 This pattern was explained by the involvement of experts in news-analytical programs, first of all, by the fact that Azerbaijan was trying to make it clear that the Minsk Group's scale had already exhausted itself, and to look for other ways to resolve the conflict.
  Second, in order to cover up the reputation of the aggressor, Azerbaijan resorted to planned provocations, presenting the response of the Armenian side as a pre-offensive.
 And this is especially the case when official Baku uses its losses as bait for the international community, in this case exploiting the death of a two-year-old girl and her grandmother.
The audience expected the Artsakh conflict to be discussed at the G20 summit, but the predictions on TV were correct, that is, the abundance of problems will not leave room for the discussion of this issue.
  This is in the case when, according to experts, the Artsakh conflict was not a priority for the United States and Russia.
In the context of the G20, Armenian TV channels mostly focused on general topics, which were directly or indirectly related to Armenia and the world.
 Among those topics we can consider the Syrian problem (due to the presence of the Armenian community in Syria), the issue of global warming, etc.
 In the days leading up to the summit, stories about Turkish-German tensions were "in great demand."
Positive-negative trends in the coverage of the summit.
The information about the main activities and purpose of the G20 summit is mostly provided by the TV channels through short videos, often in the "international news" section (Yerkir Media, Armenia TV).
  "Shant", one of the well-known TV companies in the field, for example, kept this event in the news center for 2 days in a row.
 Moreover, the references were made in different dimensions, that is, during the day, through short video plots, and during the main issue, through thematic discussions ("Horizon") and interviews ("Perspective").
Our observations show that the Public Television was not active in the coverage of the G20, especially considering the fact that the companies of this model are the official propaganda machine of the country in the international media, և, as mentioned above, the one who dictates the agenda.
  Performing these functions is, of course, a rather difficult and time-consuming process.
 Often, translating materials on the Internet can be a means to an end.
 The official website of the "First Channel" is available only in Armenian and English.
  However, the reports are posted on the website accompanied by only a few sentences.
  The Hamburg summit was covered on the air with reports without analysis or thematic references.
It is noticeable that in recent years there have been tendencies to present the news related to the coverage of such summits through our own products.
 And this is in the case of the TV companies that aspire to become the leaders of the regional media competition.
 Media outlets (in this case, TV stations) that supplement their news coverage with local or international news are inferior to their own media providers.
 It turns out that in this sense, "small" media types (TV companies) "swallow" the big ones.
 The local audience demands information close to their interests, which in the case of such summits is not provided by the international news, as the internet content, which is fed by the local media, is flooded with information from the media agenda of their countries.
 Own products, of course, also lead to news-content diversity.
Information flow management issues.
 Although in the age of information technology the Internet and the online media outlets that are part of it have almost overshadowed the operative work of other media outlets, nevertheless it is felt that in the case of financially developed (and not only) TV companies the tactics of solving this problem are successfully applied.
 We are talking about so-called live broadcasts.
  The Russian media, especially the Western media, use this practice to provide interactive first-hand information.
  Experience shows that the information resource for the media is mainly the online platform.
However, in the context of G20 coverage, following the online media coverage in the West, it can be seen that the "broadcasts" of the TV companies have become the primary source of information.
Comparing the competitive activity of the Western և Russian media, the TV տեղեկատվOnline Media, with the Armenian media reality over a long period of time, one can see the management problems of the information flows of the Armenian TV companies.
 Kentron TV, for example, covered the summit only two days after it ended, using the press conference as an informational opportunity.
 This, of course, is not an exemplary manifestation of television operativeness.
Thus, as a result of the observations, it can be stated that, in general, the coverage of the G20 summit by some Armenian TV channels shows positive tendencies, but in the case of the current development of the media, the dynamics of that progress is not enough.
  Integration into international coverage standards is in the interests of the media alone.
LITERATURE https.
//russia.tv/video/show/brand_id/60851/episode_id/1520199/video_id/1649366/viewt
ype / picture /, continuation.
 01.
00.
23, (date of address.
 09.08.2017). [2] US sanctions against Russia will affect Armenia's energy sector, Stepan Grigoryan, August 3, 2017, 18.
20, URL.
 https:
//goo.gl/sL3fVH, duration 22.
56 (Accessed.
 15.09.2017).
[3] Interview with Stepan Safaryan, YouTube, LLC, 06.07.2017, URL.
https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMD3p-qsDfQ, duration 7.
35 (Accessed.
 18.08.2017).
Summit, June 26, 2017, 15.
46, URL.
  http:
//news.1tv.am/en/2017/06/26/Berlin-does-not(Accessed.
 30.07.2017). [5] Epicenter, July 10, 2017, 22.
10, URL.
 http:
//www.kentron.tv/programs/informational-political/epiketron/14171.html,duration.
 57.
23 (Accessed.
 21.08.2017).
Vyacheslav Badalyan COVERAGE OF THE G20 SUMMIT (G20-2017) ON ARMENIAN TELEVISION Keywords: G20, summit, TV companies, Armenian, Russian and Western media.
