Around the reign of SOHEMOS-TIGRAN One of the important issues of the obscure period of the Armenian history of the middle of the second century is the issue of the reign of Sohemos-Tigran.
Scholars date the end of the reign of the Armenian king Vagharsh I to 140-143. between.
 Although there is no direct evidence of this in Greco-Roman sources, the coins minted in Rome during that period, with the head of Emperor Antoninus Pius (138-161) bearing the inscription "Antoninus III Consul" on one side, confirm the appointment of a new king in Armenia at that time. On the other side, the emperor dressed in imperial apricot puts a wreath on the head of the Armenian King, գր it is written around: "It was given to the Armenians by the order of the Senate" 1.
As a result of this information, some historians believe that Antoninus Piusignor was appointed king due to the death of the previous throne holder in Armenia, Vagharsh I.
  H. came to a completely different conclusion. Asturyan.
  According to him, Antoninus Pius, who replaced Hadrian on the imperial throne, was hostile to Vagharsha in 140-143. In the meantime, he overthrew him for reasons unknown to us.
According to Asturyan, Pius could have been provoked against Vagharsh by the king of Iberia, the Roman Parasite II 3.
  H. Manandyan considered Asturyan's assumptions on this issue possible, but not firm, until they are proved by new convincing facts4.
Vagharsh I was probably succeeded by Sohemos.
  He was from the ruling dynasty of Emesa (now Homs) ությամբ most likely bore the blood of the Arshakunyats.
  He was related to the kings of Commagene, who attributed themselves to Achaemenid descent.
  But he was also a Roman citizen անդամ a member of the Senate5.
The most remarkable of the few pieces of information we have about Sohemos is, perhaps, the evidence preserved in the work of the Poti Patriarch "Biblioteka", where the author, speaking about the novel Babylonian of Yamblikos, mentions him in the following passage. "The chronicler said about himself that he was a Babylonian էր էր flourished during the Achaemenid Arshakunyan Sohemosijaman, who was a king էր followed his ancestors, who were also kings.
But he became a member of the Roman Senate and later became the consul and king of Greater Armenia again.
 Now he was flourishing, as he says, on this very day.
 And the Roman Empire was inherited by Antoninus. ”6
From such direct information, famous Armenologists G. Khalatyants, Y. Marquardt, H. Asturyan, H. Manandyan, B. Harutyunyan concluded that Sohemos had reigned in Armenia twice.
  According to the first 4 authors, for the first time Sohemos ruled in Armenia in 140-143. By the hand of Antoninus Pius, and for the second time by the order of Marcus Aurelius in 164.7.
1 Manandyan H., Examination theory of the history of the Armenian people, vol. B, Part A, Works, h. B, Yerevan, 1978, pp. 42-43.
2 Sandalgian J., Historical Documentary of Armenia, vol. II, Rome, 1917, p. 551. Tashyan H., Arshakuny's coins, Vienna, 1919, page 126.
3 Asturyan H., Political Relations between Armenia and Rome, 190-n. Q. up to 428 y. K., Venice, 1912, p. 214.
4 Manandyan H., page 42.
5 In the same place.
6 Marquardt J., A page from the ancient history of the Armenian Arshakunyats, Handes Amsoryay, 1906, 2, page 37.
7 Halatyants G., Ocherk histories of Armenia, Moscow, 1910, p. 309, 311, Asturyan H., pp. 210 և 215, Manandyan H., p. 43.
B. According to Harutyunyan, with whom we completely agree, Sohemos in 140-143. He could not ascend the throne in Armenia1.
 The reasoning is as follows. Let us refer to Movses Khorenatsi's report on the reign of Tigran the Last.
  According to that, the Armenian king Vagharsha II was Tigran's son, and this Tigran (Tigran the Last) reigned in the 24th year of the Persian king Peroz, ruling for 42 years2.
  It turns out that Tigran the Last was arrested "by a Greek girl at the time of the death of the Roman King Titus II, named Antoninus Augustus." was Vaghegestos… »3.
 It is reported that Peroz invaded Palestine over Syria. "At his command, our Tigran also invaded the Mediterranean, where he was arrested by a girl who ruled there while Caesar Lucian was building a shrine in Athens," he said.
  This, after Peroz's death, coming to the Mediterranean with a large force, conquered Armenia and released Tigran.
 He gave Tigran a wife, the virgin Ropi, whom Tigran released from him when he returned to Armenia, and turned the four teenagers born to him into a ministerial tribe, naming them Ropsyan after Ropi, so that they would not be called Arshakun ”4.
Scholars have shown that the above-mentioned Titus II is the emperor Antoninus Pius, and the Pero king of the Parthians (near Khorenatsi) is Vagharsh II (121130 / 148-149).
  Lucian Caesar is the son of Verus, adopted by the emperor Pius, who ascended the throne together with Marcus Aurelius in 161.5.
First, it should be noted that after settling on the Armenian throne, the foreign ruler should have adopted an Armenian dynastic name.
 Sohemos should not have been an exception in his case.
 StillMikael Chamchyants և K. Kostanyan noticed that in Khorenatsi's Sohemos corresponds to Tigran the Last 6.
So, what conclusions can be drawn from this confusing testimony of the Historian?
Being a supporter of B. According to Harutyunyan, first of all, it is necessary to accept the reign of Tigran before Sohemos-Tigran on the Armenian throne, because although it is already disputed that Sohemos is identical with Tigran the Last, it is clear that Sohemos could not have invaded the Mediterranean at all by Peroz.
  All the facts prove that Sohemos was appointed King of Armenia without the consent of the undefeated, which was a gross violation of the Treaty of Hrandea.
 Tigran the Last-Khorenatsian character, in all probability, intertwines at least 3 people, whose activities are quite contradictory.
 According to Khorenatsi, he reigned in the 24th year of King Peroz of Parthia, then took part in the expedition to the Mediterranean, captured by a local Greek girl, but during the invasion of Guccian Caesarea, when Armenia was conquered, he was released from prison by Caesar.
 The only possible explanation here is that the image of Tigran the Great includes a Tigran who lived during the reign of Titus II, who was an ally of Peroz, that is, Vagharsh II of Parthia, who invaded the Mediterranean during the Palestinian invasion of Syria. from a ruling Greek girl8.
  Apparently, this information intertwines events of two different periods, as during the reign of Antoninus Pius, the Parthian state had largely taken a conventional position, avoiding conflict with Rome.
 According to that, B. Harutyunyan concludes that the Armenian king Vagharsh I had died of natural causes, Antoninus Pius had handed over the throne to some Tigran, probably from the Arshakuni dynasty9.
1 Harutyunyan B., On the chronology of the II և III centuries of Armenian history, Handes Amsoryay, 2007, p. 106.
2 Movses Khorenatsi, Armenian History, Yerevan, 1997, p. 177.
3 In the same place.
4 In the same place.
5 Harutyunyan B., page 106.
6 Chamchyants M., History of the Armenians, volume A, Venice, 1784, pp. 355-357, Kostanyan K., History of Armenia (short story), 7 Harutyunyan B., p. 106.
8 Ibid., P.
9 Ibid., P.
It is noteworthy that the appointment of the new Tigran, judging by the content of the emperor's protocol, was made not only without the nomination of a candidate by the Parthians, but without their consent, which was disgraceful to the Parthians, but they reconciled themselves to the new throne of Arshakun. .
 Thus, the above-mentioned Tigran ascended the throne in 140-143. in the range.
According to Julius Capitoline, however, the Parthians began to prepare for war to conquer the kingdom of Greater Armenia.
 The matter did not escalate into a war, as the Roman emperor was able to keep him from open confrontation by letters.
 This is somewhat surprising information, as the strength of the Parthians during the period under discussion was not enough to start a war without serious necessity.
  Khorenatsi's account shows that friendly relations were established between the "Parthians" of the Armenian king Tigran, which contradicted the interests of the Romans.
 Therefore, Antoninus Pius overthrew Tigranes, and instead handed over the throne to Sohemos-Tigranes (probably in 148, the last year of Vagharsha II) 2.
 This was already intolerable for the Parthians, as the whole territory of the Kingdom of Greater Armenia was under the influence of the Roman Empire.
 That is why the war against Armenia is being prepared.
 Nevertheless, the Parthian king renounced his plans at the urging of the Roman emperor.
This does not calm down the explosive situation, but the war is postponed for 13 years.
The further aggravation of Parthian-Roman relations is connected with the name of Vagharsh III (148-191), who replaced the Parthian throne Vagharsh II.
 By ending the internal riots, he was already preparing for the conquest of the Kingdom of Greater Armenia.
 However, in 154 or 155 The situation was stabilized by the meeting of the emperor, the Parthian king, on the Euphrates.
  Sohemos-Tigran's rule was maintained in Armenia under the pressure of Antoninus Pius, and peace was maintained3.
The situation changed radically in 161, after the death of Antoninus Pius.
 Seizing the moment, the Parthians attacked the kingdom of Greater Armenia, and instead of Sohemos Tigran, who had fled to Rome, they raised Bakur Arshakuni (161-163) to the throne4.
  However, it is not ruled out that before he was taken prisoner, Tigran, who had been deposed, was a candidate for the throne. could invade the Mediterranean.
 The mention of Emperor Lucian speaks in favor of that.
 According to the Historian's report, both Tigran and Sohemos Tigran were arrested at the same time, because the first one, Lucian Caesar, would not release him from captivity, but after the victorious battles he could bring freedom only to Sohemos Tigran, who was in captivity5.
At the very beginning of the war, the governor of Cappadocia, Elius Serianus, suffered heavy losses in Armenia from the Parthians, who crossed the Euphrates and invaded Cappadocia and Syria.
 Khorenatsi writes about this, talking about King Peroz's invasion of Palestine and Syria Աս Tigran's invasion of the Mediterranean.
  Tigran, who, no doubt, was to be the first candidate for the Armenian throne, was taken prisoner and left the struggle, as a result of which Bakur ascended the throne.
But the wheel of success turned to the Romans.
  The emperor Marcus Aurelius (161-180) sent his brother Lucius Verus, Lucianus Caesar of Khorenatsi, to the East.
 163 Recently, Roman troops occupied and destroyed Artashat.
  164 Vagharsh III suffered heavy defeats from the Romans on the Mesopotamian front.
  These wars are described in detail in Roman sources6.
  He was overthrown in Armenia, arrested և Bakur was taken to Rome, and the Armenian throne was handed over to Sohemos-Tigran7.
 163-165 The Roman coins depict a sad woman sitting under a Roman flag with "Armenia" written under it, and 2 Harutyunyan B., cut by Lucius Verus, pp. 111-112.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Manandyan H., page 44.
5 Harutyunyan B., page 112.
The coins depict himself surrounded by soldiers sitting on a throne.
  He puts a crown on the head of the Armenian king, and around the image is written "Armenia was given a king" 1.
According to Khorenatsi, Tigran the Last ruled for 42 years.
  Arithmetic calculations prove the truth of this information.
  If we take into account that during the first reign he ruled for 13 years (148-161), and during the second reign for 29 years in 163 or 164-191. (It is clearly known from Roman sources that Vagharsh II was already enthroned in Armenia in 191), then the Historian's report is completely confirmed2.
It is very remarkable that the Historian mentions as a source for the passage about Tigran the Last the work of Bardatsan Edesatsi (154-222), who preserved accurate information about Sohemos who lived during the author's lifetime3.
The history of the period from 165 to the end of the century is very vague.
In the conditions of a fragmentary and contradictory source material, different authors have tried to come to different contradictory conclusions, which, however, do not shed light on the period.
The further period of Sohemos' reign is not clarified.
 It is only known that he was not a beloved and accepted ruler, but rather a Roman heir to the Armenian throne.
  The end of the presidency in historiography is currently accepted in 191.
Nina Hayrapetyan ABOUT SOHEMOS-TIGRAN'S THRONE Keywords: Problem of Vagharsh I's death or dethronement, Sohemos' reign
Information on Armenian-foreign sources, Parthian-Roman conflict
around the Armenian throne, Khorenatsi Tigran the Last - a combination of 2 people
.
