THE PROBLEM OF THE SECOND AND THIRD MARRIAGE The relationship between a man and an Armenian և The union between a man is sanctified in the church, և this union is established with a holy crown, marriage.
 The wreath is one of the seven sacraments of the Armenian Apostolic Church, which is performed with the blessing of the priest and the consecration of the church.
 Marriage without a crown council is not considered valid by the Armenian Apostolic Church [1].
  Through this counsel, two persons, a man and a woman, mysteriously become one body after receiving divine blessing.
 The sacrament of marriage originated in paradise before Adamic sin, when God, creating Adam and Eve, established the union of marriage and blessed them, saying: "Be fruitful and multiply" (Gen. 1:22, 28).
 And Jesus Christ, by participating in the divine blessing of Cana at his wedding (John 2: 1-12), once again directly proved its importance in the life of a Christian.
Marriage is a family-related issue that is being actively discussed and studied today from a variety of perspectives, not just ecclesiastical but also philosophical, psychological, sociological, and so on.
 Marriage, as a legal alliance, appeared before Christianity. It had a hierarchical structure.
 And Christianity, rejecting and rejecting pagan notions, extremes, arbitrariness in the matter of marriage, regulated, defined Christian marriage, the crown.
  With the blessing of the church in Armenia, marriage became a well-known order of marriage in the middle of the 5th century.
 This follow-up comes from Sahak A. From the rules of the Parthian (388-439) ժողով Shahapivan assembly (444).
The latter re-established the crown, recognizing it as a legal obligation of marriage for both ministers, free men and peasants.
 The Armenian Apostolic Church performs the sacrament of the coronation with a corresponding ritual ceremony, which is summarized in the collection "Mashtots" (a book of rituals and prayers defined for the performance of sacraments and similar actions) [3].
 Every activity performed in the church (starting from the entrance to the church in the order of the rite) և Ritual action has a symbolic meaning [1].
 The order of the coronation in the Armenian Church has a careful sacrament որի allegorical interpretation, which was spoken about by the great fathers of both the General and the Armenian Apostolic Church (Hovhan Voskeberan, Grigor Tatatsi, etc.).
  According to the commentary, “Marriage is not merely a physical union that ideologically represents the union of Christ with his Church.
  In the Bible, the church is like the bride և Christ, the bridegroom.
 As Christ's Church is inseparable from each other, so man and woman are not two, but one, and form a separate body, bound together for life. ”[4]
  A number of prominent Armenian church figures referred to the sacrament of the crown, defining canonical ritual norms that are still in use today (Grigor Lusavorich, Nerses the Great, Sahak Part, etc.).
 It should also be noted that the current sacrament of the coronation in the Armenian Church differs in shape and structure from the order of the coronation performed in the past.
  Many of the rituals performed in the church in ancient times are not performed now, they are performed only on the day of the blessing of the crown, that is, all the ceremonies are condensed և celebrated in one ceremony, such as the vow of commitment or the procedure of taking the crown [5] 1 և etc.
  Through the Marriage Council, the Armenian Church emphasizes the importance of family strength and stability.
 This is the reason why the Armenian Church not only does not encourage, but in many cases forbids divorce.
 It should be noted that in the pagan period, the Armenian legislation not only did not prevent free voluntary divorces, but very often promoted them [2], but under the influence of Christianity new moral ideas were brought to life - corresponding to secular norms - which tried to restrict marriage by legal means. [2]
 The Armenian Church considers the crown inseparable, according to the message of Jesus Christ. "What God has joined together, let not man put asunder" (Matt. 19: 6).
 This is the reason why there is no special ritual or rule in the Armenian Apostolic Church in which the church dissolves the crown and then performs the order of the second marriage.
 However, in the IV-V centuries, caring leaders, taking into account the demands of life, expanded the legal grounds for divorce.
 The Armenian Church, especially in the 5th century, adopted a number of canonical norms, according to which the church allowed couples to divorce.
 During the mentioned period, the Armenian Church allowed the divorce of couples in the following cases: • the death of one of the spouses, • long absence (7 years) [6], • infidelity (betrayal, prostitution), 1 In ancient times, these ceremonies were performed separately, for which the Holy Fathers of the Armenian Church established a special order.
 In case of suffering from certain physical and mental diseases (leprosy, obscenity 2, deafness 3, demon possession) [7].
  Only in the presence of the mentioned points is the crown considered dissolved, և the church has the right to perform the order of the second crown.
 These norms later changed depending on the historical period, the socio-political situation of the country.
  Very often the Armenian Catholicos expanded or reduced these conditions with their canonical definitions.
Thus, for example, Nerses V (1843-1857) ordered marriage to be considered impossible for infertility. The Catholicos (1866-1882) considered the crown insoluble, and Mkrtich A. Khrimyan (1892-1907) allowed marriage in many cases.
 Most such cases occurred during his Catholicosate.
 While preaching to the people on the mountain, Jesus Christ spoke of divorce, mentioning only one reason for it: adultery.
 When the Jews objected to Christ, saying that Moses commanded them to file for divorce in case of divorce, Christ said: "Moses so commanded you because of your hardness" (Matt. 19: 7-8; Mark 5: 4-5) 4, at another time, "Every man that putteth away his wife, except for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery. "Whoever takes a divorced woman commits adultery," "Whosoever committeth adultery with another woman, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away doth commit adultery" (Matt. 5:32, 19: 9). .
  But Jesus Christ, by this decree, did not reject the exceptional cases of divorce at all, but forbade the expression of a person's individual will or whim in this important matter.
 The same was exhorted by the apostle Paul, who tried to soften the unilateral right of divorce and condemned male prostitution (see 1 Corinthians 6:16, 5: 10-11).
Thus, it becomes clear that both the Holy Bible and the Armenian Apostolic Church-legal definitions, nevertheless, allow divorce.
 The second and third marriages are connected with the idea of ​​divorce.
 The fact is that the second marriage was allowed only after the divorce was performed in the church.
  For the second crown, the Apostle Paul says: "I tell widows ին widows that it would be good for them to be like me, if they do not have patience, let them get married, because it is better 2 A white mark on the body (especially on the head) - a mark, a pat on the body, put-put, pissed.
3 Scabies, leprosy, leprosy, urination.
4 The fact is that in the past the Jews were so strict that they could even kill a woman or endanger her life, which is why the prophet ordered the divorce of women.
to marry rather than to be married ”(1 Corinthians 5: 8-10).
  And the epistle of the Romans writes: "Because the woman's man is alive. He is bound by the law, but when a man dies he is free. ”- Rom.
  Thus, according to the apostle, a second marriage is permissible only in the event of the death of one of the spouses.
 The Armenian Church also, based on the canonical definitions of the Holy Bible, allows the second crown.
  Nevertheless, neither the church nor the Bible encourages remarriage, but instead promotes adultery, the sins that plague mankind and are still preserved.
 Christian anthropology leads to the belief, which is strengthened by numerous theological, philosophical, medical, psychological assertions that man was created for monogamy, monogamy.
 God not only intended man for monogamy, but also created him in such a way that the path to the best development of the human person և to perfection would pass through marriage.
 From the point of view of ecclesiastical law, man is called monogamy (or, in the same way, loneliness)) monogamy.
  The canon law condemned the two-year penance for immorality, recognizing the right to a second marriage as a means of counteracting it.
 The point is that the Armenian Church Fathers gave great importance to the virginity of the bride and groom in determining the order of the blessing of the crown.
 Moreover, the order of blessing the crown was conditioned by virginity.
 A number of rules were adopted, which considered the violation of virginity before the blessing of the crown punishable for both sexes, and Shahapivan's 444 According to the rules of the church, the order of marriage is petitioned by the party.
  Two categories of crown blessing were established. a) virgin և b) blessing of a double (non-virgin) crown.
  Canon of Caesarea II condemns premarital sex as adultery.
The same is prescribed by Rule 5 of the Enlightener.
Thus, it is clear from the above rules that in the fourth century CE, the crown of no one was not blessed by any other ritual.
 However, the careful lesson, correctly assessing the situation in the country on this issue, already in the 5th century adopted new rules on the blessing of the crown, which differed from the previous definitions in terms of influence.
  According to the new order, the rite of blessing of a virgin was to be different from the blessing of a non-virgin.
 Whether the bridegroom was a virgin or not, his crown was subject to blessing, but the virgin by the rite of blessing of the virgin, and not the virgin by a ceremony designed for them.
 The foundation of this revolution was probably laid during the life of Sahak Part րոպ Mesrop Mashtots, but the legalization took place in the meeting of Shahapivan.
 Such a view seems plausible because none of the other canons adopted before the Shahapivan meeting contained even a remote reference to the two independent rituals associated with virginity.
 It is not ruled out that the foundation of the new order was laid for the first time in the "Mashtots" ritual book of the Armenian Church.
 Thus, according to Shahapivan's rule C (3), the procedure for repenting prostitutes was established without any period of time inside or outside the church, [7] unlike the above-mentioned rules of Caesarea, Gregory the Illuminator, and Neocaesarea, which established three years of repentance.
  Rule C established two new means of influence: a fine կարգ the order of blessing the crown of the second spouse, which was essentially different from the blessing of the virgin crown. The same was laid down in Rule (7) for abducting a girl and committing prostitution with her.
 However, given that the abduction was a crime, Rule E (7) imposed a three-year penance for the "false groom" in addition to the fine.
 And, unlike the rules of Caesarea և the Enlightener, the three-year repentance was established only for the false bridegroom prostitute, in three cases the three-year repentance did not work.
 The meeting of Shahapivan, defining the order of the second crown, proceeded from the fact that the first crown should be properly terminated.
 Under the latter, the second crown could not be blessed.
 The same goal was pursued by the "Mashtots" ritual book [10], the MLE (237) rule of the "Because of this" rule attributed to Barsegh of Caesarea, which stated: "Priest, do not lay a wreath without examination."
 Then, if he examines and does not confess, and others do not reveal their evil deeds, he will give the body to the Lord, because the priest is invincible in their sins. ”[6]
 It should be noted that the blessing of the second crown had a number of distinctive features: a) the crowned will be placed on the crown of the bridegroom instead of a cross, they were satisfied only by crucifixion (see Ganon of the Shahapivan Congregation), b) the day of the ritual was significantly inferior to the crucifixion c) "Mashtots" rite), c) the priest was forbidden to participate in the wedding of the second wife, "because they are not a wedding, but only bread" [6] (see the rules of Neocaesarea E, Second Nicene, LT), d) for duality Repentance was appointed for 3-4 years (after the Shahapivan meeting, the repentance was left to the leader's discretion), e) widows are not crowned, but willows. "Do not put a crown on the second crown, and not on the next stage. but in the crown of the church.
 And show that the married have no crown of wives. and not the same place "[11].
 It is interesting that according to the rules of Shahapivan և Hovhannes Odznetsi (717-728 ․) the order of the second crown had to be performed in the church.
The rule of Odznetsi XVI (16) stipulated: "And the twelve must also, in the first instance, approve their mediation and eulogy, and accept their sign of the couple from the blessing of the church and the priest"
  For those who violated the rule of this rule, he established a legal measure of influence - punishment.
 This problem, however, was solved in a different way in the "For the sake of…" canon attributed to Barsegh of Caesarea, according to the rule of ML (238), "the priest shall take the crown of the priest and place it on the head of the church until they repent" [6] .
It is noteworthy that already in the 5th century, a strict order was established for not having intercourse before the wedding: the one who had intercourse before the wedding was punished with a fine, beating, and repentance.
 Ignoring this circumstance, such a coroner was fined according to the same rules.
 In this case, by establishing the order of the second crown, the Armenian Church does not abandon the idea of ​​fighting for premarital chastity, but changes the way to achieve that goal, which was a unique way from the point of view of moral influence for the benefit of virginity.
 Thus, according to Rule C of the Shahapivan Assembly, if one of the brides is a virgin and the other is not, then the order of the virgin coronation is performed first, and for the other, the second coronation is performed. [6]
  It is noteworthy that Nerses և Nershapuhi IE (25) rule defines the following approach in this regard. "Virgins should not be married to widows, nor widows should be married to virgins, because it is not obligatory."
Thus, based on the information provided by the Code և Mashtots Rite Book, we come to the conclusion that since the 4th century, the Armenian Church has accepted the second marriage as a means of combating immorality, establishing a special order for the blessing of such a crown.
But in later centuries the second crown began to be blessed like the first, and repentance ceased.
The problem is different in the case of third or even fourth marriages.
  This problem has found its expression in the 14th (14) of the Harantz posthoghats canon, the 3rd of Neocaesarea (3), E (7), T (9), Laodicea A (1), Barsegh of Caesarea (4), the thirteenth (13) of Zion Catholicos, attributed to Barsegh In the MLT (239) rules of "Because of this ...".
 In particular, Rule B (4) of Barsegh of Caesarea condemns third or more marriages, stating that one who crosses the border of a second marriage does not deserve to be called a husband.
  According to another rule, Barseghni-type marriages are considered prostitution, which is not acceptable by the church.
 These rules, in spite of their strictness, however, do not solve the crown, but only establish repentance.
Analyzing the above, we come to the conclusion that the third and fourth weddings, however, were allowed by the church, because by establishing these rules, in any case, the third and fourth weddings were not dissolved, moreover, by establishing an order of repentance, after which such couples are acceptable in the church.
 The second possible argument is that Nerses V ordered to allow the fourth և fifth crowns, knowing in advance the extreme condition of the bridegroom և the poor condition [8].
 The third possible argument is that in the manuscript Mashtots we find the "Rule of the Third Coronation" [12], where the content of the Coronation is the same, only the nature of the prayer is different.
Interestingly, there are instances of polygamy in both the Old and New Testaments of the Bible (for example, in the book of Tobit, Sarah, who was married seven times, or a Samaritan woman, who was married five times).
 In this respect, the conversation of Jesus Christ with the Samaritan woman is interesting. During this conversation, Christ reveals the secret of the woman.
  It is noteworthy in this Gospel account that Jesus Christ not only does not criticize this phenomenon, but also does not force a woman to sever her relationship with a man.
  Thus, the Armenian Church, guided by the path of love and mercy, allows the second wreath, forbids the third wreaths.
Interestingly, the Russian Orthodox Church allows a second marriage if one of the spouses dies.
 According to the Russian priest V. According to Krechetov, it is not customary in the Orthodox Church to remarry, and according to Russian Orthodox law, a second marriage after a legal church divorce is permitted only to an "innocent" spouse, and those who have divorced can only remarry after repentance. [13] .
  In exceptional cases, when the third marriage is allowed, the term of the sentence is increased.
 The Orthodox Church does not encourage second marriages, but it does meet the needs of the individual to avoid the sins to which he is inclined to this day.
Thus, the Orthodox Church, however, allows divorce և second marriage (even the third), and if one of the spouses marries for the first time during the second marriage, the marriage is prohibited, and in the case of both for the second time, there is a special A ceremony in which there are no crowns, աsa, in fact, has no solemn nature.
  Here it is possible on what grounds the divorcee is divorced.
 If he divorces because of remarriage, his guilt increases.
  It should be noted that, unlike the Apostolic orthodox Churches, there is no second marriage in the Catholic Church.
  From a canonical point of view, there is no ecclesiastical divorce, but Catholic clergy find a way to circumvent the apostolic rules so that people can receive the blessing of the church during a second marriage.
According to recent sociological surveys, the number of divorces has increased in our country, which contributes to the frequency of second or third marriages.
  However, it is a very small percentage of second and third marriages that are performed according to the rites of the Armenian Apostolic Church.
  Based on sociological polls conducted from the outside, we can state that the public is in favor of the second or third crown, despite the fact that the Armenian Apostolic Church prohibits the third crown, and the second does not allow in all cases.
 It should be added that most of the respondents were not aware of the canonical position of the Armenian Apostolic Church on this issue.
  The reason is that in the Armenian society, the second or third marriages are performed outside the walls of the church, without divine blessing.
LITERATURE [1] Mkhitaryan A., The order of the wreath according to "Mashtots" ritual collections, Banber Matenadaran, No. 19, Yerevan, Nairi Publishing House, 2012, pp. 73, 78.
[2] Hovhannisyan S. H., Marriage and Family Law in Early Evil Armenia, Yerevan, 1976, pp. 153-154, 259, 260, 268.
[3] Ormanyan M., Ritual Dictionary, Yerevan, Armenia Publishing House, 1992, pp. 99-100.
[4] Poladian D., The Mysteries of the Armenian Apostolic Church, Beirut, 1957, p. 87.
[5] "Mashtots", Venice, 1831 (RMD).
[6] Codex of the Armenians, volume B, diligently V. Hakobyan, Yerevan, 1971, pp. 205-6, 166, 432-5, 487, 337-8, 166.
[7] Codex of the Armenians, volume A, diligently V. Hakobyan, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 104, 169-70, 245, 432-5, 439-40, 522-3.
[8] Melik-Tankyan N., Armenian Ecclesiastical Law, Etchmiadzin, 2009, pp. 818-9,795.
URL.
  http:
//www.pravmir.ru/povtornyie-braki-nikto-ne-obeshhal-chto-budet-legko/ (датаобращения.
 20.05.2018) [10] Mashtots Matenadaran, manuscript 953, page 189a, [11] Tatatsi G., Summer volume, Jerusalem, 1998, page 203.
[12] Mashtots Matenadaran, manuscript 4577 (Mashtots hand, nineteenth century), page 155a.
Krechetov, http:
//www.pravoslavie.ru/66120.html (data date.
 20.05.2018). [14] Second marriage, URL.
  http:
//www.pravmir.ru/vopros-otvet/category/chelovek/brak-icemya/vtoroj-brak-brak-i-cemya-chelovek/ (data description.
 20.05.2018) .Grigoryan THE PROBLEM OF THE SECOND AND THIRD MARRIAGE IN ARMENIA Keywords: second և third marriage, Armenian Church, Code of the Armenian Apostolic Church, divorce, Bible, Orthodox, Catholic, ritual, sociological issue.
