Sci. Head: Candidate of Technical Sciences Ն. Sahakyan key sphere for each state.
  The thematic modernity of the Government of the Republic of Armenia has always been and continues to be conditioned by the intensive development of the market economy, as the development of agriculture and the proper planning and implementation of agricultural exports can become one of the most important drivers of economic development in the Republic of Armenia.
  However, there are still problems that hinder the development of this sphere.
To find out the problems of the export of the RA agricultural products, to study the peculiarities of the agriculture of the Republic.
The drastic changes, severe winters and severely hot summers have an impact on the region, particularly on Armenia's agricultural products.
  The difference between the maximum daytime and minimum nighttime temperatures reaches considerable proportions, but this is the reason for the high taste of Armenian fruits and vegetables21.
The most systematic improvement requires reliable operating processing, loans, insurance, market orientation, technical and consulting assistance.
Agriculture is a large economic sphere.
 The disadvantages are due to the fact that it is not diversified for export, abroad 21 See V.C.Aykazyan. Question of plants. Some biochemical principles Currently, the Armenian economy is vulnerable to agricultural production, despite the attention to the climate, with the main emphasis on animals.
According to the NSS, according to the NSS, there are no roads due to money transfers, problems with recurring problems in Upper Lars, standardization and certification issues.
Thus, in contrast to other years, there has been an increase in data exports to Armenia.
    Exports were carried out mainly to Russia, CIS, Republic of Georgia, EU countries: ևAgriculture The National Statistical Service published the macroeconomic indicators of Armenia in January-December 2016, according to which the exports from Armenia made about $ 1.783 billion, up from $ 1.485 in 2015. front. growth - 20%.
 Armenia's imports amounted to about $ 3.292 billion against $ 3,239 in 2015 (an increase of 1.6%).
The export index in 2016 was recorded at a record low of only $ 697 million, and the highest in 2014 - $ 1.547 billion 22.
It is no secret that the problem in this sphere is conditioned by a number of problems in Armenia's trade relations: unreliable market conditions, customs barriers, non-competitive position in the environment, etc.
 However, it should be noted that in recent years a number of steps have been taken to improve the sector, enter foreign markets and sell.
present the main export picture (as indicators partners) անում export by goods.
Exports to the CIS countries increased by about 43.5% to $ 411 million instead of $ 286 in 2015.
 Exports to Russia amounted to $ 371 million instead of $ 245 in 2015. growth was 51.5%, to Ukraine - $ 8.43 million instead of $ 6.2 million in 2015 (growth - 29.7%), to Kazakhstan - $ 5.9 million against $ 4.1 in 2015 (growth 42.9%), and 22 See ս http:
//www.armstat.am/en/?nid=57 Export to the CIS.
Export by goods. In January-December 2016, ready-made food products were exported from Armenia in January-January-December against $ 325 million in 2015. (28.6% growth).
However, despite all this, the competitive environment poses new challenges.
 In the age of modern globalization, new waves of economic integration are emerging, which enable economic relations between economic units.
  From this point of view, in 1968, in the European region, they came to a united, complete thanks to the European Union.
 The latter gave a boost to the development of a free economic environment, excluding internal customs duties between member states, creating a common system for trade with third countries, a single monetary system, a common policy.
Despite the statements of the Republic of Armenia in 2014. signed on October 10, 2015 to join the Eurasian Agreement. It became a member of the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) on January 2, 1945, entering a fundamentally new phase of economic development.
  The main goal of the above-mentioned Union is to ensure the free movement of goods, services and capital in its territory.
 From this point of view, "Agriculture, as a key sector for Armenia, has a significant weight in these areas."
  In particular, the EEU membership had a great impact on the agricultural and food production sectors in Armenia.
However, in reality, it is quite difficult to assess the short-term impact of the EEU on the Armenian economy, due to a number of other events that currently affect the economic situation in Armenia and other EEU countries.
Until then, great economic impacts have been made on the payment.
For example, foreign companies to import Armenian goods to their own countries are faced with a lack of large quantities.
It is mainly about food - agricultural products - processed food from them.
  For example, a company wants to buy a few tons of Armenian apricots a day to sell in their country, but it turns out that we have even a quantity of apricots that is close to the required quantity.
  Thus, the deal does not take place, and the export does not increase23.
Unfortunately, it should be noted that the measures taken by the Government of the Republic to improve the sector are of short-term nature, which does not provide the expected result by economic entities.
 Here we face another problem.
  Surprisingly, Armenia, being rich in underground water resources, has an irrigation problem.
 The villager must get water and pay for the water he actually received.
Navigation equipment needs to be improved.
  Today's developed countries have long since switched to a drip irrigation system, saving and using their own resources efficiently.
Being no less expensive, however, the drip system provides a high yield.
  Moreover, export a significant amount of drinking water to a number of experts, if I reconsider the concept of water use.
When we talk about solving the problems of agricultural exports, we can not fail to point to the introduction of new technologies in the first place - the increase of productivity, as well as the implementation of measures by the Government to minimize crop losses from natural disasters.
 Then, it is necessary to maximize the work with the farms, creating a structure that will unite all those who have a large number of agricultural products for export, who are unable to sell them on their own under the conditions.
but in a small wayArmenia can 23 See Khachatryan A., Stability և Ensuring Development, Yerevan, 13.13.2010. Export-oriented development program "approved strategy" Referring to the state policy implemented in the field of agriculture in Armenia, it should be noted that it is enshrined in three main documents, which are: "RA Rural Agriculture 2010-2020. Government of Sustainable Development 04.11.2010 Resolution No. 1476 (hereinafter referred to as the Development Strategy) 24.
"RA Industrial Policy Strategy" approved by the RA Government on 15.12.2011 by decision No. 49.
"Sustainable Government of the Republic of Armenia 2008 By the decision No. 1207 of October 30.
International experience should be studied as a significant example, as the economies of many countries have developed thanks to the development of the book sector.
 At present, these countries have a developed industry և high quality services, but the agrarian sector based on the latest technologies continues to progress.
 Like a number of branches of the economy, agriculture has developed rapidly in Israel.
It would be wrong for us to use the experience absolutely, but it can be adapted to the conditions in Armenia.
Summing up, the role of export is big in agriculture. The advantages of those competing products will be emphasized.
  The state support here, in addition to tax-customs privileges, needed targeted financing, discovery of foreign sales markets, organization of export of goods.
 In terms of promoting the export of agricultural products, I propose the protection of local producers, to establish tax-customs privileges for economic entities engaged in export, the emphasis should be on: 1. Ensure the approved tariffs 24 See Village կայուն Agriculture Sustainable Development Strategy 2010-2020 Program Active Attention 2. To support the establishment and development of export-engaged enterprises with the participation of the state, ensuring free competition conditions; 3. Assist in the identification of foreign markets and the organization of exports of goods, 4. Particularly for the products in which Armenia has competitive advantages, 5. Continuous control of transaction costs, their reduction արագ acceleration of the process, 6. Concentrate և strengthen refrigeration economy,
to make Badalyan with Gorintensive development.
eGaghtnik PROBLEMS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT EXPORT IN ARMENIA Keywords - Export, agriculture, EEU, agricultural products, state support, issues.
