HENRY MORGENTHAU'S MEMORIES ABOUT THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE The centuries-old history of the Armenian people is a difficult story of struggle for survival, woven with the most heroic and tragic elements, written with the sweat of his sweat for his creative work and the constant struggle of blood.
  The newest page of that history was written at the beginning of the 20th century, in the world-wide turmoil of the First World War.
It is true that the First World War was a great evil for the peoples of different countries, but no nation has suffered such a great loss in comparison with its specific weight as the Armenian people.
  The latter was slaughtered in his cradle with indifferent tolerance, prepared with a hellish program prepared by the Young Turks, with the tacit consent of the powerful of the civilized world.
 He was the first in the world to commit a premeditated, carefully planned genocide, which is the greatest crime against humanity aimed at destroying national, religious or racial group (s).
  In the days of its great tragedy, being ignored by the great powers, the Armenian people were not left completely alone.
  The atrocities committed against the latter cause the anger and protest of the world community ար progressive figures.
 Archival և official documents, memoirs, monographs, collections of articles, testimonies of survivors և other literature were published.
The documentary evidence brought by foreigners who did missionary and diplomatic work in Turkey is of special importance.
  Such invaluable material is contained in the certificate of US Ambassador to the Ottoman Empire Henry Morgenthau.
H. Morgenthau was born in 1856. He was born in Germany on April 26, 1865. moved to the USA.
 1877 He graduated from Columbia University School of Law.
 Later he was an active member of the Democratic Party of the United States, engaged in financial, diplomatic and public activities, from 1899 to 1913. He was the chairman of large financial companies.
  1912-1916 He participated in the election campaign of US President Woodrow Wilson, leading the financial system of the Democratic Party.
 1913-1916 He was the US Ambassador to Turkey, where he represented the interests of countries at war with Turkey.
 It was he who was destined to communicate and meet with all the criminal Turkish officials who committed the Armenian Genocide at the beginning of the last century.
  He was also the Vice President of the Middle East American Relief Committee.
  His image summed up the protective features of Christians in Turkey in those years վառ the vivid manifestations of human conscience1.
  H. Morgenthau 1 "Electronic Jewish Encyclopedia", vol. 5, col. 457-459, see http.
//www.eleven.co.il/article/12839.
He could not stand all that when he realized that he was incapable, as a diplomat, of showing all that to the world. He resigned in the spring, saying, "I could no longer continue my relations with people who, though kind and polite, can shed the blood of a million people."
 The ambassador adds. "I am convinced that there are no such horrible facts in the whole history of mankind as this massacre.
  The great massacres and persecutions mentioned in the past seem almost insignificant in comparison with the sufferings of the Armenians in 1915 ”2.
Officially H. Morgenthau received information from American consuls and preachers in Western Armenia, communicated with local Armenians and diplomats from other countries.
H. Morgenthau left a rich legacy, which is an undeniable documentary on the genocide.
  His testimonies are irrefutable evidence, and the analyzes with which he exposes the insidious bankruptcy of the reasons and justifications of the Turkish denials are well-founded and realistic.
  He married his wife, T. Together with Morgenthau, he acquainted the American and international community with the deportations and persecutions against Armenians in the Ottoman Empire, and defended the Armenian question.
 At that time, H. Morgenthau wrote his memoirs entitled "The Armenian Genocide is the greatest tragedy in history", where he states: "Few people have suffered as much as Armenia, so horrible, the atrocities that he has been a victim of have continued, that even the name of Armenia has become synonymous with martyrdom in the eyes of many of us.
  The sufferings he has suffered in the present world are the largest known case in the history of the world.
 No one can attribute the horrific unrest in the various war zones to the tragic fate of the Armenians. ”3
  The article outlines the Armenian question, raising the reasons why the current Turkish government sought to exterminate "this peace-loving, architectural, harmless people", as well as the methods "used by the Turkish authorities for secession" 4.
1919 K. In Istanbul, the Armenian translation of Enovk Armen "The Memoirs of the American Ambassador Henry Morgenthau - The Secrets of the Armenian Genocide" was published in Yerevan, which was published in 1990.
 The book became a starting point for a number of Armenian Jotar historians studying the history of the Genocide.
 One of the most important merits of the book is the documentary authenticity of the author, the process of remaining honest, impartial and impartial until the end.
  The translator of the book states: "At the time of the horrific crime committed in the Ottoman Empire, a sensitive heart was found, which raised its voice in protest against the perpetrators of the horrible conspiracy.
  The book describes H. Morgenthau's memoir on the Armenian Genocide, brutal murders and tortures 1 "Henry Morgenthau: The Armenian People", edited by L. Barseghyan, Yerevan, 1999, p. 41.
2 See Nersisyan M., Undeniable Documents of the Armenian Genocide, Yerevan, 2005, p. 71.
3 "Henry Morgenthau և The Armenian People", page 10.
4 See ibid.
5 See Karapetyan M., Gorgyan E., Melkonyan E., Abgaryan A., The Issues of the History of the Armenian Genocide in Armenian Historiography, Yerevan, 2010, p. 33.
about the throne.
 The diplomat deeply analyzed the bloody cases, strengthening his views by citing and analyzing official sources.
  A special place in the work is given to the role played by Germany in the Armenian Genocide, noting: "Germany is also responsible for the Armenian page, which is arguably the most important page" 1.
According to him, this part of Asia has been called Armenia since the time of Herodotus.
  The Armenian people have lived in that area for 3000 years.
  H. Morgenthau claims that Armenia under Turkish dictatorship is the homeland of the Armenians, as evidenced by the ancient cuneiform inscriptions of the largest Armenian city, Van.
  The ambassador assures that the Armenians are the most civilized nation in the eastern part of the Ottoman Empire, as early as the 4th century. They accepted Christianity as the state religion, so the Armenian Christian Church is the oldest in the world.
  He emphasizes that the Armenians have identified themselves as Europeans, that scholars view them as a people of Aryan origin in the Indo-European language2.
H. Morgenthau testifies that Turkish-Armenian policy was state-organized.
 In one of the ambassador's certificates we read: "The extermination of 2 million men, women and men by the state-led massacre seemed to them the only way to prevent the further collapse of the empire."
H. In his memoirs, Morgenthau reveals many other aspects of Turkish genocidal policy.
  Rejecting the official version of the government on the reasons for the deportation of Armenians, he writes: "The assurances of the Turkish government that it intends to resettle the Armenians in new safer places are absurd.
 Enver և Talaat's real goal was to exterminate the Armenians ”4.
  He was convinced: "The real purpose of the deportation was robbery and destruction.
 It was really a new method of massacre.
 They understood perfectly well that they did not try to hide that fact during the conversation with me. ”5
 He substantiates this information with a conversation he had with a Turkish official, and in this connection he writes: "The Young Turks showed more ingenuity in the Armenian massacres than Abdul Hamid" 6.
 Moreover, quoting Talaat, H. Morgenthau notes. "In terms of solving the Armenian problem, they did more work in three months than Abdul Hamid did in 30 years."
During this period, Ambassador H. Morgenthau sent numerous messages to his government, presenting the most horrific atrocities organized during the Armenian Genocide.
 The ambassador gives us a strong testimony. In order for the annihilation of the nation to succeed, it was necessary to deprive all Armenian soldiers in all cities and towns of their means of defense.
  Before the destruction it was necessary 1 "American Ambassador H. Morgenthau's Memoirs գաղտն Secrets of the Armenian Genocide ", Yerevan, 1990, p. 304.
2 See A. Simonyan, The Armenian Genocide և Henry Morgenthau, p. 6, www.armeniansgenocide.am/images/menus/304/Aram_Simonyan_Armenian_genocide.pdf.
3 See Henry Morgenthau և The Armenian People, page 16.
4 See ibid.
5 See "American Ambassador H. Memoirs of Morgenthau…, pp. 301-325.
6 See Henry Morgenthau և The Armenian People, p.
7 See “Commemorative Book of the Great Genocide. 1915-1965 ", Beirut, 1965, page 95.
disarm the Armenians.
  Throughout the Ottoman Empire, a plan was taken to exterminate all healthy men in order to exterminate the entire male population capable of reproducing a new generation, so that the wider population would become easy prey.
  The high-ranking diplomat testifies that the young Armenians drafted into the army were disarmed and used as labor force.
  They were taken out in groups of 50-100 people and slaughtered at the place of Jama 1.
  "I do not think that even in the darkest centuries, such horrible scenes as are currently taking place in Turkey have been punished.
The Turkish police-soldiers did not know anything cherished.
 In the name of searching for stored weapons, they looted churches, desecrated tabernacles, sacred objects, and ousted priests on the pretext that the churches were the source of unrest.
 When weapons were found, bishops and priests were sometimes armed with guns, pistols, and swords and dragged to military courts as bearers of weapons.
  There have been cases when women accused of possessing weapons were stripped naked and beaten with newly cut tree branches.
 The ruthless acts and the search for weapons became so common that Armenian women and girls, hearing about the arrival of police-soldiers, fled to forests, mountains or caves. ”2
The assessments of the American ambassador about the Young Turk paramilitaries are influential. "Just as crime was the means by which those people possessed supreme power, so crime remained their tool to maintain their positions in that power."
  He included excerpts from conversations with Enver, Talaat, and Khalil Bey in his memoirs, during which he raised the issue of deportation and massacre in an attempt to prevent genocide.
 Talaat Pasha categorically refused to talk about Armenians և to answer. "The deportations of Armenians were the result of long, thoughtful consultations. The Armenians refused to disarm. They resisted us in Van, Zeytun and supported the Russians.
 The only way is to deport them. ”4
  "We were reprimanded for not distinguishing between innocent and guilty Armenians, but at that time those who were guilty today could not be guilty. It is useless to prove that we have already ordered the case of 3/4 of the Armenians, ie more than 1.5 million There is no one left in Bitlis, Van, Erzurum, the hatred between Turks and Armenians is so great now that we have to fill the case of Armenians, if we do not give up, the Armenians will take their revenge.
  They can live in the desert, but nowhere else… No Armenian can be our friend after what we Armenians have done… Our Armenian policy is absolutely determined և nothing could change it ”5.
The conversation ends with the fact that the Turks cynically demand their 1 See "American Ambassador H. Memoirs of Morgenthau…, p. 324.
2 See S. Poghosyan, History of the Armenian Genocide, vol. 2, Yerevan, 2008, p. 546.
3 See "American Ambassador H. Memoirs of Morgenthau…, p.
4 See Poghosyan S., Poghosyan K., History of the Armenian Question և Armenian Genocide, vol. 2, book 1. The Armenian Question in 1908-1914, Yerevan, 2001, p. 110.
5 See S. Poghosyan, The Problem of the Genocide, State Policy և National Perceptions, Yerevan, 2001, p. 34.
to hand over the money of the Armenians to the American insurance companies, as their owners and heirs are no longer alive!
The ambassador had meetings with other figures of the Young Turk government, but all his efforts were in vain.
 Describing the deportations and massacres organized by the Young Turks under the auspices of the Turks, he came to the following conviction. "The Armenian issue will be finally resolved only when the Armenians are liberated from the yoke of Turkish rule.
  And for that, immediate decisive steps must be taken to save the fragments of the ancient, honest, civilized Christian people, the Armenians, from the clutches of the Turks. ”1
  Therefore, "driving the Turks out of Europe alone was not enough.
  Being an incorrigible nation, the Turks must be deprived of the right to rule as a subject of their people, the necessity of which obliges not only to completely neutralize Turkey in Europe, but also to fundamentally transform the country of Asia, which is now called Turkey.
Not satisfied with the efficiency of his activity, in 1916 H. Morgenthau resigns, returns to the United States and works in pro-Armenian activities in New York, presenting the Armenian question to the public in the United States and other countries, the negative position taken by Turkey and its sponsoring powers during the Armenian Genocide.
H. Morgenthau died in 1946. He was buried in the temple of Emmanuel on November 27.
  As a sign of gratitude, at the end of the memorial to the Armenian Genocide Museum, among other intellectuals and figures, H. Pitcher with soil brought from Morgenthau's tomb.
Thus, H., a Jew by nationality. Morgenthau, who was called to represent and defend US state-diplomatic interests in Turkey, could not remain indifferent to the genocide against Armenians in the Ottoman Empire.
 In difficult historical and political circumstances, he was one of the exceptional politicians who, being faithful to the principle of humanity, served his mission for the sake of justice, the protection of the basic living rights of Christian nations.
 He is one of the bright personalities remembered and honored by our people due to making the truth about the Armenian Genocide available to the world with his objective information, providing scientific material to future generations, and conducting pro-Armenian activities.
Mary NajaryanHENRY MORGENTHAU'S MEMORIES OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE Keywords: Armenian Genocide, US Ambassador to Turkey Henry Morgenthau, deportation, exile.
