THE "LOVE" LODGE OF COSTANDOPOLIS According to the popular opinion in Western historiography about the origin of Freemasonry, it was officially established as a unique association in England in 1600.
 17th century England was living in turbulent times: civil wars, the overthrow of the throne, the struggle of the Catholic Protestant churches, the sharp decline of morals, the endless suffering of the masses, new social strata, and so on.
  There is a need to change the current situation not only in the socio-economic sphere, but also in the spiritual, cultural and moral spheres of life.
  17th century At the beginning of 1717 small groups spreading solidarity and brotherly love were born, and later in 1717. On June 24, 1944, four Masonic lodges in London merged to form the Grand Lodge of England.
17-18th centuries The Masonic lodges of England were preoccupied with charitable, moral, philosophical, and often scientific matters, and had little interest in politics.
  In Spain, Belgium, Italy, and France, in addition to these problems, the lodges also dealt with civil and public affairs, giving them a political tone.
This difference in the practice of Freemasonry was especially evident in the French "Great East" lodge, which pursued national-political issues.
  No matter how officially Freemasonry was free from any political coloration, in France it was often of a republican nature.
 French Masonry and its central lodge, the Great Archeology, denied the role of the clergy in modern times, proclaiming the idea of ​​freedom, equality, and brotherhood in the 18th century. It was the slogan of the French Revolution.
 Under the ideological influence of this slogan in a number of European countries in 1848-1852. Revolutionary, national-liberation movements took place, which left a deep mark on a group of progressive liberal-Armenian intellectuals.
 One of them, Stepan Voskanyan, died in 1848. In February, one of the first French student revolutionaries to enter Tuileries Palace.
1850-1860 Some of the progressive Western Armenian figures stared at the leading European countries, dreaming of achieving the liberation of the Western Armenians, their socio-economic, political and cultural progress.
1860s At the beginning of the 19th century, the idea of ​​creating a united nation-state became a reality in the Danube authorities, and the political unification of Italy and Germany took place.
 The Poles and the Greeks fought for national independence and independence.
 All this was happening thanks to the most active participation of European Masons.
 The European press was constantly writing about the leaders of the Italian liberation struggle, Masons J. Garibaldi, K. Kavuri, J. About Mazzini's activity 4.
Thanks to Masonic solidarity, they united the secret groups and organizations operating separately under the national flag.
 Armenian intellectuals, especially Armenian Masons, knew that Garibaldi had declared before starting the liberation struggle. "First union և solidarity և then only freedom."
A group of Armenian-Armenian public and political figures, publicists and intellectuals were well aware of the political events taking place in Europe and their participation in Freemasonry.
  Some of them studied or lived in different European countries, knew Masonry closely, and even became members of Masonic lodges.
Thus, Stepan Voskanyan became a member of the Italian "Liberta" lodge, Serobve Aznavour was a member of the "Jordan" lodge in London, Srapion Hekimyan, Mikael Alishan of "Oriental", Harutyun Svachyan և Serobve Tagvoryan of "GrandOrient"
 Matteos Mamuryan, Grigor Chilinkiryan ես Mesrop Nuparyan were members of the "Tigran" Anglo-Armenian lodge founded in Smyrna.
  A number of Istanbul-Armenian figures had joined the French "Le Union de Orient" lodge1.
  These figures belonged to the "Cosmic Brotherhood" category, associated with the oath of allegiance.
  This proves that in the conditions of current censorship in the Ottoman Empire they could not openly come up with Masonic ideas or propagate them.
  However, in the 1860s. Not only purely national ideological views were involved in Western Armenian public life, but also philosophical manifestations of Masonic universal morality.
1860 The Armenians of Constantinople and Smyrna have been actively interested in Masonic principles since
 No national minority living in Turkey, except Greeks and Armenians, pursued the task of establishing a lodge in their mother tongue.
  The Armenians of Armenia were experiencing a cultural and educational renaissance in those years, had trade relations with Asia Minor and Europe, which contributed to the establishment of Armenian Masonic lodges.
  Living under Turkish rule, Armenians continued their social and political activities.
  The Armenians of Armenia had an idea about Freemasonry, and for the progressive Armenian figures, the fraternal union of Freemasons was a means of cultivating their means of activity.
  For a whole quarter of a century, the Freemasonry of Constantinople tried to refine, soften the Armenian public morals, strengthen the human-national good feelings և solidarity, spread the idea of ​​patience.
 They tried to follow the three basic principles proclaimed by Freemasonry: freedom, equality, and brotherhood.
  According to the Armenian-Armenian lodges, in order to implement these principles, the development of education, science, arts, and the Armenian-Armenian society in general must be achieved through progress.
  Many of the Armenian progressive figures have long been Masons, sympathetic to the ideology of the European revolutionary, national liberation movements, striving to follow in the footsteps of the French Enlightenment.
The progressive Armenian-Armenian intelligentsia, following the message of the American enlightener, the great Mason Benjamin Franklin, "It is the duty of a Mason to fight against violence," sought to oppose dictatorial manifestations and achieve careful freedom.
  Unity of purpose presupposed unity of activity.
  For that purpose, Masonic lodges were established in the Western Armenian reality, which had to solve a number of problems.
1860s The Armenian Masonic figures, who acted separately from each other, understood that first they had to unite, form an Armenian lodge, strengthen and spread the national union through that fraternal organization, connect it with the Cosmic Masonry, giving great, permanent moral food for the nation's progress.
  The task of the founders of the lodge was set. Which European country accepted the sponsorship of the Grand Lodge, England or France?
  This question was so important that the Armenian lodge could not operate in the Ottoman Empire without the patronage of one of the Grand Lodges of any of these countries.
  That is why the purely Armenian lodges created in Turkey operated under the auspices of the Great Lodge of England and the "Great East" of France.
The first Armenian Masonic lodge "Tigran N1014" was founded in Smyrna on April 29, 1864 under the auspices of the Mother Lodge of England.
 It operated until 1894. June 6.
 The work of the lodge was initially done in English, as the English were in the majority.
  When the number of Armenians in the lodge increased, it began to function as an Armenian lodge.
  Among the happy members of this chamber were Matteos Mamuryan, Mesrop Nubaryan and others2.
In connection with the creation of a purely Armenian lodge, a group of Armenian intellectuals from the middle of 1865 to 1866. Many meetings and discussions were held in May.
 Discussions on the issue of creating and sponsoring the lodge were held in the apartment of Istanbul architect Serobve Aznavour.
  Initially, during the discussions, Aznavour and Mikael Alishan were in favor of the lodge receiving English sponsorship.
  They substantiated it with the fact that the brothers, members of the English lodge, are more united with each other.
 Iordanyan H., Iordanyan V., From the history of Armenian Freemasonry, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 30, 50, 60.
2 "Life և Art", Paris, 1935, page 73.
England had a great influence on the Ottoman Empire.
  Therefore, the Armenian lodge in the empire will enjoy complete freedom.
  These reasons did not convince H. Svachyan, A. Hekimyan, A. Tagvoryan and others who insisted that from the point of view of national perspectives, the sponsorship of the "Great East" lodge in France should be accepted.
 According to them, England has always been a defender of the Ottoman Empire and that fact never worked in favor of non-Turkish subjects of the empire.
  Besides, England expelled all political phenomena from the Masonic lodges, so, accepting the English patronage, the Armenians had to refrain from expressing political ideas in the lodge.
  After long discussions, it was decided to contact the English-French Masonry, as there was no significant difference in their charters.
1866 The founding meeting of the lodge took place on May 7 (Sunday) at 7 o'clock in the attic of the house No. 21 on Yazici Street in the Gule Gabu district of Constantinople.
 Although it was planned to keep the meeting secret, the founding members did not succeed.
  News about the establishment of the lodge was published in the Istanbul Armenian press.
The opening ceremony of the lodge was attended by 18 elderly Armenians who were members of other Masonic lodges.
 Among the founders were architect Serabve Aznavour, who had made a pioneer vow in England for years; և others.
  At the right time, those present began to receive the presidents and members of the English, French, and Italian Masonic lodges.
 The founding members of the lodge took care that S. The upper floor of Aznavour's apartment will be shaped like a functioning Masonic lodge.
  The attic hall was long, with a table on the east side.
 It was the place of the temporary master of the lodge, S. Aznavour.
  There was a Bible on the table, a scale, a rectangle, a corner, a small hammer, a putty, which were Masonic items1.
 Ս. Foreign guests sitting on both sides of Aznavour.
  Not far from the President's desk was the brother orator's desk, and to the right was the clerk's desk.
  The janitor and the two guards were in the hall.
 Those present wore a blue ribbon around their necks to symbolize the first stage of the lodge, or blue Masonry.
 There were four caps hanging in the four corners of the hall, which represented the four main missions of Masonry: temperance, prudence, bravery, justice.
  Chairman S. Aznavour stood up and read aloud in French the license and the certificate of approval of the "Mets Arcelq" lodge.
Then, on behalf of the members of the "Free Masonry" lodge, he thanked the foreign guests, the highly respected masters of the French, English and Italian Masonic lodges.
 It was decided to name the Armenian Masonic lodge "Love".
 The patent granted to the lodge was signed by the French Grand Orient lodge Serobve Aznavour, the first supervisor Iskender, the second supervisor Gamalik.
The British Consul in Constantinople was present at the founding meeting of the first Armenian Masonic lodge, who on behalf of the guests congratulated the members of the Istanbul Armenian lodge on the establishment of the first "Love" lodge operating in Armenian.
  The Secretary of the French Embassy participated in the first meeting of the company.
 At the sitting, the conversation was initially in English and French, and after the ambassadors left, there was a switch to Armenian.
After the departure of the foreign brothers, positions were distributed through elections.
  There was a white box in which each of the brothers put his favorite candidate's name.
 As a result of the elections, Serobve Aznavour was elected master of the "Love" lodge.
 After the elections, the members of the lodge were invited to the basement of the house to participate in the organized reception.
 The session was closed with a solemn egg, on the condition that the members of the lodge will meet twice a month, on the first and third Sundays of the month.
  Toasts were sounded during the reception, the first of which referred to the Cosmic Brotherhood, the others to the success of the "Love" lodge, the well-being of the Armenian nation.
  The master and the brother-members then referred to the reasons and necessity of the establishment of the Constantinople lodge.
  According to them, the Armenian society is drowning in the stench; the lodge should have become the rain that should have cleansed the Armenian society և 1 Iordanyan H., Iordanyan V., p. 31.
to ensure its further development.
  The motto of "Love" lodge was "Union".
  A flag was hung in the hall of the lodge, on which the words "union, love, enlightenment, work, freedom" were embroidered.
The anthem of the lodge was the poem of the famous Armenian poet Mkrtich Peshiktashlyan "Give me your hand, let us be brothers".
 It was heard for the first time on the day of Peshiktashlyan becoming a brother.
He was ordained a member of the "Love" lodge in 1867. March 21 2.
 According to the old Masonic rites, the anointing in the lodge was done as follows: The candidate is brought to the lodge with his eyes closed, because he is not a brother yet, so he should be unaware of the events.
  He is accompanied by two brothers from the eleven.
  He was brought to the place of ordination with his right arm naked, as a sign of fidelity, and his left breast half-open to show his sincerity and sex, because, according to the order of Masonry at that time, no woman could enter the Masonic nest.
 The left calf of the candidate is exposed as a sign of prudence and obedience.
According to the brotherly rites, the candidate had to go through three symbolic ways in the hall.
  The first symbolized the beginning of his life, when he was mentally and emotionally blind.
 The second was the period of studying the laws of life and nature, and the third was the period of maturity, when man is ready to understand the spirit of Freemasonry, the mystery of human life. To work for human perfection and happiness for the glory of the Cosmic Brotherhood.
 After the swearing-in ceremony, the candidate's eyes were opened so that he could receive the Masonic light.
 The other brothers surrounded the ordained man with swords, but those swords were not directed against him, but against those who would try to harm him.
  Now the newly ordained is not a stranger to them, but a brother.
  The super-respected master of "Love" lodge was announcing. "We are recognized as a brother in honor of the Cosmic Brotherhood by the French Grand Lodge authorized by me.
  And after all that, all the Masonic brothers in the world know you as their brother. "
According to the order established in the "Love" lodge, members of the Cosmic Brotherhood were to be free to uphold the principles of liberty on which the Covenant is based.
 A Mason had to be reasonable, upright, and moral in order to set an example for society.
 The brother had to be of mature age in order to be able to appreciate the brotherhood wholeheartedly and reasonably.
The ideas of "Solidarity" and "Union" have been used among the Armenians for many years, but they have never left their real traces, without inspiring hope and faith.
 The ideas of brotherhood, national solidarity, and patience were able to develop among the people, but like other ideas and feelings, these did not come out of their abstract form among the broad layers of the Armenians of the time.
 The goal of the Armenian masons was to create a network from Constantinople to other provinces, through the work of which it would be possible to create a new moral atmosphere.
  In the Istanbul-Armenian "Love" lodge in the 1860s ․ Morality prevailed, including the concepts of help, charity, brotherhood, solidarity, self-improvement, and enlightenment.
 They were dominated by the following idea: to be free, that is, to be free from prejudices, sects, and slavery.
Within 8-9 months from the day of its establishment, the "Love" lodge unites a well-known group of well-known Istanbul Armenians.
  The number of members of the lodge initially did not exceed 40.
They were intellectuals gathered around the idea of ​​"union".
 The members of the lodge were selected on the basis of the degree of morality of those who wished to join.
  The old brothers of the lodge, the newly ordained, although they often did not have the same position on many political-national issues, but, in fact, were supporters of "progressive", "enlightened" ideas.
1868 The lodge had 64 members, and in 1869 The number of members reached 80 3.
 The "Love" lodge had only 168 members during its thirty years of existence, of which 162 were Armenians, 5 Turks and one Indian.
 The majority of the members were native Istanbul Armenians, the others were intellectuals from other places (Karin, Caesarea, Smyrna, etc.).
 Later 35 of them settled in Constantinople.
 Among the members, besides intellectuals, there were merchants, moneylenders, then more 1 Berberyan R., page 84.
2 Ibid., P.
 Iordanyan H., Iordanyan V., page 32.
3 Berberyan R., page 32.
Many craftsmen cried: jewelers, watchmakers, 24 doctors, 2 military, 4 lawyers, 21 administrative officials, 1 teacher, 1 judge, 1 journalist and others.
 Among the members of the "Love" lodge were many prominent figures who played a great role in the national, cultural, social and political life of the Armenian community of Istanbul.
  Among them were Nahapet Rusinyan and Nerses Pey Tatyan, who were members of the group preparing the National Constitution.
 Writers Hovsep Shishmanyan (Tserents), Mkrtich Peshiktashlyan, playwright Srapion Hekimyan were figures in the period of awakening of cultural life, and Gabriel Noratunkyan, Hakobik Noratunkyan, painter Romanos Setefjyan made significant efforts to resolve the Armenian issue.
The members of the "Love" lodge sincerely sought to improve the socio-economic, political, cultural and cultural life of the Western Armenians.
  1867 On June 24, 1945, the ranks of the "Love" lodge were filled with the famous rich man, the official supplier of the Ottoman Ministries of War and Maritime Affairs, Simon Maxut Bey1.
Being cut off from the province, they did not know the situation of the people the best, they were satisfied with the vague facts contained in the written complaints or with the eyewitness accounts.
The Armenian-Armenian province was literally wandering in darkness and ignorance, receiving no help from either the colonies or the Eastern Armenians2.
  Nevertheless, the Armenian-Armenian Masonic figures did everything to help the people, even finding hope of salvation in the ideology of foreigners.
The activity of "Love" lodge officially stopped in 1894. by the decision of the September 17 meeting.
  The protocol of the lodge said that the former esteemed master Harutyun Noratunkyan, the current supreme esteemed master Harutyun Merhemgali, the orator Yusufyan, the secretary Hakob Jelaşen, gathered in Latif khan of Galata district of Constantinople and noticed that It was not possible to carry out activities, therefore, with this announcement it was decided to "regularly stop the work in this Love lodge".
3 Nowadays, there are Armenian Masonic lodges in different countries of the world.
  Years ago, Armenian politicians decided to create a Supreme Lodge in Armenia, which should centralize the Armenian Masons and operate on the native land.
  Through their efforts, the Armenian Supreme Lodge was established, which was established in 2002 by the RA Ministry of Justice. By the decision of March 5, it was registered as a non-governmental organization.
 At first it was called "Free-accepted masons", and in 2002. On June 10, 1945, it was renamed "The Supreme Armenian Lodge of Free-Accepted Cartridges."
  The establishment of this lodge was agreed upon by the Supreme Lodge of the State of Columbia (USA), the National Supreme Lodge of France and the Supreme Lodge of Russia.
Anahit SahakyanCONSTANDNOPOLS "LOVE" LODGE Keywords: Free masons, Freemasonry, lodge,
intelligentsia, Constantinople, Love lodge
.
