Sci. Head: Candidate of Technical Sciences, Assoc. Ս. Nahapetyan The solution of the problems related to the financing of the organizations of the economic sector of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic requires the introduction of modern methods և development և mechanisms և.
The current appearance of the structure of the private sector of the NKR economy. 2014 89.4% of the total number of economic entities registered in the business register were super-small (3654), 7.5% - small (306), 1.5% - medium (62) and 1.5% - (63) large entities.
As for the placement of employees, more than half of the total number of employees in the private sector - 54.7% - falls to the large, and to the very small, small - medium entities - respectively 15.5%, 20.0% - 9.8%.
  The volume of production is distributed among these organizations as follows: 26.4% falls on small companies, 20% on small, 11.2% on medium and 41.8% on large companies1.
  And if we take into account that the small-micro-micro-organizations that are created operate on average only 2.5 years, it is impossible to conclude that the micro-micro-small economic entities in our economy are rather poorly developed, and the medium-sized entities still have a problem of formation.
  Studies have shown that the main reasons for the poor development of small enterprises are: 1. Non-competitiveness of the released product, conditioned by the existing production equipment և technology, 2. Lack of financial resources for the purchase of modern equipment և insufficiency, 3. Unfavorable credit conditions prevent small enterprises from using it, while manufacturing activities, in contrast to trade, require larger investments to make a profit. Lack of self-financing mechanisms (credit unions, mutual insurance companies).
1 NKR statistical yearbook, http.
//stat-nkr.am/.
The issues related to the financing of the enterprises of the domestic economy are mostly considered in the work.
Today, the structure of our country's economy is such that large, small and medium-sized organizations have a small choice of funding sources to solve their financial problems.
 The policy chosen in post-Soviet Armenia gave priority to the establishment and development of the banking system in the financial sector.
  And since today the banking system is incomparably developed in the financial sector of the economy, therefore, the organizations of the real sector of the economy apply for bank lending for financing.
 However, there are a number of obstacles, especially for small enterprises, which are more expedient to divide into two groups: obstacles from the point of view of borrower SMEs, obstacles from the point of view of lending organizations.
The main obstacles from the point of view of SME borrowers: ների The problems of SMEs working with the lender are often due to the lack of business skills for SMEs to do business,։ Lack of knowledge of creditors to assess the risk of lending to SMEs։.
 In addition, SMEs usually lack the resources և credit history ների traditional lenders preferred by lenders  credit, many SMEs do not have credit history և relevant financial information  lenders typically do not offer financial instruments in terms of maturity, cost և meet the business needs of SMEs;  Lenders have little experience in SME lending; հաճախ SMEs often can not provide the collateral required by the lender;  Local currency loans are either not provided or are usually too expensive for SMEs.  No long-term lending tools are offered.
From the point of view of the lenders, the problems of SME lending are: Accurate financial data  Limited-cost national currency loans are not available to SMEs, while foreign currency loans are unacceptable to the SME lenders in terms of risk, as SMEs do not make a profit in the appropriate currency.
Պատճառով Due to high risk, SME lending often requires a higher degree of credit administration, which results in lenders setting higher interest rates, which makes loans less attractive.
2014 35% of the total loans provided by the last commercial banks (9 039.5 million AMD) were loans provided in AMD և 65% in foreign currency 1.
In order to solve the above-mentioned problems related to the financing of the private sector in the economy, the NKR Government established the Artsakh Investment Fund "Rural" Agricultural Support Fund.
  These funds, by partially subsidizing the interest rates on loans provided by commercial banks, as well as by providing loans and borrowings on their own, aim to further expand the connection between the real and financial sectors of the economy.
  In 2008-2014, the National Academy of Sciences provided 25 billion drams in assistance, the majority of which, 74%, are loans provided by the fund, which were provided to 67 legal entities engaged in agriculture. 36,730 individuals.
2 Aiming to promote the development of the SME sector in the country, the NKR government implements appropriate assistance programs through the Artsakh Investment Fund (MIF). The total amount of support provided to the SME sector through the MFA is 19 billion drams3.
However, the effectiveness of the implementation of these programs հավանական the probability of achieving the set goals is directly related to a number of factors.
 First of all, not only financial support, advice should be provided to the newly established և existing organizations, but also through the involvement of relevant specialists to engage in entrepreneurship, to introduce the basic principles of this type of activity.
The concept of businessman is still perceived by some as a negative phenomenon.
 Understanding entrepreneurial psychology and mastering the basic skills of entrepreneurship is very important.
This will facilitate the rational use of the funds received in the form of loans.
  What will be the expected result? Վող 1 NKR statistical yearbook currently being created will be excluded.
2 Village and Agriculture Support Fund of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic, http.
//agrofund.am/index.php/am.
Situations when receiving appropriate financial resources, as a result of their inefficient use, borrowers are not only forced to cease their activities, but also apply to banks for new loans to refinance existing loans.
Thus, as we see, the state-wide participation in the real sector through relevant programs should be considered a key feature of the NKR economy development.
  This is due to the fact that the financial and real sectors in the NKR economy are not able to cooperate with each other independently.
Of course, the role of these state support programs for the recovery of the economy in a very large post-war country.
  However, it should be noted that the economic recovery is still quite slow.
 This implies that the state intervention in economic development should be expressed not only in the form of financial support, in order to increase the availability of appropriate resources, but first of all, conditions for healthy competition between organizations in the real sector should be created.
Lusine SantryanSOME ISSUES OF FINANCING THE REAL SECTOR OF THE NKR ECONOMY Keywords: credit history, SME, Artsakh Investment Fund, Rural և Agriculture Support Fund, competition.
