1918 THE MASSACRE OF BAKU ARMENIANS AS A REALITY: HISTORICAL AND LEGAL FACTORS 1918 A study of the massacres of Armenians in Baku in September 1945 showed that the Bolshevik-Musavat political struggle for power, [1] disguised by religious and ethnic divisions, was a pretext for the Turkish army to advance within the framework of Pan-Turkism.
 Despite this circumstance, during the three-day war, the Armenian National Council of Baku hid and sheltered 20,000 Tatars from the Bolsheviks (13,000 in public buildings, 7,000 in their own homes).
The armed clashes that took place on March 30, 31 and April 1 were presented as Armenian-Tatar clashes, and the Turks took the opportunity to accelerate their progress1 [3, 2, 13].
 In May, an Islamic Army was formed in Ganja (Gandzak) "to save Muslims from danger", followed by the formation of the "Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan" artificial state.
 On that occasion in 1923 Russian public figure, lived in Baku for two years, well acquainted with the events B. Baykov wrote: "The government of the newly established Republic of Azerbaijan made the violence targeted, raising it to the state level. A war was declared against the Armenians. "[4]
The situation in Transcaucasia on the way to the creation of the Great Turan, the collapse of the Seym, the defeat of the Turkish army in the May heroic battles, the independence of the republics, accelerated the Ottoman army's invasion of Baku.
The Turkish side finally achieved the desired result - no longer hiding under the name of the Islamic Army, the Turkish regular army's three-day battle between the Soviet government and Musavat ended on March 20 (April 2) with the defeat of Musavat.
 Most of the paramilitaries fled to Elizavetpol, some hid in the suburban villages of Azerbaijan.
 More than 3,000 people died on both sides.
  According to various sources, 700-2000 Tatars, 300-1200 Bolsheviks (Russians and Armenians) were killed.
  The Armenian National Council in those days saved oil producers H. District և Sh. Asadulla, and St. Shahumyan to Behbut khan Jivanshir, who six months later expressed his "gratitude" to the Armenians.
After the works, he attacked in the direction of Baku.
1918 During the secret meeting of the figures of the government of Azerbaijan and the Musavat party in Gandzak in May 1945, plans were made for the massacres of Armenians in the provinces of Nukhi, Aresh, Gyokcha, Shamakhi and Baku.
  The main task of the Armenian side was to open the Baku-Tbilissi road - to liberate the Armenian population of Gokcha, Aresh, Nukhi, Shamakh provinces from Turkish-Tatar persecution, then to cross to Armenia, to help the Armenian corps fighting against the Turks.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of England R. Cecil wrote that the Turks would have reached Baku sooner if the Armenians had not resisted.
  The Ottoman Empire sought to seize Baku's oil, then cross into the North Caucasus, and from there to Central Asia, creating a large Turkish state to carry out the Pan-Turkism program.
  An attempt was made to invade Baku to create the Oghuz state envisaged by the pan-Turkic program, which envisaged the creation of a new "Greater Azerbaijan" state under the tutelage of the Ottoman Empire in the area from the Sea to the Caspian Sea (from Batumi to Baku) by bridging the Turkish state. 8].
Destroying the Armenian villages of Baku ավետ Elizavetpol (for example, 48 of the 51 villages in Nukhi և Aresh were destroyed, with a total population of 40,000 [9, 2]), Turkish-Musavat forces besieged the city of Baku, where almost 90,000 Armenians lived.
1918 On September 15-17, 1945, in the city of Baku (before that in the province of Baku), the Turkish regular army and Tatar bandits continued the genocide of Armenians in Western Armenia, which began in Armenian-populated areas of the Ottoman Empire.
 The entire responsibility for what happened - overcoming the consequences - was placed on the Ottoman Empire in 1918 by the allied powers.
  1918 In December 1945, Britain, France, and the United States set up an "Allied Review Committee" in Baku.
  It was official in nature, international, the staff was international (only 7 Armenians were included).
  The commission offered the population of Baku to submit list-estimates, setting a deadline of February 15-20.
  In that sense, the 1918 statement of the RA representative in Georgia Jamalyan is possible. The telegram sent to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia on November 29 was the text of the following telegram sent by General Thomson to Nuri Pasha on November 21 "Upon arrival in Baku, reports were received about the damage done to the looted property by the Ottoman soldiers.
  A commission of representatives of Great Britain, France and the United States has been set up in Baku to investigate the assessment of the total value of the proven damages.
 As the future amount must be paid at the expense of Turkey, I am writing to you so that you can return the property.
 I inform you that in case of need other commissions will be formed to discuss the complaints.
 That is why it is expedient for you տեղեկ to inform your generals of this intention. "[10]
What happened to the Armenians in September (unlike the events that took place from March 31 to April 2, 1918), was the result of unilateral actions.
 It should be noted that terrorism and bombing carried out during a military operation are not considered a unilateral action.
  The latter cannot be considered genocide as they do not pursue the original purpose of the group's deliberate annihilation.
Witness, German officer of the Ottoman army E. Parake wrote to Lieutenant General von Zeekti about what happened to the Armenians. "The atrocities were mostly committed inside the houses.
  That is why there were relatively few corpses in the streets.
  They were mostly tucked away in the corners, so often only by smell.
 In one place I saw seven corpses stacked on top of each other, including several children.
 "Smell was blowing from the basements."
Paraquin's eyewitness accounts provide remarkable details about the events in Baku, at the same time stating that the massacre of Armenians there was planned. It was carried out with the support of the Turkish regular army, Nuri Pasha, and his military. "Գերման A German told me that he had entered a house with Nuripasha's cousin, where 13 Georgians, regardless of age or gender, had been killed.
  When he pointed out that they were Georgians, that is, defenders of Germany, he received the following answer: "they were considered Armenians" [2, 12].
There is a lot of evidence about the massacres of Armenians in Baku.
"Even those in hospitals were not spared.
  At the Balakhani Hospital alone, 360 patients were beaten to death, and 63 children from an orphanage on Komandantsky Street were thrown from the fourth floor. "
 During Misak Torlakyan's trial, the director of the Armenian orphanage A. According to Khanedyan, about 500 orphans were killed in the massacre.
The available facts show that the massacres of Armenians in Baku province (Av. Aharonyan in a letter written on July 20 informs about the conditions of the Armenians of Yerevan, Dilijan, Nor-Bayazet as a result of the actions of the Turkish army.
  In addition, there is information about the skins of 2,000 Armenians in the Gharakilisa region) [15] of a mass և periodic nature [10] 2.
  The last characteristic was the basis of the Rwandan genocide.
  It is not in vain that lawyer V. Shabas considers it a feature of genocide.
  Other factors, such as the mass or general nature of the atrocities in this or that region or country, the targeted and systematic persecution of victims according to group affiliation, provide an opportunity to identify the intent of the genocide.
The Baku massacre has some similarities with what happened in Western Armenia.
 First of all, let us mention that the goal was the same - the destruction of the ethnic group for the creation of the Great Turan.
  In both cases there are secondary motives - economic-religious.
Religious factor ․ There were a large number of Muslims in Baku (Tatars of the Caucasus).
  Besides, the "Musavat" party was an influential force among the Muslims of Baku, which became a pillar both in capturing the city and carrying out the massacre.
  In this respect, 1995 can be held in parallel. [18] In July 1945, the Serbian army led by General Ratko Mladic was deployed in Srebrenica.
Economic interest ․ As we know, in 1917 At the enlarged sitting of the Baku Council on November 17, 1945, the municipality was abolished and the oil field was annexed to the city [9, 19].
 Baku oil was attractive not only to Ottoman Turkey, but also to Soviet Russia, Britain, and Germany.
The Kurds were supported by the Kurds in Western Armenia.
 That role was played in Baku by the Musavats and the Tatars of the Caucasus.
  The extermination of the Armenians in Western Armenia was carried out by the bandits of "Teshkilat mahsuse" (Special Organization), the "Jalad Komites" (Committee of Executioners) organization operated for that purpose in Baku province.
 In both cases, the Armenian intellectuals were arrested before the massacre.
The events in Baku have something in common with the Holocaust, as the genocide was committed outside the homeland, the Rwandan genocide 2 A qualitative feature of the Genocide is the mass nature.
  In this case, we are not talking about the number of genocide victims, whose attempts to count are scientifically fruitful.
  The problem is different.
  The substantive feature of the genocide that makes it possible to distinguish the latter from other manifestations of collective violence is the logic of mass labeling and classification.
 It is about the peculiarities of the subject's conception of the situation.
  The image of a genocide victim is faceless, mass, because belonging to a group is necessary for a subject who has a sufficient basis to qualify as a target of annihilation.
Having regard to the judgment in the case of Akayesu of the Rwandan Chamber of Justice of the International Criminal Court, in which cases of mass murder of prisoners of war were recorded, հետ with Srebrenica on the basis of external leadership (recorded in the case of "Bosnia-Herzegovina v. Serbia" case).
According to the UN 1948 Article 2 of the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (which sets out the crime of genocide) with regard to the total or partial destruction of national, ethnic, racial or religious groups: a. the murder of group members, b. causing serious bodily injuries to group members, c. creating intentional conditions for the group, which are aimed at its complete or partial physical extermination, d. birth control measures in this group.
These acts fully correspond to the scenario of the Baku massacres.
We think it is not acceptable to consider only Western Armenia or the Ottoman Empire as the Armenian Genocide, because, as we have seen, genocide was committed against Armenians in all areas that came under the control of the Ottoman army.
For example, the fact of slaughtering 2,000 men in Gharakilisa, which has in common with the Srebrenica genocide, that is, the killing of 8,000 Muslim Bosnians.
We think that it is necessary to look for a common intention for the Armenian Genocide in Baku, because it was, in fact, an episode of the Armenian Genocide, carried out with the general intention of destroying the Armenians who existed as an ethnic group.
In 1918, it was not the Turkish-Kurdish mob, but the Turkish regular army that set fire to the Armenian settlements all the way to Baku, massacring the civilians, later repeating the same thing in Baku.
 This fact, confirmed by numerous evidences and documents, leaves no room in the Turkish file for "justification" of deportations for a false statement about the unreliability of Armenians.
 The Armenians living in Nakhichevan և Eastern Transcaucasia were not citizens of the Ottoman Empire to be considered unreliable, nor, moreover, did they pose a threat to the empire or to Turkey.
 They were massacred on the spot exclusively for being Armenians.
We believe that both the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Azerbaijani SSR, and the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan have adopted the genocidal anti-Armenian policy of Turkey, which went unpunished, on issues concerning Armenians and Armenia, until it is fully recognized and condemned by the Ottoman Empire. Genocide, that political line will not change in any way.
LITERATURE [1] Bagu's self-defense, "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), October 23, 1918.
[2] "The massacres of Armenians in Baku և Elizavetpol provinces in 1918-1920", Collection of Documents, Materials, Yerevan, 2003, pp. 158-61, 260-3, 429, 152, 104 (according to some data 14,000) 1267, c. 1, c. 26, թ. 22-23.
 "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), №66, March 29, 1918.
[3] HAA, f. 223, c, 1, c. 117, թ. 2.
[5] Stepanyan G., "Armenian massacres and self-defense battles in Nukhi ուխ Aresh provinces in 1918-1920", issues of historiography of the history of the Armenian Genocide, № 5, Yerevan, 2002, p. 25.
 "Worker", March 29, 1919, No. 61.
[6] Gharibjanyan G., "Baku Commune in favor of preservation of the Armenian identity", Social Sciences Bulletin, № 1, 1999 page 42.
[7] HAA f. 276, c. 1, c. 37, թ. 48.
[8] Horizon, Tbilissi (Georgia), October 30, 1918, № 222.
[9] Stepanyan G., The history of the Armenians of Baku (historical-demographic study), Yerevan, 2011, pp. 430-1, 402, 347.
 Dadayan Kh., Armenians - Baku, p. 150.
[10] Genocide in the Focus of Public Analysis, Collection of Articles, Mkrtichyan A. scientist Edited by Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2015, pp. 10, 11-3.
[11] Stepanyan G., Armenian massacres Հայ self-defense battles in Baku province և Turkish-Azerbaijani responsibility (September 1918, April 1920), International Conference. Armenian Genocide 100. Recognition: Compensation, Provisions of the Reports, Yerevan, 2015, p. 41.
[12] Hayruni A., The Armenian Problem in German Foreign Policy in 1918, Yerevan, 2013, p. 166.
[13] Stepanyan G., Hamazasp Srvandztyants, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 433, 629.
[14] The trial of Misak Torlakian, the assassin of Pehput Khan Jivanshir. Before the Military Court, Athens, 1936, p. 22.
[15] HAA f. 200, c. 2, c. 5, թ. 1-2.
[16] Schabas W., Genocide in international law.
 The crime of crimes, 2000, p. 208․ [18] Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro, № 185, p. 81 ․ Marukyan A., Grounds and Possibilities to Appeal to the International Court of Justice in the Armenian Genocide Case, Yerevan, 2014, p. 55.
[19] HAA f. 1267, c. 2, c. 94, թ. 103.
232.
Ruzanna Gasparyan 1918 THE GENOCIDE OF THE ARMENIANS OF BAKU AS A REALITY: HISTORICAL AND LEGAL FACTORS Keywords: Armenians of Baku, genocide, Pan-Turkism, comparative analysis, motives, factors, Baku և Elizavetpol Armenian villages, genocide.
