Scientific Supervisor: Doctor of Technical Sciences, Assoc. H. Mnatsakanyan Currently, one of the key directions of the economic development of the Republic of Armenia is the development of small and medium enterprises, which will stimulate the increase of new products in the market and the creation of new jobs.
 Small and medium-sized enterprises are more flexible in responding to structural changes in the market, the introduction of innovative management systems and new technologies.
  Today, SME-oriented measures are in the center of the RA Government's attention, by which continuous steps are taken towards the development of this sphere.
 Particular attention will be paid to the enterprises that operate using them. The government will support the access to finance for SMEs.
For the banking system, financing to SMEs allows not only to gain income, but also to diversify credit risks, ensuring profit.
  From January 1, 2017, the minimum amount of total capital of commercial banks operating in Armenia was set at 30 billion drams instead of the previous 5 billion drams 1, which led to an increase in lending supply by banks, which in turn contributed to lower interest rates and better lending conditions.
  One of the target directions for the allocation of free resources of banks 1 www.cba.am - The latest technologies of the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, such as the increase of production.
SME financing is the current source of funding.
  Considerable work is being done to meet the requirements of SMEs by developing flexible, innovative credit instruments.
Examining SME financing proposals by commercial banks operating in Armenia, financial instruments can be divided into two main groups: traditional Innovation.
  The first group includes loans, credit lines and business mortgages provided for financing the main րջCirculation expenses.
  The need for additional collateral can be mentioned as the main generality of the above-mentioned credit instruments.
 In these cases, the loan amount is calculated based on the security value offered as collateral, based on the company's financial indicators, such as the company's profit level, the amount of equity, a number of financial indicators, depending on the lender bank's policy.
  The table below shows the guidelines for "traditional" credit instruments offered by commercial banks operating in Armenia today. Table 1 Guidelines for Traditional Credit InstrumentsRelatively long-term loan լրացուցիչ Additional costs related to obtaining a loan 2 Official websites of commercial banks operating in the Republic of Armenia Maximum amount 1 billion AMD or equivalent foreign currency 200 million AMD or equivalent foreign currency 1 billion AMD or equivalent foreign currency Nominal interest rate AMD: 12-16% Other currency: 8-11% 15-18% Other currency: 10-13% AMD: 15-16% Other currency: 10-11% is favored (expenses related to property valuation, notarization, pledge registration).
They are offered for loans provided within the framework of agriculture and tourism development programs.
  The data loans are provided in AMD, at a nominal interest rate of 12%, with a repayment period of up to 7 years.
 Funding for these programs is provided by the German-Armenian Fund3.
There are also offers of "traditional" loans without collateral from Armenian commercial banks, but the maximum amount offered by the latter does not exceed 25-35 million AMD or the equivalent currency.
There are also innovative financing tools in the credit market, from which can be distinguished leasing, factoring, order financing, export financing, pre-export financing.
 The innovative characteristics of leasing "factoring" are more typical of the Republic of Armenia, as these tools have long been used in developed and developing countries.
  However, today there is an increase in the use of innovative tools for industry representatives, which is also due to the increase in the supply of similar tools by commercial banks operating in Armenia.
  Below is a brief description of innovative financing tools for small and medium-sized enterprises, the main conditions of provision.1. Leasing or financial leasing.
  It is the acquisition of property դիմաց for a certain payment stipulated in the lease agreement, under certain conditions ում transfer to the latter for a period of time with the right of purchase to the property by the lessee.
Financing is carried out on the following conditions:  Currency: AMD, USD, EUR, RUB,  Annual nominal interest rate starting from 7%,  Leasing term up to 60 months,  Prepayment starting from 20% of the property value.
Financing in the SME Market is more favorable 3 www.gaf.am - Official website of the German-Armenian Fund 2. Factoring.
  It is a financial service provided by the bank to those companies that provide deferred deliveries to their buyers, both in the domestic and foreign markets.
 In the factoring transaction, the supply company concedes to the bank the monetary claim made by the buyer, in return for which it receives financing from the bank.
 The main terms offered by the internal factoring service in the RA market are presented below:  Currency: AMD,  Annual nominal interest rate: 12-17%,  Financing amount: up to 90% of the money demand, ագույն Maximum transaction term: 120 days.
The main attraction of factoring is its unattractive nature.
 In this case, the main asset of the companies is the receivables, which arises as a result of deferred payments.
3. Order financing.
 This tool provides an opportunity for SME entities to receive appropriate funding for the supply of goods or services provided by the contract (tender) in the presence of a contract.
    One of the directions of SME development by the Government of the Republic of Armenia is the facilitation of participation of SME entities in public procurement.
  Using this tool, SMEs also have the opportunity to solve the problem of attracting funds necessary for public procurement or other orders in an accessible way.
  The financing conditions offered by the commercial banks of the Republic of Armenia are as follows:  Currency: AMD, USD, EUR,  Annual interest rate starting from 8%,  Financing amount up to 60% of the contract amount, but not more than 200,000,000 AMD or equivalent currency, կետ Term: not more than 12 months.
which by definition 4. Lack of additional export financing Financing The main advantages of order financing are the short term of the decision on lending and the provision of the loan, the availability of alternative options for property repayment.
Voluntary factoring.
  In this case, the underwriting debt underlying the financing arises as a result of the deferred export.
  Within the framework of the 2013 export-oriented policy, the Government of the Republic of Armenia "Armenian Export Insurance Agency" CJSC (EASA) 4, the main purpose of which is to promote exports.
The establishment of HAAG created a wide opportunity for Armenian banks to develop innovative tools for SME financing.
  The EASA allowed exporting companies to insure the risk of non-payment of a foreign buyer for a certain commission (0.3-1.2%) after exporting on the condition of deferred payment.
  The conditions for providing this tool in the RA market are as follows: financing based on financing.
Currency: USD, Euro,  Annual interest rate - from 6.5% to 16%, 16 Financing - up to 85% of the money demand,  Term - up to 180 days.
with 5. Pre-export joint tools are pre-export financing.
  It gives exporting companies the opportunity to receive an unsecured loan from Armenian banks for the purpose of fulfilling export contracts, the amount of which can be used to purchase raw materials, 4 www.eia.am - Official Website of the Export Insurance Agency of Armenia
In terms of customs clearance, packaging, transportation, and the cost of transport, the IAEA, in turn, insures credit repayment. Although their export financing product is quite innovative, the risks are minimized as much as possible, and the Armenian banks are not in a hurry to invest it.
 At this time 1-2 banks offer the mentioned product, and the main conditions are as follows:  Currency: AMD, AMD, USD, EUR,  Annual interest rate: AMD 16%, USD ևEuro starting from 8%,  Financing amount: 75-85% of the price of the export contract, կետ Term - up to 18 months.
Thus, it can be stated that there are both traditional and innovative tools for financing SMEs in the market, արդյունավետ the effective use of the existing toolkit will enable SMEs to develop and achieve their business goals.
  In Armenia, traditional lending tools are offered by all commercial banks, and a small part of commercial banks are actively involved in offering innovative tools.
    Low level of awareness of innovative SME financing financing proposals for SMEs.
  The development of the SME sector is directly conditioned by the level of application of innovative financing tools, which is possible only in the case of raising the awareness of SMEs.
  Such a step will increase the demand for innovative financing tools by SMEs, which will force more commercial banks operating in Armenia to be involved in the development of innovative tools.
APPLICATION OF INNOVATIVE LEVELING TOOLS MARGARYAN KARLANGE DEVELOPMENT IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA SME-SME, CREDIT, FINANCIAL INNOVATION Keywords.
