V. ARMENIAN TRANSLATIONS OF TWO VISOTSKI POEMS ("КОНИ ПРИВЕРЕДЛИВЫЕ", "ОХОТА НА ВОЛКОВ") TRANSLATION is a rather complicated process.
  The task of the translator is to convey the complete և exact content of the original through another language, preserving the stylistic և expressive features.
 However, he must be able to convey not only what is expressed in the original, but also how it is expressed1.
  Linguists have written in detail about the role of the translator և continue to write.
 The theory of translation is evolving, պահանջ at the same time the demands on translators are growing.
V. Komisarov, noting that the translator is a participant in a complex type of verbal communication, presents his communicative functions.
  The latter, first of all, acts as a commentator of the original, secondly, as a creator of a text in the language of translation.
And finally, thirdly, the translator does not create a direct text, but a text that acts as a substitute for the original in functional, semantic-structural relations2.
It is due to the creation of that semantic-structural similarity that not only complete texts but also separate expressions correspond.
  The choice of a particular unit in the translator language for the original unit is not accidental.
 Both units have a relatively stable meaning,։ the fact that one of them can replace the emus, testifies to their semantic similarity3.
During the written translation, as the theorist Ya. Rhetoric, familiarity with the original, analysis of it allow to determine in advance the nature of the content, the stylistic features of the material, through which the linguistic means are selected, the criteria of the translation process.
  Nevertheless, in the analysis of the text, such "units" stand out, be they individual words, phrases or parts of a sentence, for which there are permanent correspondences in the given language by the force of tradition.
 Of course, the translator can not be limited to using bilingual dictionaries. No dictionary can predict the full variety of word meanings.
 Thus, during translation, three equivalents (categories) are obtained, which are created by the force of the significant, variant correspondences, all types of translation transformations4.
 Ya. Retsker distinguishes between complete և partial, absolute և relative equivalents, the difference of which is quite insignificant.
  Considers complete the equivalents, which include all the meanings of the word in full, and partially, one or several of the meanings.
 Relative equivalents differ in stylistic-expressive shades, and absolute equivalents are the only possible translations5.
Speaking about the translations, which completely expressed the self, the essence of the author of the original, K. Chukovsky notes that such art is available only to great masters of translation, to those who are endowed with the precious ability to overcome their own selves.
 This requires not only talent, but also special flexibility of mind և agility6.
1 See Reckker G., Theory of translation and translation practice, Moscow, 1974, p. 7.
2 See Komisarov V., Theory of translation, M., 1990, p. 46.
3 See ibid., P.
4 See Retsker J., pp. 8-9.
5 See ibid., Pp. 10-11.
6 See Chukovski K., High Experience, Moscow, 1988, p. 40.
The author, who has undertaken such a difficult task as the translation of poetry, must be endowed with a number of qualities, that is, a sense of philology, a sense of style, a knowledge of the nuances of language և, of course, the poet's talent.
  However, such an approach may even lead to a complete or partial loss of connection (semantic or stylistic) of the original translation.
 Ed. Jrbashyan notes that in this case, the differences in the grammatical systems of the languages ​​play a role.
  Languages ​​whose word stress is stable have a syllabic grammatical system, while others whose word stress can be placed in different places ել change the meaning of a word have a syllabic grammatical system.
  The decisive factor in the first is the syllabic equality of rhythmic units, in the second - the position of stress 1.
 When translating a verse, it is very important to keep the rhythm.
  The syllable system is typical in Russian, the syllable in Armenian, the translator must be able to keep the rhythm through syllables and syllables.
V. Vysotsky, at the same time being an actor, poet and singer, gained wide recognition within the Soviet Union and beyond.
  During his short life (1938-1980) he composed for about two decades, but was able to leave an indelible mark with his songs in the 20th century. on culture.
 To understand his works well, one must use the language in which the lyrical hero speaks to the listener.
 It can be said that the uniqueness of the language of the work is the basis of Vysotsky who is so well known.
  His lyrical hero stands out with his colloquial, often jargon vocabulary, impressive, concise and clear expressions.
 This is the street language of the Stalin-era camps and the decades that followed, which was somewhat widespread among the intelligentsia.
  Vysotsky spoke this language in his songs, but pursuing artistic goals, he transformed it and introduced it into poetry.
  Without such language, there would be no Vysotsky's lyrical hero, at least as we imagine him2.
V. Attempts were made to translate Vysotsky into Armenian by L. Blbulyan, Hovh. Saroyan, S. Martirosyan, S. Arakelyan և others.
  1997 ․ Leon Blbulyan published his translations entitled "I, of course, will come back."
 He also published a separate book. Saroyan entitled "Monument" / 2007 /.
 In our work we have examined the Armenian translations of the poems "Horses Convenient" և "Ohota of Wolves", as both of them have found a place in the mentioned collections of Leon Blbulyan and Hovhannes Saroyan.
The poem "Кони привередливые" V. Vysotsky wrote in 1972.
 This was originally written for the movie "Zemlya Sannikova", but it was not included in it.
  This song is of a tragic nature.
  The poet seems to tell how he anticipates his death.
  Vysotsky creates the image of horses embodying time.
 On the one hand, the lyrical hero desperately asks the horses to stop, and on the other hand, he drives them faster.
 He begs the horses to lengthen the path to the last harbor, but the horses persistently do not listen.
  And L. Blbulyan, Հով! Hovh. Saroyan's translations are entitled "Whimsical Horses".
  The adjective Привередливый in Russian is typical of the colloquial style, translated into Armenian with an eccentric equivalent, which corresponds to the original, or in our opinion the stubborn version would be more convenient.
  In Russian, the word konь means male, and the word bad means female horse.
The name of a horse in Armenian is general, it has no gender difference.
 We have the words zambik, which means stallion ար female horse, but these are book words, they would not correspond to Vysotsky's vocabulary.
 Already when translating the word koni in the title we have a loss of meaning, which is inevitable.
 Here is the first quatrain. Saroyan has composed a new word for the phrase "after the ruin of the first line" - abyss, which, in our opinion, is not convenient.
 Blbulyan chose a simpler option. Making only a change in the syntactic position of the words, he chose the full equivalent, the abyss, րել making the place of the original in the translation a later participle.
 Нагайкою1 See Jrbashyan E., Theory of Literature, Yerevan, 1980, pp. 274-275.
2 http.
//www.licey.net/lit/poet20/vusotskiiLir3 Высоцкий В., Я не люблю, Москва, 2009, стр.251-252.
  From now on the quotations of the original will be brought according to this book.
  The pages will be attached.
The phrase "steat" has received an interesting solution in both translations.
 Blbulyan has completely changed the structure of the second line: Under the whip, my roar is subdued. The mentioned expression was transformed, becoming a connection structure under a whip.
 As we can see, the translator added a word to create a rhyme, a roar, to describe the horses.
  Saroyan translated with a whip. It would be more convenient to hit the version with a whip, because the word whip is of a high style, and the equivalent of a whip would be completely in line with Vysotsky's style.
  Blbulyan replaced the Russian word туман with emuzh, and Saroyan with fog equivalent.
 The first is relatively equivalent, as it is a little practical, and the second is absolutely equivalent.
 Saroyan added a further determinant to the word fog for the rhyme: fog is sin, but this sinful word not only does not correspond to the original, but is a completely unnecessary, purely rhyming introduction.
 As mentioned above, in Vysotsky's works the colloquial vocabulary occupies a large place, և even if it is not possible to translate with adequate vocabulary, then at least one should choose neutral style words.
 The word Vostorg has two lexical meanings in Armenian: 1. admiration, admiration, wonder, admiration, admiration, 2. enthusiasm, delight, joy 2.
  Blbulyan translated "joy" - the joy of falling, and Saroyan - delight (with the delight of death).
 Both of these words are partially equivalent to the original version, as they do not fully cover the meaning of the expression.
  Of course, it is difficult to say in what sense Vysotsky wrote this word, but we think that the version of joy written by Blbulyan is more appropriate.
  Let's bring the two translations of the quatrains in full. Along the slope, right in the abyss, under the whip, under the whip, my horses are flying ... The air is not enough. I breathe wind and mist, The joy of the Fall grows. I am getting lost, I am getting lost!
 (152) (L. Blbulyan) On the steep edge of the steep slope, right on the tight edge, I beat and chase my horses with a whip. What is not enough in the air?
(Hovh. Saroyan) The first quatrain is followed by the refrain, which consists of a quatrain and a double line.
  It is repeated three times after the three main quatrains.
 In general, only the second line of the quatrain changes in the chorus, the changes of the other lines are insignificant.
  Let's bring the first refrain. Blbulyan translates the word horse as horses, although in the title he prefers horses to horses.
This option can also be accepted, as we call a fast, noble horse.
In Russian medlenno makbay gets a degree of comparison և becomes moddlenee: Vysotsky uses this very horse, asking his horses, that is, in time, to move more slowly.
 This request is repeated twice in one line, which is formulated in the same way: Чуть копдленнее, кони, чуть копдленнее.
  L. When translating Blbulyan, for some reason, he writes slowly in one place and slowly in another.
 Hovh. In both cases, Saroyan writes the equivalent slowly, which we think corresponds to the rhythm.
 In terms of meaning, it would be more convenient to replace the macabre with the verb: Slow down a little, horses, slow down a little.
 Both translators have chosen the equivalent of whip for the word Plet, and its complement is the adjective tugoy, Blbul 1 Vysotsky V., I, of course, will come back , pages will be marked on the spot).
2 Gharibyan A., Russian-Armenian dictionary, Yerevan, 1968, page 110.
 From now on, dictionary translations will be brought according to this book.
 The pages will be attached.
3 Vysotsky V., Monument, translated by Hovhannes Saroyan, Yerevan, 2007, p. 319 (henceforth the citations of the given translation will be quoted according to this book, the pages will be marked on the spot).
He replaced it with a pirk equivalent, Saroyan with a solid version.
 The latter is probably related to the plural meaning of plet п, which means woven, woven whip, but the word "weaving" does not correspond to the original version.
It is surprising for the verb's to obey բ Saroyan's unspoken versions.
  Both, of course, are equivalent, in Russian this word has several meanings: to hear, to listen, to listen, to obey, and so on.
 All these meanings also have the meaning of hearing the verb in Armenian, which is the full equivalent of the original version, as it covers it in semantic-stylistic terms.
The last line with its condensation expresses the meaning of the whole poem: И дожить неуспел, мне допеть не Спост успе.
 The Armenian translators could not pass this pun և they tried to translate the content.
  Here, in our opinion, it is very possible to succeed in the full sense of the word.
  The poet did not have time to live, he will not have time to sing.
  We do not see this word in Blbulyan's translation at all: My life is incomplete, I will not finish my song.
 Дожить և допеть verbs have undergone a grammatical transformation, becoming nouns.
 The original forms, however, were not accidental in this case, as the verbs, expressing action, have continuity in them.
 Saroyan used to bring the verb, but he could not not only keep the rhythm, but also gave a 19-syllable in front of the 12-syllable line: And I did not have time to live, I will not have time to finish singing.
  The phrase "Complete verse" was mistranslated into Armenian: "I will finish my quatrain" (152), "I will finish my quartet" (319).
  Vysotsky wants to sing-finish, not write-finish, which seems just as likely from the Armenian version.
 Saroyan translated the word "couplet" as a quartet, which is wrong, because the quartet is a type of poem in Armenian.
 One had to write a quatrain or one of the house equivalents.
 The word "end" is found both in the first quatrain of the poem and at the end of the second song.
  After filling his horses with water and singing the quatrain, the poet wants to stop at the border for at least a moment.
Hovh. Saroyan chose to stand by (I will stand by), and L. Blbuyan is the final version.
  This short word, according to A. According to Gharibyan's dictionary, in Armenian it has an equivalent, edge, edge, lip, edge, periphery (408).
 In our opinion, Hovh. Saroyan is better at understanding the author's thought, because the latter, standing in the corner, wants to prolong the time a little more.
  Here are the complete re-translations. A little slow, my idiots, a little slow, Do not obey the will, you whip.
What kind of horses fell to me capriciously. My life is half over, I will not finish my song.
I will water my horses, finish my quatrain, and stand at the Finish Line for at least a moment.
 (152) (L. Blbulyan) A little slowly, horses, a little slowly, do not listen to the stubborn whip. But some very capricious horses have fallen to me, And I did not have time to live, I will not have time to finish singing.
I will water the horses, I will finish the quartet, I will stand by at least one more moment.
 (319) (Hovhannes Saroyan) Vysotsky is a master of creating powerful images.
  The following contradictory picture expresses a figurative meaning: Сгину я, мея пашинкой ураган сметет с ладони (252).
 Can we say that Hovh. Saroyan translated this literally, preserving the number of syllables: "I will perish, the storm will blow me from the shore with feathers" (319).
  Blbulyan found an interesting solution, transferring the image by comparison: "I will get lost. like a feather, the wind will take me from the shore ”(152).
  The poet mentions that he has reached, it will not be too late to go to God, but the rhetorical question is: "So why do angels eat such evil naked?" (252), which becomes Blbulyan's translation into a narrative sentence, thus losing its charm: "Let the angels sing there with an evil voice" (152).
  Hovh. Saroyan has preserved the form of the question, but here we see that the member that complements the verb to sing has become an addition to the nouns angels, which has distorted the meaning: "But what do the angels sing there in a bad voice?"
 As we have seen, the translators were not able to keep the content իթ rhythm at the same time. One of them constantly suffered because of the other.
The idea of ​​the poem "Ohota na wolkov" was born in the summer of 1968.
  After writing the first two quatrains, Vysotsky stopped շարունակ could not continue for some time.
 Speaking about this poem, he mentions that in his dream he constantly heard the first lines of the second song, but he still did not understand what he had to write.
 Two months later, while filming in Siberia, he thinks about writing at night by the light of a lamp.
 Then his friend Zolotukhin wakes up and warns him to turn off the light, because it is dangerous.
  Vysotsky does not chill him և writes the whole poem that night.
 Then in the morning he learns that Zolotukhin allowed the villagers to watch him create in exchange for a drink.
  The poet wrote his long-awaited poem under close eyes, which was first recited in 1968. In autumn.
  Just as horses symbolized time, so wolves symbolized freedom.
  Vysotsky himself imagines himself a wolf, whom he constantly tries to hunt down and persecute.
Both translators translated the word-for-word title into one word, "wolf hunt," which corresponds to the original.
 This poem consisting of twelve quatrains has a rhythmic nature, the lines are relatively short, from 9 to 13 syllables.
Let's bring the first quatrain. Saroyan replaced the phrase Рваться из сил with the corresponding Armenian phrase - to get tired (369), and Blbulyan translated it in a descriptive way. Let us quote the line: "To be saved by salutations, I come out of myself" (194).
 As we can see, Blbulyan's version is stylistically very different from the original.
  He used words typical of literary language that do not convey the spirit of the original.
 The verb Обложить in Armenian has the meanings to surround, cover, surround (618).
 To emphasize the meaning more, Vysotsky says this verb twice in one line: "Обложили меня, обложили" (6).
 Blbulyan uses different verbs: I was surrounded, I was surrounded again (194), and Saroyan translates: I was surrounded again, and my thing is wool (369).
 In our opinion, it is not accidental that the poet repeated the same thing, this stylizes the rhythm of the passage.
 Here are the complete translations of the quatrain. I'm already exhausted, I'm about to explode, I'm escaping with all my nerves, I'm coming out of myself. Again, they chase after him and drive him to the net.
 (194) (L. Blbulyan) They happily drive me on the ambushes.
 (369) (Hovhannes Saroyan) The translations of the second song are noteworthy.
 Let's bring two lines from the refrain: The word Material in Armenian has the following meanings: a) strong, big, strong, strong, b) pkhb. experienced, c) pkhb. petrified, incorrigible (465).
  Blbulyan translates, "He is going wolf hunting.
 They beat the wolves, the Gray predators, the big and the small innocent ”(194).
 It is difficult to say whether Blbulyan understood the meaning of the word mother, as the large version does not correspond to the original part in terms of meaning alone.
 Hovhannes made a translation mistake. Saroyan, confusing this word with the sound mat with him's phonetic structure: "A wolf hunt goes, a wolf hunt goes, It is a hunt for a gray predator, both mother and puppy" (369).
Speaking about the translation of poetry, we mentioned its difficulties.
  In the case of visocous works, these difficulties are multiplied. That, of course, has a clear explanation.
 Vysotsky is not only a poet, but also a singer, he plays the guitar, sings the songs-poems he has authored.
  And all this is so harmonious that so far no singer has managed to approach the quality of those author's performances.
 His original voice "Songs" are dear not only to Russians, but also to foreign, particularly Armenian listeners.
 It is very difficult for an Armenian reader to read an Armenian text and accept it as a work of Vysotsky.
 The reader's hoarse voice is heard in the ear, which is perceived only in Russian with its interesting vocabulary.
Thus, we can say that Vysotsky's songs themselves are untranslatable, as they are unique in their content.
 If necessary, at least the most elementary features of the poems should be transferred when translating.
  We should try to keep the rhythm, because in this case we are dealing with not ordinary poems, but songs.
  The translator must have studied the language of the poet very well, have an idea of ​​the era he lived in, his creative religion, his spiritual aspirations.
  Only the translations of the two poems revealed show that the Armenian translators did not deeply understand the songs of the Russian poet and their philosophy.
  The reader who, not knowing Vysotsky in advance, will try to get acquainted with his works in Armenian translations, will form a wrong opinion about them.
 The translators, at least, had to understand more deeply the torrent of emotion that fills the Russian poet's speech and song.
  They should be able to convey the spirit of the poems, which is especially important when the translator is a person like Vysotsky.
Taguhi ManukyanV. ARMENIAN TRANSLATIONS OF VISOTSKI'S TWO POEMS "KONI PRIVEREDLIVYE", "OHOTA NA VOLKOV" Keywords: Vladimir Vysotsky, Lon Blbulyan, Hovhannes Saroyan.
