FEATURES OF EXPRESSION OF EMOTIONS IN OLD AGE Old age is the last stage of human life, which is characterized by changes in the "mental" and "physiological" spheres.
  The thematic nature is conditioned by the fact that the number of elderly people in the world is increasing year by year, և it is necessary to have a clear idea about the peculiarities of emotional manifestations in old age, as they have a direct impact on the mental and physical health of the elderly.
The need to study the topic is due to the fact that the identification of a number of age-related traits could be used to demonstrate an appropriate attitude towards adults.
  Among the physiological changes that occur in old age are the decrease of hearing, vision, the tone of the muscular system, the decrease of the activity, the ability to work.
 The rapid onset of fatigue does not allow you to do any work for a long time.
 As you grow older, your heart rate decreases.
 During physical activity, the blood supply is difficult, the muscles are not provided with the necessary amount of oxygen, consequently, the person's physical capabilities decrease, fatigue increases.
 They also have mobility problems, which affect their gait, which becomes slow and unstable.
 One of the changes taking place in the mental sphere is the decline in the effectiveness of cognitive processes.
  For example, there may be a decrease in the speed of mechanical processing of information, mechanical memory, a weakening of intellectual abilities.
  The speed of reactions changes, the processing of perceptual information and the speed of cognitive processes slow down.
 Weakening of cognitive processes in the elderly may be due to direct or indirect reasons.
 Among the simplest are brain diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease.
  Indirect are diseases that, although not related to brain function, but also affect the intellect.
 These are: deteriorating health, low level of education, etc.
 In addition to the above changes, there is also a change in character traits.
  All this, of course, affects the expression of their emotions վիճ emotional state.
Emotion is the reflection of the subject's attitude towards the significant objects of the surrounding world.
 As a rule, the elderly show uncontrollability of affective reactions, uncontrollable sadness, tendency to lamentation.
Elderly people often have a completely unconscious expression of anxiety.
 It includes concerns about one's own health, geopolitical and economic situation.
  Carries out studies on the imminent concern of the elderly Roshak, who believes that the needs of anxiety և anxiety are a unique mechanism to avoid the sufferings of old age [1].
  When senile anxiety recurs, which often occurs in anxious situations in the elderly, it can become chronic for no apparent reason.
 In our opinion, these features of old age make an old person helpless in any unexpected situation.
  Deterioration of attention to the environment reduces the retardation of irritants, decreases irritability.
 Elderly people are able to process information that comes in several ways.
 They can be perceived one-sidedly.
 In such a situation, when that only object of attention is of an affective nature, over-concern may arise.
  As a result of the research of some authors, it was found out that there is a connection between anxiety and "anxiety".
 Anxiety manifests itself in a somewhat unpleasant, often waiting state, accompanied by feelings of one or more somatic.
  Anxiety can occur in the elderly for three main reasons: 1 ․ Fear of relatives getting sick or dying, 2 ․ fear that they will get sick, 3 ․ Fear that interpersonal relationships in the family will be broken, Zink will be left alone.
The ratio of positive to negative emotions in old age depends on the psychological characteristics of the elderly person, his / her attitudes towards life, health condition and a number of other factors.
 Depending on the circumstances of the elderly person, those around him may have different emotions: joy, sadness, fear of loneliness, thoughts of death.
Happiness is a positive emotional state, which is connected with satisfying the modern need.
 Happiness in the early stages of old age can be a predominant emotion when a person, looking back on the past, is satisfied with life and now feels safe and surrounded by love.
  If he does not reconcile himself to the fact of aging, then in later stages he does not have the feeling of closeness, as he demands to go back to the past, to delay as much as possible the appearance of the external manifestations of old age, which he does not succeed.
 This can lead to joy, a diametrically opposed emotion, to sadness.
  The reasons for sadness are various in this period.
 It can be due to situational failures, changes in living conditions, as well as loneliness.
 It is mainly manifested from family members - isolation from the environment, tendency to whimper, gossip, reduced level of communication.
Fear is especially emotional in old age.
 Fear is an internal state that is actually conditioned by the expected or assumed danger.
This mainly occurs when a person finds himself in a relationship that he thinks has no way out, վախ he has a fear of helplessness.
 The causes of fear vary in different age groups.
 The main reasons for fear in old age can be: 1. loss of relatives2. Completion of professional activity 3. Weakening of physical and psychological health 4. social isolation [2].
Another characteristic of old age is the feeling of loneliness.
 The feeling of loneliness is specific to a person at any age.
 Gerontologists claim that monogamy is a traumatic factor in old age, showing the fragility of the physical and physiological state.
Older people who see the meaning of their life in the past are more likely to experience loneliness, whether they live alone or with their family.
  At the same time, loneliness may be due to isolation, that is, a lack of interest in the family's care for them, or an exaggerated feeling and perception of the intensity of family-friend meetings.
  It has been proven that the most lonely are those who have a strong dependence, a desire to be constantly interested in themselves, as well as those who want to be under the guidance of someone all the time.
Գ ․ Craig found that older people were less anxious about death than young people, that people with a clear purpose in life were not afraid of death.
 The elders state that they think more about death, but with unusual calmness.
 However, Kraig points out that the individual approaches to mortality are conditioned by the values ​​of the elderly, their complete state of adaptation to life.
 Those who do not accept it as the final stage of life are afraid of death, և not adapting to it, they start to fear death.
Thoughts about death have their manifestations in the form of physical discomfort, sick feelings.
 Depression is another psychological condition specific to the elderly.
 In general, senile depression is manifested by a weakening of effective tone and a slowing down of effective feelings.
  At the same time, the old man's face shows a limited amount of emotion.
  Old people find themselves in a sense of emptiness around the world, a sense of its uselessness and vanity.
Everything that happens in front of their eyes seems insignificant, uninteresting, only the past is interesting.
 These feelings are natural for the elderly և have no morbid nature.
  These are the result of a reinterpretation of life և have an adaptive value, as they hold back from new aspirations, worries arising from the struggle.
Having formed an idea about the emotional feelings typical of old age, we conducted a study, the aim of which was to reveal the peculiarities of emotional manifestations in the elderly.
 The research was conducted in L. A. Karginsky և A ․ A. Through the methodology of Nemich of the same name.
 It is aimed at revealing the manifestations of mental activity, interest, emotional tone, tension and conformity in old age.
 30 people aged 65-90 participated in the research.
 The results of the research are presented in the form of a diagram.
Diagram 1 ․ Indicators of mental activity, curiosity, emotional tone, tension և conformity in old age As can be seen from the diagram, the elderly հետաքրքր have the highest expression of interest և emotional tone.
  The high level of interest is due to the fact that conversions have a small place in the life of the elderly.
  Their thoughts are mainly on the events of the past.
 The interest in the lives of their relatives and people around them is conditioned by the desire to fill the emptiness of not being able to bring back the past.
  They may even be interested in what may have seemed uninteresting in the past.
The high degree of emotional tone indicates the variety of emotional expressions in the elderly, that is, depending on the perception of the situation, the elderly can express extreme emotions.
There is a decrease in mental activity in the elderly, which indicates a decrease in the speed and accuracy of personality processes.
 In the elderly, this is manifested in the difficulty of understanding the և inability to act accurately in the observed changes in the emotional sphere.
Increased stress is the basis of obsessive-compulsive disorder in old age.
  Tension is observed especially in the emotional sphere ․ The elderly become irritable, irritable, and sometimes irritable.
The degree of conformity implies a person's tendency to behave when there is a change in the beliefs of real or imagined influence.
 This is a consequence of the fact that businesses are more conservative, find it difficult to re-evaluate social values, avoid wrongdoing, conflicts, fear of disappointment, and therefore appear to have a high level of comfort.
Thus, the differences in emotional feelings expressed in old age are mainly due to personal characteristics, to the extent to which a person perceives this age stage as the next of the stages.
LITERATURE Mesropyan Features of EMERGENCY EXPRESSION OF ELDERLY Keywords: old age, depression, personal disorders, feeling of loneliness, anxiety.
IN AGE.
