THE IDEOLOGICAL FEATURES OF CROATIAN FASCISM AND THE ROLE IN CONTEMPORARY SERB-CROATIAN RELATIONS From World War II
 Here, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, led by Acting King Pavle Karadjordjic, led by Prime Minister Dragisa Tsvetkovic, joined the Axis on March 25, 1941, but just two days later a coup overthrew the juvenile Petar Karadjordj. The April 6 attack on the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
 Already on April 17, the Third Reich, Italy, Albania, Hungary and Bulgaria occupied the entire territory of Yugoslavia, except for the region of Croatia.
 In the territory of the latter, on April 10, the independent state of Croatia was declared under the auspices of the fascist forces.
  This article examines the preconditions for the creation of an independent Croatian state (hereinafter referred to as the CPF), the peculiarities of the official fascist ideology existing in the country, and their possible impact on modern Serbo-Croatian relations.
 There were both practical and ideological bases for the creation of this state, which existed in 1941-1945.
The practical grounds appeared: 1. During the establishment of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, when Croatian political forces such as the Croatian Peasant Party, led by Stjepan Radic, opposed to the newly established Slovenes, Croats and Serbs in the Serb-Croat's state (CPSU), opposed the the unification and the creation of Yugoslavia1, because they saw in it the danger of national assimilation.
 However, the creation of a united state became possible, as the union with the only mandate of the people of the USSR, the National Council, considered the conflict of this union secondary, giving priority to the immediate solution of their internal economic problems, the liberation of the remaining Yugoslav lands and protection from new attacks.
2. As a result of political processes after the annexation of 1918, such as: • Adoption of the Constitution. Croatian political forces sought to create a federal, often even a federal, model of the country, fearing the establishment of full Serbian rule and national assimilation.
  However, the model proposed by them was not accepted in the Constitutional Assembly, instead the program presented by the democratic, radical parties was adopted.
 The latter proposed a joint constitutional government proposal with administrative divisions with less limited self-government powers2.
 It was argued that all the former cultural and customary differences between the southern Slavic peoples had to be overcome, because, according to this view, the southern Slavs originated from the same ethnos, the Illyrians, and the existing borders were considered to be imposed by false and foreign oppressors.
• Confirmation of unity. After the Serbian parliament approved the annexation of the FSBS ST, the first Minister of Internal Affairs of Yugoslavia, Svetozar Pribic, used all his potential to prevent the ratification of the same document by the Croatian Sabor.
 In this way, he aimed to prevent the possible activation of the forces against the federalists and the union և internal political unrest.
 From a legal point of view, there was no need for the Croatian Sabor to approve the unification, as at that time the only state body with the mandate of the people of the USSR, the National Council, had already agreed to the unification.
• Increasing the role of the King's institution. A great contribution was made by Prince Alexander, who was soon to become king. He rejected the proposal of the Provisional Government to nominate Nikola Pashich (Prime Minister) as Prime Minister.
  With this step Alex 1 I. Banac, The national questions in Yugoslavia.
  origins, history, politics, NY, Cornell University2 Ա. Pavkovic, The Division of Yugoslavia, Yerevan, 2007, p. 48.
Sandar increased the role of the king's institution in the newly created country, pointing out that it would not be like the example of a constitutional monarchy where kings have a symbolic character.
  Thus, the power of the Serbian Karajorgs in the newly created state was not at all formal.
These and other processes pushed Croatian politicians against the possible establishment of Serbian hegemony, the threat of the creation of a Greater Serbia, the struggle against which made the Croatian nation's self-consciousness and integration more viable than the struggle against a united Yugoslav ideology could do.
Under these political conditions, a movement called "Ustasha" (Croatian Revolutionary Program) was de jure de facto practiced among the Croatians of the newly formed Yugoslavia in 1929, which was initially of a terrorist nature.
 For example, in January 1932, Brushane's police barracks, led by Andria Artikovch, were attacked by 10 female supporters.
  It should be noted that "Ustasha" was one of the organizers of the assassination of King Alexander Karadjordjich in 19343.
3. In the conditions of favorable international situation. By favorable conditions, we mean the emergence of fascism in Italy in 1919 and already in the 1930s. spread in Europe, especially in Germany.
 The direct influence is connected with the king's order of January 1929, by which all national parties were to be shut down. After this decision, Ante Pavlich, the leader of "Ustasha", who settled in Italy, was deported and began to work closely with B. With Mussolini.
 The latter was interested in re-establishing his influence in Dalmatia through "Ustasha".
As an ideological basis, they acted.1. The ideas of the Croatian historian-politician Dr. Milan ֆufla, according to which Croatia has been the pillar of Western civilization for centuries, lost its power and prestige in 1918 with the annexation of Serbia4.
2. The ideas of the Croatian historian, father of the Croatian Catholic Church Reverend Krunoslav Draganovich, who believed that 16-17th 4 R. Sabrina, The Three Yugoslavias.
  State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2005, Bloomington, Over the centuries, many Catholics in southern Herzegovina were forced to convert to Orthodox Christianity.
3. The Ustasha movement was quite widely influenced by Italian fascism and German Nazism.
 First of all, the acceptance of Ante Pavlich as Poglavnik was politically completely identical with the acceptance of Hitler as Führer և Mussolini as Duchess.
Identity was also expressed in general, in the supremacy of collective rights over the rights of the individual, in the corporatism of the economy, in a number of characteristic features, from the order of welcome to populism and statism.
Examining the existing practical and ideological bases for the creation of the CPF, two main features of the official ideology of the future state become obvious: • Serbism. From the very beginning of the establishment of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Croatian nationalism opposed the threat of Serbian hegemony, and already in an independent state the ideology of "Ustasha" considered the Croats to be members of the Dinaric race, but denied that the Croats were Slavic and Germanic. of races.
  The ideology that considered its own nation Aryan considered the Serbs a foreign, Eastern element, which corrupted the Aryanism of the Croats in its presence and was subject to destruction.
In May 1941, Milovan Zanic, a representative of the CPF legislature, announced that it was time to have an ethnically pure Croatia, which was only for Croats.
  For the implementation of the Ustasha program, the three-step strategy proposed by Minister Mile Budak was adopted: 6: • 1/3 physical extermination of Serbs, • 1/3 deportation of Serbs, ethnic cleansing of the area, • 1/3 forcible Catholicization of Serbs.
• Absolute the role of religion. Since the Croatian ideologues considered that most of the Croats had assimilated, lost their national identity due to their conversion to Islam և Orthodoxy, the CPF played a major role in the Catholic Church.
 The Catholic Church played an important role in the internal governance of the country, participating in the extermination of the Orthodox and the Jewish faith.
 Day 5 Ibid., P. 126.
6 S. Jacobs, Confronting genocide.
 Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Lexington Books, 2009, pp. 158–159. However, the celibate Catholic father Timoslav Filipovich-Maistorovich (known as the Jasenovite devil) ruled in 1941. According to the US Holocaust Museum, about 100,000 people were killed in the first concentration camp opened in April, according to the US Holocaust Museum.
In total, the number of Jews, Gypsies and Serbs who were massacred in the CPF area in 1941-1945 is about 1,700,0007.
 According to Serbian sources, more than 800,000 Serbs were killed8, which Croatian sources deny և is about 197,000 killed 9.
Official documents from the Vatican state that by the end of 1942 alone, 350,000 ethnic Serbs had been exterminated in the CPF10.
When studying the influence of Croatian fascism in modern Serbo-Croatian relations, it should be borne in mind that Yugoslavia was reorganized after World War II into the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (since 1963, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia).
 Until 1980, the country was ruled by Marshall I. B. From Tito, whose cult of personality until 1948. was the second largest in the world after the cult of Stalin, and in 1948. then the first.
 During the reign of Marshal Tito's Iron Hand, all manifestations of nationalism in Yugoslavia were doomed to extinction, as the formula of national unity (narodno jedinstvo) was fully in force in Socialist Yugoslavia11.
 Nationalism began to re-emerge in Yugoslavia in the 1980s. since the death of Joseph Broz Tito, when democratic elections brought to power nationalist leaders seeking decentralization.
 1989 The President of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, who ousted his country after independence, had a clear position on the Ustasha և CPF, according to which in the history of modern times the CPF allowed Croats to have their own independence in the motherland;
  His ideas of Holocaust denial in the CPF are expressed in his own book "The Horror of War. Historical Reality և Philosophy.
  The newly independent Republic of Croatia, led by Tudjman, copied all the symbols of "Ustasha", from the military uniform to the main symbol of "Ustasha" chess. Pavkovic, The Division of Yugoslavia, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 75-76.
on the flag.
  The CPF-currency unit, Kuna, was chosen as the state currency. In the 1990s, about 3,000 anti-fascist genocide memorials were destroyed in the country12.
 Many streets in Zagreb and other cities were renamed after the criminal warlords of the CPF, for example, there are still streets named after Minister Mile Budak until 2013. There was a street called "April 10" in memory of the creation of the CPF.
The ideological and historical legacy left by Ustasha during the years of independence of the Republic of Croatia was used as a weapon against the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as the war for independence was fought by the Croatian People's Army, the local Croatian forces. The government of Tudjman needed a viable ideology that would awaken the national spirit of the new Croatian generations born in the years of the dissolution of the national differences of the united Yugoslav ideology.
  Thus, the Republic of Croatia gained its independence in the struggle against the possible establishment of Serbian hegemony in the 1990s. As a result of the above-mentioned political processes, ethnic cleansing of Serbs took place in the territory of the Republic of Croatia13.
The ideological and historical heritage left by "Ustasha" from the 1990s to the present has a profound influence in Croatia, both in state institutions and in the social sphere.
This is expressed many times, such as the public glorification of war criminals Ante Gotovina և Mladen Markac in 2012, the emergence of neo-Nazism-neo-fascism in Croatia14.
All of the above factors have a negative impact on the Serbo-Croatian inter-state հարաբերությունների interstate relations, which are repeatedly expressed in various spheres during sports matches, from mass clashes to state-level mutual court appeals to the International Court of Justice15.
12 T. Judah, The Serbs.
 History, myth and the destruction of Yugoslavia, London, 2009, pp. 19-22.13 In the same place.
151999 Croatia has filed a lawsuit against Serbia on genocide charges.
  2010 Serbia sent a reply application against Croatia with the same accusation.
 2015 Both applications were rejected.
Edik Harutyunyan THE IDEOLOGICAL FEATURES OF CROATIAN FASCISM AND THE ROLE IN MODERN SERB-CROATIAN RELATIONS Keywords: Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Croatian state, Croatian fascism
