SOME PROBLEMS OF THE APPLICATION OF EUGENICA IN ARMENIA Not only have not been some common positions on Eugenics, but there are also very conflicting views.
 According to some theorists, for more than a century, the ideas or discoveries put forward have not caused as much harm to humanity as the idea of ​​Francis Galton, the founder of eugenics, which is based on the theory of the existence of all mankind. to live և to reproduce.
  Eugenics is considered to be the result of ethnic "cleansing", infant homicides, abortions aimed at getting rid of the unhealthy generation with "psychophysiological defects", etc. [1].
A question arises. After all, who was Galton, what was the purpose of eugenics, what benefit or harm can it bring to humanity, is it used in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Armenia?
 Galton, who was the cousin of Charles Darwin, died in 1883. discovered eugenics, which received a great response և spread.
 It is a teaching about the improvement of the human race (its hereditary traits).
  The problem of eugenics is to actively influence the evolution of man, to improve his nature, to promote the inheritance of talent, to limit as much as possible the transmission of inherited diseases to future generations.
 Diagnosis of a child before its birth, complete decoding of the human genome, surrogacy, various experiments with the embryo, gene therapy, cloning give a person for the first time the set of genetic tools, which is part of the concept of "eugenics".
  Evgenik is observed in two aspects: positive։ negative.
  The positive is the biotechnological intervention of the human eugenics inheritance for the purpose of selective change of his "breed", for the betterment, and the negative is the medical intervention of the genetics of a specific person in order to eliminate incurable diseases.
  Eugenics has always been an idiotic phenomenon, as it allowed to improve human genetic traits, to have a new and healthy generation, but the authorities of the Third Reich perceived eugenics as a means of committing genocide, which gave a new dimension to eugenics, presenting it to the world as "negative". murderous science. "
 There are many discussions about eugenics [2].
Eugenics is also referred to by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, according to which Article 25, Part 3, "In the fields of medicine and biology, in particular, eugenics experiments, making human organs and tissues a source of profit, and human reproductive cloning are prohibited."
 It follows from this provision that the Republic of Armenia raises to a constitutional level the issues related to the performance of eugenic experiments.
 However, it has not been revealed yet what eugenics experience is, therefore, in this case it is not clear what exactly is forbidden, as Eugenics is a self-contained science with its sub-branches.
However, in this paper, we will introduce abortion for embryos with psychophysiological defects, such as the surrogacy institute, in an attempt to identify the problems and legal gaps in those institutions.
 Thus, abortion is a great reason to discuss the existence of a psycho-physiological defect of the embryo, not only for the Republic of Armenia, but also for doctors, psychologists, lawyers, philosophers and other specialists in the field who deal with it in one way or another.
Modern legal systems (national և international) take two, often contradictory, approaches to the status of the unborn child.
  According to the first approach, the state, by envisaging relevant provisions in its criminal legislation, considers the protection of the unborn child from violent actions and attempts related to the human embryo as a priority, and obvious anti-abortion sentiments prevail in the society.
 According to the other approach, the state prioritizes the "freedom of motherhood" of a woman over the right to life of an unborn child, which, of course, is not always absolute.
 If the first approach describes the unborn child in terms such as "human" and "person", the second emphasizes the constitutional right to abortion.
If we analyze our Armenian legislation, according to Article 41, Clause 1 of the RA Family Code, a child is considered to be eighteen years old.
  Almost the same legal regulation has taken place in the RA Law on Child Rights, according to Article 1 of which everyone under the age of 18 is considered a child.
 That is, "any legal act does not stipulate the legal status of embryos" or does not stipulate that the embryo acts as a child.
 However, the legal regulation, which provides restrictions for abortion, is noteworthy.
Thus, the RA legislation allows abortion up to 10-12 weeks, in exceptional cases up to 22 weeks, but modern medical technologies allow to find out the defects in the psycho-physiological structure of the fetus only in more than 22 weeks.
  That is, in this case, the "freedom to become a mother" is violated, that is, the freedom to choose to give birth to a child with a physical or mental defect.
  In this case, it is not very expedient to consider the issue only from the legal point of view, as there are psychological, philosophical and moral aspects of the issue.
  If we look at the issue from a psychological point of view, the birth of a child with mental or physical defects is a great psychological pressure for both parents and children, which is inadmissible.
 As for the moral or philosophical aspects, opinions are divided here.
 Strong and undeniable arguments are brought for everyone, but we are in favor of the opinion that giving birth to a child who is morally and philosophically defective can have a negative impact on parents and children from a moral point of view. After all, they will be considered isolated in society.
 No matter how much the society develops, from the point of view of social psychology, children with disabilities will not be considered full members of the society.
In medicine, however, the boundaries of the embryo can be called a baby.
 From the 22nd week of pregnancy, the embryo is considered a child.
  This is confirmed by the terminological change that exists when a child is lost during pregnancy.
 That is, the loss of a child during pregnancy at 22 weeks is called an abortion, at 22-35 weeks - premature birth, and at 3537 weeks - term childbirth.
 This reality creates new problems, causing controversy between the legal and medical spheres.
 However, by combining the above, we should get one general conclusion.
In our opinion, reserving the right of parents to abortion due to any psychophysiological defect of the embryo / child can in no way violate the rights of the child, as from the legal point of view everyone is a child under 18 years of age, and in psychological, moral and philosophical terms We will face problems, what problems will we solve?
 As for the medical approach, we can not pass by it indifferently, since there is no clear legal regulation on this issue, there is a need to apply the practice.
 Armenian և international experience shows that eugenic experiments (more specifically, abortion at 22 weeks or more) are prohibited in order to prevent sex-selective abortions.
 In other cases, for example, if the health of a woman or a child is endangered, the woman has the right to have an abortion.
 This is an international legal experience based on practice, but not legally fixed.
As for the international legal documents, I enshrine a number of conventions in the same legal regulation as provided by the RA state legislation.
  Human Rights 1948 Universal Declaration, 1966 The relevant articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights state that "everyone has the right to life ...".
 This raises the question of whether the term "everyone" refers to a child conceived in the womb, not yet formed.
 Judging by Article 1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, "For the purposes of this Convention, a child is any person under the age of 18 ...", we can say no, because an embryonic and unborn child is not considered a child due to legal documents. .
It should be noted that the European Court of Human Rights is investigating a case in which a Latvian citizen, Cruzman, complained against Latvia, stating that he had not been screened for a newborn, as a result of which, not knowing that his future daughter had Down Syndrome, he applied for an abortion. services.
  In this regard, in 2012 A roundtable discussion was held at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 28 June 2006, in which the case of Cruzmann v. Latvia was discussed.
 The discussion ended with the participants being against abortion of women pregnant with children with Down syndrome, as the right to life of the unborn child was violated.
  According to them, if the European Court ruled in favor of Cruzman, it would give abortion to every parent, which would have a huge impact on the legal systems of the 47 member states of the Council of Europe, allowing each parent to get rid of sick children by screening newborns.
In other words, experience shows that there are parents who do not want to have a child with a physical or mental disability. aspects.
  In this case, however, the question arises as to which of the parents is superior if they are unable to come to a common denominator.
 The issue must be considered from a legal և medical point of view.
 Abortion is a complicated համար health risk process.
 A woman's health can deteriorate at any time (for example, hormonal imbalance, bleeding, rupture of the cervix, etc.), which can be the result of abortion.
As Article 6 of the RA Law on Human Reproductive Health guarantees safe motherhood and women's health in connection with pregnancy and abortion, we strongly believe that abortion requires the consent of a fully functional woman who soberly assesses the situation.
And finally, why are eugenic experiments prohibited by the constitution?
  It is aimed at preventing the introduction and implementation of appropriate selection programs, forced sterilization, forced pregnancy, ethnic marriages, ethnic cleansing and other methods by the states.
 It should be taken into account that the Constitution, by prohibiting eugenic experiments, meant the above-mentioned compulsory statements, but in this work it is spoken only about giving that right to the parent.
It is eugenics to apply for surrogacy.
 Alternative motherhood is a therapeutic method in which embryos matched during the IVF (in vitro fertilization) cycle are implanted in the uterus of a woman who is not genetically related to those embryos.
Surrogacy is an innovation in both medicine and the legal system.
 That is why the regulations have not been clarified and adjusted, although Articles 15-19 of the RA Law on Human Reproductive Health and Reproductive Rights refer to the institution of surrogacy.
 Let us mention a few legal gaps, which allow the process to be completed in full, without any shortcomings.
  The legislation provides for surrogacy, both with monetary compensation and without remuneration.
 Because the latter does not work, and the services of a surrogate mother are quite expensive, they can be legal, therefore, they can cause various scams, moreover, both the biological parents and the surrogate mother can suffer.
According to the RA Criminal Code, a child cannot be the subject of a transaction.
 According to Article 168 of the RA Criminal Code, the purchase of a child for the purpose of taking care of a child or the sale of a child for the purpose of handing over to the care of the undertaker is envisaged.
  The subject of this crime is not specific, but every sane individual over the age of 16 who sells or buys a child.
 Thus, the subject of the contract cannot be omitted from concluding a contract between the biological parents "surrogate", which is an essential condition. otherwise, the contract will be considered unsigned.
 And in that case, if the child is mentioned as a subject in the contract, that contract will be considered invalid և in the presence of a corpus delicti.
  A question arises here. And how can the biological parents of the child և the surrogate mother sign a contract?
 In this case, we are witnessing a collision, which arises between Article 168 of the RA Criminal Code "On the RA Law on Reproductive Health".
Summarizing our observations on the selected topic, we offer the following version of the solution of the issue. Not objecting, fully agreeing with the above provisions, according to which the child can not be the subject of the transaction, let us mention that the provision can be seasoned with an exception, which will apply only when applying for surrogacy services.
 That is, the child can be the subject of a contract only in the case when the biological parents have applied to the surrogacy service և to sign a contract with a surrogate mother, envisaging that case in the Code as an exception.
 We think that our above-mentioned proposals will become an occasion for making certain changes, will clarify the legislative regulations even more.
LITERATURE Establishment of Postgraduate Training Programs, URL.
  www.medgen.asnet.am (Accessed.
 05.08.2017). Hakobjanyan Victoria SOME PROBLEMS OF APPLICATION OF EVGENICS IN ARMENIA Keywords: eugenics, eugenic experiments, Francis Galton, child rights, abortion, psychophysiological issues.
