NEWS IN MODERN ARMENIAN AND ENGLISH ECONOMIC SPEECH There are certain factors in each historical period that determine the peculiarities of the language in this period.
 These factors can have a decisive influence on the internal and external patterns of language1.
 Nowadays, unprecedented scientific and technological progress is observed, which has a significant impact on the vocabulary of living languages.
  The vocabulary immediately responds to the changes taking place in the population of that language, constantly being supplemented with new words ՝ word meanings, new formations և neologisms.
  The creation of new words is one of the essential features of the life of a language, which shows that the given language is active ին at the moment it serves to linguize the non-linguistic reality.
Based on their relationship to the common active vocabulary, neoplasms are divided into two major groups: language-neutral vocabulary innovations or real innovations և specific vocabulary-specific or terminological innovations (neonyms).
  Real աբանական terminological innovations have some differences.
This article clarifies the realities of terminology based on the key differences between the two groups of terminology, and reflects on current trends in the formation of new words in the Armenian-English terminology.
  Linguistic material of recent years has been used as a linguistic material for the study of the vocabulary of the economic sphere2, dictionaries 3 և etc.
Neo-modernism (Greek: neo - new և logos - word) is a new word that serves as a name for new concepts and subjects as a result of the development of public life in the language.
Broadly speaking, every new linguistic reality or reality is called neoplasm, in a narrow sense, every new word, stable word combination, phrase expression (idiom), new meaning of the word or new reality of word usage4.
Types of innovationsFull new wordAdd new meaningNew meaning of the old wordChart 1. Types of innovationsFirst new word - are innovations that have not existed for some time, that is, have not been mentioned in the text until now.
 Their "egg" and their content speak a new reality.
 These types of innovations are relatively small5.
Assigning a new meaning to an old word - words that retain the old word but lose the old meaning և acquire a new meaning by forming semantic innovations.
1 See Levchenko YS, Neologism in the Lexical System of Modern English, Luhansk, 2010, pp. 3-4.
2 "Bulletin of Yerevan University, Sociology, Economics", "Bulletin of the Armenian State University of Economics", Financial Times, The Economist, Forbes, Bloomberg businessweek, etc.
3 Aghabekyan Al., English-Armenian dictionary.
 Business, Economics (ed. H. Marzpanyan), Yerevan, 1998, Avetisyan D., Financial-Banking English-Russian-Armenian Explanatory Dictionary, Yerevan, Antares, 2002.
4 See Aghayan E., General և Armenian lexicography, Yerevan, 1984, p. 169.
5 See Levchenko YS, page 14.
Addition of a new meaning to an existing word - those are words that retain their meaning and meaning, but at the same time acquire a new meaning, that is, they reveal ambiguity1.
The innovations are generalized and isolated. The new words that eventually pass into the active vocabulary are generalized; they cease to be neologisms, and the isolated neologisms are the words that are used in this or that writing, but do not pass into the active vocabulary due to their frequent use 2.
  The spread of innovations is conditioned by a) communicative value, b) semantic և sound features, c) the presence or absence of a competing word for the corresponding meaning3.
Based on the existing guiding differences between the real terminology, a number of realities characterizing the terminology can be identified. 1) reason for creation. Term innovations are called concepts of a certain field of human activity, 2) main function. Term innovations serve the name of new concepts, realities within the framework of certain activities; 3) synonymous relation. In contrast to basic vocabulary innovations, synonymy is a unique phenomenon for term innovations; 4) the form of existence in language; Term neologisms are also multi-member phrases, especially when it refers to a concept; 5) the existence of language; The novelties of the terminology are permanent, as their existence is substantiated by the existence of this or that phenomenon of non-linguistic reality, the existence of which determines the existence of a new word in the language; 6) the nature of the relationship with other languages; Terminologies are rapidly moving from one language to another (term borrowings) ում taking their place in the vocabulary of other languages.
Thus, the following features are typical of terminology. Absence of ambiguity, unequivocal attitude, belonging to a defined sphere of human activity, stability, compliance with the word-formation norms existing in terminology4.
  These peculiarities stem from the essence of the content of the term innovations, and from the structural point of view they do not differ from the realities.
There is constant progress in the economic sphere, new concepts are emerging, and consequently, new words.
 The borders of the modern Armenian economic terminology have been expanded not only at the expense of loans, but also at the expense of new structures.
Economic innovations are created by the internal possibilities of language (by the roots of a given language or by its own word-formation methods of borrowed roots), by means of external-internal borrowings.
It should be noted that the innovations of the economic vocabulary are not uniform. they are the original terminological innovations, such as premium, և occupational dialects.
 The latest types of innovations mainly arise by attributing a new meaning to collaborative words in the field of professional colloquialism or by creating incidental, incidental units with a certain professional significance.
For them, as in the case of real innovations, it is possible to have a stylish shade. For example, drop-dead day - "dead day", deadline 5, hot money-investment fund, which persistently strives for high profitability in a short period of time.
 The way of importing them into Armenian economic vocabulary is mainly copying from English. for example, bear market6 - bear market.
 Such phrasal, incidental neonatal word units of English often pass from the professional colloquial sphere to the terminological system of the sphere, that is, they are terminated, and the Armenian one is a copy 1 See Levchenko YS, pp. 15-16.
2 See ibid., P. 170.
3 See Abrahamyan SG, Modern Literary Armenian, Yerevan, 1981, pp. 119-121.
4 See Cabré MT, Terminology.
 Theory, methods and applications, USA, Philadelphia, 1999, pp. 205 - 207.
5 See Bulycheva VP, Interpretive Anglo-Russian Dictionary of Economic Professionalism with an Educational Component, Astrakhan, 2011, p. 17.
6 See http.
//www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bearmarket.asp.
Armenianizes them և makes them Armenian economic terminological units, eg bull position1 - bull position.
In the modern Armenian economic vocabulary, a number of terminological innovations have been created by the internal means of the language, by complicating the Armenian roots: signal, trade discount, coupon, valuation, valuation, stock, share, share, stock exchange, encumbrance, overdraft, overdraft, overdraft Guarantee, discount, license, surcharge, balance sheet, manual labor, profit rate, turnover, deficit, premium, rent, borrower, credit line, creditworthiness, final settlement, trust, money, etc.
Certain term-innovations are formed by borrowed internal բառ word-internal means of our language, more often by suffixes. For example, extra-budgetary, grant-giving, sub-excise, leasing, licensing, transfer, oligopolistic, offshore Giles.
Borrowings of the Armenian economic vocabulary are mainly international terms, in parallel with which Armenian-equivalent new formations are used in our language, such as audit-accounting, auditing, aval-guarantee, brand-brand, deficit-deficit, deflation-devaluation, globalization-global, global -profit, diversification-multiplication, leasing-renting, marketing-marketing, conversion-conversion, management-management, transfer-transfer, subsidy-surcharge, overdraft-exceeding և etc.
In the economic vocabulary there are a number of interchangeable terms made from Western Armenian: globalization, certification, accounting, inflation, etc.2.
Modern English economic innovations are created mainly by derivation, compounding, word combinations, to a lesser extent by abbreviations (abbreviations, abbreviations).
In the English economic vocabulary, there are innovations consisting of blending two word bases, some of which, as a result of the merging of the endings of the first component որոշthe beginning of the end, are squeezed or, if those keywords have such a shape or sound, one of them is preserved.
Grexit3 (Greece - Greece + exit) - this term was coined by WillemBuiter Eb Ibrahim Rahbari in 2012.
 Speaking about the possibility of Greece leaving the European territory, they suggest the term Grexit - a novelty, which was later used actively.
 This terminology is now introduced in the electronic wiki encyclopedia with the appropriate explanation: Greek withdrawal from the eurozone - Greece's withdrawal from the euro area4. it is referred to as an economic word-unit.
Chermany5 (China - China + Germany - Germany) is a combination of the names of the two countries that are the largest countries in the world in terms of trade surplus.
This novelty was created in conjunction with some of the other neologisms that existed before: Chimerica6 (China - China + Amenrica - America). It was created by Harvard University historian Niall Ferguson and Moritz Schularick of the Free University of Berlin to describe the alleged economic assimilation of China and the United States.
 Chindia7 (China - China + India - India) was written by Indian politician Jairam Ramesh to name the economic union of two Asian giants.
These are found in Armenian economic materials mainly in English, presenting the names of the countries in parentheses.
Among the new economic formations there are many, in the composition of which the word-component of economics participates, or certain sounds are suppressed, but the main snow and meaning of the component are preserved.
  Recently created 1 See ibid.
2 For the innovations of the Armenian economic vocabulary, see Zakaryan M., Tsoklinyan K., Economic innovations, compound special names, singular և polysyllabic words, abbreviations, synonyms-antonyms, homonymous-synonyms, free և stable relations, Yerevan, 2013.
3 See http.
//www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/9e59bcfc-4b74-11e2-88b5-00144feab49a.html#axzz3Aa6rGf5R.
4 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_withdrawal_from_the_eurozone.
5 See http.
//www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/cd01f69e-3134-11df-8e6f-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3Aa6rGf5R.
6 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chimerica.
7 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chindia.
a series of innovations, the first component of which is a specific name indicating an economic program or the founder or author of a theory, the other being an economics component.
 For example, the Abenomics1 novelty was created in 2013.
 That year Shinzo Abe, who became the Prime Minister of Japan, first of all paid attention to the country's economy.
 According to his economic program, it was planned to help local exporters by sharply reducing the value of the currency by increasing government spending on economic growth.
  This program became known as Abenomics (Abe - Abe + Economics - Economy).
 In Armenian, the term Abenomika is borrowed2.
By the same token, the Likonomics3 (Li - Li + Economics) innovation was created in the same period.
 This terminology is associated with the name of Chinese Premier Li Keqiang.
 His economic program is based on three principles. a) reduction of public debt, b) exclusion of large-scale public spending as a counterbalance to Abenomics, c) structural reforms.
  The term Likonomika is borrowed in Armenian.
In modern English economics, word-formation is also an effective way to create innovations.
BRIC (S) - (Brazil, Russian, India, China, (South Africa) 4 - Brazil, Russia, India, China, (South Africa)) - The BRIC term first appeared in Goldman Sachs's 2001 commercial bank records. թ. Jim O'Neill, in November, and then penetrated the vocabulary of the political arena for several years.
  The BRIC countries began to hold high-level meetings, and when they were joined by the Republic of South Africa, the initials S (South Africa) were added to the novelty.
 In Armenian, the acronym is mainly preserved, the abbreviation is opened in parentheses (BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa).
PIIGS - (Portugal, Italy, Greece, Spain, Ireland) 5 - Portugal, Italy, Greece, Spain, Ireland) - This terminology was coined in the 1990s and is based on the English word pig.
 Initially, the novelty consisted of the initials of the countries that were considered the countries with the largest public debt in Europe - PIGS - (Portugal, Italy, Greece, Spain).
 And in 2010 At the beginning of the 20th century, the countries affected by the economic crisis, which was joined by Ireland, began to be understood under this acronym, and the acronym was changed to "PIIGS".
G - SIFI - (Global + systemically important financial institution) 6 - The abbreviation entered the competition with the same meaning too big to fail.
 This innovation means the unification of such financial companies and institutions that the government does not allow the bankruptcy, as it will be accompanied by a full-scale crisis.
 However, due to its more misuse, the term Hyman Philip Minsky is too widely used7.
During the long economic crisis in Europe, all economists were divided into two main camps, which were looking for ways to escape.
  Some of them try to prevent sharp budget cuts, reduce public debt, others thought that in order to get out of the crisis quickly, it is necessary to spend as much as possible to reduce unemployment and increase economic growth.
 Those who called for austerity were called Austerians, which derives from austerity based on austerity, which in turn is synonymous with the rigid policies of the Austrian School of Economics.
Fill or kill (FOK) - (Execute or cancel) - The customer's request to buy or sell a product addressed to the exchange, the intermediary, which must be fulfilled immediately 9.
Alpha earner10 - alpha earner - The woman who earns the most in the family 1.
1 See http.
//lexicon.ft.com/Term?term=abenomics.
2 See http.
//armef.com/news/category/interesting/article/article_1365743235.
3 See http.
//www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/07/stimulus-v-reform-china.
4 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BRICS.
5 See http.
//internationalinvest.about.com/od/glossary/a/What-Are-The-Piigs.htm.
6 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systemically_important_financial_institution.
7 See http.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Too_big_to_fail.
8 See http.
//ru.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=austerian.
9 See http.
//www.investopedia.com/terms/f/fok.asp.
10 See http.
//new_words.enacademic.com/445/alpha_earner.
Omega man - A man who prefers not to be the center of attention, not to play a significant role in a professional or social situation.
In the field of Armenian economic and practical communication, the linguistic examination of new English terms has the purpose of valuing the Armenian language in other scientific fields, the study of which today is somewhat limited to non-professional faculties.
Interdisciplinary research, being up-to-date today, in this case contributes to the development of economic, scientific-information progress, on the other hand facilitates communication.
  The flexible vocabulary and linguistic means of the Armenian language allow to create equivalents, to translate the terms, which over time are able to pass to the sphere of active communication, weakening the positions of the borrowed terms, pushing them out of the practical-communicative sphere of our language.
Meline GrishkyanNEWS IN MODERN ARMENIAN AND ENGLISH ECONOMIC DISTRIBUTION Keywords: economics, borrowings, terminology, copy, comparative test, word combination, structural feature, syllabic, syllabic
