ISSUES OF SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT In Armenia, proper and complete forest management is extremely important, as it is of primary importance for the development and protection of forests.
  In each country, depending on the internal features of the country, forest management is carried out differently.
According to the Decree N 7 of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of January 15, 2004, the state forests of the Republic of Armenia are managed by the Ministries of Agriculture and Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia, including the system of Specially Protected Forest Areas (SPAs), which mainly includes forest landscapes. .
The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Armenia is the public administration body authorized by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in the field of forest protection, protection, reproduction and use.
  It carries out the reserved functions through the Forestry Department of the Ministry's staff, "Hayantar" and "State Forest Monitoring Center" SNCOs.
  About 75% of the forest areas, including 13 of the 27 sanctuaries, are managed by 19 Hayantar (SNCO) regional branches [1].
"Hayantar" SNCO "Forest State Monitoring CenterAnron" SNCO "Hayantar" SNCO 19 "Forestry" branches Staff of the Forestry Department Management agency, such as "San" National Park, "Dilijan" National Park, "Lake Arpi" National Park, "Khosrov Forest" State Reserve "," Reserve Complex "," Zikatar "Environmental Center," Zangezur "Biosphere Reserve" SNCO- through.
In other words, by the decision N 7-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of January 15, 2004, to refer to the issue of institutional reorganization, to separate the management and control functions of the sphere from each other.
The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Armenia carries out forest management functions on about 75% of the forest lands, and the other 25% is carried out by the Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia, at the same time performing the functions of environmental control.
Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia of the Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia
State Inspectorate
Department of Biological Resources Management State Non-Commercial Organizations "Sean" National "Dilijan" Park "National Park" "National Park" "Khosrov Forest" State Reserve "Reserve Park Complex" "Zikatar" Ecological Center The ratio of control over the application of forest legislation enshrined in Article 7 (1) (n) of the Forest Code to the environmental control powers set out in part 2 of the same Article.
  In fact, the decision N 7-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of January 15, 2004 does not correspond to the provisions of the Forest Code of the Republic of Armenia.
The control over the application of the forest legislation according to the point 7 of part 1 of Article 7 of the RA Forest Code, ությունն the environmental control strengthened by part 2 is exercised by the authorized state body in the given field [2].
Management by various state bodies reveals various problems, one of which we have presented with the example of Stepanavan forestry.
 Here, according to the forest management plan, the forest cover in the forest economy is 5674 ha [3] (Figure 1), according to the image from the Sentinel 2A satellite image - 5173 ha [4] (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Forest cover of Stepanavan forestry according to the current forest management plan Figure 2. Forest cover of Stepanavan forestry according to the image of "Sentinel 2A" satellite. To avoid similar problems ), o Improve և clarify the system of sustainable management in the field of protection, protection, reproduction և use of forests of the Republic of Armenia, o Restore the integrity of forest management in the Republic of Armenia, o exclude similar sectoral activities of the two state bodies, o Optimize the list of forest management organizations, clarify their status.
It is also necessary to restore a number of key forest subdivisions previously operating within the "ArmForest" SNCO, such as the Forest Seed Station, the Forest Ameliorative, the Forest Experimental and Forest Protection Stations
LITERATURE [1] Criteria of sustainable forest management in Armenia և indicators, National Training Seminar, Yerevan 2017, pp. 6-7.
[2] RA Forest Code, adopted on 24-10-2005, URL.
 https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=21354 (Reference made: 28-03-2019).
[3] "Hayantar" SNCO of the RA Ministry of Agriculture, URL.
 http:
//hayantar.am (The link was made on 24-03-2019).
[4] Ministry of Nature Protection, State Forest Monitoring Center, URL.
 http:
//forest-monitoring.am (Link made 18-03-2019).
Mirzoyan Nelli SUSTAINABLE FOREST-MANAGEMENT ISSUES IN RA Keywords: sustainable forest management, issues, Forest Code.
