PROSPECTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SANATORIUM AND SANATORIUM SERVICES IN THE EXAMPLE OF THE CITY OF DILIJAN IN ARMENIA The rapid growth of industry in the structure of the world economy
 At the same time, the rapid process of urbanization contributes to the quantitative growth of the urban population operating in conditions of high health risk with a more active rhythm of life.
  As a result of all this, the demand for sanatorium-sanatorium services continues to grow, which, as it is known, is a special group of services aimed at providing visitors with rehabilitation, health recovery and disease prevention. [4]
  The provision of such services has always been based on the use of different combinations of favorable climatic conditions, which make the territory of the Republic of Armenia stand out.
 Areas with such combinations are accepted, where there are sufficient infrastructures for the exploitation of those resources, qualify as resorts [6].
 World experience shows that not only sick but also healthy people visit resorts for leisure, which provides significant income for businesses and local communities, making the provision of sanatorium-health services a precondition for the socio-economic development of attractive tourist destinations.
Due to the geographical location and climatic conditions, the resorts can have different specializations.
 The following types of resorts are distinguished on the natural factor used by the sanatoriums [7]: • climatic sanatoriums, among which the mountain subtype climatic sanatoriums have a special place, • balneological (mineralogical) sanatoriums, • mud sanatoriums (mixed);
It is known that in this respect, the climatic conditions of the Republic of Armenia allow to develop everyone.
 From ancient times, attempts have been made in our area to use the diversity and resources of nature to restore and maintain health.
  The ancient traces were found in Garni և date back to the 3rd century.
 However, the rapid rise of the sanatorium and health resort is conditioned by the developments that took place in the Soviet period of Armenia's history.
 The sanatoriums established during that period received huge financial support from the state as a means of promoting a healthy lifestyle.
Resort towns and zones were formed throughout the USSR, such as Arzni and Jermuk, Kislovodsk, Borjomi, Yesentuk, and others.
Dilijan was also an area of ​​similar importance.
  Being in the most forested region of Armenia, Tavush, the territory of Dilijan also has rich traditions of providing health services.
  Thus, the aim of the work is to reveal the preconditions for the development of Dilijan as a resort-sanatorium-sanatorium services ևPerspectives.
Based on the researches carried out in Armenia during the Soviet years, 10 resort areas with their therapeutic factors have been singled out in the country [2]: 1. Arzni orthopedic resort. Comfortable, landscape-climatic conditions և cold, healing mineral waters, 2. Bjni-Arzakan-Aghveran balneo-climatic resort. Mild, favorable climate, rich forest cover, numerous mineral springs with different physico-chemical, gas composition, 3. Dilijan mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Favorable mountain forest climatic conditions և cold, carbonate healing mineral waters, 4. Lori resort area. Favorable mountain-forest climate, mineral water springs, healing peat deposits, 5. Tsakhkadzor mountain-climatic resort. Mountain-forest favorable climate, presence of forest cover և mountain meadows, Saturation of light ions with high oxygen content, 6. Hankavan-Marmarik orthopedic spa resort. Favorable highland zone landscape-oxygen conditions, rich in oxygen, clean air, as well as thermal, carbonate mineral waters. 7. Jermuk climatic-balneological resort. Extremely hot, carbonate mineral waters և high mountainous, forest climate, 8. Syunik mountain-climatic resort. Favorable climate, mineral springs, 9. Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, clean air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. The balneo-climatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. Hankavan-Marmarik orthopedic resort. Favorable highland zone landscape-oxygen conditions, rich in oxygen, clean air, as well as thermal, carbonate mineral waters. 7. Jermuk climatic-balneological resort. Extremely hot, carbonate mineral waters և high mountainous, forest climate, 8. Syunik mountain-climatic resort. Favorable climate, mineral springs, 9. Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, fresh air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. Balneoclimatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. Hankavan-Marmarik orthopedic resort. Favorable highland zone landscape-oxygen conditions, rich in oxygen, clean air, as well as thermal, carbonate mineral waters. 7. Jermuk climatic-balneological resort. Extremely hot, carbonate mineral waters և high mountainous, forest climate, 8. Syunik mountain-climatic resort. Favorable climate, mineral springs, 9. Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, fresh air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. The balneo-climatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. carbonate mineral waters, 7. Jermuk climatic-balneological resort. Extremely hot, carbonate mineral waters և high mountainous, forest climate, 8. Syunik mountain-climatic resort. Favorable climate, mineral springs, 9. Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, fresh air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. Balneoclimatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. carbonate mineral waters, 7. Jermuk climatic-balneological resort. Extremely warm, carbonate mineral waters և high mountainous, forest climate, 8. Syunik mountain-climatic resort. Favorable climate, mineral springs, 9. Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-water resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, clean air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. Balneoclimatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. Mineral health resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, fresh air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. Balneoclimatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers. Mineral health resort. Moderately cold, forest climate, rich vegetation, fresh air, carbonate mineral waters, 10. Balneoclimatic resort zone of Lake Sanaa basin. Favorable pastland-climatic conditions, mineral water springs, healing peat layers.
It should be noted that in terms of mineral water composition (Figure 1) Armenian resorts are comparable to a number of famous European resorts, such as Karlovy Vary, Zheleznavodsk աշ Mashuk (Jermuk mineral water), Borjomi և Vishin (France), Dilijan ջուր mineral water.
As can be seen from the above, Dilijan has more than one therapeutic factor: its sanatorium-sanatorium capacity may belong to the mixed type, which gives additional attractiveness and potential to the resort area.
At the same time, the advantage is that there is a huge mineral water resource here, and, as it is known, health services in Europe have developed from the very beginning due to hydrotherapy and bath services.
  This emphasis is confirmed by the fact that during the years of the Republic of Armenia, the authorities focused their attention on Jermuk, a local resort resort, the main advantage of which is again mineral water.
  Recent developments in the Amulsar mining area have significantly increased the prospects of Dilijan as a pre-resort area providing resort services.
The sanatoriums in the Republic of Armenia are going through a rather complicated qualification process, due to the fact that they have undertaken the responsible mission of maintaining the health care of the population.
First of all, they are fixed for five years by the RA Ministry of Economic Development և Licensing և Investment Permits Agency [9], because according to Article 10 of the RA Law on Tourism, hotel entities in the RA can qualify. , which meet the minimum requirements for urban planning, sanitation, fire protection defined by the RA legislation [3].
  However, a license is issued by the Ministry of Health to obtain the status of a sanatorium, according to the 2001 Licensing Law adopted by the Government of the Republic of Armenia և 2002 ․ Procedure for licensing the provision of medical care and services by organizations or individual entrepreneurs in the Republic of Armenia, adopted by the decision N 867 of June 29, 2006.
  Thus, the introduction of a joint "simplified status process" may open new perspectives for sectoral development.
2018 As of January 1, 2012, the Dilijan resort complex, "Impulse" և "Mountainous Armenia" sanatoriums are licensed to provide sanatorium services in Dilijan.
 Moreover, only the "Mountainous Armenia" sanatorium operating under the auspices of the RA Ministry of Defense provides a wide range of medical services, from examinations to mud therapy, massage, physiotherapy and other services.
  "Dilijan" sanatorium provides only spa services, and "Impulse" only rest services, without any medical procedure.
The main indications for treatment in the sanatoriums operating in Dilijan during the USSR years were: tuberculosis of the respiratory organs, extra-tuberculosis, diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, diseases of the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, pancreas [1].
  However, after the collapse of the USSR, one of the main problems remains the undercrowding of low-season tourist resorts, which also hinders the expansion of resort activities, as there is a problem of forced downtime and outflow of qualified personnel.
 One of the objective reasons for the overcrowding is that the weather conditions are favorable only for the warm half of the year for organizing climate treatment.
  Therefore, the general development of tourism and the deepening of international cooperation can open new perspectives for the development of sanatorium-sanatorium services in Dilijan.
As a precondition for the development of sanatorium-sanatorium services, it is important that the architectural plan of the Dilijan area is based on the following basic principles: [11]
• Conservation of the existing landfill is envisaged տեղափոխ Transportation of household waste to a waste treatment plant on an area of ​​1 hectare (to be built at a distance of 10-12 km from the community).
• In the near future, it is planned to install only small-capacity ecologically clean productions in the city, in order to avoid a significant amount of industrial waste.
• Sanitary cleaning of the areas adjacent to the clear lake, prevention of swamping, based on the development and implementation of a special program.
• Take measures to relieve the area of ​​transit vehicles, improve the road network and provide a green protective layer.
• Implement noise protection measures.
• Create a sanitary protection zone with a radius of 200 m to mitigate the effects of electromagnetic radiation on the TV tower, taking into account its reconstruction և further increase the power of the transmitters.
• It is necessary to ensure about 70% of the annual discharge of surface collected water.
• Increase the total area of ​​green areas by about 131, the area of ​​common green areas by 40 hectares.
 Increase the security of the population to 21-24 square meters / person, which significantly exceeds the existing norm for the resort towns of 12 square meters / person.
• Carry out large-scale rehabilitation measures in damaged, degraded green areas.
Figure 1. Distribution and mineral composition of the mineral waters of the Republic of Armenia [5] Dilijan resort area, located in Dilijan National Park, is a unique tourist destination, which is able to use the rich recreational resources of the national park (Figure 2).
 The recreational resources of Dilijan National Park are represented by the mesophilic forests of the Caucasus, climate treatment, mineral water treatment, favorable conditions of peat mud, historical and cultural, archeological and natural monuments, among which there is a UNESCO World Heritage List.
Landscape conditions here (gently sloping slopes with abundant vegetation, small ravines) are irreplaceable for all the methods of therapeutic physical culture, the use of moderate therapeutic walking, in the direction of which they already carry out tangible work (furnishing according to international tourist standards local ևinternational non-governmental organizations.
  One of the advantages of Dilijan is its location in the northern part of Armenia, on the interstate road connecting Armenia with Georgia, as well as the attention of large entrepreneurs, which gives its results at least in terms of increasing the number of tourists visiting the city.
Figure 2. Distribution of natural and cultural monuments in Dilijan National Park. [10] Given Dilijan's geographical location, climatic conditions, and vast biodiversity, this resort area has significant potential for cluster development, including modern tourist attractions such as tourism. such as agri-food complexes, transport networks, etc.
Another positive factor in the perspective development of Dilijan sanatorium-sanatorium services is the tendency to turn the city into a financial-educational center in recent years, as this also fits within the model of a cluster development of an environmentally safe resort area.
 Such developments have the potential to solve not only the main problem of Dilijan, but also of other resort areas - the issue of business activity and lack of financial flows.
LITERATURE [1] Dolukhanova N. I., The resort riches of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan 1963, p. 25.
[2] Tovmasyan G., Spa Recreational Tourism Management System հայ Conceptual Foundations of Development in RA, Yerevan 2013 (3), ASUE Banber, pp. 91-2.
[3] RA Law on Tourism, Yerevan, 2003.
[4] Sargsyan T., Sahakyan I., Explanatory Dictionary of Services, Yerevan 2016, YSU Publishing House, p. 123.
[5] Atlas.
 Climate and natural healing resources Armenia Yerevan [6] Ветитнев А. М., Войнова Я. А., Organizational sanitary-resort activities.
[7] Ветитнев А. М., Журавлёва Л. B., Kurortnoe delo.
 Moscow, 2007, Text. пособие, [8] Features of the resort business, URL.
 https:
//news.am/arm/news/114666.html (Link made: 31.08.2018) [9] Organization of the qualification process of hotel facilities, URL.
 http:
//www.mineconomy.am/en/306 (Link made: 02.09.2018) [10] Map of Dilijan National Park, URL.
http:
//www.mnp.am/images/files/nyuter/2010/13%20Tourism%20Dilijan%20Arm.jpg (Link made: 01.09.2018).
[11] Action Plan for Territorial Cultural Systems in and around Dilijan, Yerevan, Dilijan, 2013, URL.
  http:
//www.urbanlab.am/files/wareshelf/1/1497862361081.pdf (Reference made: 01.09.2018) Sargsyan Sargis SANATOR - SANATORIUM DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS, cluster development.
