THE "WE - THEM" DIFFERENTIATIONS OF JAVAKHK ARMENIAN YOUNG PEOPLE 'S FEATURES OF ARMENIANS LIVING IN ARMENIANS: THE CONTEXT OF ARMENIANS ARE CONCERNING ARMENIAN CONCENTRATION
  The problem of intergroup differentiation becomes more urgent, especially in the case of groups that are frequented in Armenia, such as, for example, the Armenians of Javakhk.
  Javakhk Armenian youth mainly come to Armenia for educational purposes, as Armenia is a platform for them to receive Armenian-language education.
  Studies on the problems of Javakhk Armenians are fewer than studies on the problems of other similar groups, such as Syrian-Armenians, where relations with Armenians living in Armenia are discussed in the context of physical space, omitting the peculiarities of intergroup differentiation in social space.
From this point of view, it becomes urgent to understand the intergroup relations with the Armenians of Javakhk after overcoming the physical distance in the social space with the Armenians living in Armenia.
  On the other hand, it is also possible what factors influence the "we-they" differentiation of Javakhk Armenian youth.
Javakhk Armenians հայ Armenians living in Armenia are physically close, but in the same physical space their group borders are already separated by the state border of Armenia and Georgia1.
 In order to find out how the peculiarities of "we-they" are manifested after overcoming the distance in the physical space, it is necessary to study the group relations of Javakhk Armenian youth with the Armenians living in Armenia in the context of physical and social space at the same time. Javakhk is part of the Republic of Georgia.
  Administratively, Javakhk today includes the Samtskhe-Javakheti province of Georgia (6 regions) and the Tsalka region of the Kvemo Kartli province.
Initially, it was considered to be very close to physical space.
  It was perceived as a place where social groups are located, socially important events take place.
  Space, according to Simmel, has sociological significance; it is inseparable from the concept of "social group".
 "Social space is a place of interaction between people, it does not differ from the people who occupy that space" [1].
 Sorokin defines space as the "population" of the country.
 On the other hand, space is defined as an environment for regulating social positions.
  It is hierarchical և has a graphic image in which each individual can be defined as a point that is at a certain distance from the other points.
  In this scheme, representatives of the Chicago School also view space in the context of empirical research.
French sociologist P. on the interplay of physical and social spaces Bourdieu's approach presents social space as an indication of social position, and physical space as the localization of an object.
  According to him, people act simultaneously as biological individuals-social agents, they are unrecognizable through a certain relationship with the physical-social space.
 If the place occupied by the individual is one - the physical space, then the social space is determined on the basis of the exclusion of positions [2].
 It turns out that space (physical և social) is the social environment where the relationships of individuals և groups take place.
  Therefore, it is in the space that as a result of different social relations, the peculiarities of "we-they" differences are emphasized.
The inter-group relations of the Javakhk Armenians with the Armenians can be considered as the relations between the two sub-ethnic groups.
 This should reveal the "we-they" differences in their inter-ethnic relations.
  It is in the context of the differentiation of "we-they" that the inter-border boundaries are formed, which not only separate the group from the other, but also show the position of the groups in relation to each other in the social space.
  That is, the notion of "social distance" is connected with the notion of "intergroup borders".
  Social distance, in turn, is related to the issue of maintaining status. "Social distance is the result of maintaining social status.
 He who maintains social distance from others, at the same time maintains his position in the circle of friends, for example, in his groups, etc. "[3].
 On the other hand, social distance is conditioned by the existing threats in the social space, which may be encountered in the context of intergroup relations.
 In addition, "inter-ethnic relations can be driven by stereotypes that are represented in what group members say they do."
Depending on these perceptions and threats, that is, social distance, inter-group trust or distrust may arise.
"Trust can be considered the most important component of human life, which determines their actions, where other people are essential" [4].
  It turns out that intergroup trust and distrust condition the actions of members of one group when communicating with members of another group.
 That is, as a result, the individual chooses the strategy of his action and decides how to act in a specific space-time environment.
Thus, it is urgent to reveal the peculiarities of imitation and differentiation of Javakhk Armenian youth studying in the Republic of Armenia.
  For that purpose, in-depth interviews were conducted with 16 young Javakhk-Armenians studying in the Republic of Armenia, whose selection criteria were: gender, education (school, secondary and higher education institutions), the fact of having or not having admission in the Republic of Armenia.
  In-depth interviews were conducted in accordance with a pre-designed guideline, which focused on identifying survey participants' expectations and justified or unjustified expectations.
 The impact of group experience in the process of repatriation of Armenians and the possibility of identifying the factors influencing the process of adaptation in the Republic of Armenia were also taken into account.
 He also և projective technique was used ․ The participants of the interview were instructed to draw an image of an Armenian from Javakhk.
  Content analysis was performed based on those images.
  The interviews were conducted with the Javakhk Armenian youth studying in Armenia in the 2017-2018 academic year.
For this purpose, a sociological research was conducted, the generalization of the results of which allows to assert that Armenians are "completely different, different and not like Armenians."
  The fact that members of such groups (in this case, a sub-ethnic group) are more likely to have positive perceptions of members of their own group - negative perceptions of members of the "other" group - is manifested here.
 These stereotypes expressed by their group in perceptions are as follows: • Self-stereotypes: "achieving", "helping", "loyal", "kind", "trustworthy", "honest", "smart", "strong".
• Heterogeneous stereotypes: "deceitful", "dirty", "unreliable", "envious", "inhospitable".
The respondents, for example, mentioned that "... Armenians are liars, liars, they come around spinning one by one, you have to be careful here, suddenly they will not spin on your head ..." (17-year-old boy studying in high school).
"... The people of Javakhk do not have a bad side, it is best for them to be behind each other…."
  I would like the people of Armenia to be like us.
  Girls in particular should be as modest as we are. ”- A 16-year-old college student.
These heterogeneous stereotypes are cautious because people seek to communicate with people who are looking for help in their precarious situations, who they think are kind, helpful, honest, and loyal.
  And the Armenians are far from the descriptors mentioned in their perceptions.
  Consequently, there is a lack of trust, which in turn leads to an increase in social distance.
It should be noted that the real bearer of the stereotype is the group, the perceptions of Armenians among Javakhk Armenian youth are largely conditioned by the stereotypes expressed by their group, which are formed in them even before coming to Armenia.
  Many of the respondents mentioned that before coming to Armenia they said that Armenians are deceivers, unreliable, we should be careful. "... Armenians cannot be trusted, we do not trust Armenians, it will always be emphasized about Armenians that they are a deceitful nation.
 Definitely the Armenian on his back.
 We are always told to be careful with Armenians, do not be deceived by sweet words, do not be cynical.
  Made of cloves.
 I do not want to communicate too much, where is there something that our people say so much? ”
In such a case, the caution of the Javakhk Armenian youth is really "justified".
 It seems that it is these notions rooted in them that have become part of "cultural knowledge" and condition inter-ethnic relations.
 On the other hand, in the context of the "we-they" distinction, it is possible to maintain status, especially when it has been challenged in the past.
  Many of the respondents mentioned that in Georgia, living with other nations, they allegedly kept their language and religion, remaining identical.
 According to the latter, they should keep their position, good qualities, or in other words, their status in Armenia.
 It is interesting that they, keeping social distance from the Armenians, at the same time want to keep their position in the group of Javakhk people.
 This is evidenced by the fact that the one who maintains a social distance from others, at the same time tries to maintain his position within the group.
"... I am very proud that I am from Javakhk, the people of Javakhk have given me a name that no one will be treated badly.
  I would not like to be an Armenian, I will feel more proud of this, our history will make us very proud that we have remained Armenians in another country ”(17-year-old girl studying in high school).
"... Well, what kind of friendship should I have with Armenians now? We do not have any with them. When I came to Armenia, I was told that suddenly they are not very close. On the one hand, I will think that they are shabby, but on the other hand, my friends come to us so that they know I am very close to the Armenians, they may not even be able to ... ”(22-year-old boy studying at the university).
Another interesting conclusion is that in the "we-they" differentiation of Javakhk Armenian youth, the language also acts as a distinguishing factor, initially becoming an obstacle in communicating with Armenians.
 One of the respondents mentioned: "... I would be very upset, it would seem to me that they would take me by the hand, I would not understand what they were saying, I would be silent, but if I were good now, what would I say to an Armenian girl" (21-year-old girl studying at university) .
Another important difference is the educational mechanism of the Republic of Armenia.
  The young people of Javakhk think that they are better, smarter, therefore they have some advantages.
  Besides, according to them, it causes the relatively bad attitude of the Armenians, causing jealousy.
  One of the respondents mentioned. "... For example, my classmates are nervous, where the people of Javakhk will be admitted without training, we will be accepted after so much training.
 I will feel good, I have something to take us forward.
 It is good that they separate us. ”
Cultural contradictions are one of the key aspects of the "We-they" distinction.
 It is first of all about the combination of modern and traditional elements.
 It is interesting that the ideas of both girls and boys coincide on this issue.
  They consider Armenian boys to be far from their families, moving forward according to their wives, and girls to be free-spirited.
 One of the respondents mentioned. "... The girls here take the girl next to us to the sea to quench their thirst.
And one of the respondents mentioned that the woman and the family have a stronger basis for the Javakhk boys. "... For the people of Javakhk, the family is always in the first place, they are divided into numbers, the boys from Javakhk are at the head of the family…".
It is as a result of such a contradiction that, for example, the young Armenians of Javakhk do not want to marry an Armenian living in Armenia.
 To the question whether you will marry an Armenian, a girl answered: "... No, no, my parents would not want either.
 Many in Lyon that want Javakhk from Armenia, but we do not want.
 "Armenians are disgusting."
The circumstance of perceiving the Armenian "completely different from us" in the old paintings.
 Armenians were portrayed as girls, with a combination of modern elements, while Javakhk was either a man without a striking element, or a girl or a woman with a rather modest image, with traditional elements, often in different clothes (Figure 1).
Picture 1 ․ According to them, the only common denominator was the Armenian's Javanese perceptions.
  However, as the pictures showed, that commonality is absolutely in their perceptions, because they wrote next to each character which one is Armenian, they were afraid of which one.
  It is interesting that in 9 out of 16 pictures Armenian was written in Armenian's pictures, not Armenian (Picture 1).
It is obvious that the young Armenians of Javakhk differentiate themselves not only from Armenians, but also from Armenians.
 On the other hand, they wrote the word "Javakhk" quite capitally.
 In other words, they connect themselves more with Javakhk than with Armenia.
 That is why their relations with Armenians living in Armenia develop in the context of a certain social distance.
The people of Javakhk consider the presence of their group in Armenia to be peace and security.
 Their "Javakhk" identity, which embodies the continuation of the past, from this point of view performs an encouraging psychological function for the individual in such situations.
For example, one of the respondents mentioned ․ "I will feel good that I am from Javakhk, not Armenian, this is better, there are many of us here, they stand behind me ...".
Thus, the peculiarities of the "we-they" distinctions of the Javakhk youth are conditioned by cultural differences, by the avot-hetero-stereotypes formed as a result of the group experience, which is manifested through the following chain process: LITERATURE [2] Vermishyan H. R., Balasanyan S. S., Grigoryan O. G., Kerobyan S. N., Localities in Yerevan, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2015, page 32.
Ghalamdaryan AngelaJAVAKHAKH ARMENIAN YOUTH "WE - THEY" DIFFERENTIAL FEATURES OF ARMENIANS LIVING IN ARMENIA WITH RELATIONSHIPS: SOMETHING OF CONTENTS, SOCIETY.
