BOUNDARIES OF COMPLAINT EXAMINATION IN CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Various forms of review of judicial acts, in particular, the issues related to the institute of appeal have been analyzed in the domestic judicial literature, but have not been studied yet.
  In the framework of this research, we have particularly touched upon the boundaries of the appeal, the urgency of which is evidenced by the legal positions expressed by the Court of Cassation, which fills the gaps in the current Criminal Procedure Code.
 By the term of examination of the case by the order of appeal, we mean the scope of the issues within the limits of which the court of appeal exercises its powers, that is, it reviews the decision of the court of first instance.
The legislative regulation of the limits of the examination of the case by way of appeal mostly depends on the choice of a specific model of appeal, full or limited.
 In case of a full review, the court is not constrained on the grounds mentioned in the appeal; it has the right to go beyond the limits of the appeal at its own discretion, to examine the case in its entirety, in essence.
 In the case of this model, in fact, the court of appeal replaces the court of first instance.
 In case of a limited review, the court is constrained on the grounds mentioned in the appeal; it is not authorized to go beyond the appeal, to respond to judicial errors in the case on its own initiative.
  Until 2008 The full review model operated in the Republic of Armenia, but in 2008 it was replaced by a limited review.
In the legal literature, there are several criteria for limiting the scope of the case: փաստ Argumentation of the complaint, the legal grounds presented by the appellant in support of his allegations, պահանջ Claims of the complaint, claims that the appellant did not mention, the court does not decide on them; Քը The basis of the complaint is the judicial error, ie the material և violations of the procedural law,  The scope of the evidence to be examined, the court may not re-examine the evidence examined in the court of first instance or gather new evidence on its own initiative,  The subject of the complaint is the circumstances in which the trial was allowed wrong.
Հեղ Complainant: Based on the submitted complaint, the judicial act can be overturned or changed only in respect of the given appellant or the person represented by him1.
There are conflicting views in the literature on the limits of the examination of the case as an appeal.
  Some forensic experts believe that the court should be constrained by the appeal; in no case does it have the right to go beyond it2.
 Other forensic experts believe that the appellate court should have the right, not the arrogance, to eliminate violations in the judgment of the court of first instance but not mentioned in the appeal3.
1 See Ghazinyan G., Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, Special Part, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2010.
2 See Духовский М., Русский уголовный производство; Student Edition, Moscow, 1908, p. 390; Foynitskin I., Course in the Case Study, Volume 2, St. Petersburg, p. 546.
3 See Vorozhtsov S., Principles of cassation under the new UPC, Russian ostics, 2002, № 12, page 15; Razinkina A., Appellate Court of Appeal Production, Moscow, 2003, pp. 140-141.
We consider it necessary to refer to the regulation of the borders of appeal by the criminal procedure legislation of some foreign states.
  Article 318 of the German CCP states that "an appeal may be limited to the prescribed points", ie within the grounds set out in the appeal, and according to Article 2 նույն 2, "if there are no restrictions or no justification for the appeal, That is, the case is being examined by a full review.
This approach may be justified in the case of Germany, but we believe that the full appeal model is generally not acceptable, as it implies a repetition of the powers of the court of first instance in the Court of Appeal, which contradicts the idea of ​​a recurring reduction.
 Article 404 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine stipulates that "an appeal is examined within the limits specified in the appeal", but the following parts of the article provide for certain exceptions, in which case the court goes beyond the limits of the appeal.
  In particular, the CCP of Ukraine reserves the right to withdraw from the appellate court, unless it aggravates the situation of the accused or the persons against whom a decision has been made to apply medical coercion or educational supervision.
  Thus, the Ukrainian legislature is allowed to go beyond the limits of the appeal if they do not aggravate the situation of the accused.
 Article 409 of the Moldovan CCP states that "an appeal shall be heard by the person bringing it or by the person against whom the complaint was brought."
 The Moldovan Legislature does not allow the court to go beyond the scope of the appeal, but allows the case to be heard in its entirety in respect of the person who brought it or the person against whom it was brought (Article 409 of the CCP of Moldova).
 According to Article 389.19 of the RF Criminal Code, the court is not constrained by the arguments mentioned in the appeal; it has the right to review the case in its entirety.
  The RFCC (Article 389.19) stipulates that "during the review of a criminal case by way of appeal, the court is not constrained by the arguments of the appeal; it has the right to review the criminal case in its entirety."
 The issue of the borders of the appeal was also referred to by the RA Court of Cassation.
 The latter recorded in the case of Arman Karakhanyan (EKRD / 0569/01/08): "The Court of Appeals of the Republic of Armenia acts as a court endowed with the right to verify the legality and justification of a judicial act made by the court of first instance, which, as a rule, reviews the judicial act of the first instance court on the basis of factual data examined by the latter.
 In other words, the RA Criminal Court of Appeals does not have the authority to investigate the whole case, as well as all the evidence presented in the case, therefore, if the Court of Appeals tries to go beyond its jurisdiction, it starts acting as a court of first instance, which is inadmissible according to the RA Criminal Procedure Code. is. "
Pursuant to Article 385, Part 1 of the current Code, as well as Article 39, Part 3 of the Judicial Code, the Court of Appeals reviews the judicial act within the limits of the grounds and grounds of the appeal.
The limits of the examination of the case in the Court of Appeal differ significantly from the limits of the examination of the case in the court of first instance.
 In particular, if the limits of the case in the court of first instance are determined on the basis of the accusation against the person (Part 1 of Article 309 of the RA CCP), then when reviewing the case, the limits of expertise are predetermined by the appeal (Article 385, Part 1 of the RA CCP ) (This position is enshrined in the case No. EAKD / 0065/01/11 of the Court of Cassation by Arthur Khurshudyan).
If the current RA Criminal Procedure Code does not provide for the possibility of going beyond the limits of an appeal, then Article 372, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) states that the Court of Appeal has the right to go beyond the appeal if the defendant: A circumstance excluding criminal prosecution is found. Article 12 of the draft enumerates these circumstances in full, for example, it has been proved that the accused did not commit the act he is accused of, the act committed by the accused is considered lawful by criminal law.
  In other words, these are the grounds, in the presence of which criminal liability is excluded, առ taking into account this, we think, envisaging this ground is justified and well-founded ված is aimed at protecting the persons who have suffered from judicial errors.
- it is found that the accused's act was given a wrong legal assessment, - the circumstances defined in part 1 of Article 381 of this Code are revealed, the study of the circumstances defined in Article 381 of the Draft shows that they are almost identical in terms of the current Code on the grounds of unconditional reversal of the act.
 A. In Khurshudyan's case, the Court of Cassation expressed a legal position that the Court of Appeals has the right to go beyond the grounds and grounds of the appeal only in case there is a violation of the procedural law, which should unconditionally lead to the reversal of the judicial act (Article 398 Article 3 of the RA CCP - there is a ground for terminating the criminal case or terminating the criminal prosecution (Article 35 1 1, parts 2 of the RA CCP).
- it is found that the accused has been sentenced to a non-statutory punishment for the crime attributed to him, the punishment or the sentence imposed on him has been miscalculated;
 According to the regulation of the new Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine (2012), "if the examination of an appeal gives grounds to make a decision in favor of a person, no appeal has been lodged against the parties, the appellate court is obliged to make such a decision."
 According to Part 2 of Article 389.19 of the RF Criminal Code, "if several persons are accused in a criminal case and an appeal has been filed by one or several of them, the Court of Appeal has the right to review the criminal case of all the accused."
Summarizing the above, we conclude that: (1) the appellate court must examine the case in the light of the facts substantiated by the grounds submitted to the appellate court; (2) the appellate court has jurisdiction in favor (which implies the impermissibility of abrupt reversal) of the accused; has been improved, but no complaint has been filed, to go beyond the limits of the appeal - legality, humanitarianism արդար fair investigation of the case.
Lianna Sahakyan BOUNDARIES OF COMPLAINT EXAMINATION IN CRIMINAL TRIAL Keywords: appeal, limits of appeal, justice.
