GERMAN STATE ORDER AND THE RIGHT TO LEGAL DICTATORSHIP Nazism is the official political ideology of the Third Reich, which is one of the forms of fascism and includes elements of anti-Semitism and scientific racism.
Some scholars describe Nazi ideology as a link between extreme nationalism and "socialism"; others argue that this ideology cannot be socialist because it denies the existence of social classes.
 No matter how that ideology is defined, it became the basis of A. Hitler's full takeover of power in Germany և weapon to rule millions.
To understand how A. Under Hitler, full Nazi rule was established in Germany, and it was necessary to look back to 1933. on a number of interrelated events.
The National Socialist German Workers 'Party (originally the German Workers' Party) was founded in 1919. by Anton Drexler in January.
 The latter aims to create a nationalist party, the public basis of which would be the workers, unlike other parties, which were based on the middle class.
 1920 On February 24, A. Hitler presented a program consisting of 25 points, which became the official program of the party from April 1.
 From the very first point, the nationalist orientation of the program is emphasized: "We demand the unification of all Germans in Greater Germany, based on the right of nations to self-determination."
 In addition, state positions are required to be entrusted only to German citizens (paragraph 6).
1 See Galkin, A. A., German Fascism, -M., Science, 1989, http.
//scepsis.net/library/id_2737.html.
The 4th point of the program is worth mentioning. "Only he who belongs to the German nation can be a citizen of the state.
 Only a person who has German blood in his veins without religious discrimination can belong to the German nation.
  That is why the Jews cannot belong to the German nation. "
  In fact, anti-Semitic ideology had already begun among the Hitlerites in 1920.
We think that the 25th point is the main pillar of Hitler's ideas about the structure of the state. "... We demand the creation of a strong central government, unlimited power of the central political parliament over all the organizations of the whole empire ..."
In other words, Germany should not be a union of independent states, but a united empire, on which the Germans do not just live side by side, but are governed by one central national power.
1929 A global crisis begins, especially in Germany, which suffered a complete defeat in World War I.
  Under such conditions, the Nazi party with its chauvinistic, racist ideas begins to attract the attention of the financial capitalists of Germany.
 There is a rapprochement between the big tycoons - the Hitlerites.
  According to the representative of the US Embassy in Berlin D. Gordon in 1930 On September 23, 1945, "there is no doubt that Hitler received significant financial support from certain large manufacturers."
  Thus, a rather large financial basis is provided for the activities of the Nazi party.
 Naturally, this crisis had a more severe impact on the middle class, which was more easily influenced by Nazi propaganda (it should be noted that the role of Josef Goebbels in the implementation of propaganda was great, who in time managed to concentrate the main German culture of that time control levers in the fields of radio, press, cinematography).
 The result of that propaganda was that in 1930 During the parliamentary elections, the chroniclers received 8 times more votes than in 1928.
In the end, A. Hitler in 1933 On January 30, 1945, he was appointed Chancellor by President von Gindenburg.
 This event was interpreted by former Chancellor von Papen as "for the sake of hiring Nazis."
  However, such a view was extremely short-sighted և unfounded, if we take into account that Hitler had repeatedly shown his position և programs related to state governance և state issues before coming to power.
 As an example, we can mention 1930. A. The words uttered by Hitler. "The Constitution predetermines only the arena of struggle, not the goal.
 We participate in legal organizations in order to make our party a dictating factor.
 "Once we have constitutional power, we will change the state as we see fit."
  Hitler had just taken office as chancellor when he immediately demanded an agreement to use the president's powers.
Extraordinary powers were enshrined in the Constitution of the Weimar Republic with the aim of preserving the republic's democratic foundations when necessary, but history has shown that the exercise of those powers actually has the opposite effect.
  In order not to stand in the way of assuming these powers, Hitler proposes to dissolve the Reichstag and hold new elections.
 However, before the elections, the building of the Reichstag building was set on fire in 1933. on February 23.
The Nazis interpreted this event as an attempt by the communists to carry out a coup.
 Taking the opportunity, they arrested thousands of communists.
  Due to the successful Nazi propaganda, the general public welcomed the terror against the communists.
  Marinus van der Lubbe is accused of the fire.
  He is sentenced to death for not betraying his accomplices.
4 Some historians believe that the communist Marinus van der Lubbe was in the building but was set on fire by the Nazis as a provocation against the communists.
4 Dimitrov GM, Leipzig process.
 Words, letters and documents / G. Dimitrov. –M.:
 The very day after the Gospoli Reichstag fire, Hitler insisted that the president sign a decree on "measures to protect the nation-state and communist terror threatening the security of the state."
  This decree restricted the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens (thought, printing, assembly, etc.).
  Thus, the regime that survived until the fall of the Third Reich in 1945 was almost established.
1933 In his speech at the opening of the newly convened parliament on March 21, A. Speaking about the poverty and misery in Germany, Hitler considers the reason for their emergence to be the lack of German unity, common ideas and goals.
 He stated that the Nazi party was ready to carry out major reforms aimed at transforming the Reich և people, and expressed hope that members of the parties elected in parliament would be able to overcome the existing party differences, subject to strict necessity and dictation5.
The sitting of the new parliament was convened on March 23.
  In the new parliament, the Nazis managed to secure 2/3 of the total number of seats, thanks to the 81 communist deputies arrested in connection with the burning of the Reichstag building.
 A law was passed to establish a state of emergency.
 The government got the opportunity to make changes in the constitution, as well as to pass laws.
 Treaties with foreign states would no longer be ratified by parliament.
 The validity of the law was set at 4 years.
No new constitution was adopted during the rule of the Nazi Party.
 In fact, it continued to operate in 1919. The Weimar Constitution, which was officially repealed only in 1945. by the allies.
  1934 On April 1, 1945, after the death of President Ginderburg, the government passed a law unifying the post of Chancellor.
  This law was approved through a nationwide referendum, thus gaining the highest constitutional force.
  As a result, from August of the same year, Hitler was not only the head of the government, but also the commander of the armed forces, the representative of the country in foreign relations.
  He appointed officials, ministers, declared a state of emergency, granted amnesty, worked out the basic principles of the party-state worldview.
  In fact, A. Hitler managed to centralize the government in his hands.
  State order during Hitler's rule can be described by the unity of the notions of "state" - "party" and "Führer" 6.
  Hitler proclaimed the slogan of bipartisan էր state unity.
  All this explains the establishment of a totalitarian regime in the country, where the Nazi ideology ruled, persecution, dissent were punished, the formation of new parties was prohibited.
  German Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick to describe the ruling order correctly. "Modern Germany is neither a monarchy nor a republic. It is a leading state. "
Under the dictatorship, the Nazis set up the following bodies to govern the country: , The State Secret Police (better known as the Gestapo), • the main governing body of the Imperial Security, headed by Gimmler.
We consider it necessary to speak about the judicial system, which also underwent significant changes in this period.
 The highest judicial body of the Third Reich was the National Judicial Chamber, established in 1934.
 It investigated cases involving national treason, espionage, and other political crimes.
 The palace members were appointed by Hitler personally for a period of 5 years.
From here it becomes obvious that the court depends on the Reich leadership and that its decisions are predetermined.
 Some facts show that on the eve of World War II, the palace had already sentenced 225 thousand people, of whom 5,000 had been sentenced to death.
 In general, http created in this period.
//znaniya-sila.narod.ru/solarsis/zemlya/earth_21_06.htm. The courts have much in common with medieval feminist courts (feminist courts were a secret system of courts established in Westphalia in the late 12th and early 13th centuries).
 Let us mention some of these commonalities: • Court decisions were not subject to appeal, • Judgments were carried out immediately, • There was a secret police, which operated by maintaining direct contact with judges.
 In the Holy Roman Empire it was the so-called jury court, and among the Nazis it was the Gestapo, etc.7.
The only significant difference between these two judicial systems was that the feminist courts heard cases related to religious crimes, while the National Judicial Chamber, as noted, dealt with cases of high treason, espionage, and other state crimes.
 Thus, the step of the German judicial system from the achievements of world legal thought becomes obvious.
Hitler's dreams of purifying the national gene and uniting the nation eventually led to his expression of extreme nationalism.
 Already in 1935 The "Nuremberg Laws" on "Reich Citizenship" and "Protection of German Blood" were adopted.
 Reading the content of the laws, their anti-Jewish, highly chauvinistic orientation becomes obvious.
 An example is Article 2 of the Reich Citizenship Act, which states that a Reich citizen is a German or a blood relative who has demonstrated by his or her conduct that he or she is ready to serve the German nation, the Reich.
Citizenship is granted through the issuance of a Reich citizenship certificate.
  Only the citizen of the Reich possesses all the political rights granted to him by law8.
The content of the mentioned norm is almost the same as in 1920. with the 4th point of the "25 points" program presented in February. "Only a person who belongs to the German nation can be a citizen of the state.
Only a person who has German blood in his veins, without religious discrimination, can belong to the German nation.
 That is why the Jews cannot belong to the German nation. ”
The Law on the Protection of German Blood արյան Honor forbade marriages between Germans and Jews (Article 1), Jews were forbidden to raise the Reich flags or to wear national flags (Article 4), and so on.
 In fact, we can conclude that A. For 15 years, Hitler carried out a very purposeful activity to formally implement his anti-Semitic, extreme chauvinist ideas in his life.
Inadvertently, the above-mentioned laws are reminiscent of the public order of some countries of the ancient world, where also only the nationalist representatives could fully enjoy their political and civil rights.
  In fact, Hitler restricted the civil liberties not only of the Jews, but also of the representatives of his nation.
 As an example, we can cite the result of German remarriage to Germans, the fact that pure German women under the age of 35 could not work in Jewish households10.
 In other words, the principles proclaimed by Hitler were simply a setback from the achievements of world legal thought, as in Germany in 1919. from the democratic provisions of the Weimar Constitution.
Astghik Khudinyan GERMAN STATE ORDER AND LAW DURING THE NAZI DICTATORSHIP Keywords: Nazi party, anti-Semitism, one-party seizure of power, non-legal laws Summary.
