THE STRUCTURE OF CARLOS THE GREAT POWER After the fall of the Roman Empire (476 AD), the European continent fell into a dark age.
 Lawlessness and disorder prevailed throughout the European continent.
 In fact, the Eastern Roman Empire (capital Constantinople) continued to exist in the East, and the West was divided into multiethnic, with different systems of government, from small to medium-sized states.
 The least alive of those states was the Frankish state.
  After the death of King Pippin the Short (768), the kingdom was divided between his two sons, Charlemagne.
 After his death in 771 CE, all power passed to Charlemagne.
 After many victorious wars, Charlemagne extended his rule over much of Western Europe.
  Thus, in 773-774. The kingdom of the Langobards was conquered in northern Italy, then the duchy of Bavaria.
 770s The Franks subjugated the West Saxons, the Westphalians and the Ostfals.
 778 Charlemagne invaded Spain and reached Zaragoza.
  After a long war, Northern Spain was captured with Barcelona as its capital.
 In 772-804, after nearly 30 years of struggle, Charlemagne conquered Saxony, followed by Bavaria.
  In all, about fifty raids were organized, thirty of which were led by the emperor himself.
  The aim of the long-term strategy of the invasions was to achieve them in every way possible, as Charlotte the Great, who later depended largely on their victories, would later become emperor.
 There was a high military discipline in the armies of Charlemagne, which was extremely important for securing victories.
 In fact, as a result of these conquests, much of Western Europe came under French rule, which with its territory almost corresponded to 2 Ibid., P. 692. Khan of the Western Roman Empire.
  Thus, as a result of the Carlos the Great invasions, the enlarged Frankish state gained opportunities to become an empire.
  In fact, the title of king was no longer enough for the king of France.
  Now it was necessary to use every opportunity to win the title of emperor.
At the same time, in 799. Pope Leo III was attacked by his political opponents.
  Charlemagne rushed to the rescue, defeating and arresting the latter3.
  800 Charlemagne went to Rome with the rebels, who were executed by the pope.
  A few days later, on December 25, during the Christmas ceremony, Pope John III crowned Charlemagne in St. Peter's Basilica. As the king was on his knees in prayer, the pope suddenly placed the crown on his head.
With this, Charlemagne and John III strengthened their mutually beneficial cooperation.
 Many scholars believe that the coronation was symbolic.
 However, there is no doubt that Leon provided the military protection of the papal throne with the Third Order; Charlemagne understood that the church needed to unite the various Germanic tribes under its rule, to spread its influence over those tribes, and to revive the Roman Empire և infrastructure,, which were its main objectives.
 The coronation of Charlemagne by the pope resulted in military support, and Charlemagne gained the power to revive the Roman Empire in medieval Europe.
  The coronation affirmed the independence of the emperor from God ընտր's pope.
 Thanks to the coronation of Charlemagne, both the pope and the king gained power in their respective roles.
  Thus a new empire was established in the West, which was destined to establish a European identity.
In fact, in solving his main problem, which is to be proclaimed emperor, Charlemagne had to deal with the internal affairs of the empire, which is the most difficult thing - to govern.
 The king, who, while perfectly expanding the borders of his country, continued to pursue his inner life with the same determination, for the sake of his country.
The Romans had laws, an education system, roads, trade. In a broad sense, the structure of civilization was solved by them.
 So Charlemagne had to figure out how to rebuild the structure of that society, which was to be based on the ancient Roman structure that would govern the vast empire.
 One of the ways was to educate the society. "This was the key that would open the door to Christian culture."
 Thus, scholars from various parts of the world began to flock to the Frankish state of Carolingia (named after Charlemagne).
  The biographer of Charlemagne Einhard wrote: "He" pursued "the free science scholars; he kept the books under his pillow; as soon as he had free time, he started writing."
Charlemagne sought to return Latin to his classical horse, as it underwent many changes, becoming local dialects that formed the basis of modern French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and other European languages.
  Latin was to become the official language of the church-state, and dialectal versions were to be the spoken language.
  To accomplish this, the emperor established schools throughout the country.
 Writing houses were established, where old manuscripts were copied.
  The number of manuscripts increased greatly during the Carolingian period (if 500 were preserved from 400750, then 7000 manuscripts from 750-900).
  The biographer of Charlemagne Einhard, speaking about the difficulty of that work, says: "Three fingers write, while the whole body works, և as much as it is pleasant for a sailor to reach a port, so it is for a transcriber to write the last word of the last line."
 The writing system was adjusted, which contributed to the increase of readability.
 Thus, the Carolingian Renaissance was a glimpse into the past, especially the culture of Roman Cyrus.
  This was a new revival of Western European culture.
Despite its enormous size, the empire of Charlemagne was a fragile state structure with a diverse ethnic composition.
  It was mainly due to his own reputation that it was possible to maintain the integrity of the empire, in which the royal power was paramount. work.
was.
 Power և instructions were sent to the vassals from the center9.
As we can see, in this system, the vassal standing closer to the palace was the primary link between the central "local self-government".
  The administrative officer in charge of each district was responsible for that district.
 In other words, there was always a real danger that these officials could become stronger և in time to threaten the imperial government.
 So Charlemagne created a special group (missi dominici) to oversee their activities.
The emperor kept a group of elite fighters (vassidominici), which was his "parade", the main tool for controlling the riots.
  In fact, not having a clear system of government for a huge power, the emperor still had leverage to establish power.
Although he managed to establish good relations with the outside world, to succeed in all diplomatic negotiations ("Keep the Franks as a friend, but not as a neighbor" 10), the situation was unstable in his own country.
  Each of the conquered tribes and peoples, face to face with the emperor's sovereignty, had their own customs within which they followed.
Caesar's conquests aroused the displeasure of the Carolingian peoples, so the emperor could not control them without the use of military force.
 That is why he was constantly on the move, moving in the direction where there was a real threat.
 This means that the recognition of his power by the ethnic circles of the empire was purely formal.
  In fact, the reforms carried out by the emperor greatly contributed to the development of culture and economy, but were not able to prevent the collapse of the empire a few years after the death of Charlemagne, which means that the lack of a central control mechanism gradually led to further collapse of the empire.
Anahit AvagyanCARLOS THE STRUCTURE OF THE GREAT POWER Keywords: The result of the invasions of Charlemagne, being proclaimed emperor as
axis of church-state relations
Summary.
