MONETARY POLICY IN ARMENIA. FROM THE ORIGIN TO OUR DAYS1 Monetary policy is one of the most important components of the state regulation of the economy, արդյունավետ its effectiveness is crucial for the sustainable development of the economy.
 This year marks the 20th anniversary of the implementation of monetary policy in Armenia.
  Two decades is not a long time compared to the domestic experience of other countries with a market economy, but that period in Armenia was quite rich and diverse.
  1994 Since the implementation of the first monetary policy program, it has been possible to curb high inflation rates in a short period of time, not allowing the deepening of catastrophic consequences.
  In the following years, the Central Bank of Armenia managed to create a well-established monetary policy system, to ensure macroeconomic stability along with economic growth.
  In recent years, the monetary policy of the Republic of Armenia has entered a stage of development, which must be continuous.
The implementation of the RA monetary policy can be divided into four main stages.
 Each of them has features, achievements and challenges.
  Let us touch upon each of them separately.
First phase. Period of formation of preconditions for the implementation of monetary policy (until 1993).
 1991 With the independence of the Republic of Armenia, the process of transition from the planned to a market economy began, during which inflation was redefined as an economic category.
 Inflation was not typical of a planned economy, so there was no need to pursue an anti-inflationary monetary policy in a planned economy.
  The vivid evidence of that is the fact that in 1950 1990 compared to the base year Not only was there no inflation in Armenia, but there was a deflation of 10.8% (see Figure 1).
On the other hand, inflation is the constant companion of the market economy, a characteristic component of it.
  That is why there was a turning point in the importance of inflation in the transition to market relations, which required a fundamentally new approach to it - the introduction of effective structures to combat it.
It was during the initial period of transition that inflation in Armenia took on the heaviest possible form.
 This was due to two possible circumstances, the first of which was the late introduction of the national currency.
  1991-19931 Dedicated to the 20th anniversary of the implementation of monetary policy in Armenia.
year The collapse of the ruble zone began,։ The CIS countries began the process of introducing their national currency.
 At the same time, the Soviet ruble, which was pushed out of circulation by those countries, began to flow to countries where the ruble was still a legal tender, including Armenia, which was the last of the former Soviet republics to introduce its national currency.
 This led to a significant accumulation of cash rubles in Armenia.
  The second circumstance was price liberalization, which together with the first circumstance caused unprecedented hyperinflation1.
 The peak of inflation came in 1993, when prices rose about 110 times (see Figure 2), which was one of the highest in the post-Soviet space.
Chart 1. Inflation dynamics in Armenia in 1950-1990.2 Chart 2. Consumer price index in Armenia (%) 1991-1994.3 Inflation had a negative impact on the socio-economic situation in Armenia.
 The population's savings of billions of dollars were devalued in 1990-1994. Nominal incomes increased 1367, consumer prices - 22111 times, leading to a 16-fold decrease in the purchasing power of the population4.
1 See A. Mkhitaryan, The Need for Reconstruction of the Banking System in Transition փուլ Stages of Implementation, Yerevan, 1998, pp. 11-12.
2 See "Price Indices in the Republic of Armenia, 1992-2002", NSSRA, Yerevan, 2003, pp. 32-33.
3 See "Peculiarities and Stages of Economic Reforms in Armenia in 1991-1998", NSS, Yerevan, 1999, p. 27.
4 See "Armenia's Social Image - Poverty in 2001", NSSRA, Yerevan, 2002, p. 10.
In addition, the hyperinflation was conditioned by the unfair process of the privatization process, when the new owners of the privatized enterprises acquired large objects, expensive equipment և structures at symbolic prices reflected in the book value1.
In such conditions, the implementation of monetary policy became a historical necessity.
  The latter was first fixed in 1993. According to Article 3 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, adopted by the Supreme Council on April 27, 2006, monetary policy became one of the main functions of the Central Bank2.
However, the Soviet ruble was still circulating in Armenia, which did not allow for an independent monetary policy.
1993 The Armenian dram was put into circulation in the territory of the Republic of Armenia on November 19, 2012 by the decision No. 15 of the State Commission for Regulation of Money Circulation of the Republic of Armenia3.
 With the introduction of the national currency, for the first time in the history of Armenia, real bases were created for the implementation of an independent monetary policy.
The second stage. The period of the beginning of monetary policy (1994-1995).
  Inflation management became one of the priorities of economic policy.
 1994 The Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia developed the first monetary policy program, according to which the main goal of the monetary policy was to create monetary and financial conditions conducive to the stability of the dram արդյունավետ the efficient operation of the economy4.
The implementation of monetary policy required a well-defined strategy, as in a market economy, central banks, having the ultimate goals set, do not have direct leverage to influence them.
  That is why a monetary policy strategy is adopted, the course of which is presented in line. In 3.
  After selecting the final goal, the Central Bank selects certain indicators - intermediate goals (nominal anchor), which directly affect the final goal, contribute to its realization.
  However, even the intermediate goals do not have a direct impact on the Central Bank's monetary policy instruments.
 That is why the Central Bank chooses another set of indicators - operating targets, which are more sensitive to monetary policy instruments; are closely related to intermediate targets5.
 The exchange rate, monetary aggregates վող projected inflation can be an intermediate goal of monetary policy.
 Accordingly, there are three main strategies of monetary policy: exchange rate targeting, monetary aggregation targeting, and inflation targeting.
1 See "Peculiarities of Pre-Initial Capital Accumulation, Wealth and Income Loading և Settlement Issues in the Transition Economy of the Republic of Armenia", Yerevan, 2011, p. 14.
2 See RA Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, 1993.
3 See About the Central Bank of Armenia, History, Developments of the Financial-Credit System of Armenia. https:
//www.cba.am/en/SitePages/achfinancialbankingsystem.aspx 22.03.2014.
4 See Republic of Armenia 1994 monetary policy program.
5 See Mishkin F., The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets, 7th ed., Prentice Hall, 2004, pp. 414-416.
Figure 3. Monetary Policy Strategy 1994 In Armenia, the monetary aggregation targeting strategy was adopted as a monetary policy strategy.
Under this, the intermediate goal is the money supply, which is managed by the Central Bank through an operational goal, the money base.
 The adoption of this strategy had no alternative in Armenia, as the policy of targeting the exchange rate, which was the only possible alternative, could not be applied due to the lack of foreign exchange reserves in the country.
The application of the monetary aggregation targeting strategy in Armenia was quite effective and allowed to control the extremely high rates of inflation.
  Already in 1995 Armenia became the second lowest (32.2%) and in 1996 the lowest inflation (5.7%) among the CIS countries (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Consumer price index in the CIS countries (%) 1995-1996.1 Third phase. Monetary policy development period (1996-2005).
 1996 The second law "On the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia" was adopted, according to which "the main task of the Central Bank of Armenia is to ensure price stability in Armenia… և if other problems of the Central Bank contradict the main problem, the Central Bank gives priority to the main problem և by necessity ”2.
 Thus, the final goal of the monetary policy in the Republic of Armenia was defined, that is, to ensure price stability, which in 2005 With the constitutional changes that took place, it was raised to the constitutional level3.
1 Based on the IMF database, see http.
//www.imf.org/.
2 See RA Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, 1996.
3 See RA Constitution, Article 83.3, point 1.
A significant step forward was that monetary policy was now to be implemented only through the use of indirect instruments, while the first law provided for the possibility of using rather harsh direct instruments, such as restrictions on lending, interest rates, and commissions1.
  Restrictions on lending were implemented, setting the minimum interest rate at 360%.
  Although these tools made it possible to curb high inflation rates, their use could not be over 2.
The implementation of monetary policy through open market operations and permanent opportunity instruments was a serious step towards the establishment of monetary policy in Armenia3.
Board of the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, 1996 The decision was established as a floating currency by the decision No. 122 of July 19, 2006 "On the principles of the monetary policy of the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia".
 From that moment it can be considered that the strategy of targeting money units was fully implemented in Armenia4.
1998-2006 Under this strategy, the average inflation in Armenia was 2.4% (see Figure 5).
 Thus, due to the established monetary policy, along with double-digit economic growth, stable prices ensured macroeconomic stability and economic development.
Figure 5. Consumer Price Index in Armenia (%) 1998-2006.5 Money aggregation targeting strategy continued to cause problems during monetary policy implementation.
  The core of this strategy is that the Central Bank must achieve its main goal - price stability in one way, targeting money units, ensuring the program indicators of the latter.
 However, do not 1 See the RA Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, 1993.
2 See Banking, chap. Editor: B. Asatryan, Yerevan, 2004, pp. 160-161.
3 For the implementation of monetary policy in Armenia, the mandatory reserve method is also used, which, however, is not formulated as an instrument of monetary policy, but as an economic norm.
4 See "Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia forecasting and policy analysis system", Central Bank of Armenia, 2010, p. 9.
5 Based on the CB statistical database, see https.
//www.cba.am/Storage/AM/downloads/stat_data_arm/6.CPI_monthly-armenian.xls.
Due to a number of factors (fluctuating behavior of money demand, structural changes in the money supply in conditions of high dollarization, the impact of non-monetary factors on inflation, external shocks, etc. 1), it was very difficult to provide software indicators for money units.
  The main factor was the volatility of the demand for money, which was conditioned by the structural shifts in the banking system of the Republic of Armenia, the high growth rates of crediting volumes, the decrease in the level of dollarization along with the dram devaluation, the high growth rates of remittances, etc.2.
 As a result, the demand for money became highly volatile and, consequently, difficult to predict.
 And since 1997 Every year since the beginning of the year, the RA National Assembly has fixed the level of inflation that the Central Bank should have achieved as a result of monetary policy in Article 4 of the Law on State Budget. The Central Bank has always resorted to discretion, preferring to ensure the program level of inflation at the expense of money. Ensuring target indicators for units.
 As a result, the latter often needed to be reviewed by the Central Bank, which significantly affected the financial system, economic entities and public confidence in the monetary policy.
Figure 6. Programmatic-actual growth rates of money supply by year-end (%) 1997-2005.3 As shown in Fig. From 6, the actual indicators of money supply growth mostly went beyond the program indicators.
 In particular, in 1997-2005. The deviation of these indicators was 12.6% on average during the year.
Thus, the money supply did not necessarily meet the two possible criteria of the intermediate goal of monetary policy: the existence of a close connection with the end goal կա is fully available by the Central Bank 1 See "Statement on the adoption of the inflation targeting strategy by the Central Bank of Armenia". https:
//www.cba.am/Storage/AM/downloads/kanon/1_gnach_haytarar.pdf.
2 See "Rationale for Adoption of Inflation Targeting Strategy by the Central Bank of Armenia". https:
//www.cba.am/Storage/AM/downloads/DVQ/npatakadrum%20hajeren.pdf.
3 See "System of Forecasting and Policy Analysis of the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia", Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, 2010, p. 11.
manageability.
 Under such conditions, there was an objective demand for the development of monetary policy.
The fourth stage. period of monetary policy development (2006 to present).
  In terms of system development, either exchange rate or inflation targeting strategies could serve.
  The transition to an exchange rate targeting strategy in Armenia was inexpedient due to the following factors: 1. • The implementation of an independent monetary policy would become impossible, which would make the Armenian economy vulnerable to external shocks.
• A possible advantage of this strategy is the neutralization of inflation expectations, which is not a significant problem in the case of Armenia.
• There is no effective currency.
 The US dollar cannot serve as such, as Armenia's main economic partners are Russia and the European Union, and if the dollar starts to depreciate against the ruble or the euro, Armenia will find itself in serious economic difficulties, unable to give an adequate response.
  It is inexpedient to strengthen the dram against the ruble, taking into account the volatility of the ruble (for example, due to fluctuations in oil prices), as well as the existence of a higher inflationary environment in Armenia than in Russia.
• As the development and implementation of monetary policy is determined by the "impossible trinity", according to which the country can provide only a combination of free capital flows, price and exchange rate stability, in the case of Armenia the choice leads to an inflation-exchange rate dilemma.
 It is clear that the restriction of capital flows from the point of view of the development of a destructive clinic is even practically impossible (for example, it is impossible to imagine the imposition of a tax on private remittances).
 And since the sacrifice of price stability will be illegal, even unconstitutional, from this point of view, the exchange rate can not be used as a nominal anchor of the monetary policy strategy.
Thus, the only effective solution in terms of monetary policy development was the transition to an inflation targeting strategy.
  In the created conditions, the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia announced the 2006 The adoption of a transitional regime of inflation targeting on January 1, 2012, the end result of which should be the transition to a full-fledged inflation targeting policy.
Under this strategy, the intermediate goal of monetary policy is the projected level of inflation, which is managed through an operational goal - a short-term interest rate.
In addition, as a secondary operational goal, the cookbook base is still maintained.
  Thus, under the new strategy, the monetary policy is aimed at eliminating the deviations between the projected levels of inflation.
  The refinancing rate was set as the main instrument of monetary policy, and the program level of inflation was set at 4 ± 1.5% (3% in 2006).
The transition to an inflation targeting strategy had a positive impact on the development of monetary policy in the Republic of Armenia. 1 See "Rationale for the adoption of an inflation targeting strategy by the Central Bank of Armenia". https:
//www.cba.am/Storage/AM/downloads/DVQ/npatakadrum%20hajeren.pdf.
in a number of directions.
  Unlike the previous strategy, the core of which is M. Friedman's principle "Inflation is always a monetary phenomenon everywhere" was used, then a wide range of factors determining inflation is considered, the problem of "time mismatch" is solved, as inflation expectations are significantly reduced.
  In addition, the transition to an inflation targeting strategy contributed to the introduction of a new monetary policy decision-making process, a significant improvement in the analysis and forecasting system, an increase in the Central Bank's accountability and transparency, and an increase in the level of publicity.
 The above-mentioned factors play an important role in increasing public confidence in the Central Bank, which is one of the most important guarantees for the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The transition to an inflation targeting strategy and its implementation in Armenia was not without its problems.
 The main problem is the underdevelopment of the financial market.
 No less important are the imperfections of the transfer mechanisms, the existence of some fiscal supremacy, the lack of a complete inflation model, the uncontrollability of asset prices, and so on.
The further development of monetary policy must be a continuous process.
  In particular, it should address issues related to inflation targeting strategies, as well as reducing the impact of non-monetary factors on inflation.
  The implementation of the latter in many cases is beyond the powers of the Central Bank, which means that the effective participation of other state bodies in this process is necessary for the effective management of inflation.
Jirayr Mkhitaryan MONETARY POLICY IN ARMENIA. FROM THE ORIGIN TO OUR DAYS Keywords: inflation, monetary policy, inflation targeting, targeting money units.
