FACE THE INDEPENDENT PROBLEMS OF THE INVESTIGATIVE ACTIVITY The investigator performs different actions of different nature in order to complete his / her tasks in a timely manner.
  Of particular importance in all actions is the collection of evidence, as evidence underlies the indictment ումների decisions made by the investigator.
The actions aimed at gathering evidence are called investigative actions; they have a number of characteristic features, in particular: a) the investigative action carried out during the investigation of the case is made by the investigator, in other words, based on the specific circumstances of the case, the investigator decides when to carry out the action. (b) The investigative action may be carried out only for a specific purpose, if there are sufficient grounds for its implementation.
The RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), as well as other investigative actions, defines confrontation.
 The primary purpose of the latter is to collect, verify and evaluate evidence.
According to Article 216 of the Code, "The investigator has the right to confront two pre-interrogated persons whose testimonies contain significant discrepancies."
 A prerequisite for a confrontation is the existence of significant discrepancies between the testimonies, therefore, if there are none, then a confrontation cannot take place.
 Conflicting information about the same circumstance (event, facts, phenomena), which is essential for the correct resolution of a criminal case, can be considered as a basis for conducting a confrontation.
  In fact, the law prohibits the conduct of confrontation in the absence of substantial contradictions, when it is carried out in order to strengthen the testimony of one of the participants.
 In the absence of contradictions, the repetition of testimonies given in the presence of each of the persons previously questioned may not have probative value, as they do not contain any new information13.
 The question of whether the discrepancies in the testimony are really significant or not is decided by the investigator based on the circumstances of the case և the importance of those circumstances on the outcome of the case, as significant discrepancies are not defined by the Code.
In fact, the investigator largely determines the existence of significant discrepancies in terms of more or less probability.
  However, the law provides for the need for the investigator of each criminal case to find out the circumstances (subject of proof) to be proved, and contradictions are possible in the case of the subject of proof14.
  Significant contradictions exist when the testimonies are mutually exclusive, and the fact or case of interest is essential in revealing the truth of the criminal case.
 According to G. A. According to Zorin, substantial contradictions must be of a fundamental nature, changing the assessment of the situation, affecting the essence of the qualification, terminating the criminal proceedings15.
  According to V. A. According to Orbaztsov, the contradictions that differ from each other and relate to the circumstances involved in the subject of the evidence are significant. ”16
  However, in our opinion, it is not right to restrict the subject matter only within the framework of the circumstances included in the subject matter of the criminal case.
 In a number of cases, it may be of tactical importance to resolve a non-evidence circumstance, such as insignificant circumstances related to the crime.
 Sometimes the clarification of the positions of the participants of the confrontation on insignificant circumstances gives an opportunity to 12 See Vardanyan A. J., Issues of prevention of false testimony ացման exposure, dissertation Ph.D. Scientific degree application, Yerevan, 2005, p. 148.
13 See Порубов Н. I., Tactics add to the precautionary consequences. M., 1998, p. 154.
14 See RA Criminal Procedure Code № HO-348 RA PA 1998.09.21 / 22 (55) 01.07.1998.
15 See Zorin G. A., Tactical Leadership Doprosa. M., 2001, page 11.
16 For details see Образцов В. А., Следованные действие, М., 2001, p. 159-160.
to assess the reliability and credibility of their testimony.
According to Article 216 of the Code, "The investigator is obliged to make a face-to-face if there are significant discrepancies in the defendant և another's testimony."
  It follows from this wording that in the event of a substantial inconsistency with the provisions of the Code, the conduct of the confrontation is the responsibility of the investigator, if the accused is at least one of the participants in the role.
 The suspect is not mentioned in this article17, that is, thus the investigator's possibilities in determining the most expedient moment of confrontation are expanded.
 The reservation of the responsibility to confront the investigator, in our opinion, has both positive and negative sides.
  A. Ժ. According to Vardanyan, the legislature has taken a more drastic step in the Code, as it is often inexpedient to use tactics when a defendant in a juvenile rape case denies his guilt. and the victim is not psychologically ready, he categorically refuses to face the accused.
  In this case, the investigator, guided by the requirements of the Code, is obliged to conduct a confrontation, which, of course, limits the scope of the choice of tactical tricks used to reveal the objective truth.
  There is an opinion in the legal literature that the confrontation in the above-mentioned example will be more effectively replaced by the double interrogation of the accused, combined with the successive presentation of the evidence of the victim այլ other evidence in the case.
Consequently, in not all cases of predicting the negative consequences of a confrontation with the participation of the accused, the confrontation is effective, therefore, such a sharp definition of the law often hinders the discovery and proof of the objective truth in the case.
 Criminal case studies show that in addition to the above case, it is tactically inappropriate to conduct a confrontation in the following cases as well: • In the case of a confrontation with defendants giving false testimony, as contradictory testimony 17 It should be noted that in the Moldova Criminal Procedure Code he the suspect.
will be matched և will grow into non-contradictory but again false testimony; in material, kinship or other dependence;
Thus, it can be said that there are situations in which significant contradictions can be maintained.
In the current Code, apparently, confrontation is the investigator's right and responsibility, while, for example, in Russia, as in Kazakhstan's criminal procedure codes, it is the investigator's right, not obligation.
 The Estonian Criminal Procedure Code also states that confrontation takes place if the existing contradictions cannot be resolved otherwise19.
  Therefore, we believe that in case of significant discrepancy in the testimony of the accused or another person, the investigator should not have the obligation to confront, because the "tools" of proof should be chosen by the investigator, as he bears the risk of proving the accusation in court.
 The legislator has given the opportunity to carry out proof with different "tools", and the investigator must make a choice, assessing the situation correctly, choose this or that version of the tactics.
 At the same time, it should be noted that a well-prepared, well-organized confrontation not only provides an opportunity to resolve differences in testimony, but also to identify new factual circumstances that are directly or indirectly relevant to the case.
It should be noted that the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) does not impose such an obligation on the investigator, 18 See A. Vardanyan. K., in the same place, page 152.
19 See Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Estonia, Chapter 3, Division 4, § 77.Confrontation, Passed 12.02.2003, RT I 2003, 27, 166, Entry into force 01.07.2004.
which follows from the following wording defined in Article 107: "The confrontation is the simultaneous interrogation of two people who were previously interrogated, in whose testimonies there are significant contradictions."
 A similar wording is found in the Latvian Criminal Procedure Code.
  We believe that such an approach is justified. Ելը Dismissal of the investigator's duty means that in the event of a substantial controversy, the investigator will not be obliged to conduct a confrontation, as "it may be completely useless if the respondents are limited to repeating previously given testimonies." , if during the confrontation a preliminary agreement is reached between its participants, as a result of which the participant who testifies in advance changes them or refuses to testify at all ”20.
  In case of being relieved of such a duty, the investigator decides whether there is an objective need to carry it out or not.
Of particular interest is the question of whether a confrontation should take place when the accused is exercising his right to remain silent and the witness or victim is testifying against him.
 This issue is very controversial in the legal literature.
 Some jurists suggest that this may be seen as two factual testimonies, between which there is a significant discrepancy, suggesting that the defense should be given the opportunity to question the person who testified against him.
 A similar position was expressed by the RA Court of Cassation (hereinafter referred to as the Court of Cassation), which states that "the preliminary investigation body has the right to conduct a face-to-face interrogation between the witness (accused) when the latter, exercising his constitutional right, refuses to testify."
  It gives a real և proper opportunity for the defense to interrogate the witness և to challenge the veracity of the factual information he has provided ”21.
 Such a position of the Court of Cassation is mostly based on the precedent decisions of the European Court of Human Rights.
 However, in our opinion, the right of the accused to remain silent should not be interpreted to his detriment. In that case, it turns out indirectly that since the accused does not testify, then yes 20 See Vardanyan A. K., in the same place, page 161.
21 See the decision of the Court of Cassation on Saribek Harutyunyan of 31 May 2014 in case No. EAKD / 0189/01/12, paragraph 30.
The carpenter insists that he is not to blame.
  The simulation of the Court of Cassation leads to the fact that the "testimony" or "non-testimony" of the accused is evaluated on one level, that is, there is a contradiction, and a significant one, in any case there is a need to confront.
  In our opinion, the presumption of innocence is violated here, as the accused is not obliged to prove his innocence.
 If the accused has not exercised his right to prove his innocence or if he has exercised but has not achieved the desired result, it cannot be interpreted to his detriment22.
  Therefore, giving the accused the opportunity to exercise the right to remain silent is not an end in itself, so in such situations, in our opinion, confrontation should not take place.
The next problem is that the Code creates the illusion of conducting a counterclaim in pre-trial proceedings, which, as such, is perceived as synonymous with confronting the investigative action.
 The apparent manifestation of the position of the Court of Cassation is that "the RA Criminal Procedure Code generally contains the right of the defense party to the counter-inquiry, as well as the legal mechanisms necessary for the implementation of the preliminary investigation stage."
 Here, too, the Court of Cassation refers to Article 216 of the Code, pointing out that a combined analysis of the cited norm of criminal procedure, as well as other provisions of the procedure for conducting face-to-face interrogation, shows that confrontation is an investigative action whose primary purpose is to obtain evidence. There are contradictions between the testimonies of the two persons. "
 Confrontation, on the other hand, is the only remedy at the pre-trial stage that allows the prosecuting authority to challenge a person who has testified against him or her, thereby securing Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention). the right guaranteed by Article 3 (d). "
  In particular, under Article 6 3 3 (d) of the Convention, "Everyone charged with a criminal offense has the following minimum rights: (...), 22 See RA Criminal Procedure, General Part, Textbook for Higher Education Institutions.
 Author group leader և editor G. Ghazinyan.
 4th edition with reprints. (1st edition, 2000, 2nd edition, 2004, 3rd edition, 2005, 4th edition, 2006), Yerevan, 4th edition, amended. և supplement., YSU Publishing House, 2006, page 163.
d. to question witnesses who testify against him or to have the right to be questioned by such witnesses; to have the right to call and question witnesses on the same terms as the witnesses who testified against him. "
The above-mentioned right is envisaged by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereinafter referred to as the Covenant), according to which everyone has the right to at least the following guarantees on the basis of full equality in the investigation of any criminal charge against him. (...), e. to interrogate or interrogate witnesses who testify against him; to ensure the appearance of witnesses who testify in his favor; to interrogate him under the same conditions as the witnesses who testify against him. "
According to Article 67 of the RA Constitution, “Everyone accused of a crime has: (...). 4. The right to interrogate persons who testify against him, such persons may be interrogated as if the persons testifying in his favor were summoned, interrogated under the same conditions as those who testified against him. ”
In fact, in the light of the Convention, in the light of the Covenant, the right of cross-examination is also provided for in the Mother Law.
 However, there is a real opportunity to make a counter-inquiry in line with the current regulations in the court, if the court ensures the presence of the relevant person, so the approach that the confrontation in the pre-trial proceedings "resembles" the counter-inquiry does not follow from the current regulations.
In our opinion, when we analyze the concepts of "counter-inquiry" և "confrontation", it is obvious that confrontation does not provide a counter-inquiry for the following reasons: a) in order to conduct a counter-inquiry, one must first know the testimony of the person, because the counter-inquiry is not an end in itself. We should try to find out the credibility of the testimony given through questions.
  And in case of confrontation, according to Article 216 of the Code, "the publication of the testimonies given by the participants of the confrontation during the previous interrogations is allowed only after they have given testimonies during the confrontation, after writing them in the minutes."
  It turns out that if you do not know what testimony was given, you can not ask questions, b) the confrontation is about a limited number of circumstances, and they are decided by the investigator, c) the questions that are asked are limited to the investigator's discretion.
  However, in case of a counter-inquiry, such a restriction does not apply.
 In this case, the defense is given the opportunity to receive answers to the questions posed.
The draft refers to the counter-inquiry in the chapter "Judicial deposition of testimony", in case of the application of which an opportunity is given to exercise the above-mentioned right.
  In particular, according to Article 306 of the Draft, "Testimony deposition is made in case of not having the opportunity to appear at the trial or on the reasonable grounds of not giving legal evidence during the trial, in order to ensure the proper receipt of testimony from that person."
  In this case, the person mentioned in the pre-trial proceedings is taken to court, մասնակից the depositors are given the opportunity to properly exercise the right of cross-examination, ie to ask questions in the same way as during the trial, և in this case there are no restrictions on questions.
  That is, in this case, the right to a fair trial is guaranteed. After all, “a person's conviction cannot be based entirely or decisively on the information provided by a person to whom an advocate had an adequate opportunity to ask questions.
 In fact, the European Court of Human Rights, in interpreting Article 6 3 3 (d) of the Convention, has stated once and for all that if at any stage of the trial the accused has not been given the opportunity to question the person who testified against him, he is deprived of the right to a fair trial. .
The analysis of the draft norms shows that a counter-inquiry can be carried out: • in pre-trial proceedings, ie at this stage of the trial, the accused is given the opportunity to ask questions to the person who testified, • in the case of a motion to deposit testimony, which is used when the person to testify 23 See Sadak և Others v. Turkey v. Turkey, judgment of 17 July 2001, Appeals 29900/96, para. 65.
24 See Unterpertinger v. Austria, judgment of 24 November 1986, Case No. 9120/80 31 31-33.
will not have the opportunity to appear, or there is a reasonable presumption not to testify legally during the trial.
Thus, such a fixation of the Draft, of course, allows to distinguish the concepts of "confrontation" and "counter-issue".
Nane Melkonyan SEPARATE ISSUES OF FACILITY INVESTIGATION ACTIVITIES Keywords: confrontation, pre-trial proceedings, tactics, interrogation, essential contradiction, counter-inquiry, deposition of testimony Summary.
