FEATURES OF THE INVESTMENT ENVIRONMENT IN THE EU MEMBER STATES The Eurasian Economic Union is an international integration economic union established in 2014 on the basis of the Customs Union of the Eurasian Economic Community. May 29, 2015 with the signing of the contract, which enters into force in 2015. January 1 1.
Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Armenia are members of the union.
 The goal of the EEU is to strengthen the economies of the member states, to strengthen their relations, to modernize the economy, to increase the competitiveness of these countries in the world market.
  The Eurasian Economic Union was established by an agreement signed by the Presidents of Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus.
  The contract defines the free movement of goods, services, capital and labor, implementation of a coordinated, agreed or unified economic policy.
 The total volume of the economies of the member states is more than 2 trillion US dollars, the volume of industrial production of the three states is 1.5 trillion US dollars.
Prospective integration result in the form of GDP in 2030 will amount to 900 billion dollars.
 The Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union is based on the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and protection of national interests.
2015 The Republic of Armenia officially joined the Eurasian Economic Union on January 2, 2006.
 One of the protocols to the EEU Treaty, Annex 16, deals with the implementation of services, trade, establishment, activities and investments.
This appendix sets out in detail the legal framework for investing in the recipient Member State 2, investment protection, compensation for investor damage, investor rights guarantees, transfer of investor rights, and settlement of investor disputes.
 All these issues are dedicated to regulating investment relations between the EEU member states, creating a more favorable investment environment.
 The concluded agreement does not limit the international economic integration agreements concluded by a member state with a third country, if they meet the pre-defined criteria3.
 These are: • Covers a significant number of service areas, such as obviously not excluding any of the issues related to the provision of services, establishment, activities, • Aims to eliminate existing discriminatory measures, prohibit the introduction of new ones, • Aims to establish services, establish and operate liberalization.
The Member State shall notify the EEU Member States of the conclusion of such an agreement within one month.
The provisions on investments under the EEU Treaty apply to all types of investments, starting from 1991. December 16 to 4.
 Under the agreement, each Member State ensures a fair ահ equal treatment in its territory with respect to the investment և activities of investors from other Member States.
1 EEU official website - page is available at http.
//www.eaeunion.org/?lang=am#about-history.
2 According to the Protocol, "receiving State" means the State in whose territory investments are made by investors of other Member States.
3 See EEU Treaty, Annex 16, page 18 (available at http: // www.
//www.translationcentre.am/pdf/Trans_ru/EVRAZES/Annex_16_am.pdf link).
4 See EEU Treaty, Annex 16, page 23 (available at http: // www.
//www.translationcentre.am/pdf/Trans_ru/EVRAZES/Annex_16_am.pdf) The current regime should not be less favorable than the established regime for investment activities carried out by national investors.
 The regimes for investments made by a Member State in that country should also not be less favorable than those of third country investors.
 It should be noted that each Member State, in accordance with its legislation, reserves the right to restrict the activities of investors of other Member States, as well as to establish and apply other exceptions to the national regime.
Each Recipient State shall guarantee to investors of the other Member States the right to use and dispose of for any purpose any income received by the Recipient State after fulfilling all its obligations under the legislation of the Recipient State.
Each Member State shall, in accordance with its legislation, guarantee և ensure the protection of investments made by investors of other Member States in its territory.
  Under the agreement, investors are entitled to compensation for damage, whether caused by civil unrest, hostilities, revolution, riot, state of emergency or similar situation in the territory of a Member State.
Investment disputes are settled through negotiations.
 However, if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiation, within 6 months from the date of written notification of the dispute, at the discretion of the investor, it may be submitted to the competent court of the receiving State for consideration of the dispute, by international commercial arbitrators under the Chamber of Commerce of any State. agreed.
 It may be known that the choice of investor in a court or arbitral tribunal is final, and any decision made by them is final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
It seems that quite favorable conditions have been created for the EEU member states to make investments.
  However, in addition to the legal regulation of investment activities, it is necessary to know what kind of investment environment is created in the given country.
 It is quite interesting for those investing in Armenia to know how the investment environments of the member states are indexed, what position these countries occupy in the world ranking list.
 Let's consider the investment environments in Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia separately.
The main document regulating investment activities in Belarus is the "Investment Code of the Republic of Belarus" adopted in 2001, according to which foreign investors have the right to establish a legal entity in Belarus without restricting the volume of investments.
  If the authorized capital of a legal entity includes a foreign investment of at least $ 20,000, the main purpose of which is the distribution of dividends to the participants, then such an organization may be recognized as a trading organization with foreign investments1.
According to the Investment Code, foreign investors can carry out investment activities in the Republic of Belarus under a concession agreement without the establishment of a legal entity2.
 Moreover, such an agreement may stipulate that the right to dispose of the produced goods belongs to the investor, who is obliged to pay the relevant taxes and state duties.
 In another case, according to the contract, the parties distribute the produced goods to each other until և և in this case the investor is partially exempt from taxes այլ other mandatory payments.
  There is a certain difference in the provision of services. The implementation of the relevant service, which leads to the production of goods as a result of that service, is the property of the Republic of Belarus, and the investor only receives a bonus.
There are currently 6 free economic zones in Belarus, where in order to operate, an investor needs to establish a legal entity in the Republic of Belarus.
 The directions of investments and activities in free economic zones are different. Includes furniture, food production, household chemicals, cosmetology. 1 Belarus investment code is available at http: // www.
//www.startbiz.by/open-biz/inostr-investor/invest-klimat-RB/.
2 Concession (Latin: Concessio - permission, concession) - a contract for the commissioning of natural resources, enterprises, other economic objects belonging to the state or municipalities under certain conditions.
production of materials, machine building, production of innovative technologies, etc.
  Note that in 2013 The volume of FDI was $ 2.16 billion 1.
  The main areas in which investments are made are metallurgy, construction, consumer goods, chemical products, mechanical engineering and healthcare.
 Belarus's oil, potassium nitrogen equipment, trucks, tractors, dairy products, meat and sugar have a large share in Belarus' exports.
 Mainly imported natural gas, raw materials necessary for chemical production, machinery.
 The main partner is Russia, which accounts for 40% of foreign trade.
Despite the legal conditions, the investment climate in Belarus may be viewed by foreign investors as uncomfortable.
 The reason for this is the rather low level of certain indicators characterizing the investment environment of the World Bank, the high level of annual inflation (12.2-month inflation in 2014 was 16.2%)
  The tax regime is quite strict, in which case a 20% VAT is added to the 20% VAT, a 3% tax for the development of the area after the profit tax is reduced, a 0.6% salary fund tax to avoid accidents.
The macroeconomic stability of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the main factor that makes the country attractive for foreign investments3.
 Such a conclusion was reached by international experts, by whom 84% of foreign investors mentioned this factor.
 Kazakhstan's economy has been growing steadily in recent years, are there any opportunities in 2015? to be included in the top three fast-growing economies.
 2013 Macroeconomic indicators confirm the above, in particular, the unemployment rate was 5.2%, inflation - 4.8%, in 2014. The country's GDP grew by 4.3% to 233.95 billion dollars4.
After the collapse of the USSR, an average of $ 5.41 billion in foreign investments are made in the economy annually. amounted to $ 9.74 billion 5.
In addition to a stable macroeconomic environment, foreign investors consider socio-political stability to be a key factor. - The Pacific region with the Middle East (Europe).
 Investors also point out weaknesses. In Kazakhstan, the growth of foreign investment may be hampered by insufficient potential for innovative technologies, low level of transparency and predictability of the business environment, level of transport infrastructure, open and flexible trade policy, with a strong bureaucracy) corruption).
The favorable investment climate in Kazakhstan is evidenced by the volume of foreign investments.
  According to official data, about $ 122 billion in foreign direct investment has been made since independence.
In general, experts predict that in the next 3 years, the majority of FDI volumes will go to the most developed sectors - the energy mining industry.
  Foreign investors make some of their investments in areas such as mechanical engineering, construction, metallurgy, consumer goods production, agriculture, and biomedical industries.
  The majority of imports are technologies և equipment, metal products, food.
Today, Kazakhstan occupies a leading position among the CIS countries with the involvement of FDI volumes. Foreign investment per capita is $ 1,300.
 Among the attractive countries for FDI involvement are the CIS countries (55.7%), Kazakhstan (36.4%), Belarus (11.8%), Azerbaijan (9.1%), Georgia (6%).
The favorable conditions for doing business testify to the fact that there are about 8000 companies with foreign capital, most of which 1 See National Bank of the Republic of Belarus (available at http: // www.
//www.nbrb.by/statistics/ForeignDirectInvestments/ link).
2 See Inflation in Belarus (available at http: // www.
with reference to //myfin.by/info/inflyaciya).
3 See Investment Attraction Research Kazakhstan, 2014, p. 12.
4 See Agency of the Republics of Kazakhstan for Statistics, 2014.
5 See First Foreign Investments (available at http: // www.
//ru.theglobaleconomy.com/Kazakhstan/fdi_dollars/ link).
"Siemens", "Microsoft", "Shron", "General Electric", "Coca-Cola", "Danon", "Henkel" are famous.
Reforms continue in the country, which can contribute to attracting larger amounts of foreign investment.
 It should be noted that the implemented state support applies equally to both national and foreign investors.
  The foreign investor is exempted from customs duties for the imported equipment for the implementation of his investment program.
 State grants are provided in the form of free provision of land, buildings, equipment, vehicles, vehicles, except for cars.
In recent years, Kazakhstan has seriously changed its tax policy by reducing taxes.
  Corporate profit tax has increased from 30% to 20%, VAT from 13% to 12%, which is one of the lowest VAT rates in the world, the social tax is 11%.
 To provide information to investors, there is a special website: www.invest.gov.kz, which provides investors with the necessary information և is regularly updated.
 It should be added that a similar address operates in Armenia: www.ada.am, where updates and new publications are made non-intensively, therefore, it can not be a necessary guide for potential investors.
The forthcoming reforms envisage that in case of investing at least $ 20 million in the economy of Kazakhstan, the foreign investor will be exempt from profit tax for 10 years, property tax for 8 years, and land tax for 10 years.
 It is envisaged that the state will participate in the implementation phase of the program in the amount of 30% of the expenses.
Legal regulation of foreign investments in the Russian Federation is carried out by the Law on Foreign Investments in Russia.
  The law provides for a wide range of guarantees and benefits for foreign investors.
  They guarantee the impartial settlement of disputes arising from unfavorable changes in the Russian legislation, the establishment of wide choices for foreign investors to invest, the transfer of rights and obligations to another foreign investor, the guarantee of rights to land, other natural resources, buildings, etc.
Despite these benefits, most analysts have recently noted the deteriorating investment climate in Russia due to declining international economic sanctions and international ratings.
  For this reason, analysts believe that in order to get out of such a situation, Russia must implement serious reforms, in particular, simplify the process of establishing new enterprises, attract foreign investment in key areas.
 2012 year. Russian President Vladimir Putin signed the decree "On long-term state economic policy", where it was particularly mentioned that until 2018. Russia should be included in the list of the top 20 countries in the "Doing Business" index.
 One of the primary reforms was the elimination of the requirement to create a notarized bank account for start-ups.
Nevertheless, the picture changed significantly in 2014. From the second quarter, due to the aggravation of tense relations with Ukraine and the tightening of economic sanctions against Russia.
  At present, the investment climate in Russia has registered a serious setback.
2014 In the first quarter, capital outflows from the country amounted to $ 50 billion, weakening the ruble, which led to high inflation in the country (inflation was 11.4% in 2014) 2.
  To stabilize the exchange rate of the national currency, the Central Bank spent significant funds from international reserves, which decreased from $ 509.6 billion compared to the beginning of the year to $ 486 billion (as of April 1, 2014).
 In addition, the volume of transactions in the Russian stock market was reduced by 15%.
 As a result, according to a recent survey by Bloomberg Markets Global Investor Poll, which involved traders, bankers and money managers, Russia was recognized as the least investment attractive of the world's eight largest economies.
 About 56% of the respondents think that these are the most unfavorable conditions for business, compared to the other 7 largest economies, and 45% even recommend selling Russian assets.
 Loans are becoming more expensive for Russian investors. The reason is 2014. Standard & Poors's 1 See Foreign Investments in the Russian Federation, July 9, 1999, № 160-FZ (available at http: // www.
//economy.gov.ru/minec/about/structure/depInvest/fz199920709).
2 See Central Bank of the Russian Federation, Inflation of the Necessary Ring, December 2014.
is the reduction of Russia's credit rating.
  The short-term rating of Russia in foreign currency was reduced from A3 to A2, the long-term rating in national currency, from BBB to BBB +, և the general situation was assessed negatively.
  Such downgrades have weakened the stock market.
The US Trade Representation (USTR), based on its own analysis, assessed the investment climate in Russia as unfavorable.
  American experts think that the steps and measures taken by the Russian government are insufficient.
 The report notes that foreign investors are confused by investment legislation, high levels of corruption, low trust in the Russian judiciary, poor protection of minority rights, administrative barriers, and poor corporate culture1.
 Problems include the low level of employment, the size of the shadow economy, which allows employers to reduce tax costs illegally.
  According to estimates, in 5-10 years the shortage of specialists, which is still a problem, will become chronic.
Russia in 2014 was not included in the list of 25 countries as the most attractive country for foreign investment2.
 2013 It was ranked 11th, in 2012 - 12th, and in 2011 - 11th.
  Such a decline in the position is explained by the unpredictable state policy of Russia, state intervention in the economy.
  Foreign investment in the Russian economy has decreased by about 70% or about 19 billion dollars.
 The main oil and gas companies of developed countries in 2014 have stopped investing in Russia 3.
At present, foreign investments are mainly made in the food industry - agricultural processing industry, wholesale trade - intermediary trade, financial activities, machine building, chemical - petrochemical industry, metallurgical industry, coal production, nuclear fuel production, etc.
 In the first quarter of 2014, the distribution of foreign investments was as follows: processing industry - 40.3%, transport - telecommunications - 16.8%, retail - wholesale - 27.8%, real estate investments - 9.7%, but - 5.4%.
 The establishment of new, special economic zones is very important; it is envisaged that the Crimean territory will be recognized as such.
 One of the first steps is to set VAT at 4% for ordinary goods and 2% for public goods.
  In January-September 2014, the largest investments in Russia from the CIS countries were made by Kazakhstan - 134 million dollars, Armenia - 16 million dollars, Belarus - 2 million dollars, Uzbekistan - 9 million dollars.
Referring to the indicators, let us note that according to the World Economic Forum "Economic Freedom 2015" index, the Republic of Belarus ranks 153rd among 178 countries with 49.8 points4.
  This point is 0.3 lower than the previous year's index.
  Indices such as freedom of investment, control over government spending, and fiscal freedom have declined by about half.
 2015 According to the data, the Belarusian economy is classified as a pressured economy.
 2014 Inflation was 18.3%. և The system of government is characterized as a state governed by an authoritarian system.
With this index, the Republic of Kazakhstan ranks 69th with 63.3 points.
 Compared to the previous year, the point has increased by 0.4.
 Indices of freedom of property and business have registered a decline.
  The strict fiscal policy pursued by the state, low taxes5, balanced monetary policy bring great economic benefits to the state.
According to the index of economic freedom, the Russian Federation ranks 143rd with 52.1 points, which is an increase of 0.2 compared to the previous year.
  Improvements were observed in such indexes as: business freedom, freedom from corruption, labor freedom.
  Inflation և unemployment rates in 2014 amounted to 1 See ренarenkov S., триtrikunova M., Investment Climate in Modern Russia, Economy and Modern Management.
2 See Kearney A., Foreign Direct Investment Confidence, US grows more attractive for foreign investment (available at http: // www.
//www.marketwatch.com link).
3 See United Nations conference on trade and development, World investment report, 20144 See WEF, 2015 index of economic freedom, 2015, p. 121.
5 Profit tax - 20%, VAT - 12%, Income tax - 10% for residents և 15% for non-residents.
respectively: 6.8% և 5.8% 1.
  Income tax is 13%, profit tax is 20%, taxes / AE index is 28.7%.
In the Corruption Perceptions Index 2014, Belarus ranks 119th out of 174 countries with 31 points, Kazakhstan ranks 126th with 29 points, and Russia ranks 136th with 27 points2.
Belarus was not included in the "Global Competitiveness Index 2014-2015".
 Kazakhstan ranks 50th among the 144 countries surveyed by this index with 4.4 points3.
  According to the polls, doing business in Kazakhstan is mostly hindered by the following factors: corruption - 16.7%, access to finance - 14.6%, bureaucratic hassles - 8%, inflation - 6.9%, etc.
According to this index, Russia is in the 53rd place with 4.4 points4.
  The worst indicator in the studied spheres is the financial market development index, by which Russia is 110th in the world.
  Despite all this, it ranks 7th in the market.
  According to the polls, doing business in Russia is most hindered by the following factors: corruption - 14.3%, tax rates - 12.3%, access to finance - 11.7%, tax administration - 10.8%, bureaucratic hassles - 8.2%, inflation - 7.6% .
The next most important indicator is the Doing Business annual report published by the World Bank, which assesses the ease of doing business in different countries.
 Through the summary table, we will present the assessments of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia according to 2015. of the report (See Table 1).
The fall in world commodity prices and the reduction of remittances from Russia make the issue of the stability of the economies of the CIS countries quite risky.
  The Armenian economy is highly dependent on copper exports, the volumes of which are quite resilient to international prices, and in the medium term, copper exports are expected to decrease.
 It is noteworthy that Russia is the main export market for goods from the CIS countries, as well as the main source of cash flows and the involvement of FDI5.
The increase in the share of public debt և problematic և doubtful loans in bank loan portfolios can also cause additional complications.
 In particular, the large amount of public debt can increase the sensitivity of the economy to external financial conditions և exchange rate fluctuations.
In order to withstand external economic shocks, each government needs to properly assess the expected risk levels and, accordingly, develop an appropriate prevention and development plan.
Table 1. Estimates of the EEU member states according to DB-2015 EconomyRussian FederationYear 2015 Change: Republic of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, 2015 Change: Republic 2015 Change: Republic 2015 Change: Ease of Doing Business Starting / Registering / Obtaining a Building PermitAccessibility of ElectricityRegistrationRecording to Investors NOT CHANGED NOT CHANGED NOT CHANGED PROTECTION 1 See WEF, 2015 index of economic freedom-Russia, 2015, p.
2 See WEF, Corruption perception index 2014.
3 See WEF, World competitiveness report 2014-2015, p. 230.
4 See WEF, World competitiveness report 2014-2015, p. 319.
5 See World Bank group, A cloudy outlook of Armenia, 2014, p. 24.
Payment of TaxesFrequency of Border TradingContract ImplementationSolvency AnalysisNot ChangedNot ChangedNot ChangedIf we try to generalize the prospects for a favorable investment climate within the three countries, we can note that there is a need for Increasing the number, ensuring full judicial independence, development of active and realistic investment attraction programs, implementation of anti-corruption programs.
Thus, the main indicators that characterize the investment environment of the given country were considered.
 Despite the less favorable investment climate in individual EEU member states, we must not forget that the EEU as a whole can provide a wide range of opportunities for investors in one country, as well as a unified settlement system will allow national and foreign capital to flow more freely and flexibly. First of all, the corresponding economy benefits.
 This new union with a market of 170 million consumers can be a new impetus for economic revival.
Nairi Chagharyan FEATURES OF THE INVESTMENT ENVIRONMENT IN THE EEU MEMBER STATES Keywords: EEU, investments, investment environment
.
