RESULTS OF RESEARCH-CURRENT PHYSICAL FIELDS CARRIED OUT FOR SAFE OPERATION OF THE ANPP The territory of the Republic of Armenia is considered to be a highly seismically active area, therefore the operation of a nuclear power plant in its territory has a significant potential.
 From the point of view of the strategic energy security of the national economy, the nuclear power plant is considered one of the most important structures in the republic.
Since 1980, geological, geophysical and other comprehensive studies have been carried out in the area of ​​safe operation of the nuclear power plant.
  In particular, among the geophysical works, one can single out the regular studies carried out in the territory of the nuclear power plant from the chair of the Atom-Energy-Seismo Project, the National Academy of Sciences and the Department of Geophysics.
The presented work is dedicated to the results of the work entitled "Study of geophysical fields to clarify the seismic activity of the ANPP area", which consists of an introduction, the geological-geophysical characteristics of the ANPP area, the results of geophysical field research, and conclusions.
We have presented district 1.
Geological, tectonic schematic maps of the 50,000-scale geological, basalt surface area of ​​the nuclear power plant area, as well as the scheme of routine observations of the geophysical field.
For the study of the deep geological structure of the ANPP for the last 40 years, the Armenian Geological Survey, Grozneft and Gomelogeophysics geological organizations will carry out complex geophysical-geological studies for oil and gas exploration works in the Ararat Gogas region.
 During the works, 120 km of linear wells were drilled, some of which were up to 5 km deep [1-3].
] The 25 km radius of the NPP covers most of the Ararat valley, including the foothills of Mount Aragats volcano, the western suburbs, and part of the Yeghvard plateau.
Figure 1. Physical map of the Republic of Armenia և Artsakh The geological structure of the region has been described in detail in the works of numerous researchers.
 V. A. Aramyan has compiled a detailed geological map for the whole region (1).
50000), and after the corrections, after the additions, A. A. Gabrielyan, O. A. Sargsyan և E. Kharazyan formed the seismotectonic model of the region.
  And here is the data of 50 wells with a depth of 50 in the territory of the ANPP. Kharazyan formed the basalt ceiling of the area of ​​the main և secondary buildings of the nuclear power plant 1.
Map of 1000 scale (Figure 2) [1, 3].
Figure 2. Basalt roof map of the main և secondary building area The area of ​​the ANPP is almost completely covered by the Upper Pliocene Quaternary volcanic, lake-alluvial և young continental formations.
 In the Kasakh-Amberd deep sections, as well as in the Aniishrjan, beneath the Upper Pliocene lavas, medium-acid volcanic layers (tuff breccias, tuff conglomerates, tuff sandstones, tuffs, etc.) known as Oghjinyan are exposed.
Oligocene Miocene sand-clay and gypsum deposits are exposed in the south-east of the area.
 The Hoktemberyan stratum is of middle-upper Miocene age.
 In the area of ​​Parakar village, Upper Pliocene-Quaternary volcanic rocks are exposed, especially dolerite basalts, which are represented by angular disharmony in the lower Vlochaberd volcanic stratum and Upper Miocene sandstones [1, 5].
In the geological section of the ANPP area, Upper Proterozoic, Upper Cretaceous, Neogene, Paleocene, Lower Miocene, Middle Miocene, Lower Pliocene, Upper Pliocene, Middle and Upper Quaternary rocks are represented [1, 3, 4].
 In this area there is a separation of megablocks, blocks, their zones, which are more actively involved in modern movements.
  Seismic reconnaissance, gravity reconnaissance, GPS, magnetic reconnaissance drilling methods were used to solve these problems.
Based on seismic surveys in the study area, which is part of the Alpine-Himalayan zone, the geological structure of the territory of the Republic of Armenia is divided into a number of fractures in the Caucasus, which are located in the direction of the University of the Republic of Armenia. has created a "GPS" measurement network.
  This network has been selected in such a way as to be able to estimate the direction և velocity of the vector of active faults approaching the territory of the ANPP.
In 1998, 2000, 2003, GPS measurements were made at pre-selected points.
  In the summer of 2009, "GPS" measurements were made again to assess the possible displacement of the Earth և fault activity, for which 22 points were selected.
 The probable or apparent shifts of the Sardarapatistura structure were observed in the selected points, as well as the supposed stretch of the southern border of Shamiramiplato, the large faults of Aragats, the Yeghvard region, the shifts of the Yerjan faults and other structures.
 2009 2 GPS receivers (Lecia GRXI200 Series) were used during the measurements.
The "GPS" measurements of 1998, 2000, 2003 և 2009 made it possible to determine the speed of movement of the Pambak-Sjan, Garni և Javakhk faults.
 Based on the results, it was found out that the Aragats plateau and the Ararat valley are relatively stable, they do not move, while no other faults were found in the area of ​​the Yerkhanyan և Sardarapat faults.
  During the "GPS" measurements made in 2009, two identical GPS receivers were used - a new method of data processing, which reduces the degree of error of the received old data.
  The new method of processing was proposed by Dr. Philip Vernant Դ Eric Drofilinger (University of Montpellier).
The presence of faults in the vicinity of the nuclear power plant may increase the seismic risk.
  That is why, in order to avoid it, regular studies with geophysical complex methods have been used along certain routes.
It is known that under natural conditions, the earth's crustal rocks are under the stress of a different nature, which causes certain deformations.
  Changes in the physical properties of rocks (density, magnetic absorption coefficient, electrical video resistance, radioactivity) occur, as well as modern crustal movements of the earth.
  By modern movements of the earth we mean not only superficial vertical-horizontal movements, but also chemical, geological, tectonic processes that take place in the earth's crust, causing changes in the physical fields of rocks.
  The study paths of the geophysical field were chosen in the direction of intersection of tectonic structures.
Field observations were made with a certain frequency, with modern, high-precision instruments.
Comparing the data of the geophysical fields measured at the same points, but at different times, it was found that no changes in the gravitational-magnetic radioactive fields were registered in the studied area.
The results of the regular observations of the geophysical fields show that there are no modern movements of the earth's crust in the territory of the ANPP.
  The observed very small changes are within the limits of instrumentation accuracy, which once again proves that the nuclear power plant site has been selected in a very correct and stable area.
The above arguments allow us to make the following conclusions: • since the planet Earth is not inanimate և tectonically inanimate, it lives, it is constantly undergoing active physicochemical processes in its subsoil (decay of radioactive elements, under various effects of heating, cooling, cooling materials) geological-geophysical studies must be carried out continuously throughout the safe operation of the ANPP.
• To study the modern movements of the Earth's crust, the density and number of points should be increased by including the "GPS" method.
• In order to get complete information about the processes taking place in the upper layer, it is necessary to expand the study area so that the observation points are located in different geotectonic zones.
• To avoid the effect of temperature on the instruments used for field observations, it is advisable to carry out the work in the spring and autumn months, when the daily temperature fluctuations in the area are not large.
LITERATUREHayrapetyan Mary ANPP FOR SAFE OPERATIONS RESEARCH OF RESEARCH AND PHYSICAL FIELDS RESULTS Keywords: safe operation, transient, geographical
