NATIONAL IDENTITY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE PROCESSES OF WORLDWIDE When speaking about national identity, first of all, the phenomenon of identity must be clarified, in particular, its psychological interpretation.
 The term identity derives from the Latin word identitas (idem - the same as himself).
The brightest representative of identity psychology E. Erickson defines it as a sense of identity, of one's own identity, of one's integrity, of the longevity of the "I", as well as a sense of being part of larger systems, of being a member of them.
  It should be noted that self-consciousness is an important part of identity.
  This means that in addition to feeling, it has a cognitive component.
 Some scholars equate identity with the concept of "I", defining it as a set of human perceptions and attitudes towards it.
  Erickson states that the formation of identity presupposes a simultaneous process of reflection և observation that takes place at all mental levels, as a result of which the person evaluates himself դիտ by looking inside, և by internalizing the perceptions and imaginations of the people around him [1].
Distinguish between personal and social identities.
  Personality is formed as a result of a person's identity, while social identity is a person's sense of belonging to larger systems and being a part of them.
 It is about group, social identity, which presupposes the existence of the concept of "we" և group consciousness.
Another approach to identity belongs to analytical psychologist K. G. Jung.
 Jung presents the person with the archetypes that make up the content of the collective unconscious.
 Identity plays an important role in self-construction.
 Jung writes: "In each of us, from the moment of birth, there is an example of a personality, a pattern that we must become.
 It is this identity of ours… The circumstances of life և human endeavors that characterize only the symbolic context of identity, the degree of its "manifestation" և realization "[2].
 In the theory of archetypes, Jung defines identity as an archetype of the harmonious balance of the integrity of the person, the opposite sides.
 We meet symbols of identity in fairy tales, dreams, mythology.
  It is sometimes depicted with mandala or dao symbols as a symbol of dualism.
One of the most important forms of identity collectivity is national identity.
 Let's try to define the concept of "nation", to distinguish the national from the ethnic.
 A nation is a large social group, which presupposes a certain community of people with a common territory, language, culture, national spiritual features, as well as close economic ties.
 The nation is considered the highest form of development of the ethnos.
The functions of national identity are important in terms of the preservation and development of the nation, the preservation of the statehood, and the personal psychological stability of the individual.
 The national unity necessary for the existence of the nation, which is often aimed at preserving the state-territorial integrity of the nation, is possible only in the presence of the identity-cognitive-emotional components of the ethnic groups.
  Nation and national identity ensure the group affiliation of an individual, define value orientations, guide his thinking և behavior, give a sense of stability և security.
Through national identity, a person has a sense of identity with a superhumanly chronologically stable, eternal being, which gives him a sense of life, freeing him from existential neuroses.
  This was written by Freud, Fromm, Kոնիnigsberg, Weber.
  E. Fromm calls this "escape from freedom" [4], and Kոնիnigsberg writes that he identifies with his nation in order to avoid his ultimate existence, of transience, by moving to a realm that seems immortal.
Thus, national identity is a mental state formed as a result of a person's identification with his or her nation, which includes the realization of nationality, ethnonymy, wearing a national label, feeling of identity with one's own person, and positive emotional attitude as an emotional component.
 The most important part of the national identity is the cultural symbolic system that is considered a component of the nation's mentality: language, traditions, folklore, ethnic myth.
 Other possible factors are national-collective memory, perceptions of common ancestors and the past.
 From the point of view of mysticism, it can be said that national identity, as well as national affiliation, are characterized by conditionally determined attributes, which delimit the representatives of this or that nation according to cultural factors.
B. has such an opinion. Anderson.
 He writes that a nation is a society that is socially created, "depicted" in the consciousness of people who perceive themselves as a part of that "existing" group.
  In fact, the representatives of the nation have only a mental idea of ​​their unity, և these very ideas are the basis of the nation և national identity [6].
From the moment of its formation, the nation has played a significant role throughout history, providing one of the most important forms of identity.
 Today, in the social situation of postmodernism, many processes, structures and institutions have changed their ways of expression.
  The fundamentally new social processes taking place lead to the unification of world economic, political, cultural, religious integration, which is called "globalization".
Imanali writes that it is, first of all, a process of creating a unified global financial information platform based on new technologies.
Sociologist Jean Baudrillard, referring to the process of globalization, writes that democratization, freedom of information and its constant flow, being at first sight positive, constructive social processes, in fact have opposite tendencies.
  "The more information, the less it is in reality.
 When it is too much, it ceases to be perceived.
  "This is the paradox of globalization. Excess of information leads to misinformation, giving birth to entropy," Baudrillard wrote.
  Baudrillard writes about freedom ․ "Non-conditional emancipation, that is, the emancipation of everything և everyone, quickly brings the problem to a critical point, when by liberating the good, the evil is liberated, from this point of view, emancipation is not a moral step." [6]
 He compares globalization with the end of civilization, when national features are lost.
  Globalization also leads to social change such as cultural standardization, which is associated with the removal of barriers between different cultures.
 Libkind speaks of a phenomenon such as acculturation, which means the interaction of cultures.
 As a result of this process, the original models of cultures are broken. they seem to mix.
  The reactions observed by a person in such situations can be classified into four types: engagement, assimilation, segregation or marginalization.
The positive outcome is the involvement, the integration of cultural models in an integrative way, at the same time preserving the essential features of each.
Thus, in case individual cultures do not adapt to the world, do not integrate, they face the danger of extinction, and adaptation already presupposes assimilation and assimilation.
 The basis of the process of globalization is considered by many scientists to be the so-called westernization (rationalization), which is connected with the spread of US political, economic and information value principles.
As we see, the processes of globalization are influenced by the information and technological saturation of the time, the existence of global networks in all spheres.
  But what effect does it have on a person's mental identity, particularly ethno-collective identity?
  As we have already mentioned, the existence of we's not us, a clear demarcation is possible for identity.
The stability of those borders is a resource for the preservation of national identity.
It should be noted that this process of globalization և unification is sometimes received "differently" by different nations.
Citing the example of the Armenian ethnos, we can say that having a stable form of national collective concept, which has developed for thousands of years as a defensive response, the Armenian ethnos shows its strong resistance to the process of globalization.
 This is typical of other ancient countries, such as Japan, China, India.
  The ethnoprotective-ethnocentric features that form the basis of ethnic identity play a big role here.
  These are traditions, language, religion, family, education.
In particular, it should be noted that religion, being a powerful differentiating factor, is also a stimulus for the preservation of national roots.
 History shows that religion was one of the basic attributes of our identity when we had a state, our own territory, even writing.
 We can mention that it continues to perform that function to this day.
 For example, it is noteworthy that Armenian communities in the Diaspora retain their identity, especially in non-Christian countries, where, as a rule, the contrast is greater; the distinction between "we" and "them" is clearer than in countries with a Catholic or Orthodox religion.
 The existence of apostolic churches in such communities testifies to the mentioned fact.
The national psychological structure, the national character is passed down from generation to generation through such cultural factors as traditions, folklore, arts and crafts.
  Proverbs and sayings that seem insignificant at first glance say a lot about the identity of the nation.
 That is why the other possible way is to modernize them in order to preserve the national identity.
 The role of the family և education is great in this matter, as they are the primary institutions of socialization of the person.
  As we know, education has the most important function of cultural reproduction.
  Today, general education is subject to the process of globalization, which pursues the goal of intercultural communication.
 And finally, language, as an attribute of a nation's identity, is also subject to globalization.
 A vivid example of this is the presence of international terms in the vocabulary, the avoidance of which or the immediate translation into the native language reflects the tendency to resist globalization.
Thus, national identity responds to globalization in many ways.
 In some cases, complete assimilation takes place, the next extreme version is fundamentalization, which categorically excludes anything different from the national, universal.
 Such examples are Saudi Arabia and Iran.
  In some cases, the nation chooses modernization, preserving its national peculiarities, at the same time following the new world trends.
According to our analysis, the preservation of national identity is especially important in socially unstable conditions that can lead to an identity crisis.
 The role of the primary culture for the preservation of this important structure, which undertakes the preservation of the national spirit ումը the reproduction from generation to generation.
Globalization poses challenges in terms of national identity, with some risk of assimilation, but optimality has many positive effects not only on the economic and political development of the nation-state, but also on the transformation of its own culture through communication with cultures.
LITERATURE [1] Erickson J., Identity.
 юность и кризис.
 пер. с англ., Москва, انتشارтельская [5] Manusyan S., The social-psychological understanding of national identity, Theoretical-practical issues of YSU hand psychology, Yerevan, Asoghik Publishing House, 2016, pp. 179-92.
[8] Stefanenko T. G., Ethnopsychology.
  Учебник для вузов, 4-е изд., Испр. и доп., Boyajyan Araks NATIONAL IDENTITY OF THE PROCESSES OF WORLDWIDE Keywords: nation, national identity, globalization, culture, symbols, social identity, assimilation, acculturation.
IN THE CONTEXT.
