FEATURES OF PROFESSIONAL BURNING AND VICTORY FEATURES In psychology և in practice, "professional burn" is one of the topical issues that does not lose its relevance, especially along with technical, economic, social development.
  Due to such a rapid development, people's communication has become more intense and overloaded.
  On the other hand, in the modern competitive world, people are constantly in the struggle for professional growth, competence, improvement.
 In such conditions, people are required to have maximum concentration of forces, extremely high level of tension, intensive involvement of the whole mental sphere in the work sphere.
  Such consumption of own resources can not go unnoticed. In the best case, there is a rejection of all kinds of unrelated work-related needs, and then there is an emotional dullness;
Burning syndrome has been attracting the attention of researchers since the end of the 20th century.
  The term "emotional burnout" was introduced into psychology in 1974 by an American psychiatrist. By Freidenberger.
  The latter described this phenomenon as "burnout", which describes the psychological state of healthy people who, in the course of providing professional help, are in intense, intense communication, in an emotionally overloaded atmosphere.
Moreover, from the beginning, the number of specialists subject to emotional burnout was limited to employees of medical institutions and charitable organizations.
  R. Schwab (1982) expanded the scope of this group to include teachers, police officers, prison staff, political scientists, and lawyers15.
6 (41). - Novosibirsk.
 СибАК, 2014. Other psychological models view burnout syndrome as a result of work-related stress.
 The paradigm of professional stress analysis is based on R. The stress model proposed by Lazarus, which views stress as an individual way of adapting to difficult working conditions և, the main components of which are the cognitive assessment of the situation և the actualization of internal means to overcome difficulties16.
  It should be noted that according to the International Classification of Diseases, burning syndrome is considered stress due to difficulties in maintaining a normal lifestyle17.
Q. Maslach, one of the authors of the concept of "burning", views it as "emotional exhaustion, which arose on the background of stress caused by interpersonal contact" 18.
 The author S. Together with Jackson, he proposes a three-factor model of combustion, according to which the syndrome includes 3 main components: emotional exhaustion, depersonalization (cynicism), reduction of professional achievements 19.
Saying emotional exhaustion, K. Maslach understood the feeling of emotional emptiness and fatigue associated with his own work.
  Depersonalization is the deformation of the relations of the subjects of activity, the formation of negative, cynical, indifferent attitudes towards them.
  And the reduction of professional achievements in this case will be manifested by the feeling of incompetence in one's own professional field, by the realization of failure in it20.
Based on the fact that burning contributes to physiological, affective, cognitive reductions in other areas of professional "personal activity", it can be argued that emotional burning is a mechanism of self-induced psychological protection by the complete or partial exclusion of emotions in response to psychological trauma.
  According to V. Boyko: Burning is an acquired functional stereotype of emotional behavior (more often part of scientific behavior), as it allows a person to distribute and use energy resources sparingly21.
Thus, the term "burout" was originally introduced to explain the physiological-psychological deformity of the employees of charitable structures, doctors.
  Later, due to the efforts of various authors (R. Schwab, A. Pines, E. Aronson), the field expanded, and today specialists from almost all fields are considered to be subject to burning.
 From the beginning, this syndrome used the disturbance of the emotional-motivational sphere, exhaustion, personal deformity as the main components of occupational burnout.
  Special attention was paid to interpersonal relations, which, if severely intense, lead to reductions with serious consequences in the professional and personal spheres.
 Burning դիտ is seen և it արդյունք is seen as a consequence of stress,, նշված however, the above is associated with mental health, in the context of which, acting as a factor that can significantly disrupt և completely rebuild a person's mental reality.
Let's talk about the main symptoms of occupational burns.
 Different authors give their classification, but most of them have the same content.
Thus, in 1983 E. Based on the generalization of the data offered by different authors, Mach առանձն singled out the following symptoms: • fatigue, exhaustion, • psychosomatic disorders, • insomnia, • lack of work activities, • abuse of chemical elements, • change in appetite, • negative "Self-concept", • aggressive mood, • guilt and dependence.
According to B. Perlman և E. The 3 measurements of combustion reflect the main categories of stress symptoms. 1. physiological (physical exhaustion), 2. affective-cognitive - change of feelings and attitudes, 3. behavioral - maladaptation 22.
22 Balakhonov A. V., Belov V. Г., Пятибрат Е. D., Пятибрат А. О., in the same place.
As already mentioned, according to some authors (V. Vinokur, V. Agapova) burning can not develop without external stressors.
These disorders can be manifested by mood swings, anxiety, worry, guilt 23.
A. Koshelev adds physiological-behavioral symptoms as well as psychological-communicative symptoms.
  He explains that the burn at the psychological level is mainly expressed by the desire not to work, one should not attribute everything to laziness.
 He singles out the following from the communications. Stable desire to communicate with colleagues և desire to be alone, lengthening of spoken words և slowing down speech, use of a large number of useless words in speech և etc.24.
Because in the case of occupational burns, first of all, the emotional sphere of the person suffers, then a rather wide range of symptoms includes this sphere.
 One of the most common symptoms of this class is inadequate selective emotional response when the "I want or I do not want" principle works.
  Moreover, it seems to a person that he behaves abnormally, but it can be perceived as indifference, coldness.
 Eventually a person ends up with an emotional deficit և emotional alienation.
  In the first case, the specialist feels that he can no longer help the subjects of his activity emotionally, he is not able to enter into their situation, to empathize.
 In the second case, emotions are almost completely excluded from the field of professional activity.
  Neither positive nor negative circumstances do not interest him; no emotional response is given25.
Summarizing the different approaches mentioned above, we consider it expedient to separate the following main classes of symptoms: the desire not to communicate, to be alone, to use a large number of useless words in speech, which were previously absent, etc., России.
 Electron. science Journal, 2013, N 1 (18). http:
//mprj.ru/archiv_global/2013_1_18/nomer/nomer01.php.выгорания ”. http:
//www.klex.ru/8xr25 Balahonov A. V., Belov V. Г., Пятибрат Е. D., Пятибрат А. О., in the same place.
• Behavioral: symptomatic types of behavior (maladaptation, decreased work efficiency, inadequate behavioral reactions), • social: lack of time և activity in the field of social relations.
In recent years, the interest in burnout syndrome has grown considerably, given that it is one of the most destructive types of professional destruction of a person, there is a need to study it not only theoretically, but also to create special prophylactic-correlation programs.
The biosensor approach is quite productive for the prevention of combustion, the main idea of ​​which - the introduction of energy into the field of another organism causes a psycho-emotional effect. Գ. According to Jung, who paid attention to interparticle phenomena, there was a connection between unrelated phenomena through causal energy fields26.
According to this approach, the cleansing of mental and energy structures is possible through self-prophylaxis, that is, due to the work of self-regulatory mechanisms.
 These mechanisms include changes in appetite, increased laziness, viral or other diseases, stress, depression, drowsiness.
 Man, trusting in the ability of his organism և mental self-regulation, must allow the normal functioning of these mechanisms.
Representatives of other approaches note that there is no need to hope that the organism will heal itself.
 It is practically impossible.
 The latter is explained by the fact that the field of profession includes the rational period of consciousness, and all the hidden mechanisms are in the unconscious period.
 It is this difference that does not allow activating the hidden mechanisms of self-regulation.
 That is, man automatically blocks the activity of self-regulatory mechanisms, as the latter do not find their logical justification in consciousness27.
Thus, the organism and the psyche strive for balance. They are able to prevent occupational psychophysiological dysfunctions, if the mechanisms of the organism և mental self-regulation are allowed to act independently.
 By completing all this by voluntary, conscious regulation, it is possible to achieve even more visible arousal 27 Koshelev A. N., in the same place.
results, overcoming the existing inconsistency between conscious "unconscious levels".
Different psychological directions offer their approaches to overcoming professional burnout.
  When burning covers the whole sphere of the psyche, it is possible that the feelings are connected with the loss of the meaning of life, the dissatisfaction with the pursuit of self-realization.
 In that case, psychological assistance can be provided within the framework of an existential-humanistic approach28.
One of the well-known existential psychologists dealing with the problem of professional combustion is A. Langlen.
  He emphasizes that in case of burning, a person has an orientation to achieve something that does not match his real values ​​and meanings.
  There is a loss of meaning of the activity, as a result, lack of satisfaction.
According to A. According to Langley, protection is, first of all, the right choice of work, loving it, the correspondence of the meaning for us.
  If we avoid our activities, it is untimely to review the situation to prevent further development of burns.
   In this case, you can ask yourself a question. how much I feel personal value in what I do29.
It is necessary to remember that a person should be helped to realize his resources, to realize them, which will contribute to personal, professional growth.
One such approach is a program developed by Dutch scientists (D. Dierendondk, B. Garssen), the theoretical basis of which is based on transpersonal psychology.
 According to this program, the two main elements of correction are achieving self-acceptance, revealing the beliefs that make up a person's reality.
  The fundamental mentality of this approach is that people have their own inner wisdom, knowledge, so that they can find the answers to their questions and distress30.
According to the concept of transactional analysis, the correction starts from the fact that the given person accepts the need to find ways of recovery.
  Then the analysis of the person's ego-states is carried out in order to find resources for correction.
First, the "caring parent" ego-state is analyzed, the quality of taking care of oneself.
 "What do you like to do?" "What do you like about https?"
//iq.hse.ru/news/177666226.html. »Other such questions are intended to arouse interest.
Next, self-criticism is analyzed ("Criticizing parent" ego condition).
 If the specialist gives preference to his omissions to the eight, it is necessary to take the negative critic out of his person.
  When positive emotions create favorable conditions for self-analysis, work with the "Adult" ego-state follows.
 We find out whether this part of the person is reasonable, independent or not.
 They use decontamination techniques.
 For example, old unconscious beliefs are redefined.
 This is where the "Child" ego-state, the source of healthy resources, comes to the rescue.
 The parent's care, the child's creativity, the great common sense allow to approach the work with the adaptive child.
  It is the "adaptive-child" ego-state that is burned.
  In this state, people have a stubborn, high performance, while being vulnerable to their failures and criticisms31.
In psychoanalytic theory Z. Freud proposed the concept of counter-transfer.
  He paid attention to how the psychotherapist experienced the psychotherapeutic interaction.
  Counter-transfer is the totality of the analyst's unconscious reactions to the person to be visited, especially his / her transfer.
 F. Freud viewed counter-transfer as a factor having a negative effect on the quality of the analytical process.
 Accordingly, in this context we can talk about professional burnout.
According to P. Conditionally, in this case the analyst must be able not to show his feelings when the visitor is "charged" by communicating with the analyst32.
 In order to overcome it, it is necessary to differentiate the identification with the visitor, his empathy, to realize what we transfer to the visitor, what he puts on us.
  During the visitor's feedback, the therapist should intensify his / her search to find the answers to the problems, or, for example, human advice from his / her own experience.
  If the therapist realizes that he is taking such steps, it speaks of an onset of burning33.
Another approach is the theory of psychosynthesis.
  The founder R. Assajoli is the one who distinguishes 2 stages in the development of a healthy person (personal և careful psychosynthesis), according to which D. Dierendonk 32 Куликов А. I., "Professional burnout and counterfeiting". http:
//russia.ecpp.org/kulikov33 Podhvatilin N. V., "Counterperenos". http:
//centercep.ru/stati/11-prikladnaya-psihologiya-iвыгорания ”. http:
//www.transactional offers its program.
  Personal psychosynthesis includes the study of the structure of the soul, the introduction to the content of the unconscious, and then the process of integrating and synthesizing a person around his "I".
 Discovering the potential for mental synthesis in the face of burnout involves integrating the person around the deepest center of the mental Self, the deep Self, which is essential to discovering the meaning and significance of life.
In contrast to the psychoanalytic approach, the emphasis is on synthesis, because analysis alone is not enough to achieve lasting change in human behavior, attitudes, and feelings.
 This theory is quite new in terms of combating combustion և perspective34.
One of the most popular and effective modern models of overcoming is the Balint movement, the founder of which is M. Balint.
  The latter founded it in 1963 in Switzerland.
  The goal of Balinese groups is to improve interpersonal relationships, mutual understanding and understanding, awareness of core values ​​in life, improving self-awareness ուշ attention to oneself35.
The group leader uses experience և skills for the whole group to bring out the group processes.
 The method by which this goal is achieved is a clear analysis of specific cases from the participants' practice.
  In addition to analyzing the problem situation, it is also played for the participant who tells the story in the simplest and most understandable way in the group.
  Such a practice gives an opportunity to positively assess one's own professional training, which helps the group to understand and solve the given problem.
 Thus, the problem becomes ambiguous for the participants.
  In order to avoid conformity in the group, open discussion is encouraged, alternatives, which prevent the effect of group thinking, do not allow to evaluate on a "right-wrong" basis.
  Special attention is paid to self-reflection, which allows a deeper understanding of oneself - to be able to reconsider stereotypes in one's work 36.
Summarizing the views on occupational burnout syndrome, we can define it as follows: a condition caused by occupational moderate to high intensity domestic stresses, when communications are aggravated by emotional saturation.
 It is manifested by the following main classes of symptoms: physiological, affective-cognitive, communicative, behavioral, social.
Examining the correctional work offered by different approaches to combating burnout, we can say that it is necessary to help a person to realize, to realize his own resources, to increase the level of self-reflection, which will allow him to understand and understand himself more deeply.
 All the mentioned approaches are aimed at the reconstruction of the whole mental sphere suffering from professional deformity, the effectiveness of which has been confirmed by the practice that has existed for several decades.
Luiza Gorgyan PROFESSIONAL DESCRIPTION AND VICTORY FEATURES Keywords. Occupational (emotional) burnout, emotional exhaustion,
Depersonalization, reduction of professional achievements, stress, symptoms,
prevention, overcoming
.
