SOME PROBLEMS ON THE INSTITUTE OF UNFOUNDED ENRICHMENT The institute of unjust enrichment, originating in Roman law as an additional means of protection of subjective rights, later developed և received its unique expression in different legal systems of different countries.
 It is distinguished by unique manifestations of application cases, which is conditioned by the main goal of the institute - to restore the violated rights of the participants of the civil legal circulation through their correct redistribution as a result of incorrect distribution of property.
 Another important feature of the institute is its subsidiary nature, due to which the conditional claim is often the only possible way to protect the violated property rights.
  Chapter 1 61 of the RA Civil Code is dedicated to the regulation of the Institute.
  It should be noted that since the adoption of the Code, the regulation of this institution has never changed since 1998, as a result of which, due to the development of civil law relations, it is more and more often necessary to interpret the new legal norms applicable to unregulated relations.
  This is evidenced by the seven decisions made by the Court of Cassation in the last 2 years alone.
Obligations arising from unjust enrichment are now known to the legal systems of both continental Europe and almost all Anglo-American countries; they derive from the Roman condictio (Latin: acquisition, acquisition), in which the inadmissibility of unjust enrichment is equated with the inadmissibility of all citizens.
1 Adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
 HRP 1998.08.10 / 17 (50), HO-239.
In a number of its precedent decisions2, the Court of Cassation noted that the institution of unjust enrichment is one of the institutions of civil law, the purpose of which is to ensure and promote the protection of the property rights of participants in civil turnover.
 Unjust enrichment occurs when someone else's property, including work, services, etc., is acquired or saved on an illegal basis.
 Moreover, due to the fact that the enrichment is unfounded, the conditional obligations are classified as non-contractual.
The Civil Code stipulates that in case of unjust enrichment, the property subject to enrichment is subject to return in kind, and in case of impossibility to return the property acquired through unjust enrichment or saving in kind, the acquirer must compensate the victim at the moment of acquisition. integrity).
The actual conditional obligation in this context implies that in any case the objectively received is subject to return. The purchaser returns the amount he received.
 In contrast to this regulation, the German վե Swiss աբար Civil Code և Obligation Act gave three other provisions, in particular limiting the amount of unjust enrichment required by the conditional claim to the extent that it was retained by the recipient when he learned of the unjust enrichment.
If we make comparisons with the regulations of the countries of the Anglo-American system, we will notice that there are a number of limitations for the claim of unjust enrichment 4, which complicate the application of the institute to some extent.
  It is particularly about a legal error - mistake of law.
  The English courts will reject the plaintiff's claim for the wrongly paid amount if he has committed a violation of the right.
 The cornerstone of such an approach was laid in 1802 Bible v. In the case of Lumley.
  The plaintiff in that case is the insured, see 2 For example, in the civil case No. EED / 0540/02/12 of the Court of Cassation (according to Arthur Hovhannisyan's lawsuit against Norik Soghomonyan) the decision made on 17.07.2015.
3 Adopted December 10, 1907 - Swiss Civil Code, CH231, Statute onObligatory Law as part of it - January 1, 1912.
4 See Understanding Unjust Enrichment, Jason W. Neyers, Mitchell Mcinnes And Stephen GAPitel, Oxford And Portland, Oregon, Hart Publishing, 2004, p. 135.
withdrew the insurance indemnity paid to him from the insured defendant on the grounds that the latter had not reported any circumstances that increased the risk when concluding the contract.
The court found that the plaintiff knew or could have known all the circumstances that could have been the basis for the denial of compensation when paying compensation.
  The court expressed the following position. Every person is supposed to know the law, otherwise it would not be possible to find out the scope in which ignorance of the law would be considered respectable.
 It is true that the present situation in this case would have been resolved in a slightly different way, but in this case the very principle embedded in English law is used.
 By the same logic, in English law countries, the approach is that the unreasonable payment of a defendant who, being in good faith, demanded payment from the plaintiff for a non-existent obligation, and the latter, from a legal point of view, misjudged the factual circumstances, is not subject to compensation. obligor 5.
 Continental countries are unfamiliar with such a principle. Conditional claims are satisfied on the basis of erroneous payment, even if there was a real mistake.
6 There is another conditionality clause that applies in both Anglo-American and continental countries.
  It is about such an unfounded payment, which was made for immoral purposes or on the basis of an illegal transaction.
  This approach gained its unique expression by the decision of the Court of Cassation No. EED / 0540/02/127. The Court of Cassation found that the property bribed as a trade was the subject of a crime, which from the point of view of civil law could not be characterized as unjust enrichment.
The Court of Cassation based its position on the fact that If the object of unjust enrichment is the property rights of the victim, then the object of commercial bribery is commercial or other 5 See Bible v. Lumley (1802), 2 East 469, 102 Eng. Rep. 448.
See also: Introduction to Comparative Law in the Sphere of Partial Rights, Moscow ZweigertK, Ketz H., T. 2, page 323.
6 See Understanding Unjust Enrichment, Jason W. Neyers, Mitchell Mcinnes And Stephen GAPitel, Oxford And Portland, Oregon, Hart Publishing, 2004, p. 164.
7 See the decision made on 17.07.2015 in the civil case No. EED / 0540/02/12 of the Court of Cassation (according to Arthur Hovhannisyan's lawsuit against Norik Soghomonyan).
Public relations aimed at ensuring the legal activities of organizations.
 Moreover, if the main primary goal of the return of property acquired as a result of unjust enrichment is to protect the property rights of the participants of the civil turnover and promote its implementation, then the confiscation of property provided as a commercial bribe in favor of the state, like any coercion envisaged by the RA Criminal Code. to prevent possible crimes.
The other limitation is also found in the two legal systems.
  A claim for repayment of unjust enrichment may be rejected if the status of a bona fide acquirer has changed so much that a claim of full repayment would have been unfair (change ofposition) 8.
 Thus, Lipkin Gorman v. In the case of Karpnale Ltd, Lord Goff reiterated that position. If the conscientious objector status has changed so much that it would be unfair to demand a full or partial payment from him, then the injustice of such a return is more serious than the rejection of the plaintiff's conditional claim9.
 For the application of such an approach, it is defined that it is applicable only to the bona fide acquirer; և second, it is not sufficient to present evidence of the use of the recipient only for a change of status.
 However, if expenses were incurred which, in the absence of enrichment, would most likely not have been incurred, it would be justified to release him from the obligation to repay the money.
 Such injustice can also be manifested in terms of costs.
 As already mentioned, in the case of a condition, both direct and indirect enrichment (actually received ները income) is reimbursed, minus the expenses incurred by the enricher in connection with the incentive to acquire the property of another.
 Such expenses may be both necessary and those which were not spent directly on the object of enrichment, but which the enricher would normally refuse (for example, a person, by acquiring an unplanned increase in property, performs charity).
 And here a question may arise. Is it such a cost? 8 See Vincent Sagaert, Unjust Enrichment and Change of Position, 11 Maastricht J. Eur. & Comp., 2004, p. 42.
9 See Lipkin Gorman v. Karpnale Ltd. (1991) 2A, 548, 579.
Compensation for love is part of the regulation of the institution of unfounded enrichment.
A more exhaustive list of status changes is provided by Article 10 142 of the Rules of Procedure, which stipulates that status changes exist in cases of destruction, loss or theft of property, sale at its expense, expenses incurred in connection with acquired property, and forced obligations that cannot be waived. in general or only at a loss, waiving rights and guarantees, investing unjustifiably acquired funds after the expiration of their own rights, donating what has been acquired, spending property acquired11.
If the property subject to enrichment has been spent, used by a bona fide acquirer or alienated at a lower than usual price, both the German and English courts may reject in whole or in part the claim for the return of the subject of unjust enrichment12.
The actual domestic regulation does not provide for such a way of applying the condition.
As can be seen, in the current regulation of unjust enrichment, the amount of enrichment does not always correspond to the amount of loss.
  For example, in the case where illegally justified property is sold at a price below its market value, its value is subject to compensation, so it is obvious that the amount of enrichment is less than the amount of damage suffered by the victim.
 In this situation, the question arises as to how much compensation the rich person should pay.
 Current settlement determines the fair value at the time of acquisition of the property.
It turns out that the unjustly enriched will have to pay more than he did as a result of enrichment.
It is noteworthy that in connection with this issue, 13 cities of France. Article 1380 states that if a bona fide rich person sells 10 In 1937, the American Law Institute drafted the Restitution Regulations, which were authored by Warren Save և and Austin Scott.
  The regulation completes the practice in the field of relations arising from unjust enrichment.
11 See Zweigert K., Ketz H., op. work., page 348.
12 See German Civil Code6.
Paragraphs 2 և 3 of Article 212.
See in more detail Zweigert K., Ketz H., Introduction to Comparative Law in the Sphere of Partial Rights, Moscow, Meдуdunar. Opinion, 2000, pp. 343-350, Machtel F., The DefenseVol. 5. N 1, p. 23-46.
13 Adopted April 21, 1804. The Napoleonic Code.
What is unfoundedly received at a price lower than the real (market) price, the price of that contract is reimbursed, not the value of the property.
There may be cases when the value of enrichment decreases for the acquirer due to the decrease in the value of the property.
 The victim himself is often guilty of enriching others at his own expense.
 In such cases, the bona fide purchaser, who did not suspect that the acquisition or saving of the property was unfounded, is put in a more difficult situation, being obliged to return what no one else has.
 The same regulation will apply in the opposite situation, when the enricher sells the property at a price higher than the real value of the property at the time of acquisition.
 In one case it may be due to the personal / professional characteristics of the enricher.
 The theorists express a common position in this regard, noting that in this case the amount that the victim would have received in the conditions of ordinary civil turnover is limited as compensation14.
 If the enricher sells the property at a higher price than the price at the time of acquisition, է this is due to the increase in the value of the property itself, for example, its obsolescence; և if the enricher does not know the enrichment is unfounded, the victim can not claim compensation, which we believe within this institution , is completely justified.
  Due to the same logic, the German law emphasizes that in case of unjust enrichment, the positive difference is compensated, which is due to the incomes, benefits and losses as a result15.
Taking into account the above-mentioned possible problems, we propose to envisage the possibility of limiting the claim to the bona fide acquirer by supplementing Article 1095 with the following point: "A claim for repayment of unjust enrichment or reimbursement of its value may be rejected or the amount of compensation may be reduced if the acquirer alienated the property free of charge or at a price significantly below the time of acquisition before the moment when he knew or could have known it was enrichment." from the current price, or there is another change in the status of the acquirer, under which the compensation of the cost of enrichment disproportionately worsens its condition. ”
14 See Tolstoy J. K., Sergeev A. P., Civil Law, Moscow, "Prospect", p. 774-775.
15 See Zweigert K., Ketz H., op. work, pp. 343-344.
We consider it necessary to refer to the following question as well. City. Article 1097 stipulates that the enricher is obliged to compensate the direct enrichment with direct enrichment, including not only the actual income received, but also the income that he could have received.
 The claim for a refund of possible income contradicts the whole idea of ​​the institution of unjust enrichment, the main purpose of which is to compensate for the actually received, materialized enrichment, not presumably, in contrast to tort liabilities, for which compensation for lost profits is provided.
 Perkunov also expressed such an opinion, emphasizing that the right to claim the missed benefit contradicts the essence of the conditional obligations, which are aimed at returning the received, and not the possible receivable 16.
 Therefore, we think that the phrase "or could have received" should be removed from point 1 of Article 1097, written in the following way: "A person who has unjustifiably received or saved property is obliged to compensate the victim or return all the income he received from that property, from the day when he knew or should have known that the enrichment was unfounded."
Particular attention should be paid to the fact that the issue of improvements has been left out of the regulation of the institution of unfounded enrichment.
Applying the proposed adjustment to the compensation limit will significantly protect the property rights of the wealthy person who has made the improvement, but we nevertheless believe that it would be more effective to be guided by the vindication rules, providing for appropriate disconnected improvements at the discretion of the holder.
 Such a settlement will be based on the principle of ensuring the right to return in kind.
  In view of the fact that a direct reference to the relevant article of the indication is inexpedient due to some peculiarities of the condition, it is suggested to supplement Article 1098 with the following point: can be separated without causing damage to property.
  If improvements are to be distinguished, such a requirement may be made only in respect of improvements which have been made before the time when the person knew or could have known that the enrichment was unfounded. ”
16 See Perkunov E., Unfounded enrichment-place in the Civil Code and practice of the Supreme Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation, VAS RF Journal, N 2, Moscow, 2004, p. 172.
Thus, in this paper, taking into account the peculiarities of conditional relations, studying the legal practice adopted in other countries, an attempt was made to clarify the settlement of liabilities arising from unjust enrichment, paying special attention to the amount of enrichment to be returned, its possible limitations and improvements.
Luiza Meliksetyan SOME PROBLEMS ABOUT THE INSTITUTE OF UNFOUNDED ENRICHMENT Keywords: unjust enrichment, condition, indirect enrichment, income, improvements, change of status.
