DYNAMICS OF ATMOSPHERIC LOCATIONS IN THE SEVAN BASIN ESTABLISHMENT OF EXAMINATION REGULATIONS FROM THE CLIMATE CHANGE.
  They characterize the water regime of the given area, the water balance, the in-house distribution of the river flow, determine the yield of agricultural crops.
 On the other hand, as a rule, atmospheric precipitation is classified as a meteorological element, which is more characterized by spatial-temporal distribution features.
  Therefore, especially in the context of global climate change, the knowledge of the spatial distribution of precipitation, change and the creation of an effective management system are very important.
Given the above, as well as the importance of precipitation, the importance of organizing and planning the irrigation of agricultural crops in Lake Sanaa, the efficient use of water resources, in the water supply of Lake Sanaa, we will work to discuss the changes in the climate of the Sana Lake basin. .
  To this end, the following tasks have been proposed և solved: 1) to collect և to process արդյուն the results of atmospheric precipitation դիտարկում actual river flow observations, 2) to identify, analyze և to assess the dynamics of precipitation change in the river դրանց patterns of their occurrence in the river և spatial characteristics of the region, 3) արդյունավետ Maintenance issues արդյունավետ Effective use of river flow, Conservation, 4) Develop ways to prevent adverse effects of change.
Methodology. In order to solve the set problems, the work was served as a theoretical-informational basis: relevant studies, printed works, decisions of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, reports, development programs, projects, work plans, reports.
 The factual data of the multi-year observations of atmospheric precipitation of the meteorological stations of the MES hydrometric service of the studied area (1935-2016), as well as the climatic bulletins were used as a starting material in the work.
 Mathematical-statistical, extraction, analysis, correlation methods were used as methodological basis in the work.
  At work, the issues of atmospheric change were discussed, studied according to the results of actual observations of separate meteorological stations.
The study area is located in Gegharkunik region.
  It is bordered on the east by Aregun, Shan, Arjelyan Sang, on the south by Vardenis, on the west by Geghama-Pambak mountain ranges.
  The length is 120 km, the width is 30-80 km, the distance is 4891 km2.
The lake basin extends in the range of 1900-3500 m.
The maximum area is 2000-2800 m, the average height of the basin is 2390 m [2].
 The lake basin is a complete ecosystem, for the viable, sustainable development it is necessary the interconnected improvement of all the factors influencing it և the regulated use.
All activities in the basin should follow the principle of not disturbing the balance of the existing vulnerable ecosystem, aimed at creating and maintaining sustainable ecosystems [4].
Results և discussion. At work, the issues of atmospheric precipitation change were discussed, studied according to the results of the actual observations of individual meteorological stations (Figure 1).
The study area has a temperate terrestrial climate with well-defined mountainous zoning.
 The isolation of the basin and the presence of the lake have a great influence on the formation of the climate.
  As a result, being surrounded by mountains, the amount of precipitation in the basin is comparative.
  The winter is long, frosty, with constant snow cover.
Summer is hot, slightly cloudy weather prevails.
Air and gas stationsSemyonavkaShorzhaMasrikKarchaghbyurMartuniVardenyats XII year V ․ GetashenGavarNoratusSan Lake Table 1. Monthly և annual average values ​​of atmospheric precipitation (mm) Both in the lake area and on the lake surface the precipitation is evenly distributed [5] (Table 1).
 In the northern "northwestern" part of the basin, more precipitation falls than in other parts of it.
  This is due to the fact that the northern part, especially the northwestern part, is more accessible to the flow of external air masses.
The annual amount of precipitation in the coastal parts is about 400 mm.
 The number of relocations to the mountains is increasing.
 More precipitation falls in Dzknaget basin (635 mm in Tsovagyugh, 724 mm in Semyonovka), and relatively little in Masrikihovt (435 mm in Mets Masrik).
Figure 1. Sean Lake's meteorological stations և observation points [2] 1. Semyonovka, 5. Shorzha, 12 ․ Masrik, 17. Karchaghbyur, 21. Martuni, 26. Verin Getashen, 35. Gavar, 36. Noratus, 41. rising, preventing upward air currents.
In the coastal zone of the lake mirror (up to 5-12 km) the precipitation is 390450 mm.
 In the mountains perpendicular to the lake, precipitation gradually increases at the peaks of Ajdahak (3595 m), Spitakasar (3555 m), Vardenis (3522 m), Geghamasar (3446 m), reaching 800-900 mm.
In winter, stable snow cover is established everywhere with an average rainfall of 120-150 days, but the thickness of the snow layer is 10-20 cm in the eastern, south-eastern coastal regions of the lake, and 30-50 cm on the southern shores.
 On the slopes of Vardenis-Geghama plateaus, at an altitude of 2300-2400 m, it reaches 50-70 cm.
 In the second half of the summer, when the snow disappears, the precipitation decreases and there is a lack of water in the alpine and sub-alpine pastures.
          Snowfall in the form of river flow is great.
  The nature of their accumulation during the winter և melting in the spring determines the amount of flow.
  Depending on how much water has accumulated in the snow cover, not only the in-house flow distribution but also the total flow rate will change.
Martuni
This:
Gavar
m:
m:
r:
e:
n:
m:
ւ:
o:
ղ:
e:
t:
n:
ի:
a
t:
r:
o:
o:
n:
թ:
M:
l:
յ:
Figure 2. Dynamics of atmospheric precipitation change in Lake Sanaa
Years: Studies show that the region is experiencing an increasing trend of atmospheric precipitation in the context of global climate change (Figure 2).
  The latter has its manifestation in the process of river flow in the area in question.
Figure 3. The water metering points of Shana Lake [2] 1. Dzknaget-Tsovagyugh, 18. Karchaghbyur-Karchaghbyur, 28. Argitchi-Getashen, 36. Gavaraget-Noratus In the work, the patterns of atmospheric precipitation of the lake basin in the river flow were studied. Characteristics of the lake basin (Dzknavar, Karchagh 3)
 The latter was discussed with the change of river flow.
 There are 29 rivers in the lake basin (including 2 large springs, which flow into the lake by the river), with an average annual flow of 26.8 m3 / s.
The water regime of the rivers flowing into Lake Sanaa is conditioned by the geographical position of the basin, the relief, the average height of the basin, the geological structure, the soil, the vegetation, the feeding conditions.
Due to the climatic conditions ավորված due to the geological structure, a large area is occupied in the Sևn basin և by the areas completely devoid of surface flow, the northern slopes of the Geghama plateau and the western slopes of the northern Sևn mountain range.
River-observation point Months Fisherman TsovagyughKarchaghbyurKarchaghbyurArgitchiGetashenGavaragetNoratusTable
 The river network is especially well developed in the south, the rivers are few in the northeast, the flood flows are typical, in the southeast it is Masrik.
  The rivers flowing through the Sana Mountains are characterized by low water richness, many of which do not reach the lake in the low water stage (Table 2).
The rivers of the basin mainly have mixed nutrition - melt, rain - groundwater.
 There are no pure rainwater supply rivers, except for the temporary ones.
  Gavaraget, Masrik, Tsakkar have the most underground nutrition, and Lichk has exclusively underground nutrition.
 The rivers of the Lake Sanaa basin are characterized by spring flooding, overflow, summer, autumn and winter water scarcity.
As can be seen from Figure 4, the corresponding annual river flow values ​​tend to increase in the respective observation points of all the studied rivers.
  Moreover, the increase of river flow in the Karchaghbyur river section of the Karchaghbyur river is significant, and in the Noratus river section of the Gavaraget river - very little.
In the current context of global climate change, both the monthly average annual precipitation and river flow have increased in the study area.
  Moreover, the largest amount of atmospheric precipitation is observed in May-June, and the river flow in April-May.
  This indicates that the precipitation flow is large in the formation of atmospheric precipitation, but the solid precipitation accumulated in the highlands in winter has a greater role, the melting of which determines the more water-richness of the rivers observed in April-May.
c ․ Fisherman - d ․ Tsovagyugh
c ․ Karchaghbyur - d ․ Short source
c. Argitchi - d. Getashen
c ․ Gavaraget - d ․ Noratus
years:
r:
f:
m:
q:
s:
o:
h:
n:
ի:
a
t:
e:
C:
յ:
Figure 4. Dynamics of fluctuating river flow in Shana Lake BasinThe role of atmospheric liquid precipitation in river flow formation is smaller than that of solid atmospheric precipitation, despite the fact that the amount of solid precipitation in winter is relatively less than precipitation (2) .
 It is explained by the peculiarities of the geological structure of Lake Sanaa.
 It is dominated by porous, water-permeable rocks, which have great opportunities for surface water permeability.
 That is why there are no purely rain-fed rivers in the lake, except for those with temporary flow.
Conclusions. Thus, the study of atmospheric precipitation and river flows observed in the context of global climate change, we come to the following conclusions: • Atmospheric precipitation is classified as a series of meteorological elements, which are characterized by local features of spatial distribution.
• The isolation of the basin առ the presence of the lake have a great influence on the climate formation.
• Both the annual amount of atmospheric precipitation and the river flow have increased in the study area.
• Atmospheric precipitation in the study area is characterized by intra-annual distribution patterns. The highest amount of precipitation is observed in May-June, and the river flow is observed in April-May.
• Precipitation is unevenly distributed in the lake area.
Most precipitation falls in the northern և northwestern part of the basin.
 The amount of precipitation is increasing since the mountains.
• More precipitation falls in Dzknaget basin (635 mm in Tsovagyugh, 724 mm in Semyonovka), and relatively little in Masrik valley (435 mm in Mets Masrik).
• Stable snow cover is established everywhere in winter.
  The nature of their accumulation during the winter քը melting in the spring determines the flow.
• The role of atmospheric liquid precipitation in the formation of river flow, in contrast to solid atmospheric precipitation, is smaller.
• The increase in atmospheric precipitation և river flow in the study area is positively assessed in the development of branches of different sectors of the economy.
• It is necessary to: • ensure the homogeneity, continuity և reliability of the monitoring series, • assess the vulnerability of ecosystems due to changes in precipitation.
• Continuous assessment of the change of atmospheric precipitation and its detection in the river flow in the perspective development of the natural-economic systems of Lake Sana'a basin.
LITERATURE [1] RA Climatic Bulletin, "Air Humidity, Atmospheric Precipitation և Cover", RA Ministry of Emergency Situations, Yerevan, 2013, Lusabats, Part II, 172 pages
[2] Margaryan V., Vardanyan T., Peculiarities of intra-annual distribution of river flow in the Lake Sana basin.
  "Scientific-constructive potential of geography և practical application" (materials of the conference dedicated to the 55th anniversary of LH Valesyan 80 80 և scientific-pedagogical activity), Yerevan, 2011, YSU Publishing House, pp. 211-23.
[3] Chilingaryan L. A., Aghababyan K. A., Tokmajyan H. V., The hydrology of the river lakes of Armenia, Yerevan, 2002, 49 pages.
[4] Sayadyan H. Y., Sargsyan R. N., The delimitation of the geographical distribution of the Lake Sana basin as a key factor in ensuring the quantity and quality of water in the lake. 7.
BZNUNI ANNA SEVANA POOL DYNAMICS OF ATMOSPHERICAL PLACES
