GURGEN YANIKIAN AND THE BIRTH OF THE ARMENIAN SECRET ARMY OF LIBERATION OF ARMENIA
 The Sultan was so full of hatred towards Armenians that he even declared. "Armenians can cut my head off my neck, but never Armenia from my empire" 2.
  The Armenian people are being subjected to genocide by three Turkish regimes: Hamidian and Young Turk-Kemal.
 By Young Turk criminals in 1915-1916. 1.5 million Armenians became victims of the genocide, and the rest of the Armenians spread all over the world, creating a new notion of "Diaspora" among us.
  The great powers not only do nothing to save the Armenian people, but also, proceeding from their geopolitical interests, try to "bury" the Armenian question and the Armenian victims.
Although the Turkish court sentences the organizers of the Armenian Genocide to death, it does nothing to enforce the sentence.
 The Armenian avengers, who in 1920-1922 They carried out the revenge operation "Nemesis" and put an end to the lives of some of the organizers of the genocide3.
1915 Even after the great national tragedy, the Armenian people continue to struggle, demanding a solution to the Armenian question and recognition of the genocide.
  Civilized methods of struggle, however, do not yield any results.
  The world looked at all this with cold indifference.
 Even if the progressive intelligentsia condemned the Armenian Genocide, the states turned a blind eye to that crime in every possible way.
  Not wanting to worsen their relations with Turkey, they avoid recognizing the Armenian Genocide.
  Meanwhile, the generations of Armenian-Armenians displaced from their ancestral lands and scattered all over the world are still waiting for justice.
1923-1973 From the point of view of the recognition of the Armenian Genocide, it can be defined as a period of silence and indifference.
  No serious achievement is registered, that the fragments of Armenians living in different countries of the world, while overcoming the difficulties of new living conditions, forming communities to defend their cause, resorted to all possible means, organized protests and marches, flooded the League of Nations with petitions. Teru 1 Poghosyan St., History of the Armenian Question և Genocide, Yerevan, 2005, p. 51.
2 Petrosyan V., Armenia. Let's not forget, Yerevan, 2006, page 38.
books, articles, photos, etc. of Turkish atrocities.
 The world looked at all this with glassy eyes of indifference.
 The moral support of the famous foreign intellectuals was not possible.
And in Soviet Armenia, raising such a topic was off the agenda, even with pregnant dangers.
 And so, exhausting the means to make their voices heard by civilized methods, the Armenians turn to the last horse of the struggle, the weapon.
The Great Genocide continued to be forgotten until that indifference in 1973. The shooting of 78-year-old Gurgen Yanikyan on January 27 marks the beginning of a new phase in the history of the Armenian people's armed struggle, shocking the whole world and orienting the international community to wonder why this "strange terrorist act" took place1.
  Գ. Yanikyan's shot becomes a signal, as a result of which a fist is formed, which calls itself the "Hero Gurgen Yanikyan gang"; On the Armenian issue և the Armenian Genocide, forcing those same powers և to recognize and condemn the Armenian Genocide in Turkey.
Who was G.? Why did Yanikyan kill two Turkish diplomats?
 To answer these questions, let us consider his biography.
Գ. Yanikyan was born in 1895. He was born on December 24 in Karin (Erzurum).
  He was barely six months old when the great historical massacre of Western Armenia took place.
  Gurgen's father had a close relationship with the Persian consul of Karin, "taking advantage of this, their family and 28 relatives took refuge in the Persian consulate, then moved to Kars2."
Years later, at the age of six, Gurgen returned to Erzurum with his mother and brother, Hakob, to find the jewelry and a box containing documents in their barn and transport it to Kars.
  However, two Turks entered and caught Hakob and cut off his head with a knife.
  Gurgen tries to scream in horror, but his mother immediately closes his mouth tightly with his palm, so that he does not become a victim.
 Some time later, before his eyes, the Turks slaughtered 26 members of the family.
  Soon the outbreak of the First World War, և G. Yanikyan thinks that the time has come for the Armenian people to take revenge on their brother.
  He recruits volunteers of Armenian, Russian, Georgian and other nationalities and leaves for the Caucasus Front.
  He is instructed to rebuild the destroyed bridges and to conduct reconnaissance behind the enemy.
1930 Yanikyan founded the first smelter in Tabriz.
At the beginning of World War II, he was commissioned to build a highway on the Persian Gulf-USSR border to deliver American aid, for which he was awarded a medal by the US government.
1 Yanikyan G., Purpose և truth, Yerevan, 1999, page 60.
2 Ibid., P.
It should be noted that G. Yanikyan was persecuted several times by the American authorities due to anti-Turkish initiatives, as well as pushed him towards the Armenian liberation struggle, made him a pioneer of that modern period of struggle.
 Գ. Yanikyan decides to target Turkish Consul in Los Angeles Mehmet Baydar և Deputy Consul Bahadr Demir.
It was necessary to find a very good and serious reason to go to the consulate.
1935 Գ. Yanikyan had established free access to the Persian embassy in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon and established friendly relations with the ambassador and the Shah's brother.
 That is why he was invited to gatherings of embassies of almost all countries.
 Various officials, including former Turkish officials, were present at those gatherings.
  Գ. Yanikyan decides to collect the signatures of those "big" people on a banknote, which had become a money worthy of the museum.
  Գ. Yanikyan had decided to present himself as a rich man, preferably a Persian, who lost his mind in old age and wanted to have many medals from various countries, including the Tajik government.
 In addition, he was going to present to Turkish diplomats a picture hanging in Abdul Hamid's bedroom, which was stolen from the palace during the revolution.
And here, G. Yanikyan agrees with the ambassador ել to meet with the ambassador in the room he rented at the Baltimore Hotel in Santa Barbara.
After killing the two Turkish diplomats, he called the police and said: "I destroyed two evils in my room."
Գ. Yanikyan was not a person obsessed with youth. He was 78 years old at the time of the operation.
 It means that he had weighed everything, he could not act under the influence of the moment.
  He felt the pain caused by the Turkish bloody slaughter on his own skin, he was guided by the slogan "Death is known immortality".
 His actions are spreading to genocide survivors and their descendants scattered around the world.
Գ. Yanikyan was sentenced to life imprisonment, but on July 28, 1981, he was released from prison and placed under house arrest, dying in 1984. on February 28, at the age of 89.
In court, he told. "I opened the book while standing, թերթ after browsing for a while, the ambassador saw that the weapon got out of the book and entered the barrel, starting firing at the same time.
  The ambassador's assistant took a step, but after receiving two bullets, he fell to the floor. Using all nine bullets, he put the empty weapon on the table. to the ambassador's skull, saying this is a gift from the Armenian people, whose 1.5 million unburied corpses are still scattered everywhere. "
Գ. Yanikyan is taking this step because it was impossible to endure the decades-long cold indifference and immoral contempt of the Turks towards the moods of the Armenians around the world.
"People's Struggle" newspaper in 1987 writes in its 23rd issue in January. "The blows of the bullets fired by Yanikyan were heard in the petrified silence of 60 years, finally breaking the stony silence."
1 Yanikyan G., page 61.
2 Poghosyan St., pp. 74-75.
Գ. Prosecutor David Miner, who is accusing Yanikyan, said the following after the verdict was handed down. "Yanigian wanted to take the initiative to" Armenian Nuremberg "with his trial, because the Turkish authorities will not recognize the Armenian Genocide" 1.
Գ. The bullets fired by Yanikyan instead of gunpowder were filled with "the blood of about two million Armenian martyrs, and the iron will of an entire nation."
  They were the outburst of that people, who no longer believed in the humanity of human forces. ”
Finally, G. With this step, Yanikyan sought to "awaken the human conscience, to force the crime committed against my race not to go unpunished, to force the thieves to return to the owners what was stolen from them" 2.
Գ. Yanikyan, however, distinguishes the Turkish people from the Turkish government.
 He is convinced that the Turkish people have fallen victim to his criminal government.
  He considers that the Turkish government is the successor of the sultans, the Young Turks, the Kemalists, which does not renounce the crimes of its predecessors, not only defends them, but even denies the fact of genocide.
Գ. Yanikyan acts as an individual, having nothing to do with this arbitrary party.
As a result of all this, in 1975 The Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia was born on January 20, 1945. It tried to draw the world's attention to the Armenian Question and the Armenian Genocide by intimidating Turkish diplomats and destroying Turkish diplomatic institutions.
Thus, in 1975, in the 60th year of the genocide, a decisive turn took place in the Armenian movement of demands.
  Exhausted by all possible means to make their case heard by the powers, offended by the indifference of those same states, the Armenian youth are forced to resort to the last means of struggle - weapons.
 A new generation, liberated from partisanship, had entered the square, beginning a new period of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  This generation brings to the forefront the Armenian secret army of the liberation of Armenia in the life of Armenia, which creates a unique history, tradition, style of activity, acquires a very fast in the international issue, forms a large network of contacts.
  Thanks to the activities of the ANC, action groups, divisions, movements are formed in various countries to take part in the national liberation struggle and to "mobilize the Diaspora Armenians" through rallies, demonstrations and political struggle.
One year after the establishment of the ANC, in 1976, G. Yanikyan expresses his attitude from San Luis Obispo prison as follows: "I knew that I would not be left alone, coming together to serve a purpose, Armenian individuals joined and announced to the world that the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia had been born.
 Their generation lit up my cell… They have one enemy, the beast Turkey, և one goal, to get back our ancestral lands ”3.
1 "Diaspora", 1998, No. 1-3, pp. 10-11.
2 Yanikyan G., page 32.
3 "People's Struggle", 1984, No. 11, page 20.
Thus, G. Yanikyan's action shocks the Armenians all over the world, as a result of which a new stage in the history of the Armenian people's armed struggle begins. The Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia and the Armenian Genocide Justice Fighters' Organization are formed, which by their actions prove to the world and Turkey that the people sentenced to death and buried about 60 years ago were resurrected.
 The world understands that the Armenians are alive և can defend their land cause and human rights.
Liana MamyanGURGEN YANIKYAN AND THE BIRTH OF THE ARMENIAN SECRET ARMY OF ARMENIAN LIBERATION Keywords: Armenian question, Armenian Genocide, Armenian Cause, Turkish authorities, armed struggle.
