ISSUES OF LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF INTERNATIONAL BANKRUPTCY IN ARMENIA Recently, more serious attention is paid to international bankruptcy in the science of private international law.
 Unfortunately, the situation in the RA legislation is fundamentally different. The Bankruptcy Law (hereinafter referred to as the Law) does not even contain the notion of "international bankruptcy".
 Such a situation is a very serious shortcoming in the domestic settlement, as the legal settlement of international bankruptcy is one of the modern "complex legal phenomena" and has very strong legal and economic consequences [1].
 According to the RA Constitutional Court, "Legal regulation of bankruptcy relations is one of the guarantees of ensuring the stability of the economy of each state" [2].
As a rule, international bankruptcy can be referred to in cases when the insolvent debtor և the creditors have different nationalities, or the insolvent debtor's property is in the territory of different states [1, 3, 4].
 The doctrine of private international law uses different terms to describe cross-border insolvency: "international competition law", "international bankruptcy", "transnational insolvency", "transnational bankruptcy" [4, 5].
  The terms "international bankruptcy" or "transnational insolvency" are more concise and acceptable terms, clearly indicating that bankruptcy proceedings within a national legal system have an impact outside the borders of that state.
In developed countries, there is no unified approach to international bankruptcy, to a legally specific branch.
In Germany, England, and France, for example, it is considered a field of private international law, but not in the Netherlands.
 This issue is presented in more detail in the Russian literature of international law. P. Anufrija [4], V. V. Stepanov [6], S. Ս. In the works of Trushnikov [7].
  According to L. P. Anufria's international bankruptcy is a special area that has both substantive and procedural features, which makes it a sui generis settlement area [4].
We consider it acceptable to include international bankruptcy law in private international law as a set of procedural norms that regulate international bankruptcy, to define it as an independent field of private international law.
  The term "International Insolvency Law" (International Bankruptcy Law) has long been used in Western doctrine.
Problems of material and legal settlement of international bankruptcy.
 There is a vacuum in the legal settlement of the international bankruptcy sphere in the Republic of Armenia, as there is no legal act envisaging the material legal settlement of the international bankruptcy sphere.
 The commentary on the draft federal law on transnational insolvency of the Russian Federation states: "The current bankruptcy legislation does not contain provisions that will regulate bankruptcy relations with a foreign element (foreign creditors, the debtor's property is in a foreign country)… In practice, there is legal uncertainty when Bankruptcy proceedings are instituted in the territory of one of the States or in several States at once. [8]
 This applies equally to the Republic of Armenia, especially when attracting foreign investment is one of the main directions of the country's economic policy.
The increase in the number of cases related to international bankruptcy reflects the constant expansion of trade and investment activities worldwide.
 It is just that the bankruptcy laws of some countries lag behind this trend, as they are often not developed enough to regulate international affairs.
  This often leads to inappropriate և non-certified legal approaches, which hinders the maintenance of an enterprise in dire financial straits, does not support the fair and effective settlement of international bankruptcy, hinders the protection of insolvent debtor assets from dusting, and prevents the maximum increase in the value of those assets.
 In addition, the lack of predictability in the settlement of international bankruptcy cases hinders the movement of capital and has a detrimental effect on foreign investment.
Fraud by an insolvent debtor, particularly by concealing property or moving it to another state, is a growing problem both in terms of frequency and scale.
  The modern interconnected world facilitates the implementation of such frauds.
Approaches based solely on the doctrine of international etiquette or the concept of exequatur are not able to provide the degree of predictability and reliability in the field of international bankruptcy that can be ensured by specific legislation [9].
In this context, we consider the adoption of a separate legal act regulating the field of international bankruptcy in the Republic of Armenia, taking into account the fact that in the international practice legal documents regulating this field have been developed, which have proved their practical significance for more than a decade.
  Such documents are the European Union 2000. Bankruptcy Law No. 1346/2000 of May 29, 2000 [10] (hereinafter referred to as the EU Regulation), European Convention on Certain International Bankruptcy Matters (1990) [11], Montevideo Treaty of International Commercial Law (1889 և 1940). Convention on Private International Law (Bustamante Code, 1928).
In the framework of international instruments governing this area, we would particularly like to refer to the UNCITRAL Transnational Insolvency Standard (hereinafter referred to as the Standard Act) [13].
 As stated in the UNICTRAL Standard Bankruptcy Guidelines for the Implementation of the Standard Bankruptcy Code, the Standard Banking Law is intended to assist States to ensure that their bankruptcy legislation is in a modern, unified and fair framework, more effectively regulating [9]
The standard law first discusses the scope of cooperation between legal systems, proposes solutions that can help solve a number of simple but at the same time very important issues, as well as help to apply a unified approach to international bankruptcy.
 The standard law includes four main areas of regulation, each of which effectively addresses the above issues, in particular: 1. Accessibility.
 The provisions on accessibility will allow the bankruptcy trustee to take certain actions in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Armenia on behalf of local proceedings in other countries.
On the other hand, the manager of the proceedings in another state (hereinafter referred to as foreign proceedings) (hereinafter referred to as the foreign manager) will have the right to apply to the courts of the Republic of Armenia to submit an application for recognition of the foreign proceedings in which he has been appointed manager.
 After the recognition, the foreign manager will have the opportunity to participate in the bankruptcy proceedings against the same debtor in the Republic of Armenia, to demand the application of such measures that will not allow causing harm to the creditors.
2. Recognition.
  The provisions on recognition will allow recognizing bankruptcy proceedings in the territory of another state in the Republic of Armenia.
 The main purpose of recognition is to assist in proceedings in another state, but, in addition, the foreign manager, as already mentioned, will have the opportunity to participate in any proceedings in which the debtor participates.
3. Judicial assistance.
 A key element of legal aid is the suspension of lawsuits against the debtor or enforcement proceedings against the debtor's property after the recognition of foreign proceedings, as well as the suspension of the debtor's right to alienate or encumber his property.
Moreover, the operation of such a moratorium starts automatically, immediately from the moment of recognition of the foreign proceedings.
  The purpose of the suspension of lawsuits is to give the debtor the opportunity to "breathe", and the suspension of the alienation of property in the conditions of globalization of the modern economic system, to prevent the transfer of funds and property to another country.
4. Cooperation։ coordination.
 In the sense of standard law, co-operation takes place both between the courts and the bankruptcy trustees, and recognition is not required for its implementation.
 As for coordination, this refers to the cases when bankruptcy proceedings are conducted against the same debtor in the territory of both states.
  In this regard, the Standard Law establishes the "hotchpot" rule, which does not allow one of the creditors to gain an advantage over other creditors by filing a claim in the territory of different states, by obtaining satisfaction of its claims.
An effective document in the field of international bankruptcy in the field of international bankruptcy is the EU regulation, which aims to "… the proper functioning of the internal market to avoid actions by parties aimed at transferring assets or litigation from one Member State to another Member State with a view to gaining more benefits." Legal status (forum shopping) ”(4th term).
It should be noted that the above two legal documents are quite similar in terms of regulations; they can be a guideline for more effective and fair settlement of international bankruptcy in developing countries.
 One of the important similarities between these two international instruments is that it is permissible to conduct parallel bankruptcy proceedings against the same debtor in different states, providing for a wide range of mutual assistance and cooperation between these proceedings.
  The current European experience shows that the principle of expedited proceedings can be used quite effectively if the conditions for cooperation are met, both between states and courts, as well as between bankruptcy trustees.
In this regard, we strongly support the adoption of the law regulating the field of international bankruptcy in the Republic of Armenia, for which the regulations of the Standard Law and the EU regulation can be the basis.
 The UN General Assembly in its 1997 In Resolution 52/158 of December 15, 2006, justifying the adoption of the UNCITRAL Standard Law, it directly stated the need for the adoption of that text.
 It is no coincidence that UNICTRAL emphasizes the fact that states should not change the provisions of the Standard Law as much as possible when adopting a law regulating international bankruptcy.
 Standard law currently operates in 43 countries around the world, including Australia, Canada, Greece, the United States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and other countries.
 The draft law was also developed in Russia on the basis of a standard law.
Problems of international bankruptcy settlement-bankruptcy. In cases where the parties or assets involved in the bankruptcy proceedings are located in different States, complex questions may arise as to the validity or legality of those assets, rights or other claims, as well as the right of the asset regime to apply to the bankruptcy proceedings.
 In the case of such proceedings, the court should, as a rule, apply the norms of private international law (or collision norms) to clarify which law should be applied to determine the right or legal force or claim in relation to their procedure or bankruptcy proceedings.
 It should be noted that according to the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia, the collision-legal regulation of international bankruptcy is completely absent.
  There is no unequivocal collision rate that will determine the status of an international bankruptcy; it will distinguish it from other collision ties.
 The only collision norm that can be defined to some extent as a collision norm determining the status of an international bankruptcy is Article 1272 of the Civil Code, according to which the issues of termination of a legal entity are determined by the latter's personal law, and bankruptcy proceedings can be considered termination of a legal entity. (in case of liquidation) process.
 This insolvency norm alone cannot solve the many issues related to the bankruptcy relationship with the foreign element that arise in the debtor's bankruptcy proceedings.
It should be noted that the UNCITRAL International Bankruptcy Law does not contain unified conflict-of-laws provisions for states that have adopted the Standard Law, in which case these issues are left to the practice of the existing rules.
  Collision-legal regulation in the field of international bankruptcy is envisaged by the European Parliament (Article 4).
  There is also a separate article on the conflict-legal settlement in the RF Bill on Transnational Insolvency (Article 7).
  The issues of conflict-of-law regulation of international bankruptcy are currently set out in more detail in the UNCITRAL Guide to Insolvency Legislation adopted by the Legislature in 2004 [14], with the latter մոտեց the EU's approach to conflict-of-law regulation is almost identical.
According to the most common approach, bankruptcy proceedings are regulated by the law of the state in which it was initiated (lex fori concursus).
The right to be applied to the validity of rights և claims. The provisions of the Bankruptcy Law do not explicitly "create" rights (personal or property) or claims, but ensure the observance of the rights and claims acquired through debt in accordance with the norms of other law, whether civil or public.
 The subject matter of bankruptcy law is the determination of the status of each of these claims after the bankruptcy proceedings, and, if necessary, the implementation of such restrictions and amendments that will incorporate those claims and rights into the bankruptcy proceedings to achieve the collective objectives of the proceedings.
 These limits and restrictions are "after bankruptcy" because they arise from the force of initiating bankruptcy proceedings against the debtor.
In the context of international bankruptcy, it is necessary to distinguish between the court's application of the law by virtue of the law subject to the collision rule, the origin of claims, such claims and the consequences of bankruptcy for rights.
 As it has already been mentioned, the bankruptcy legislation does not create rights և claims, the solution of the questions whether this or that specific right or claim is valid, բովանդակ the content of such a claim or right, refers to the sphere of regulation of general collision norms.
  For example, general collision rules usually stipulate that the lex rei sitae must determine the existence of a secured right to real estate in favor of this arbitrary creditor, and so on.
 In this area, the court must apply its own conflict-of-laws rules, including the provisions of any existing international treaty.
In the case of bankruptcy proceedings, the court must, as a rule, apply its own conflict-of-laws rules to determine what right should govern the validity or legal force of a claim or claim before referring to that claim or legal regime in pre-bankruptcy proceedings.
 It can be stressed that the decision of validity or legal force is not a matter of bankruptcy. it is regulated by the norms of other applicable law.
The right to be applied to bankruptcy proceedings: Lex fori concursus. Once the validity of a particular claim has been determined, the legal force in accordance with the right that is defined as applicable in accordance with the court's collision rules remains the second question, which concerns the consequences of such a claim or right in the bankruptcy proceedings, ie The question of whether the given right or claim will be recognized will be included in the scope of the proceedings, and if so, in what status.
This question concerns the field of bankruptcy.
 From the point of view of the law of collision, the question that arises in the second stage presupposes the decision of the right that should be applied to the bankruptcy.
  The situation is typical when the issues of initiation, implementation, completion, as well as management of such a procedure are regulated by the law of the state in which the bankruptcy procedure was initiated, ie lex fori concursus.
 These issues usually include the determination of the scope of debtors to whom the provisions of the Bankruptcy Law may apply, the parties on whose initiative the bankruptcy proceedings may be instituted, the consequences of the proceedings, including the scope of the moratorium, the scope of asset management, the rights and functions of the participants. priority հերթական the order of satisfaction, the rules of satisfaction.
  Accordingly, this law will regulate the consequences of bankruptcy for a claim, including those acquired in accordance with foreign law, such as whether, by nature and conditions, this right or claim, as well as the possible sequence of its satisfaction, may be included in the debtor. within the framework of bankruptcy proceedings.
Problems may arise when the law governing the order of claims and the applicable law (non-bankruptcy law) governing claims are different.
 The current categories of claims priority benefits (for example, the law provides for certain benefits for secured creditors, the individual claims of the financier under the financial recovery program are met first), and the order in which they are met is always determined by the lex fori concursus.
 As a rule, the bankruptcy legislation allows for the introduction of such categories համապատասխան in order to establish such a claim in accordance with national legislation.
  At the same time, the creditor's claim may arise in accordance with foreign law.
  In such a case, there is a need to determine that the requirements arising in accordance with foreign law can be considered equivalent to those requirements for which certain privileges and priorities are defined in accordance with national law.
 In other words, it is necessary to determine whether a right arising in accordance with a foreign law is a type of law in which lex fori concursus establishes a special status in the context of bankruptcy proceedings.
 The criteria used to resolve this issue are as follows: Do the two requirements (taking into account their main content - functions) correspond to each other to the extent that they are considered "functionally interchangeable"?
  If this question is answered in the affirmative, the claims must be considered adequate and used in the same way during the bankruptcy proceedings.
  In cases where such equivalence cannot be established, the claim is normally accepted as a normal claim.
Exceptions to the lex fori concursus may be allowed for financial markets which, as stated in the law of many countries, should be excluded from the scope of the lex fori concursus.
 In the event of a return to the marketable market, it is possible to avoid interfering in the regulated market in the event of bankruptcy of one of the participants, which will help maintain an environment of general confidence in the market, as well as avoid systemic risks (Article 27 of EU Rules Article 4, Part 4).
A number of bankruptcy laws provide for exceptions to the lex fori concursus regulation of bankruptcy rights.
 This approach assumes that the law that determines property rights must determine not only their origin and general validity, but also their legal force in bankruptcy proceedings.
 In other words, the status of the property right secured during the bankruptcy proceedings in another state should be determined not by the lex fori concursus, but by the bankruptcy law applicable to the secured right.
  Otherwise, the use of lex fori concursus may damage the legal framework of collateral lending, which may lead to an increase in instability, which in turn may lead to an increase in the value of financing in the domestic market.
 If the foreign proceedings affect the locally secured interests, the value of such secured interests may be seriously violated.
 Similarly, relocating the debtor's business interests to another state could lead to a radical change in the status of the secured party.
Summing up the above, we can conclude that the legal regulation of the international bankruptcy sector is an objective necessity for Armenia, especially when the work on reforming the bankruptcy legislation is underway.
  We consider that when envisaging legal regulation of the sphere, it is necessary to rely extensively on the legal documents developed in the international practice, effectively regulating this sphere.
In general, only a limited number of countries have a legal framework that adequately supports international trade investment requirements.
 At present, the investment of foreign capital is actively encouraged in Armenia, so the provision of effective regulation of the international bankruptcy sector in the national legislation will allow making decisions that will be more in line with the interests of creditors and debtors, will ensure judicial cooperation between states.
    The existence of such mechanisms in the law of a state is assessed as a favorable factor for foreign trade in that country.
LITERATURE [2] RA Constitutional Court, 2008 Decision SDO-735 of February 25.
11, 2016, ss. 3266–3270, URL.
 http:
//e-koncept.ru/2016/86689.htm. URL.
http:
//economy.gov.ru/minec/activity/sections/corpmanagment/bankruptcy/doc20110
225_04 (date of address.
 15.08.2017). Official Journal of the European Communities, 30.6.2000, L 160/1, URL.
http:
//eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ.
L:
2000.
160.
0001.
0018.
en.
PDF.URL.
 http:
//www.uncitral.org/uncitral/ru/uncitral_texts/insolvency/1997Model.html. Kristine Alexanyan THE ISSUES OF LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF INTERNATIONAL BANKRUPTCY IN ARMENIA
