COVERAGE OF ARMED CONFLICTS AND TERRORIST ACTIVITIES IN GLOBAL MEDIA News of war և armed conflicts is always at the forefront of the world media.
 India, Pakistan, Israel, Palestine, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria have remained in the "hot" spots of the world.
 1990s Religious and local wars erupted in the former Yugoslavia, Nagorno-Karabakh, Chechnya, and South and North Ossetia.
1989-1994 94 conflicts were registered, only 4 of them were interstate.
At present, the aim of armed conflicts, especially between world leaders, is not to destroy the enemy, but to "subdue" him.
 However, the hostilities in Iraq in 2003 have shown that large-scale wars have not gone down in history.
Coverage of wars և armed conflicts on television is a source of controversy among media մասնագետspecialists investigating journalists' issues և.
  There are several approaches to this issue.
 According to the first point of view, television, especially global television, aims to raise its coverage, to justify one of the parties, to blame the other.
  The Chechen war is a vivid example.
  CNN International և BBC World reports 1999 from December to 2000 In March, they highlighted the issue of refugees, including interviews with people who had suffered from federal troops, thus creating a picture of the unjust policy of the Russian government towards Chechnya.
  "Journalists of global TV channels are not looking for the explanation of the real reasons for the armed struggle, they are not able to assess the situation objectively," Russian newspapers wrote.
Quite often, the TV channels follow the second way of covering the conflicts, presenting the opinions of the two conflicting parties.
 Thus, the representatives of Israel and Palestine were invited to the discussion on the Middle East crisis on global television.
  This is one of the most effective means of coverage, as the main reason for the clashes is the huge difference of ideologies and different approaches.
  This method of coverage allows each party to express themselves fully.
Despite this, it should be noted that CNN was constantly criticizing Israel in its coverage of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
 Camera, which has covered Western media coverage of the Middle East crisis, has repeatedly said that CNN reports on Israel contain errors, not a general analysis, often a mockery of the facts.
 Camera notes that CNN is friendly with the Palestinians and extremely critical of Israel. For example, in one of its reports, CNN made it clear that the Muslim population was declining because of Israel's tough policies.
 CNN, of course, did not admit its mistake.
 But a real scandal erupted when CNN founder Ted Turner in 2002. He publicly accused the Palestinians of having the same terrorist ambitions as the Israelis, which infuriated the Israeli government.
 At that time, Israel was about to remove CNN from its satellite television system.
 With great effort, CNN executives "proved" that Turner 1 For more details see http.
with reference to //www.kp.ru/online/news/1926711/.
2 See http for more details.
//edition.cnn.com/2014/12/13/world/meast/isis-violence/index.html?hpt=imi_c2 link.
3 See Gilboa E., The Global News Networks and US Policy Making in Defense and Foreign Affairs, Harvard University, 2002.
has no bearing on CNN's information policy.
 Of course, some theorists also saw a financial incentive here, as Israel demanded that CNN reduce the price of subscriptions by 40 percent in its territory, but the political context is more obvious.
  It should be noted that Al-Jazeera, in an attempt to balance coverage of the Middle East conflict, often criticizes both the Pakistani Autonomy and Israel.
  BBC World journalists have encountered this problem.
 2003 In July, articles appeared in the press about the anger of the Israeli government against the films shown by BBC World about Israel's strategy.
  More than a decade has passed since these events, but the events in Ukraine have proved that the global media still has a problem with the establishment of a balanced media.
 This time Russia Today was attacked by CNN և BBC.
Global media, however, has many advantages.
 First of all, the correspondents of the global TV companies must be in the center of events.
  This approach is not new.
 At the annual European Media Forum, BBC correspondent Martin Bell said that cold-hearted journalism should be replaced by "participatory" journalism, which requires the journalist not only to record facts, but also to express sincere feelings.
  "A journalist is not an observer, but a participant in events," says Bell.
  At the end of his speech, he tells a case related to a journalist who wanted to write about a sniper.
 Standing next to the sniper, the journalist asks. "What do you see?"
 The sniper answers. "I see two people walking on the street.
  Which of them should I kill? ”
  The question remained unanswered, the journalist left terrified.
  Then two shots were heard behind him, he heard the sound of a sniper. "What a pity, you could have saved the life of one of them!"
 Bell notes that danger is not a template for a journalist.
 He later published his concept in the British Journalism Review, to which British Journalism Veteran John Simpson, Editor-in-Chief of the BBC International Media, responded.
 Belle was accused, saying that the journalist is not obliged, he should not express his thoughts.
  "We give people facts, they can make assumptions personally.
  "Should we teach them how to evaluate events?" Writes Simpson 3.
 The latter notices that if you want to influence people's mentality, become a politician, and if you want to tell people about what is happening, become a journalist.
It should be noted that global TV channels are improving their ratings by covering armed conflicts, ethnic cleansing and terrorism.
 The competition between the TV companies has reached the point where the media researchers differentiate the spheres of influence of the TV companies.
  If CNN was the main informant during the Persian Gulf conflicts, then BBC World was the main one in the wake of the Kosovo crisis and the riots of Timor-Leste.
The connection between television and terrorism has often been the subject of controversy.
 When reporting on terrorist acts on the air, the journalists draw the attention of the world community to this issue, which means that terrorism has "free" advertisements.
 On the other hand, it is impossible to remain silent about this not only due to the people's right to be informed, but also to use the world's political and diplomatic forces and ties to solve the problem.
  2001 On September 11, the whole world felt captive, everyone felt powerless, at the same time realizing that this situation was exactly the goal achieved by the scriptwriters and directors of the terrorist act.
 The role of global TV companies in 2001 The coverage of the September 11 terrorist attacks cannot be assessed unequivocally.
  Coverage of terrorism would not be so effective if millions of people did not follow the terrorists' actions live.
The British newspaper Observer called the September tragedy the biggest PR trick of terrorism in the history of mankind4.
  The terrorists had calculated everything. The break between the first plane, which crashed into the World Trade Center, and the "second plane" was 18 minutes.
  During that time, all the global TV channels showed everything without a break.
  "The first plane was to capture 2 Debate Flares Over whether Journalists Should Ever Stray from Objectivity // Europe Media Forum.
 News Traditions & Transitions, 4 See Hobsbawm J., On Public Relations.
 How They Held All of Us Hostage // The Observer, 2001, September 16.
"The attention of the media, the second one, should have used the opportunity of direct influence, as the TV channels were already broadcasting terrorism live," says Professor Deppa.
The world's TV stations immediately agreed to help each other և exchange the received information և videos.
 However, the media was flooded with vague "unreliable information" related to information chaos and panic.
 The incident was reported in the US by TV channels that did not broadcast political news at all. ABC was broadcast on sports ESPN, and music on MTV CN VH-1 on CNN.
After September 11, the global media started airing with permanent headlines. "America's New War", "America in a State of War", etc.
 In the early days, CNN began to tell about Afghanistan, where it is located, how it should be besieged, what military equipment will be used.
  On the one hand, television in those days was an irreplaceable source of information, but on the other hand, the global media became effective in the hands of terrorist terrorists.
 2001 Then the term "international terrorism" entered the global media vocabulary.
  However, this was a great experience for media moguls in their future work.
In general, it should be noted that international news broadcasting has changed significantly over the last 15-20 years.
 If during the war in the Persian Gulf, CNN International was the only one with its exclusive videos, other TV channels were already broadcasting during the events in Iraq.
  CNN, BBC, Euronews, SkyNews covered the hostilities around the clock.
  Their rival became the already famous Al-Jazeera era Al-Arabiya.
Nowadays, the world seems to be concentrated in Syria, where the ongoing civil war is not calming down.
 The ways of coverage and comments are different.
  Let's talk about The New York Times և The Washington Times, the Syrian war coverage mechanisms.
Throughout the coverage of the Syrian civil war, these two periodicals do not hide their negative attitude towards the regime of Bashar Assad, they actively encourage the opposition, whose goal is to overthrow the president.
  This reason is largely due to the interests of US foreign policy. Syria has always been of interest to the West, first of all, as a country with the richest oil resources.
2012 year. from January to 2013 The New York Times published more than 324 news and analytical articles on the Syrian conflict in January.
  Publications provide insights into the mainstays of the propaganda campaign.
First of all, The New York Times և The Washington Times were extreme in their assessments.
 Representatives of the opposition, who are fighting against the Assad regime, were presented by them as heroes, and Assad himself, the political circle supporting him, as anti-heroes.
  The former are fighting for their sovereignty and independence, the latter are clinging to power, ready to destroy those who will try to restore the country's sovereignty2.
 To confirm this, let us refer to 2 articles in The New York Times.
  Describing the rebels, the newspaper assures that they are ready to sacrifice themselves with determination, only to stop the progress of Assad's destructive regime3.
  Speaking about the Syrian government, The NewYork Times theorist E. Barnard mentions that it kills its people not only physically, but also curses moral character4.
 It is noticeable that the representatives of the opposition are not accepted by the newspaper as violators of the law, although by fighting against the current government and organizing widespread military operations throughout the country, they are breaking the law.
1 Made-for-TV terrorism.
  Networks and Stations Scramble to Cover the Attacks that Shook the Nation // Broadcasting & Cable, 2001,2 For more details, see http: // www.
//www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/dozens-killed-in-attack-in-central-syria/2012/12/11/021d344043d6-11e2-8061-253bccfc7532_story.html.
3 See http for more details.
//www.nytimes.com/2012/02/24/opinion/how-to-halt-the-butchery-in-syria.html.
4 See http for more details.
//lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/06/13/a-rare-view-of-conflict-in-syria/?_r=0.
Newspapers are distinguished by the fact that they make the choice and comparison of facts, which is not always objective.
  If, for example, the government forces are found guilty of the massacre of civilians, the newspapers criticize them severely.
The situation definitely changes when civilians are killed through the fault of an opposition force. In this case, the losses are presented as "insignificant".
  The New YorkTimes even voiced the idea that those killed might be wearing the uniforms of pro-government militants who had confused the rebels.
 A vivid example of this is the destruction of a Turkish warplane in Syria.
  Immediately after the incident, the newspapers rushed to accuse Syria of displaying aggressive behavior against neighboring countries2.
  However, the mentioned materials do not say anything about why the Turkish pilot appeared in the territory of Syria, what was his purpose.
 And this is in the case when Turkey has never hidden that in the current situation it sympathizes more with the opposition than with the Syrian government.
 The reason why the newspapers did not pay attention to all this is explained only from their political point of view.
 2012 year. The New York Times և The Washington Times has been actively circulating the issue of secret stockpiles of mass weapons in Syria since January.
  The two newspapers reported that the supplier of these weapons was Iraq in the early 2000s, which was ruled by Saddam Hussein.
  At the same time, it was impossible to understand in the publications whether these weapons really exist, what they are, what opportunities they have.
The New York Times և The Washington Times skillfully uses democratic values ​​as weapons for their propaganda: freedom, security, civil elections, loyalty, etc.
 If the Syrian president and his entourage are presented as violators of democratic values, and the rebels, on the contrary, as advocates of the preservation of those values.
The examples given, in fact, show the desire of these two newspapers to divide the parties to the Syrian conflict "with us" and "against us".
Analyzing the situation in Syria, The New York Times և The Washington Times not only raises military-political issues, but also pays attention to the behavior of Bashar Assad կնոջ His wife Asma Assad։.
  Thus, the Syrian president is characterized as tough, rude, ruthless.
 For example, The New York Times blamed Assad եց and put all the responsibility for the war on his shoulders3.
  In its turn, The Washington Times noted that Assad personally dealt with the issue of juvenile conscription, turning a blind eye to the existence of sexual violence by his military in war zones.
 As for the president's wife, she is presented in a mocking tone, who reads love novels and modern foreign magazines4.
  From all this, the peculiarities of the orientation of these two American newspapers become clear.
At the same time, the global media must realize its role in presenting a fair combination of impartial facts, as it shapes public opinion in the world.
 In this case, the viewer should not feel the huge barrier between the East and the West.
Amalya Karapetyan COVERAGE OF ARMED CONFLICTS AND TERRORISM IN GLOBAL MEDIA Keywords: global media, armed conflict, coverage, terrorism.
