ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT OF MOUNTAIN RELIEF AND METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS FROM FLIGHTS AT LOW ALTITUDES (EXAMPLE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA)
  They have a great influence on the organization of flights և ensuring safety [1, 4, 5, 6, 7].
 All this has its manifestations in the territory of Armenia, in particular, in low-altitude, mountainous flights, where the terrain creates a variety of climatic conditions and complexities, peculiarities of the emergence, development and transformation of atmospheric fronts and intra-mass phenomena [3], which in turn has on the organization and security of aviation work.
Mountainous areas are those that have an altitude of 1000 m above sea level, areas that have a radius of 25 km have an altitude of 500 m above sea level.
  As it is known, the territory of Armenia occupies the north-eastern mountainous part of the Armenian Highland, which is distinguished by the complex and multifaceted relief.
  Here, on a small area, such reliefs as high mountains, deep gorges, plateaus, depressions, etc. can appear at the same time.
  The average height of the territory of Armenia is 1800 m above sea level.
  About 90% of the area is 1500 m, 40% is 2500 m բարձր higher, only 10% is up to 1000 m.
 The highest point of the country is Mount Aragats (4090 m), the lowest points are about 350400 m high, which are located in the northeast (Debed river gorge) and southeast (on the banks of the Araks).
 The Ararat Valley extends from 800 to 1000 m above sea level.
Thus, as can be seen from the above, the territory of Armenia is a typical mountainous country.
  The latter, in turn, have an impact here, especially on the organization and safety of low-altitude aviation flights.
 According to aviation documents, low flights are flights from 100 to 1000 m above the ground [4,6, 7].
 These flights are directly affected by the climatic conditions observed in the terrestrial layer, which are more complicated in mountainous conditions.
  Separate flights of the RA military aviation and civil aviation are mainly carried out on these heights.
According to the standards adopted in aviation, depending on the meteorological conditions, the following classifications are distinguished after determining the degree of complexity of flights1. "Non-flying weather" means the weather conditions in which one or more dangerous aviation events are observed at the airport, on a separate flight path or on the runway, in which case a safe flight is impossible; "Complicated meteorological conditions" are the conditions under which flights are restricted or suspended in certain cases.
 Such weather conditions mainly refer to the heights of the lower surfaces of the clouds, limited horizontal visibility, in some cases also strong winds, 3. "Minimum weather conditions" are those weather conditions where the values ​​of low cloudiness and limited horizontal visibility are within the minimum permissible limit range for a given flight, in which case air-safe flights can still be performed; "Clear meteorological conditions" are the weather conditions in which meteorological meteorological phenomena are not observed for aviation, there are no puddle clouds up to 1500 m high, the horizontal visibility is more than the minimum, etc.
The impact of mountainous terrain, meteorological conditions on low-altitude flights in Armenia has been little or almost not studied.
  In this work we have tried to assess the impact of mountainous terrain, meteorological conditions on flights.
  Carrying out such work օգտագործ Using the results in the preparation of flight plans can greatly contribute to the efficiency of their safe implementation.
Low flights in mountainous areas can be described by the following conditions [1] .- In mountainous conditions, the orientation of the visible horizon becomes more difficult.
 This is due to the limited relief environment և due to the fact that the horizon orientations are less or less frequent here.
 In such conditions, the flights are complicated especially by the constant "shift" of the so-called mountains and the invisible weather conditions of the opposite slopes.
 The latter can be a great danger, especially in cases when the signs of dangerous meteorological phenomena for aviation are not visible, եխն flying equipment may appear in them when crossing the opposite slope, as a result of which the probability of aviation accident or even crash increases, - mountainous meteorological situation is very unstable especially on the slopes of a very small space և of different positions, up to 500-1000 m altitude wind turbulent winds of different directions are observed, which cause the aircraft to shake, violating their aerodynamic forces, - dangerous aviation avalanches in mountainous areas. Thunderstorm, heavy precipitation, fog, low cloudiness, wind deviations, gusts,turbulence, freezing areas, etc.) is often difficult, impossible due to the closed slopes of the mountain slopes, peaks or fog, as well as the lack of other air inlets and exits.
  Under these conditions, it is strictly forbidden to enter such hearths, especially fogs, in low clouds, according to aviation documents, as the probability of collision of flying equipment with mountains or other objects increases, as they can cause electrification, freezing and shaking of equipment. Typical upstream currents (upstream gradients of which reach 5 m / s և more at every 100 m) lead to rapid thunderstorms, which are often accompanied by lightning-thunderstorms, heavy rainfall, wind deflections, eruptions, etc. .
 During the cold period of the year (November-March) in the mountainous regions there is a high frequency of limited horizontal visibility (2000–2500 m [4]), fog, low cloud cover (up to 200–300 m [4]), snowstorm Gylen.
  These phenomena create difficult meteorological conditions for flights or often non-flight seasons.
Thus, in mountainous terrain, such as the territory of Armenia, difficult meteorological conditions are created for flights at low altitudes, with minimal, often non-flying, weather conditions.
  When different weather conditions occur on a very small area - often in different parts of the same air mass, on the windward slopes of the mountain slopes.
Studies show that in the case of intrusions of different bar systems, air masses, atmospheric fronts in the territory of Armenia, different weather conditions are observed at different altitudes in different regions.
  The implementation of flights in this situation requires a fairly thorough study of the aviation weather, the identification of meteorological hazard zones for aviation, the development of appropriate forecasts that will ensure the maximum possible safe flight.
In the territory of Armenia, often in the cold half of the year, in the lower part of the front, in the middle of the year, the strong massive pile-sand clouds can be widespread, which create difficult meteorological conditions for flights, minimal weather, often non-flying weather.
 Flights in these areas may be restricted or suspended.
During the year, the lower limits of cloudiness in Armenia are at an average altitude of 400-500 m.
 During the cold period of the year, especially in the mountainous regions, they have an average height of 250-300 m, often lower, up to 100 m, and in case of crossing the fronts, an adequate fog is observed.
 Moreover, the heights of the lower part of the clouds undergo large changes in space-time, which are observed on average on the same mountain slope for an average of 50-100 m, often up to 150-250 m.
  During the year, the average heights of cloudiness are in the areas up to 2000 m, 1000-1500 m, and in the areas above 2000 m, 600-1000, often at the altitudes of 400-600 m.
 Studies show that at low altitudes of up to 16001800 m, the frequency of low-visibility, limited horizontal visibility is high in December-January, and at altitudes above 1800 m, in November-March.
The air-climatic conditions in Armenia in spring-summer period are especially unstable and difficult due to intra-mass cloudiness, lightning-thunderstorms, turbulent winds, gusts, heavy precipitation with frequent hail, late afternoon winds and snow-capped winds, etc. with low clouds, fog, limited horizontal visibility, freezing.
 In other words, meteorological situations are observed here, which create weather conditions of different complexity for the flights.
Fog is the number one cause of deterioration in horizontal visibility, followed by fog, snowstorms, heavy rains, dust storms, fog, fog, and more.
 These phenomena become extremely dangerous, especially for military aircraft flying at low altitudes in mountainous conditions.
Studies show that in Armenia, the average annual rainfall is 45 days, in about 60% of which the horizontal visibility deteriorates to 2000 m, and in the case of hail it can decrease sharply to 100-200 m (average number of hail days). varies from 9 to 23 days).
  If the limited horizontal visibility in case of heavy precipitation creates difficulties for the flight, in the case of hail, in addition, depending on the size of the hail grain, the surface of the flying equipment may suffer mechanical damage.
There are frequent cases when in clear or slightly cloudy weather (1-3 degrees of sky cover) in case of strong winds (15-20 m / s և more) (which are mainly due to uneven heating of the area and differences in atmospheric pressure due to local circulation At the same time on the mountain slopes up to 1000-1500 m altitude և with a radius of 10-15 km an atmospheric-turbulent zone is observed.
 The flying equipment, appearing in this zone, is subjected to shaking, which affects the aerodynamic forces of the flying equipment, violating the flight course, speed, etc.
 To avoid such situations, flights must be carried out at an altitude of at least 900-1000 m from the highest point of the area.
Accumulated cloud clouds due to intra-frontal processes, which have foci of heavy precipitation and thunderstorms, can often cover the entire air route, creating non-flight modes for flights.
  According to aviation documents, it is strictly forbidden to enter such clouds with clouds.
 Heavy precipitation և Lightning-thunderstorm is observed in the territory of Armenia mainly during the warm period of the year.
  The average number of days with lightning-thunderstorms is from 45 to 95 days, the recurrence of which is higher in areas higher than 1800 m.
Taking into account the results of the above-mentioned studies, the flight equipment crew, in order to ensure the meteorological safety of the flight, is obliged to thoroughly study and analyze all the observed meteorological phenomena before the flight (even in simple meteorological conditions). Peculiarities of the relief of the area, possible ways of bypassing them in case of meteorological complex conditions.
 Only if these requirements are met will it be possible to fly safely at low altitudes in the mountains.
Literature 1. Yepremyan M., Evaluation of aeronautical conditions at Erebuni Airport և Low cloudiness assessment, summary of the dissertation of YSU, Candidate of Geographical Sciences, Yerevan, 2014, 26 pages.
2. Physical Geography of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1971, 469 pages.
3. Surenyan G., Synoptic analysis of the baric fields that shape the weather conditions of the Republic of Armenia, summary of the dissertation of the candidate of geographical sciences, Yerevan, 2010, 22 pages.
Mamikon YepremyanLERNAYIN relief and ODEREVUTABANAKAN CONDITIONS IMPACT ASSESSMENT Low AFFECT FLYING (the pattern) Keywords mountainous terrain, low flights, low cloudiness, horizontal sahmanapaktesaneliutyun, non-flying ways in difficult weather conditions, minimum, barikakan of weather, atmospheric front, freezing , electrification, shaking of flying equipment, fog, lightning, murmur, wind deflection, mountain valley wind.
