THE MIGRATION OF CRIME ARMENIANS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NOR NAKHICHEVAN New Nakhichevan, one of the largest Armenian colonies in Russia, has played a significant role in the Armenian social, political and cultural life.
Russian-Turkish 1768-1774 After the secession of the Crimean shop after the war and the declaration of independence from the Ottoman Empire, the Russian diplomacy used all possible means to annex Crimea peacefully.
 In the conditions of the intense struggle for the appropriation of the uncultivated geopolitics of the south of Russia, for the stabilization of the population, for the annexation of Crimea, the problem of the deportation of the Christian peninsula population matured.
  Bringing the Christian population out of Crimea would mean great material damage to the khan, deprive him of his main sources of income, and put him in economic dependence on Russia.
At the same time, it was possible to populate the uninhabited steppes of Novorossia with trade, crafts, agriculture, cultivating barren lands for centuries, and revitalizing economic life.
  And in 1778 The deportation of the Christian population of Crimea in the spring of 1918 became one of the key links in the policy of the government of Empress Catherine II in Southern Russia.
Thus, the policy of Peter I in the Caucasus was continued by Catherine II (1762-1796), "expressing her consent to the restoration of the Armenian state under Russian auspices."
 This, in turn, implied the strengthening of the Christian element in the Caucasus, its use in the southern direction of Russian geopolitics1.
1778 Both Armenian and Russian authors have addressed the issue of emigration of Armenians and Greeks from Crimea in one way or another.
  Most of them, including Leon, A. Markich, M. Nersisyan, P. Nadinsky, G. According to Patkanyan, the Russian government has taken this step to implement its foreign policy accounts in a faster, easier way, and some - R. Patkanyan, H. Ter-Abrahamyan, yielding to the widespread misconception about Catherine II as a "defender" of Christians and a "proponent of freedom", thinks that the Russian Empress's migration was motivated by her loving feelings towards Christian peoples2.
  1872 ղրիմագետ Ա. Markich writes that the Russian government intended to take the khan into its own hands, to stop him from using the money of the Russian court and charity in general.
 This opinion is unconditionally shared by K. Kushneryan, which 2 Mikaelyan V., History of the Armenian Colony in Crimea, Yerevan, 1964, p. 340.
was well aware of the resettlement documents.
  The aim of the tsarist government to expel the Armenians from the Greeks was given the same assessment by academician M. By Nersisyan 1.
Until now, researchers have accepted the history of the deportation of the Crimean population to 1778. From the beginning of March 1945, two decrees issued by Catherine II addressed to Field Marshal Rumyants և Potyomkin.
 Empress, G. In a decree sent to Potemkin, informing Rumyants of the contents of the decree, he demanded that proper management be exercised so that the new migrants would not only not need supplies after entering the Russian border, but would also be given sufficient land and royal benefits to build their houses.
On the basis of the highest imperial decrees, Potemkin's "Rumyants" issued official orders to the commander of the Crimean troops Prosorovsky, the Russian plenipotentiary representative to the khan Kostandinov, the governor and other officials to prepare the migration.
 Kostandinov, who had lived in the Crimea for a long time and had studied the rules of the shop very well, summoned the Greek metropolitan Ignatius to urge him to contribute to this cause, promising great privileges to the people and great honors.
 He makes similar promises to the caring leader of the Armenian Apostles, Archimandrite Petros Markosyan, and to the leader of the Catholic Armenians, Archimandrite Hakob Varderesovich.
 The latter give their consent, but do not promise success, because the case was very difficult, they wanted to consult with the leaders of their community, discuss the details of the case, and then announce their decision, offer some conditions 3.
The case of organizing emigration gets a certain process when in 1778 In April, Prozorovsky was replaced in the government's resettlement policy by the already recognized, determined and energetic General Alexander Vasilich Suvorov.
 1778 On May 17, 1945, Prince Potemkin issued a special decree ordering Suvorov to immediately begin the deportation of Crimean Christians to Armenia and Greece as soon as possible4.
In order to accelerate the emigration, Suvorov buys the food of the emigrants, promises to pay the value of the real estate from the state treasury, satisfies the other problems that make Christians hesitant. Օ On August 18, 1778, he reported to Rumyants that the first group of emigrants (3896 people) had left for Russia.
 Armenians were mentally reconciled with the idea of ​​emigrating, but in reality it was not easy to leave the country where they had lived for centuries, to create their life, rich culture.
 The second group of migrants leaves on August 22, and the third, the last caravan, on September 18, although in the following months the departure of small groups of Christians to the Russian border, Perekop fortress, continues.
  The number of Christians in Crimea was 40,000.
 31,386 people left Crimea. The Greeks numbered 18,407, the Armenians 12,598, the Georgians 219, and the Wallachians 1625.
1 Nersisyan M., Suvorov և Armenian-Russian relations, Yerevan, 1944.
2 Shahaziz E., New Nakhichevan և new-Nakhichentsik, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1903, page 31.
3 In the same place.
4 Nersisyan M., page 7.
5 Bagdykov G., Short History of Nakhichevan-on-Don, Rostov-on-Don, 2013, p. 9. Barkhudaryan V., History of the Armenian colony of Nor Nakhijjan (1779-1861), Yerevan, 1967, p. 36.
Subsequent events showed that the Russian government had done very little to accommodate the newcomers, և such a situation led to great losses, deprivations և victims.
 To the surprise of the migrants, when they gradually reach the Dnieper, the valley between the Samara and Oryol rivers, where they live, it turns out that there is no free space, some are already inhabited, and others are inhabited by other migrants.
 The Crimean-Armenians, accustomed to mild climates, could not withstand the frosts of the steppe winter, many of them are victims of colds and widespread diseases.
1779 In numerous petitions written by Crimean Armenians to Suvorov and Potyomkin Չ to General-Governor Chertkov of Azov Province ալի the catastrophic situation of the deported Armenians was fully expressed in the complaints1.
Spending the winter with great difficulties, in 1779. At the beginning of the 19th century, the Armenians sent two delegates to St. Petersburg to take care of the relocation.
  They glorified Garabed, the son of Ter Voskan, or Garabed Voskanov; I glorified the resurrection of Ignatius, the son of Mahdes, who died in St. Petersburg.
  Their efforts probably do not yield tangible results, as Garabed's letter to Potemkin states that the Armenians had received Potyomkin's consent in 1779. In the spring, the whole community moved to St. Dmitry Rostovsky Castle.
 And since that promise was not fulfilled, the Armenians continue to apply to Potyomkin, not forgetting to turn to Suvorov, Lazaryans and Arghutyan for help.
  Another deputy is sent before the caravan of migrants to get acquainted with the conditions of the place, to choose a certain place of permanent residence.
  The delegation stopped on the bank of the Don River near the fortress of St. Dmitry Rostovsky, where, after settling, the New Nakhichevank (now part of the city of Rostov-on-Don) was built.
  The Lazaryans, especially Hovhannes Lazaryan, as well as the caring leader of the Russian-Armenians, Archbishop Hovsep Arghutyan, who was in St. Petersburg at the time to consecrate the newly built local Armenian church, are listening carefully to the deputies' request.
  After purposeful attempts, on the advice of Arghutyan, at the end of August, on behalf of the Armenian emigration, they applied to Potyomkin, who was in the capital, and through him reached the settlement of the problem3.
1779 Catherine II signed the "Supreme Charter" on November 14, 1945, granting the request of the Crimean Armenians to move to the vicinity of St. Dmitry Rostovsky Fortress.
 On November 26, deputies Karapet Voskanov and Hovhannes Abrahamyan received the proclamation from the population migrating to Tsughor.
 As soon as spring opens, the people start construction work.
 Residents from 6 cities of Crimea join, found the city of New Nakhichevan, the villages of Chaltr, Topti, Mets Sala, Sultan Sala և Nesvita4 around the city4.
1 Mikaelyan V., page 370.
2 “Армяне юга России.
  History, culture ”, published by Buduщe, sub. OK. Mr. Matishova, Rostov-on-Don, 2012, p.269. Abrahamyan A., Brief outline of the history of Armenian colonies, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1964, page 375.
3 Diloyan V., From the history of the Lazaryans' social and political activity, Yerevan, 1966, p. 144.
4 Barkhudaryan V., Pages of the history of Armenian colonies, Yerevan, 1996, page 37.
 "Armenians are from Russia.
History, culture, commonplace ”, p. 140.
 Barkhudaryan V., Voskanyan V., Armenian-Russian historical ties և The annexation of Eastern Armenia to Russia, Yerevan, 1978, p. 146.
1780 On March 9, H. Arghutian և H. Lazaryan visited the Empress, then the Crown Prince, and hurried to New Nakhichevan to meet the needs of the population on the spot.
  H. With the advent of Arghutian, the construction of the town և villages of the city is significantly regulated.
 The famous architect I. was brought to the city from St. Petersburg. The already approved plan drawn up by Starov, according to which the construction of the city is planned, or there is a version that the author of that plan is Riegelman, the builder of Dmitry Rostovsky ամր fortress և 1.
  According to the plan, New Nakhichevan had a crossroads and other parts needed by the cities.
  In the central part of the city there is a large square, where in 1783. The foundation of the central church is laid.
  All the main administrative and public buildings were located in the central part of the city2.
 They began to build stone-brick houses, open windmills outside the villages, and later shops were opened in the villages, as well as local schools near the churches.
According to the first point of the proclamation issued by Catherine II, the government took care of the relocation.
 The second point determined the borders of the territories given to the Armenians forever. The lands around St. Dmitry Rostovsky Fortress are given to the Armenians, with the exception of 3,000 desiatins, which remain in the fortress as pasture.
 The Armenians had the right to fish in the Don River within the above-mentioned lands, except for the ¼ part of the river, which was set aside for local fishing3.
 In the first year, the orphans would receive food, seeds, livestock, other assistance needed for the economy, which they would return in 10 years, the timber for the construction of the estates, the necessary building materials were given free of charge.
  Those who had the right reserved to build kiosks, databases, whatever they wanted, on their own land.
  Point 4 of the letter of intent refers to the issue of religion.
  Petros Markosyan was instructed to take care of the needs of the whole community of Crimean Armenians for life.
  It was allowed to build churches, bell towers, to perform Armenian church rites freely, being under the domination of the Mother See.
  Article 3 of the Charter classified Armenians as state residents.
 Armenians were exempt from taxes for 10 years.
 According to Article 5 of the Charter, a magistrate was to be created, who was to act selectively according to national "law" customs.
  By the same token, Armenians were given the right to trade freely both within the country and abroad.
 Armenians were allowed to build new ships at their own expense, to produce wines and French vodka (champagne) 4.
  In other words, it was encouraged to develop all kinds of industries according to their own desires and abilities.
Thus, the Armenian-populated colony of New Nakhichevan, in accordance with the imperial proclamation and privileges granted to it, became autonomous, creating structures of internal government based on national traditions.
 During almost a hundred years of independence New Nakhichevan 1 “Armenian Рога России.
 History, culture, common ground ”, p. 266.3 Mikaelyan V., page 380.
4 Galoyan G., Armenia in the secular confrontations of the great powers (from the 16th century to 1917), Yerevan, 2004, p. 139.
Autonomy established by the "highest award" was the struggle with which the colony struggled for survival.
  The Armenian magistrate of New Nakhichevan was opened in 1780. Based on Article 5 of the Privilege Proclamation.
It included all the administrative institutions of the city and the villages.
  The trial was carried out on the basis of the "Armenian Court Book", which was signed in 1782. H. brought New Nakhichevan from Astrakhan. Arghutian.
In addition to secular government, the care department of the colony is formed.
  1781 By making a collection from the old Armenian church rules and adapting it to the local requirements of Russian-Armenian life. Arghutian sets the rules of the court.
 H. The rules laid down by Arghutian consisted of six parts: they referred to the duties and powers of the church clergy, the procedure for collecting revenue from the people, the nuns from Jerusalem, and the method of governing the court.
  According to the charter of the Supreme Court, the leader of the Russian-Armenians tried to normalize the relations between the church and the secular government1.
H. Arghutian compiled a charter consisting of 13 articles entitled "Congregation of the Covenant", on the basis of which in 1795 On May 26, the trusteeship is organized: the city duma or the parliament2.
The city parliament of New Nakhichevan consisted of 24 trustees, who were elected for a three-year term from the "honorary" citizens of the Armenian society, from five magistrate judges.
  The trustee should take care of the improvement of the city, the construction of roads and bridges, the verification of the mayor's financial report.
  It fulfilled its obligations according to the customs and principles preserved among the people, which in 1817 are summarized in 39 written articles.
In fact, the migration of Crimean Armenians - the establishment of New Nakhichevan was not spontaneous, but was organized by the Russian government - was conditioned by Russia's economic and military-political aspirations.
 Judging by the fact that in 1894 The Armenians erected a monument to Catherine II in Don Nakhichevan, it can be thought that she had a friendly attitude towards the Armenians.
 There was an inscription on the pedestal of the statue: "Grateful to the Armenian Empress Catherine", the year of construction of the monument, H. The sculpture of Arghutyan և the coat of arms of Nakhichevan.
 Or the statue was destroyed in the Soviet period, but in the post-Soviet period it was restored by local Armenians3.
Arthur Vardanyan THE MIGRATION OF CRIME ARMENIANS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NOR NAKHICHEVAN Keywords: Migration of Crimean Armenians, 1768-1771. Russian-Turkish war, Catherine II, New Nakhichevan, G. Potemkin.
