ASSESSMENT OF EXISTING PROBLEMS IN THE REAL ESTATE MARKET Passing from the planned economy to the market economy, a new part of the Armenian economy, the real estate market, began to develop.
The material basis of the market is formed from two sources.
The second is the formation of a segment of sales in the construction sector, and in addition to the commercial construction facilities (the primary market for the sale of construction and real estate).
market) free-paid Later, the secondary real estate market was formed, the market of resale of previously privatized or newly sold objects for the first time.
Real estate is considered to be land plots, subsoil plots, water bodies, forests, perennial saplings, aboveground-surface buildings, buildings, other property attached to the land, that is, the objects that can be used without any change in the land. impossibility of termination or further use for its intended purpose [1].
The real estate market is a system of organizational measures by which buyers and sellers come together to determine a certain price, how certain goods can be exchanged as real estate.
The real estate market is an economic և legal space, where cooperation takes place between all the buyers and sellers involved in the purchase and sale of real estate.
The real estate market has a complex, branched structure, it can be differentiated according to different criteria [2].
The real estate market is a very important economic player.
Real estate, in addition to meeting one of the most important needs of society, is one of the main "reserves" of wealth in the economy.
  Thus, the market value of common real estate in developing countries is usually many times higher than the capitalization of financial markets ին the volume of investments flowing into the country.
  It is a source of unique economic "energy". Ownership of real estate is the main "tool" for capital creation, when it becomes credit security (collateral), thus releasing, materializing the economic energy "inside".
  What did he say "create capital"?
  One only has to try to imagine how much investment the real estate of the country can provide in the real sector of the economy, if, of course, it is sufficiently liquid,, The financial intermediaries are ready to accept it as collateral.
  It is this feature that connects the market prices of real estate with the state of the financial system և market activity.
 At the same time, the real estate market is affected by the development of the real financial sector, as supply and demand in this market depend on the state of the country's economy and financial system.
In this market, prices are usually guided by financial-business cycles, to some extent becoming an economic barometer, giving a lot of information about the economy and then gas development [7].
In a market environment, land has a multifunctional significance.
As a natural object that exists regardless of the will of the people, the earth is the whole planet, the cradle of man, which performs the most ecological function.
  At the same time, the earth is the earth, the layer of our planets, its surface or spatial basis, the object, և, consequently, reflects economic relations.
  The right of the relevant land categories, legalized in market relations, promotes business-investment activity.
Attracting their use or real estate as an object of business activity serves as a certain guarantee of business stability and capital reproduction.
Investor investing in real estate usually not only returns equity, but also benefits and reimburses all other costs.
The real estate market is a sector of the national market economy, which represents the whole set of mechanisms (market infrastructure) for real estate objects, market economy (creation), entities, market processes, ie production use, real estate management activities.
According to the definition given in the Object Exchange Market Process Property, the market structure includes: • real estate objects, • market entities, • market processes, • market mechanisms (infrastructure).
The real estate market in the national economy performs the following functions [1]: • Effective solution of social problems related to the creation and use of useful properties of real estate, • Alienation of full or partial ownership rights to real estate objects from one economic entity to another, • Protection of these rights; ազատ Free pricing of services; • Redistribution of investment flows between competing types of real estate; • Redistribution of investment flows between competing land uses.
In the RA real estate market, a number of problems have arisen at present, the systemic solution of which will lead to the development of the real estate market.
  These problems arose not immediately, but over time.
Structural issues are considered: • Introduction of reliable real estate appraisal market mechanisms.
• Creating favorable conditions for professional real estate market participants.
• Carrying out systematic monitoring of the real estate market.
• Clarification of the real estate functions of the state as the owner of the real estate.
regulator, • Increasing the efficiency of mortgage lending investments.
• Unequal development of the real estate market.
In Armenia, real estate appraisal, analysis, the use of weak analytical methodology, are considered to be real estate market problems, which are incorrect hypotheses, procedures, insufficient quality data on local markets, unreasonable market research, investment decisions based on them.
Real estate appraisal activities are organized by individuals considered legal entities and sole proprietors on the basis of a real estate appraisal order through an appraiser.
The legal basis for a real estate appraisal order is the contract concluded between the real estate appraisers in the manner prescribed by law. [6]
Private companies and scientific organizations, as well as state-owned organizations are currently engaged in the analysis of the real estate market in the Republic of Armenia.
  However, the analyzes carried out by all these organizations do not have a common methodological basis, and sometimes the results are very different from each other.
  To have different status comments in the market.
The only task of systematic monitoring of the real estate market is to provide all market participants with information on the dynamics of the structure of the change of characteristics.
  These characteristics should reflect both the general trends in the real estate market and the trends in the individual indicators used to justify investment decisions.
In order to create a system of systematic monitoring of the real estate market, it is necessary to solve a number of organizational-methodological problems [4].
The first task is to organize the collection of information provided by the regions and its further use.
 The solution to this problem should be the annual summary report on the state of the real estate market in Armenia.
  This report should develop, analyze and generalize information on different types of real estate markets.
  The report should contain generalized information on the real estate markets of individual cities and regions.
 It is necessary to find out the specific patterns of development of the real estate markets of Armenia, taking into account the territorial peculiarities of the local markets, the general processes taking place in the country's economy.
The second task is to provide a unified methodology, information collection and processing tools.
In order to ensure data collection and processing, as well as in-depth expansion analysis, there is a need to standardize the forms and content presented in the data, as well as to automate their processing.
The third problem that arises during the systematic monitoring of the real estate market is to ensure the regular provision and reliability of information.
  By the decision N 465 of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of October 22, 1997, a procedure for systematic monitoring of real estate was established, on the basis of which the cadastral committee conducts systematic monitoring, ie study of the condition, value and quality criteria affecting real estate.
  The object of systematic monitoring of real estate is the real estate in the territory of the Republic of Armenia: land (according to the purpose), buildings, constructions (regardless of the type of ownership).
  The purpose of systematic monitoring of real estate is.1. To support the development of the real estate market.
2. Ensure the establishment of a real estate information bank և Reliable information in the real estate market.
3. Provide objective-analytical information on the state of the real estate market և price situation։.
 As a result of systematic monitoring of the real estate market, the committee developed the cadastral assessment of residential lands, zoning boundaries, coefficients ևbase values ​​based on the principles of real estate market pricing factors և deriving market values.
  They were approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia by the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of December 24, 2003 "On the Procedure of Cadastral Assessment of Lands of the Settlements of the Republic of Armenia, Grounding (Location) Zoning Coefficients" On Approving the Boundaries "N 1746-N.
  The appraisal zones և coefficients defined by that decision are the basis for calculating the cadastral values ​​of those lands in cases of alienation (direct or auction sale), lease, construction with the right of state or community-owned settlements.
  As a result of the systematic monitoring, the coefficients of the zonal cadastral assessment zoning descriptions of the buildings and constructions were approved by the government and the coefficients were developed.
Regularly, monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, eleven months և yearly, systematic monitoring of the real estate market is carried out, analyzes, the materials of which are published in the press, covered by the mass media: state bodies, real estate market participants to raise awareness. [5]
Thus, it is assumed that the organization of a comprehensive և systematic analysis of the real estate market of Armenia can be carried out at the national level - analytical subdivisions of professional unions (subject to targeted funding), or professional commercial organizations whose business is the sale of quality analytical information.
 Moreover, the state, which seeks to involve real estate in the market circulation, ստանալ to receive significant revenues from it, is supposed to be one of the primary consumers of market information, որ which is very natural, one of the financing parties.
It should be noted that despite all this, the Armenian real estate market is endowed with the need for high-level "threshold" investments, which require large financial resources, which, on the one hand, can reduce the share of other assets, on the other hand, the investor may not to master such means.
Studies have shown that there is a general pattern of change in the value of housing for emerging markets in different countries, from the initial rise in prices to the further stabilization of "global" markets.
  This growth may slow down in some periods (even a temporary fall in prices) due to a sharp deterioration in the socio-economic situation in the region, a large outflow of population, but gradually in all cities prices reach a regular level, fluctuating along with economic, investment and migration cycles.
The essence of this regularity is that the real estate market goes through a number of stages during its development.
When passing from one stage to another, in principle, the values ​​of the following factors change. • Initial price level; • Primary և secondary և price ratio of real estate; • Supply և demand ratio; • Level of market awareness of sellers և buyers (laws, rules և rights, supply և demand, price, currency exchange rate, market dollarization ), • Level of market activity (share of transactions in the total number of registered types of real estate objects), • Legislative environment (state of legislative, normative bases, level of market shadow), • Level of market infrastructure development (methodological base, corporate activity of market agents)
Mortgage lending has a special place in the development and activation of the real estate market.
  Emphasizing the need for market development of mortgage loans, as a rule, emphasize four key issues of economic development: • housing, • development of financial intermediation institutions, • creation of stable, efficient mechanisms of mortgage financing, • social.
It should be noted that special attention to the development of the mortgage loan market will provide an opportunity to achieve a number of program goals (Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, Medium Term Expenditure Framework) adopted by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in terms of economic and social results.
In order to solve these problems, it is necessary to develop և market-stimulating self-regulatory mechanisms (free from state interference), favorable legislative-sub-legislative field, regulated legal-economic relations, as well as to take steps to increase social justice and security.
It should be noted that currently in Armenia there is an activation of mortgage lending, which in turn has an impact on the activation of the real estate market.
 However, his lion's share in this activity is uniqueness, which, in particular, directly influenced the activation of the eshuka by state means.
International studies have shown that the direct participation of the state in the development of the mortgage market (despite the existence of systemic risk) can be effective only in the case of the development of the capital-mortgage secondary market.
  The direct and permanent intervention of the state (for example, the establishment of an operator's institute for market management) puts the market unreasonably dependent on the state, incurs additional costs, affects interest rates, violates the symmetry of public-private relations, accumulates systemic risks, which can be harmful due to mismanagement և and / or abuse (based on past negative experience).
In our opinion, for the establishment of the mortgage market, the role of the state should not be dominated by the private sector, and the intervention should be indirect.
 It can be: o through favorable legislation, by-laws սահման regulating the rules of the game, o facilitating the establishment of private specialized institutions, o facilitating the process of collateral lending, o reducing risks in the economy through insurance mechanisms, o promoting short-term deposits in banks, , solving social problems through various elements of the presented model.
We consider it necessary to stimulate the overall development of the corporate bond market, taking into account the impact of the latter on the mortgage credit market, if the risks are the same.
These approaches will provide a stronger foundation for a market economy, reduce the need for continued state participation in the mortgage market [4].
 Thus, in conclusion, we can say that the solutions to these problems require a new approach.
  In other words, in order to solve the problems, it is necessary to give clear assessments of them, and then study the foreign experience, on the basis of which it will be possible to create a model that will provide conceptual changes in the real estate market of the Republic of Armenia.
LITERATURE [1] Hovhannisyan V., Grigoryan A., Stepanyan S., Real Estate Economics ևManagement, Yerevan 2007, pp. 96-100, 152, 153.
[4] URL.
 http:
//www.irtek.am/views/act.aspx?aid=26214 (Link made on 16.03.2019).
[5] URL.
 https:
//www.cadastre.am/page/real_estate_market (Link made on 16.03.2019).
[6] URL.
 https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=121476 (Link made on 16.03.2019).
[7] URL.
https:
//asue.am/amberd/publications/ra/real/estate/market/and/economy/not/barometer (Link made on 16.03.2019).
Grigoryan ASSESSMENT OF PROBLEMS IN THE REAL ESTATE MARKET Keywords: real estate, mortgage lending, systematic monitoring, national market, efficiency increase.
