COMPLEX WORDS ARISING FROM RELATIVE VERBS IN MODERN ARMENIAN The phrase is a stable, ready, reproducible, reinterpreted connection of words, where the independence of the component words is feminine, the syntactic connection is obscured1.
The most "slippery" in the linguistic literature is the determination of the boundary of the ների phrases of the adjacent verbs.
  In many works, under the name "phrase", next to the connections of idiomatic value, we find ordinary relative verbs that have no meaning.
  The existing pluralism in this issue has its good reasons.
 First of all, both ordinary relations and phrases have a separate structure, for example, to enter - to enter "not to express, to experience oneself".
 Second, many and many phrases, as if linguistic units, have relative grammatical value, for example, to touch, to level the ground, to look into the eye, etc.
 Third, there are a large number of connections, which in different verbal environments appear sometimes as ordinary verbs, calling an action, without metaphorical-relative meaning, and sometimes as phrases, for example, to take up a cross.
 (VD) Crossing here is a relative verb, not a phrase, it literally calls an action.
 This same connection has a metaphorical meaning of "tormenting". We are always told a lie. We are crucified, we are crucified every day… (WT) The phrase may have the value of a relative verb, but not every verb is a phrase.
Apart from the semantic side, there are other possible differences between them.
 What is unique about ordinary (non-phrasal) verbs is that their main verb components are come, do, be, give, razor, put և, while in phrasal terms, in addition to the above, there can be an unlimited number of verbs. For example, to have, to carry, to take, to drive, to go, etc.
 The adverbs of the former are predominantly nouns, put in a straight line, even without a joint, while the latter often have other parts of speech, both straight and oblique, for example, oh, drag, say, say, hear. to do և etc.
 Finally, the syntax of the former is more stable than that of the latter.
 It is enough to change the composition of the ingredients ադրությունը the composition will "dissolve" 2.
The "logical end" of the use of phrases is the composition of various compound words based on them.
 Of course, this idea should not be understood in an absolute sense, our phrases are thousands, and the words derived from the phrases are only dozens.
 The same applies to the old man.
Where the Old Armenian had a phrase-phrase, in later periods we often find a compound word with a figurative meaning (formerly metaphorical meaning), for example, to write - to write, to look - to respect, to do evil - to do evil, etc.
It can be said that such a template is very common in the part we have studied.
The material used for our examination was first of all the points of Ruben Ghazaryan's "Grabar's Phrasebook", from which complex words (noun, part of another word) arose, we compared them with Ed. Aghayan "Explanatory of Modern Armenian 1 Bediryan P., Phraseology of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1973, page 5.
2 Ibid., Pp. 28-31.
Dictionary "data.
  Among the phraseological units examined, considering the process of the formation of a complex word from the relative composition, several main groups are distinguished. a) often the adverb has become an adjective without any change in components, except for the occasional use of an articulation, for example: • to look at, to look at, • to look at, to look forward, • to look forward, • to look at, to look at , • to write - to write, • to shave - to nominate, • to find out - to open up, • to take heart - to heartbreak, • to do evil - to do evil, • to stand firm, to wrap around, to surround, to act insidiously - to deceive, • to expose - to expose, • to expose - to crucify, to crucify, • to expose - to expose, etc., b) in this group there are formations with verbs with -an horrible suffix,
The latter include both simple adverbs (mostly adjectives) and complex words, such as: • to be annihilated - to be annihilated, • to be dragged - to be dragged to the ground, • to be ruled - to be captured,
Grabar is very specific to prepositions.
 In the material we have studied, there are a lot of verbs with complex composition, which have arisen from preposition, for example: to - to quote, • to bring to light - to discover, • to come to light - to enlighten, • to open - to exclude, • to make open - to reveal, • to crucify - to crucify, • to take - to apply - - to remember, • to bring to mind - to remember, • to express - to express, • to enter into the moment - to keep, • to appear - to rise, • to have - to raise, • to raise - to turn, • to tax - to trample, • to put oneself to work - to cooperate, • to fall asleep - to fall asleep, • to take up - to take back, to take back, • to take out a picture - to take pictures, to take pictures և etc.
Preserved versions are rare, such as: • hug and hug - hug, hug, • hurdle - hinder, etc.
We have examples in the հար phrases of Grabar's relations, which are composed և, with suffixes.
 In the future, they are either preserved or suppressed, for example: • to ask and try - to ask and try, to ask, to ask, to ask, to ask • to be merciful and compassionate - to be merciful, • whole and healthy - whole -healthy, good health, good health, • el և mut - elumut և etc.
Phrasal units undergo different grammatical changes when they become a complex word.
 They can be turned into nouns, adjectives.
A) In the following examples, there are mainly complex nouns (we have ignored grammatical ambiguities). • to go to a party - an exhibition, • to let go - absolutely, • to miss - to miss, • to reach height and thought - thought, • to hand in hand - hand in hand, • in the city - in the city, • in to meditate - to meditate - to point a finger - to envy, • to envy - envy, • to cut each - mines, • to dig a groove - to dig - a groove, a groove, • to pass a trade - a passer-by, • to cross the world - to pass through the world, • to show the sun - to show, • to have a complaint - to appeal, to complain, etc.
B) There are many cases of becoming adjectives. • to be crowned - to be crowned, • to be put to death - to be killed, • to be left in the hands - to be handcuffed, • to be carried to the head - to be beheaded, • to be reached behind - body, • to be easily taken out - , • to confirm a letter - a certificate, • to hire - to rent և etc.
When describing this word-formation process, it is necessary to point out the cases when complex words arise from two-part, three-part or multi-part relations.
  For example, it consists of multiple relations: • to wield a sharp sword - a sword, • to enter into a state of alarm - hesitant, anxious, • to strike with a sharp sword, to strike with a sword - a swordsman, • to put forward - leading, hopeful, to bring parts - evil, • to reach out - to reach, to reach, • to envy in good - to take in benevolence, etc.
We have included in the examination those units (there are such a large number in Armenian) that have the value of nominal conjunctions, from which in turn arose adjectives, adjectives or words of other parts of speech, for example: • influence natural, natural influence - instinct, • artistic hand - handicraft, • numbered song - number, • curable disease - disease, • woman man - woman man, woman man, • seal father - godfather, • weight size - weigh, weigh, weigh, • smooth equality - flat, • bread in the mouth - bread, • son of the soul - spirit, • form from the word - gossip, gossip, formula, formula, formula, formula, • ​​in the night - midnight, etc.
In addition to all this, we must add that the process of forming complex words from phrases, phrases, and stable connections already existed in our language in the Old Armenian period.
 In classical Grabar we already had words that prove that they were preceded by phrases or phrases with appropriate components and meanings, for example, liquid (f) blood, I will turn my face և etc.
Hripsime Kostanyan DIFFICULT WORDS DUE TO RELATIVE VERBS OF GRABAR IN MODERN ARMENIAN Keywords: phrase, grabar, haradir verb, modern Armenian, complex words, noun, adjective, verb.
