TOURISM COOPERATIVES AS SUSTAINABLE TO MANAGEMENT OF TOURIST DISTINCTIONS
The aim of the work is to show the need to create tourism cooperatives for the sake of strengthening the sustainable management of tourist destinations by presenting the mutual benefit of the cooperative համատեղ compatibility of the principles of stability։.
Cooperatives have existed for about two hundred years.
  In all areas of economic activity, cooperatives are more stable and long-lived than pro-investment companies.
  The cooperative model has constantly adapted to changing conditions, and innovative forms of cooperation have emerged to solve new economic and social problems.
According to the latest estimates, cooperatives are a source of income for more than 279 million people in the world. Almost 10% of the able-bodied population, without taking into account the additional indirect jobs created.
 The main reason for the success and longevity of cooperatives is that they are not interested in maximizing the profit of investors, but in meeting the needs of the community.
 Cooperatives should be treated as joint (collective) problem solvers.
Under the influence of pro-market reforms, current tendencies of privatization and decentralization, the cooperative is rightly seen as the most convenient organizational way to implement community economic initiatives, sustainable development and effective management.
 Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, Article 117, main provisions on cooperativesInternational Labor Organization (IMF: International Federation of Cooperatives] .
A cooperative is an autonomous association of people who voluntarily unite to meet common economic, social, and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly-owned, "democratically controlled" enterprise.
A cooperative is a voluntary entity created to provide goods, services, and supplies, the members of which manage and share risks and profits.
Working together in a cooperative, reducing various market risks, strengthens not only the economic but also the social capacity of people [1].
Table 1. Definition of the concept of cooperative according to different sources The above definitions have been formulated to indicate the main provisions of the activity of cooperatives, to summarize the primary goals.
However, in order to understand the mission of cooperative activities, it is expedient to study the 1995 agreement of cooperatives, the International Federation of Cooperatives. proclaimed the following principles.1. Voluntary և open membership.
  Cooperatives are voluntary organizations that are open to all individuals who are eligible to receive the services of cooperatives and are willing to make commitments as a member without any gender, social, racial, political or religious discrimination.
2. Democratic control.
  The cooperative is a democratic organization controlled by its members.
  Members are actively involved in the cooperative's policy development and decision-making process.
 In cooperatives with a large number of members, direct control is exercised by the representatives elected by certain regulations, who are accountable to the members of the cooperative.
  As a rule, members of cooperatives have equal voting rights, regardless of the number of shares (one member, one vote).
3. Economic participation of members.
  The members of the cooperative contribute to the acquisition of the property of the cooperative and have equal rights to its use.
  At least a part of that property is the common property of the cooperative.
4. Autonomy և independence.
 Coop: The narratives are autonomous organizations controlled by their members.
  If the cooperative enters into contractual relations with other organizations, including the state, it is done on the condition of maintaining the independence of the cooperative autonomy.
5. Education, training և information.
   Cooperatives provide education և training for their members, elected representatives, managers և employees so that the latter can contribute to the development of their cooperative.
 They inform the public, particularly the youth, of those whose opinions are expressed, about the benefits of the nature of cooperation.
6. Cooperation between cooperatives.
  Cooperatives cooperate with similar local, national, regional and international organizations in order to serve their members more effectively and to strengthen the cooperative movement.
7. Concern about the community.
 Cooperatives work for the sustainable development of their communities in accordance with the policies approved by the members [6].
Summarizing the principles and definitions set forth for cooperatives, we understand that the latter are especially economic units, the creation and effective operation of which is guaranteed by democratic, central government.
 Unlike joint stock companies, which are capital-centric, investment-oriented companies with an investment relationship, cooperatives are people-centered, member-based, and the latter has post-transaction relationships.
 The shareholder-investor may not be the buyer or user of the goods or services of the joint-stock company.
  In the case of cooperatives, this is a very important structural element. members are the main users of cooperative services.
 Cooperatives, as economic organizations, must ensure a positive economic result.
  However, their goal is not to ensure that positive result, but to meet the economic, social and cultural needs of their members with money [1].
   The tourism sector, as a key component of the global non-manufacturing sector, accounts for 10.2% of world GDP or $ 7.613.3 billion in annual revenue.
 However, according to the UN International Tourism Organization, tourism accounts for 5% of CO2 emissions.
Mass tourism has also raised a number of social and cultural issues, the solutions of which require the application of complex approaches.
As far back as 25 years ago, when the idea of ​​sustainable tourism was introduced at the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, it became clear that fundamental changes were needed in the approach to travel.
  In order for the sustainability of tourism to be somewhat "measurable", ie the introduction of the principles of sustainability (economic interest, environmental cleanliness, social equality and justice) into tourism is clearly evident, it is necessary to apply it to some model of tourism management.
Tourism destinations are the most important components of the tourism industry and the practical models of the system of activity, structure and presentation of that industry.
  According to Lepper, the destination is an area with certain geographical boundaries, which, containing a complex of attractive conditions, can influence the tourist's choice to meet his needs.
 The destination is not a direct destination visited by tourists, but an area that provides an appropriate infrastructure network for e-tourism services.
 Destinations are a systematic approach to providing comprehensive services aimed at meeting the needs of tourists.
 Sustainable destinations can be said to be emerging pilot models, the implementation of which հաղթանակ the victory of the working style will lead to the proof of a number of strategically և tactically developed experiments և will serve as an example of a state-controlled program.
 But how to achieve that victory? Destinations that, satisfying the spiritual and cultural needs of tourists, in the process of management: 1. Gain economic benefits, effectively influencing the economic growth of the country, registering a high level of production, 2. In the decision-making process, they ensure the improvement of the social conditions of the region, the reduction of unemployment, the provision of employment, gender-equitable involvement. 3. They do not disturb the balance of nature during the whole process of formation and implementation of activities.
Thus, strengthening the management of sustainable tourist destinations is a key issue, the development of resolutions of which is on the agenda.
One of the most effective solutions to strengthen the management of sustainable tourist destinations is the establishment of cooperatives in tourist destinations.
  If the happy development of sustainable management models is a priority for the stabilization of the tourism industry, then tourism cooperatives are practical models; they are already guided by the principles of sustainability in the management of their business.
 This is where the need to set up cooperatives in tourist destinations comes into play, which will take on the heavy burden of expressing practical experience in implementing sustainable governance.
Tourism, without proper planning and management, can cause great environmental damage to destinations, causing a number of social and cultural problems and conflicts, alienating tourist-receiving communities.
  Sustainable tourism development manages the impact of tourism on natural destination systems, economic activities and the community, while maintaining the potential for sustainable resource use in destinations.
Figure 1. VICE (visitor, industry, community, environment) model of sustainable destination management.
This model raises the need for the following issues, the non-response or lack of conviction of which does not justify the need to introduce a management model in tourist destinations. • How will the decisions affect the functional, complete, healthy operation of the destination?
• What are the economic relations?
• What consequences will it have on the lives of community members?
• What effect will it have on the natural systems of destination և (or) culture?
The conceptual adoption of the VICE model of sustainable tourism destination management requires practical application.
 The model of tourism cooperative management is introduced to practically satisfy the answers to the above-mentioned questions.
Cooperatives established for the production and delivery of tourism services and goods to meet the socio-cultural needs and economic progress of community members are called tourism cooperatives.
 Tourism cooperatives are by nature subject to separate definitions and principles of cooperatives.
 The model of the tourism cooperative carries the principles of stability throughout the management of its activity.
Why is it necessary to increase the efficiency of tourism management through the introduction of cooperative management models? Since tourist destinations are the most important functional link in the tourism industry, their sustainable management requires the use of special approaches in order to make tourism products more competitive.
 The cooperative governance model contains principles of sustainability. it is a system that proves the applicability of those principles.
 The introduction of a cooperative model in the management system of sustainable tourist destinations will implement and materialize the ideological nature of sustainable management.
We conclude from the above that the existing management model of cooperatives can give tangible practical experience to the process of introducing sustainable management.
Equally important is the fact that tourism cooperative members, in particular small entrepreneurs, have the opportunity to provide tourism products to large businesses and producers of branded products.
  In addition to purely economic motives, this also has a positive impact on the general social atmosphere of the cooperative and the community from a socio-psychological point of view.
The scope of tourism cooperative activities includes: Figure 3. Areas of activity of tourism cooperatives [8] As can be seen from the chart above, the areas of activity of tourism cooperatives are diverse and multifunctional.
  The existence and activity of tourism cooperatives in the tourist destination minimize the governmental "operational responsibilities" of the destination. Each cooperative, managing its operational sphere, makes the destination a self-governing object.
 This is the ideal image that should be obtained when each component of the tourist destination system is endowed with self-governing features.
Analyzing the diversity of spheres of activity of tourism cooperatives, we conclude that tourism cooperatives are considered to be the most important economic components of cooperative activities.
  However, pursuing economic goals and interests, tourism cooperatives are of a social nature, adhering to the principles of sustainable resource use.
LITERATURE [1] Urutyan V., Avetisyan A., Agricultural Cooperatives, Yerevan 2011, Asoghik, page 7.
[7] "Basic Provisions on Cooperatives", page 57, URL.
  http:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=7465823.05.2018).
[8] European Route of Cooperative Culture, URL.
 http:
//www.cooproute.coop/ (Accessed.
27.05.2018, 02.
45). [9] Position paper.
 Cooperatives and the future of work, International Cooperative Alliance, 30 April, 2018, URL.
 https:
//goo.gl/RFX6SJ (Accessed.
 19.05.2018) .URL.
 https:
//goo.gl/Hvm1vk (Accessed.
 29.05.2018). [11] Cooperative identity, values ​​& principles, URL.
  https:
//goo.gl/kuNiXp (Accessed.
(Reference made: Ghamorgyan Shamam TOURISM COOPERATIVES AS A MEANS OF SUSTAINABLE TOURISM DESTINATIONS Keywords: cooperative, stability, tourism management.
