BRAND STRATEGY IN THE EDUCATION SYSTEM (Students' Attitudes Towards VSPI Brand Policy) The brand strategy is aimed at establishing the institution գրավ gaining a stable place in the market relations.
 As the Bologna process presupposes the independence of the university, the competitive field of the educational system has become tense.
 Vocational education institutions must be able to find their own place in the gradually deepening market relations.
The role of the brand is especially important during admissions, when many universities are competing to attract applicants.
  A well-designed, attention-grabbing brand should attract the attention of all stakeholders, not only internally but also externally.
The aim of this research is to find out the students' perception of the brand strategy of Vanadzor State Pedagogical Institute և Attitude.
The results of the research showed that the brand exists in the vocational education market.
  The brand provides protection in the market in the process of price competition.
  A stable brand is highly trusted by consumers, gains a high rating and a guarantee of quality1.
The guarantee of success in the consumer market is the stable competitive advantages, which can be achieved due to the brand հեղինակ reputation.
  Educational services also need branding, as they require positive experience of opinion, authority, trust2.
Let's study the branding strategy in the education system with the example of VSPI.
 The components that make up the VSPI brand are the VSPI symbol, anthem, flag, neckties in a combination of blue-white colors, bright components.
 The VSPI official website also has elements of brand components, the site has the following subsections: մասին About VSPI: historical overview, symbols, legal documents (strategy, regulations, reports, decisions), structure,
 Marketing, Moscow, 2009, p. 211.2 See S. Khantarjyan, Service organization. Management, Yerevan, 2012.
 Мансуров Р., НR-брен դիմ Education-applicant: admission procedure տվյալ data of preparatory courses, information about basic college, college, higher, postgraduate և additional education,  Science about library, research, conferences, as well as collections of scientific materials  External links  Feedback.
The site has sections for applicants, students, graduates, staff, where information on admission procedures, academic year schedules, and other areas is posted1.
Fig. 1 Fig. 2 Surveys conducted at VSPI show that 54% of students believe that the VSPI symbol, anthem, flag և other components are considered as the university's brand policy.
  In their opinion, the components of the university brand shape the image of the educational institution, the reputation and the rating among the beneficiaries, the applicants-students.
  30% of VSPI students think the exact opposite: the university's brand strategy is not effective, and 16% found it difficult to answer.
The use of a complete advertising system plays a leading role in brand formation.
 According to the results of the polls, 42% of the students are guided by public opinions when entering the university, 36% are guided by the information of the VSPI official website, 16% by the information received from the directory, 6% by the announcement made on TV.
Despite the current advertising carried out by VSPI (TV, newspaper, internet, official website), the branding still does not establish the university վարկ rating եղ reputation. Most applicants rely on the opinions of different segments of society when choosing a university.
 Therefore, the brand policy of the university needs to be improved, that is, to spread beyond the university, to ensure interconnectedness between the university's "external beneficiaries".
1 See VSPI official website: http.
//www.vspi.am/index.php/en/.
Mariam AmirbekyanBRAND STRATEGY IN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM (Students' attitude towards VSPI brand policy) Keywords: brand, market relations, university strategy, competition, beneficiaries.
