Abrahamyan Anahit THE INNOVATIVE ACTIVITY OF THE TEACHER IN SECONDARY EDUCATION
 In the field of general education, the main subject that fully achieves this goal has always been the pedagogue.
 For a child, a pedagogue is the same as the soil of a shrub, as fertile as it was, the shrub will become a tall tree with deep roots in the ground.
 It is the link between the pedagogues and the generations, the bearer and transmitter of social-historical experience.
       Over the centuries, the essence of the pedagogue's profession has remained the same, although the content of its activities, working conditions, and the quality standards presented to the pedagogue have changed.
       Studying the innovative activity of a pedagogue in a secondary school is one of the most important problems of modern pedagogy, because in the modern age, when the role of the Internet, computers and smartphones in the daily activities of new generations is growing, when knowledge has simply ceased to be a goal, the role of the pedagogue is changing.
 The period presents new requirements for the pedagogues of the general education school.
 The modern age demands from the pedagogue a purposeful innovative activity, which will stimulate the creativity of the learners, will stimulate the imagination, will be spiced with modern technologies, based on the age-individual characteristics of the learner, will be aimed at discovering talent in him.
  Pedagogical-innovative activity is not only the introduction of new pedagogical experience, but also a creative process to plan and implement pedagogical innovations aimed at improving the quality of education.
 It is a social-pedagogical phenomenon, which reflects the creative ability of the pedagogue.
 This means new goals, content, new methods of teaching and upbringing.
 Մ. V. Clarin, for example, interprets the concept of innovation as follows: "Innovation refers not only to the creation of innovations, but also to the change in the style, type of thinking in the field of exchange, which is associated with these innovations."
The implementation of innovative activities in the secondary school should not be a requirement of time, but the aspiration of a pedagogue.
 No significant changes can take place in the field of education if educators do not aim to improve their professional activities.
 In this respect, the pedagogue's activity should be not only developing, but also developing.
  The pedagogue must create, constantly improve his pedagogical skills, train, if necessary, create new methods for pedagogical activity.
 The pedagogue's self-education plays a big role here, which should always accompany the pedagogue throughout his activity.
 The innovative activity of the pedagogue is first of all aimed at the improvement of his own pedagogical activity, and after that, at the activity of the whole school.
 The time և the efforts needed to put new ideas of education և new means into practice are largely dependent on the level of pedagogy's training, willingness, skills կարող efforts.
 The innovative activity of a pedagogue is not complete if it is built only on the reproduction of the methods mastered for work.
  Such activity is incomplete, as it does not contribute to the development of the pedagogue's personality.
  And, as Zagvyazinsky says, a pedagogue's personality does not exist without creativity, innovative activity.
Innovative activity requires creativity.
 Creativity is the activity that brings about new, not pre-existing, phenomena based on the transformation of experience, the formation of new combinations of knowledge, skills, and products.
 Creativity has different levels.
 One level is characterized by the use of existing knowledge և their application, at another level a completely new approach is created that changes the usual view of the object or field of knowledge [4].
 In a broad sense, creativity is the practical or theoretical activity of a person, where new results are created (material goods, knowledge, methods, etc.).
 These results can be a novelty only for that person or an innovation for many.
  The creativity of a pedagogue begins with the internalization of everything that others have already accumulated.
To the classics of pedagogical thought development: A. Ya. Komensky, D. Գ. Pestalozzi, D. Ushinsky, M. Montessori, A. Ս. Makarenko, S. To T. Shatski, V. A. Sukhomlinsky, V. F. Shatalov is united by the strong idea that pedagogical work needs a creative approach, aimed at making pedagogical activities as favorable as possible for students.
        Applying a creative approach in one's own activity is the most important feature of a pedagogue - a condition for professional development.
  According to Davidov, the concepts of individuality and creativity are inseparable.
 From this point of view, the pedagogue, who is considered a subject of pedagogical activity, but stops working on the development of his own person, does not participate in innovative activities, the individual dies in him.
 The pedagogue, who realizes the importance of being an individual, always strives to create something new, unique, not yet received by others, thus emphasizing his individuality.
 It is from here that it becomes clear that innovative activity can be carried out only by a burning individual who has a bright creative imagination.
For an innovative pedagogue, the school is first and foremost a platform for gathering necessary practical materials.
  The Innovative Teacher acts as the author փորձ experimenter of the new curriculum.
 Among other things, he is a researcher, experimenter, and at the same time promotes the use of new technologies in the pedagogical process.
 The pedagogue makes a choice, evaluates the possibility of using new ideas and methods, which are presented by colleagues or pedagogical science.
In the present period, the need for innovative pedagogical activity is great; it stands out in the conditions of development of the society, culture, life situations.
 The pedagogue should perceive the problem from different angles, without changing the perception of the problem.
 Such a pedagogue is oriented towards the real future, not the past.
 He overcomes the obstacles created in the educational process, plans the future, as well as all his actions and achievements.
 He has a sense of justice, he knows the high value of education.
  Innovative pedagogue is a creative individual. It is a part of the innovative process in pedagogy.
 For an innovative pedagogue, it is necessary to constantly study the best pedagogical experience, to perceive the experience of colleagues.
        In order for a pedagogue to be ready for innovative activities, he needs motivation, which makes his activities meaningful, sets goals from new motivational content.
  Dependent innovation activities can have different directions and goals.
 Innovative activity, like any activity, can be of different degrees, levels և effectiveness.
  It is distinguished by its content and structure.
 In our opinion, by carrying out innovative activities, pedagogues solve four problems: the development of their own և students' creativity, the creation of innovations in their own activities, the implementation of pedagogical scientific experience, the exchange of their own experience և activities.
The efficiency and purposefulness of innovative activities depend on the completeness of these tasks.
         Pedagogues can solve various content issues during their innovative activities.
 Some can focus only on improving their own activities, while others, after all this, can fully participate in the development of the school pedagogical process.
          The pedagogue's innovative ability presupposes the following components: ability to discover new things, new ideas, ability to create approaches, how to program, model them in experimental forms, individual readiness for innovation, based on the ability to combine tolerance, thinking, flexibility; Ability to understand the value of innovative activities, ability to combine ubiquitous traditional innovation requirements with innovation.
willingness to improve one's own activities [6].
These components are considered to be the most important starting point. they are the basis for carrying out their activities more fully and effectively.
        Within the framework of the "Program for Introduction of Engineering Laboratories in the RA General Education System" developed by the Union of Information Technology Enterprises (UITE) operating in the Republic of Armenia, a program has been implemented since 2014. To train a specialized workforce with technical education, which will meet the growing demand, as well as will enable educators to carry out innovative activities.
 It is expected that such an educational system will lead to a change of mentality, will nurture new, creative values, which will strengthen the social value system among students and teachers.
The engineering laboratories created on the initiative of UITE are called "Root".
   "Armat" engineering laboratory is a platform that contributes to the development of և´ students, և´ pedagogues, the expression of abilities.
  In "Armat" engineering laboratory, the teachers are constantly trained in order to meet modern requirements.
 It is in "Armat" engineering laboratories that we meet the innovative activity of a pedagogue.
 Here the pedagogue is called a group leader.
 At the same time, he is the subject of the teaching process, the object; that is, he teaches the students, learns at the same time.
  It can be said that it acts more as a guide, who helps to implement the curricula, video lessons developed by UITE, to complete all the tasks, about which he prepares a report in the future.
The learning process here is based on cooperation.
These are the first serious steps of the Republic of Armenia to implement full-fledged innovative activities of pedagogues in the technological field.
One must be well prepared for innovative activities.
 A pedagogue who is prepared for innovative activities: Knows the general principles of pedagogical innovation, Explains the place of innovative activity in an educational institution, its connection with educational activities, Can research the experience of other teacher-innovators, Can critically evaluate educational processes, Organizes Develop և substantiate innovative proposals for improving the educational process, Can develop innovation projects, Can set experimental work goals և Planned, Can work in working groups of involved projects և Conduct experiments, Can analyze և Evaluate innovative school activities,Can analyze և evaluate himself as an innovative process subject.
         V. A. Slastenin և L. Ս. Podimova distinguishes 4 levels when defining the development of innovative activities [6]: Figure 1. Levels of the development of innovative activities The level of adaptation of the pedagogue's innovative activities is characterized by instability towards innovation.
 Indifferent attitude towards the new, knowledge և training system օգտագործ Their use is lacking in the necessary pedagogical conditions.
 Technological training is connected with the use of one's own experience.
  The professional-pedagogical activity of a pedagogue is built by a pre-designed program, algorithm, and the creative activity does not appear experimentally.
 In our opinion, this is the initial stage of innovation; it is very possible for any pedagogue to overcome the level of adaptation, which is the basis for further activities.
Overcoming the level of adaptation is so important that in case of not adapting or being disappointed, there will be no progress.
  The level of reproduction differs with a more stable attitude towards innovative activities, there is a desire to connect with innovative pedagogues, a higher level of satisfaction with pedagogical activities is distinguished.
  Creative activity still arises within the framework of reproduction, but with elements of the search for new solutions.
  A positive orientation is formed towards learning alternative approaches to learning, applying the teaching of learners դարձ to complete the upbringing, duplication is accompanied by small changes.
  In our view, at this level educators emphasize the need for improvement.
 Of course, the transition from the reproductive level to the heuristic level is not so easy, because here you need desire, creative approach, purposeful activity.
 The level of reproduction can also be defined as the stage of readiness, because the pedagogue, internalizing everything that has accumulated during the development of pedagogical thought, tries to apply it all by adding independent elements, particles.
 The heuristic level in the innovation process is generally characterized by purposefulness and stability.
 Significant changes are taking place in the structure of the technological component.
Teachers using pedagogical technologies are always ready to discover the new, to take new information from the feedback of other groups.
  The heuristic level can also be described as an innovative stage, as this level is characterized by the emergence of new ideas, attempts to put them into practice.
  At the heuristic level, there can be diligence, the desire to always create something new, otherwise creative stagnation will begin.
 At the creative level, the efficiency of the innovative process, the purposefulness, the striving for the new, the respect are distinguished.
    At this level, creativity, pedagogical intuition, and creative imagination play an important role in pedagogical and innovative activities.
The scientific-pedagogical interests are harmonized in the structure of the person, the high level of creative independence creates conditions for the effective realization of the pedagogue's opportunities.
  Teachers are focused on the search for something new.
  They act as the creators of new author schools (Montessori, Rudolf Steiner) հեղինակ authors of new pedagogical ideas (Sharva Amonashvili).
 They always share pedagogical experience, have good skills in collective debates, conflict resolution, are always focused on the creation of new և practical application.
  This is where the full innovative activity of a pedagogue begins.
Thus, studying the innovative activities of the pedagogue in the secondary school, we have come to the following conclusions: The school և society needs creative-minded specialists who ensure the effectiveness of teaching new approaches և to innovative activities.
Based on the requirements of the period, the pedagogue's activity must be innovative in order to push the students to be actively creative, to discover and create something new.
The readiness of innovative activities in modern conditions is a quality for every professional pedagogue, without which it is impossible to achieve a high level of pedagogical mastery.
Innovative activities should mean certain qualities of a pedagogue, which show his / her focus on his / her own pedagogical activity, the development of the whole school activity, as well as to address the current problems of students' education, to find and implement effective means to solve them.
The nature of the pedagogue's innovative activity first of all depends on the social order given to the school by the state, the created conditions, the requirements of a specific educational institution.
Every educator must understand that every student in a public school has great potential to reach many heights; his activities must be based on discovering something new in students, developing their way of thinking.
Concluding our work, we want to make a strong observation: the innovative pedagogue is not the pedagogue who teaches the student the material structure and structure.
  The innovative pedagogue is the specialist who gives the student the light of life with which he will create new knowledge, ways that will lead humanity to the path of light.
LITERATURE [1] Model charter of "State General Educational Institution of the Republic of Armenia" State Non-Commercial Organization, E-Decision N1392-N of July 25, 2002, Article 11, page 2.
[4] Кановская М. B., Pedagogy.
 Concept lesson, Moscow, 2012, p. 102. [6] Slastenin VA, Podimova L. S., Pedagogy.
  инновационная деятельность, Abrahamyan Anahit THE INNOVATIVE ACTIVITY OF THE TEACHER IN GENERAL EDUCATION Keywords: general education, pedagogue's innovative experience.
