SOME ISSUES OF FAILED COMMUNITY There are many unresolved and contentious issues in any scientific system.
  In criminal law, such "aporia" is "unsuccessful association".
  It is one of the issues that causes difficulties in the controversial practice of criminal law.
  This is evidenced by the fact that the issue of unsuccessful complicity has been discussed many times in the legal literature; to date, no unequivocal approach has been developed regarding this institution.
The current criminal legislation does not use the term "failed complicity".
  The legislator, trying to settle the issues related to the failed crime, stated the following provision in Part 5 of Article 39 of the RA Criminal Code: "If the actions of the organizer, instigator, or supporter do not succeed due to circumstances independent of them, then the responsibility of those persons falls on the preparation of the relevant crime."
  However, the literal interpretation մի practical application of the legislative norm raises a number of problems and complications.
The main problem is that the wording of the article does not allow to identify the scope of the failed complicity.
 The substantive perception of the norm is particularly connected with the fact that the law does not clarify what is meant by the unsuccessful actions of the organizer, instigator or supporter1.
Is it possible to say "unsuccessful actions" only when the organizer, instigator or facilitator fails to make an outward manifestation of their behavior, ie the facilitator fails to provide a tool or means to the perpetrator, the instigator fails to instill intent in the alleged perpetrator?
 And if the other accomplices succeed under the term "actions" enshrined in Article 39 5 5 of Article 39 of the RA Criminal Code, the legislator, in essence, meant the passive manifestation of a person's behavior.
For it is indisputable that it is possible to be complicit in inaction.
  Therefore, it would be more correct to replace the term "action" in the legislative wording with the term "action", which includes both active and passive study of a person's behavior.
to commit the actions arising from their respective roles, but the perpetrator either does not commit the crime at all in the future, or voluntarily renounces the crime, in which case the actions of the other accomplices should be considered unsuccessful or not.
  Or can a failed complicity be considered a complicity at all, and the issue of criminal liability of persons be resolved within the framework of a complicity?
 Therefore, in order to discover the essence of this institution and to orient oneself in legal practice, it is first necessary to refer to the theoretical, legal interpretation of the term put forward in the professional literature.
According to the prevailing opinion in the theory of criminal law, unsuccessful complicity is defined as fruitless, void complicity.
 The traditional definition of a term is in itself vague, which makes it even more difficult to identify the main features of the term և.
In the professional literature, different approaches and classifications have been put forward by criminologists regarding the assessment of unsuccessful complicity.
 For example, Burchak, Telnov and Kovalyov divided the failed conspiracy into unsuccessful incitement, unsuccessful support և unsuccessful organizational activities2.
 Kolokolov viewed the failed crime only in the unsuccessful manifestation of incitement and organizational activity3.
  Krieger limited the failed association only within the framework of incitement4.
A more interesting approach was put forward by Trainin, who divided the unsuccessful complicity into unfinished and finished 5.
  According to him, the unfinished unsuccessful complicity exists in the case when the person fails to form a subjective connection with the presumed perpetrator, to arouse an intention to commit a crime in him.
  Trainin suggests that an unsuccessful complicity should be described as a preparation for a crime6.
  Or some scholars claim that in this case the qualification of preparation for a crime contradicts the principle of responsibility for the crime և խախ 2 See Бурчак Ф. G., Compassion.
  sociological, criminological and legal problems. Kiev.
High School, 1986, page 161; Kovalev M. I., Compassion in superstitions. Yekaterinburg, 1999, p.162; Naumov A. W., Russian Conventional Law. Общая часть.
 Course of lessons. M., 1996, p. 312; id.
3 See Kolokolov G. E., O sympathies in the superstitions. M., 1881, pp. 120-124.
4 See Krieger G. L., Compassion on the right of way. M.
 Госюриздат, 1959. С. 391; Telyanov PF, Responsibility for Compassion in Repurchases.
  Dis. ... doctor. юрид. science. Kharkov, 1973, p. 208.
5 See Trainin A. N., Learning about associations. M., 1941, p. 109.
6 See Trainin A. N., Mentioned work, page 109.
sets the rules for the legal qualification of crimes.
 They find that an unfinished failed crime is nothing more than a revelation of a criminal intent that is not criminally prosecuted by a person.
However, in our opinion, when a person's actions are aimed at inciting the alleged perpetrator to commit a crime, committing a joint crime with him, they cease to be mere intentional disclosure, become objective, and become objects in publicly dangerous specific actions.
The other participants act as self-initiators of the crime, trying to create motives in the consciousness of the perpetrator, aiming to push him to the crime.
 And if their actions do not lead to the desired result, it does not depend on their will.
  The actions of the other participants are limited to creating conditions for the commission of the crime, therefore, the approach put forward by Trainin can be considered unequivocally acceptable, և the unfinished failed complicity can be qualified as a preparation for a crime.
According to Trainin, the completed unsuccessful complicity exists in the cases when the accomplices manage to fully carry out the actions arising from their role. The perpetrator has an intention to commit a crime, but for some reason he does not commit the crime, realizing his own ability to complete the crime7.
  In the event of an unsuccessful complicity, Trainin proposes to prosecute him as the organizer, instigator or facilitator of the crime, depending on their role.
Before expressing our position on the issue, we consider it necessary to refer to the clarification of the question whether a failed partnership can be considered a complicity at all.
The point is that complicity exists when all the objective-subjective features of the complicity are present, and in the case of a failed partnership, either a subjective connection is not formed between the participants և at all, or the combination of actions is absent.
 Therefore, in case of unsuccessful complicity, we can not talk about complicity.
  Since in case of unsuccessful complicity there is no complicity, it is meaningless to talk about accomplices.
7 See ibid.
Consequently, the notions of "organizer", "instigator" and "supporter" used in the legislative formulation of unsuccessful complicity are not applicable in the classical sense of the word, which should be the subject of review by the legislator.
Thus, we find that in the case of an unsuccessful conspiracy, the legal characterization of the act proposed by Trainin does not follow the law և goes beyond logic, as it is not lawful to qualify the act of individuals as a completed felony when the conspiracy itself failed.
  In addition, if a person's act does not contain all the features of a completed crime, the issue of his criminal responsibility cannot be resolved by the rules of the completed crime.
 And as A. Piontkovsky rightly emphasizes, "If the perpetrator has not committed any act or the acts committed do not contain a corpus delicti, then the actions of the other participants cannot be discussed within the framework of complicity."
Just as the perpetrator did not intentionally commit the crime, so the public promise to commit the crime does not contain any corpus delicti.
 The consent of the perpetrator to commit a crime presupposes the discovery of criminal intent, and the actions of the other participants are limited by creating conditions for the commission of a specific crime, not going beyond the scope of preparation for the crime.
  Therefore, we believe that the completed unsuccessful crime should be qualified as a preparation for a crime.
However, it should be noted that if there is a failed crime for a person, but he later personally commits the crime, then his actions should be qualified as a combination of crimes.
  There are cases when one act of a person contains features of both unsuccessful complicity and other crime.
 For example, in the case of unsuccessful organizational activity, when a person makes an unsuccessful attempt to co-operate with a criminal or to form a gang for the purpose of committing robbery, his act should be qualified as an attempt to commit banditry or criminal co-operation, a preparation for all crimes involved.
Telnov proposed a more comprehensive classification of the horse of the failed association, who singled out the following manifestations: unsuccessful association, unsuccessful incitement, unsuccessful support.
 According to him, the actions of the organizer can be considered unsuccessful in cases when the persons he is trying to unite to commit a crime do not accept the offer or initially agree to cooperate, but later refuse to commit a crime, as in cases where the organizer successfully tries to create an organized criminal group or criminal association.
  Incitement is considered unsuccessful when the alleged perpetrator agrees to commit the crime or, after agreeing, does not commit a crime at all.
 Assistance fails when the alleged perpetrator first accepts the support of the supporter and then renounces the crime and does not even initiate preparatory actions, as in the case of late assistance, ie when assistance is delayed, և support is provided after the crime.
  According to Telnov, assistance is considered unsuccessful when the facilitator makes a mistake in the person և provides support to the person who had no intention to commit the crime at all8.
According to V. Pitetsky, there is unsuccessful assistance in the case when the person wishing to assist tries to provide a means or tool to the alleged executor, but is caught by the law enforcement bodies, he is unable to provide them9.
In our opinion, unsuccessful support exists when the supporter provides a means, tool, information, advice or instruction to the intended performer, and the latter does not use them.
 And, if the perpetrator commits the crime in the future, nevertheless, the causal connection between the obligatory side of the objective party of the complicity will be absent from the "crime" of the person trying to assist.
However, it is noteworthy that if in the case of incitement or organizational activity the motive for inciting the perpetrator to commit a crime or involving him in the commission of the crime belongs to the instigator or organizer, then in the case of aiding and abetting the perpetrator already has the initiative to engage in the crime. is the one who motivates the alleged facilitator to create favorable conditions or, by supporting in another way, to facilitate the commission of the crime by him.
 And if the supporter does not agree or otherwise 8 See Telyanov P. F., Responsibility for sympathy. M., 1974, p. 157.
9 See Pitecki V., Unspeakable sympathy in presupposition.
//www.juristlib.ru/book_2794.html refuses to cooperate with him, there is an unsuccessful complicity for the executor.
 If the perpetrator commits a crime in the future, his act should be qualified as a combination of crimes, as a preparation for a corresponding crime, in terms of a failed crime (if that crime is a serious or particularly serious crime) և a completed crime.
  However, if the crime being prepared is a serious or particularly serious crime, the alleged facilitator must be prosecuted for not reporting a known serious or particularly serious crime (Article 335, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code).
The clarification of issues related to the voluntary renunciation of the crime as an unsuccessful cohabitation by the perpetrator is of great theoretical and practical importance.
  There is no common position on this issue in the professional literature.
 Many criminologists consider unsuccessful complicity only in cases when the accomplices do not succeed in inciting the perpetrator to commit a crime.
  AND if it succeeds, but the perpetrator voluntarily renounces the crime later, then the complicity cannot be considered unsuccessful.
  However, we think that complicity is, so to speak, an ongoing process. It starts with the formation of a stable unity of obligatory features (objective և subjective) and ends with the commission of a crime.
 The provision of an instrument և tool կամ tool or the instigation of intent by the instigator to the perpetrator to commit the crime are not sufficient conditions to recognize the crime completed and at the same time successful.
 The purpose of the accomplices is not to intentionally commit the perpetrator or to obtain his consent, but to commit a specific crime in association with him.
  Some criminologists also believe that unsuccessful complicity exists in cases when the perpetrator develops a crime, he commits the crime, but later voluntarily renounces the crime 10,11.
10 See RA criminal law. General part, Yerevan, 2012, page 286.
11 It is difficult to say unequivocally from which point of view the legislator acted by saying "unsuccessful actions".
 Therefore, in order to ensure the uniform application of the law, in particular, to ensure the function of the development of the law, it is necessary to clarify the issues related to the failed association.
 Or the legislative norm should be formulated in such a way that there is no reason for misunderstanding about the failed association.
We accept the second point of view, because the perpetrator's voluntary renunciation of the crime leads to the dissolution of the crime, և the actions of the other participants aimed at committing the perpetrator's retaliation fail, which does not depend on their will or is carried out against their will.
  All this nullifies the realization of the ultimate goal of the accomplices, leads to an unsuccessful complicity.
 Besides, the domestic criminal law considers the action of all accomplices in the case of complicity in its entirety, in the center of which is the action of the perpetrator.
 They are liable within the same limits, within the framework of the sanction of the article of the Special Part, which qualifies the act of the perpetrator.
 Without the executor, there can be no question of complicity.
  Therefore, if there is no perpetrator, the objective side of the crime is not committed, then there is no complicity.
  However, the question arises: how should the question of other participants be solved in case of voluntary renunciation of the crime by the perpetrator?
There are two main approaches to this issue in the theory of criminal law.
 Most practitioners are inclined to view unsuccessful complicity as a form of preparatory activity, to create conditions for the commission of a crime in a unique way, and to suggest that all aspects of unsuccessful complicity, including the perpetrator's voluntary renunciation of the crime, constitute preparation for the crime.
Proponents of the other view suggest that unsuccessful complicity should be viewed as an attempt at complicity in the crime;
For example, a person's actions aimed at inciting the murder of another person, if they do not succeed, the alleged perpetrator does not agree or agrees later voluntarily renounces the crime, should be qualified as attempted murder.
However, in this case, as much as it is acceptable for us to view the failed complicity as an attempt at complicity, we still think that the legal qualification of the action of the other participants does not follow from the law.
 Because an attempt to commit a crime is possible only if the criminal 12 This approach is regulated in Article 34 5 5 of the RF Criminal Code, according to which: “A person who has not been able to incline to another person's crime, regardless of his will, is criminally responsible for the preparation of the crime. to do. "
  However, the researchers believe that the fact that only cases of unsuccessful incitement, unsuccessful assistance, or unsuccessful organizational activities have been regulated can be considered legislative open.
In the case of cases that are directly provided for in the Special Part of the Criminal Code, and if the actions of the participant do not contain the criminal characteristics of the experience of the crime provided for in the Special Part of the Criminal Code, they cannot be qualified by these rules.
  Besides, in case of unsuccessful cohabitation, the absence of cohabitation makes such a qualification of actions illegal.
The RA Legislator, moving with the logic that the failed complicity is a unique manifestation of the preparation of a crime, has envisaged an adequate regulation in Part 5 of Article 39 of the RA Criminal Code.
  However, we find that such legal regulation can not be considered a legal solution in the case of not all forms of failed communication.
In our opinion, in case of voluntary renunciation of the crime by the perpetrator, when resolving the issue of legal qualification of the actions of other participants, the primary starting point should be the stage of the crime in which the perpetrator voluntarily renounced, աստիճ the degree of realization of the criminal intent of other participants.
Qualifying the action of the participants as a preparation for a relevant crime does not cause a problem, it seems justified in the case when the voluntary refusal of the perpetrator takes place during the preparation of the crime.
  In this case, the actions of the other participants are again limited to the preparation of a specific crime, and there is no direct impact on the object of the crime.
 However, when the perpetrator's voluntary renunciation of the crime takes place at the stage of the crime attempt, the actions of the other participants go beyond the scope of the crime preparation and are directed directly against the object of the crime.
In the case of this unsuccessful complicity, despite the fact that the objective side of the crime (part of it) is actually committed by the perpetrator, the actions of the other participants are not limited to the earlier stage of the criminal activity, but their actions "join" the perpetrator. stages.
  If the actions of the perpetrator pass from the stage of preparation for the crime to the stage of attempted crime, then the actions of the other participants themselves appear in that stage.
Persons seeking to commit a crime կայ the existence of a common intent of the alleged perpetrator և their actions aimed at achieving a common goal create a causal link between both the perpetrators' actions and the crime committed by the perpetrator.
 The causal link between each participant արար's overall criminal outcome կազմում is an integral part of the objective side of his or her behavior.
Therefore, if the actions of the perpetrator are corrected, having a direct impact, they cause damage to the object of the crime, then it turns out that the damage was caused not only by the perpetrator, but also by the other participants.
  However, since voluntary renunciation of a crime is of an individual nature, only the accomplice (in this case the perpetrator) who has voluntarily refused to complete the crime will be released from criminal liability.
  If the voluntary renunciation of the perpetrator did not in itself lead to the voluntary renunciation of the other participants, the legal qualification of the participants' actions should be carried out according to the rules of the unfinished crime, depending on the stage at which the perpetrator interrupted the crime.
Thus, if the voluntary refusal of the perpetrator takes place during the preparation of the crime, the other accomplices are prosecuted for the preparation of the crime, but if the voluntary refusal of the perpetrator occurs during the attempted crime, the other participants must be prosecuted for attempted crime.
Therefore, we believe that in resolving the issue of criminal liability of persons within the framework of the legislative regulation of unsuccessful complicity, liability should be provided not only for the preparation of the crime, but also for the attempted crime.
In our opinion, there is an unsuccessful complicity in the case when a person incites another person to a crime without realizing that the latter is legally "useless".
  If a publicly dangerous act is committed, the instigator must be held criminally liable, not for preparing a crime, but for attempting a corresponding crime.
It should be noted that a group of specialists considers even a crime unsuccessful when the perpetrator does not bring the crime to the perpetrator in circumstances beyond his control13.
  We think that these cases are not so suitable within the framework of unsuccessful complicity, because in case of unsuccessful complicity there is no stable unity of features of the complicity, and the given 13 See RA Criminal Law, General Part, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 286-287.
In this case, those features are completely present.
  This view is based on the existing legislative regulations and is in line with the will expressed by the legislator14.
The problem of so-called accomplice's excess (Excess) is related to unsuccessful complicity.
  According to Article 40 of the RA Criminal Code, entitled "Crossing the border of a criminal", "Crossing the border of a criminal is considered to be a crime committed by a person, which is not included in the intent of other accomplices."
  However, not all cases of border crossing lead to unsuccessful complicity.
Unsuccessful complicity exists only when the accomplice, instead of the perpetrator, commits a crime of a completely different nature (qualitative violation), և if that act is an integral part of the crime included in the intent of the accomplices and is not absorbed by the crime committed.
  In case of qualitative delinquency of the offense, the complicity fails, because the causal link between the actions of the participants ության the crime committed by the perpetrator է is either absent or disappears.
In case of qualitative violation, if the crime involved in the participants is not committed intentionally, their act is qualified as preparation for the relevant crime.
In connection with this issue, we consider it necessary to refer to the situation when the perpetrator, instead of causing damage to the victim's health, deprives him of his life. then both life and health are different objects of criminal defense, but the issue of criminal liability of the participants should be resolved not by qualitative but by quantitative violations, ie the other participants should be held accountable not for preparing a crime of harm to health, but for their intentional crime. for complicity in causing harm to the victim's health.
In case of quantitative exceeding of the offender, when the object intentionally inflicted on the other accomplices is inflicted the most damage, there can be no question of unsuccessful complicity, because, 14 See RA Criminal Code, 2003, Article 39, part 4.
15 See Korchagina A. ,., цекссесс исполнителя преступления. / А. Ю. Korchagina. Dis. канд. юрид.наук. Moscow, 2004, p. 196.
The object to which the accomplices' act was directed is encroached upon, damaged, and they achieve their goal.
  However, in the event that the perpetrator causes more damage than was conditioned (by the way, this is also considered a quantitative violation in the professional literature 16), then և there is a failed complicity և the issue must be resolved by the rules of a failed complicity.
Petik Mkrtchyan SOME QUESTIONS OF UNSUCCESSFUL PARTNERSHIP Keywords: unsuccessful association, failed association, completed - unfinished failed association, presumed perpetrator, presumed instigator, transgressor, presumptive
