NATURAL ECOSYSTEMS VULNERABILITY IN THE CONTEXT OF CLIMATE CHANGE (EXAMPLE OF LAKE SEVAN BASIN)
This process is most pronounced in countries with subtropical "subtropical" arid, arid climates.
 Armenia, being in the northern part of the subtropical climate zone, having a mountainous relief, is also not free from the mentioned processes, which are very typical for our country in their unique expression and expression.
Studies have shown that during the last 70-80 years in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, compared to the average of the base period (1961-1990) defined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a significant increase in air temperature has been observed - 1.03 0 C, a decrease in atmospheric precipitation - about 10% [2].
These changes have left their unique impact on almost all components of the ecosystems of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, in particular, water resources, land degradation, biodiversity, and landscapes in general [1, 2, 5, 6, 7].
The aim of the work is to analyze and assess the vulnerability of changes in the hydrothermal components of natural ecosystems in the context of global climate change by the example of the Lake Sanaa Basin.
The article used as baseline data mainly the archived official data of the "Haypethydromet" service of the Ministry of Emergency Situations for 1950-2015, as well as the data taken from climate-hydrological atlases and other information.
As components of the ecosystem, the level of vulnerability for the Lake Sanaa basin was observed, the temperature, atmospheric precipitation, changes in river water resources, and vulnerability were analyzed.
Global climate change caused by rising global average temperatures could not but have a negative impact on Armenia, as well as on one of the most vulnerable ecosystems in the region, the Lake Sanaa Basin, which has been one of the main preconditions for the Armenian people for thousands of years.
  Lake Sanaa is an ecosystem of ecological, economic, climatic, recreational, health, historical and cultural importance.
  It is the only huge freshwater basin in the whole region.
  The lake with its physical, chemical, biological indicators is considered a high-quality natural reservoir for drinking, from that point of view, a natural resource of strategic importance of the Republic of Armenia [3, 4].
In the case of global climate change, it is assumed that the ecosystem of Lake Sanaa as a whole will not be subject to climate change. Its individual components will start to change at different speeds, as a result of which a completely new ecosystem may emerge.
Let us now consider the degree of vulnerability of certain components of the Lake Sanaa ecosystem: air temperature, atmospheric precipitation, changes in river water resources, and vulnerability.
Analyzing the dynamics of air temperatures ումների changes in atmospheric precipitation at 5 meteorological stations (Gavar, Martuni, Masrik, Shan, Shorzha) in the area of ​​Lake Sana basin provided by "Haypethydromet" (Figure 1), it becomes clear that օ air temperature, և Atmospheric precipitation has mainly increased during the last 70 years.
Air temperature, 0C Atmospheric precipitation, mmFigure 1. Dynamics of changes in air temperature միջին average atmospheric precipitation of the main meteorological stations of Lake Sana basin 1950-2015. When assessing the vulnerability of the dynamics of air temperature changes (Table 1), it is clear that a stable increase in air temperature is observed in all 5 meteorological stations.
 The highest growth was observed in Martuni - 0.7 ° C or 11.9%, and the lowest in Shorzha - 0.4 ° C or 6.1%.
 It can be concluded that the air temperature in the Lake Shana basin has increased by an average of 0.58 ° C or 10.25% since 1950 (Table 1).
KayannerGavarMartuniMasrikSevanShorzhaMijineTrendi gtsihavasarumTarekanmijinJermastichanikhotseliutyunjermastichan Table 1. Average annual air basin of Lake jermastichanneripopokhutyan equations and khotseliutyuneInch to the lake basin average annual atmospheric teghumnerin, then the observed meteorological stations 4, Gavar, Martuni, Masrik, Sevan, the observed increase in precipitation, and Shorzha : Declining trend (Figure 1).
Trend line equationAnnual mediation, Precipitation vulnerability,
P, mmmmMP StationsGavarMartuniMasrikShanShorzhaMediumTable 2. Equations of change of average annual atmospheric precipitation in Lake Sana basin և vulnerability Ավ Vulnerability of changes in average annual atmospheric precipitation տում Vulnerability 1 in contrast to air temperature վազ վազ decrease (!
 The highest growth value was observed in Sjan - 136 mm or 26.8%, and the lowest in Gavar - 26 mm or 5.3%.
 A slight tendency of decrease was observed only in Shorzha - 6 mm or 1.6%.
Thus, it can be concluded that the average annual atmospheric precipitation in the Lake Shana basin has increased by 50.4 mm or 10.02% on average since 1950 (Table 2).
If we compare the relationship between air temperature and atmospheric precipitation, we will see that an increase in air temperature in the Lake Sanaa basin is accompanied by an increase in atmospheric precipitation, which contradicts the general situation in Armenia (decrease in atmospheric precipitation by about 10%). factor, in particular, by increasing the evaporation of water from the lake.
The water resources of the rivers in the Lake Sanaa Basin have also undergone some changes.
 Studies conducted in relatively large rivers of the basin (Argitchi, Gavaraget, Masrik, Dzknaget, Karchaghbyur, Vardenis) show that in the period 1950-2015 most of the rivers (Gavaraget, Masrik, Dzknaget, Karchaghbyur) show an increasing trend of flow (Figure 2). ).
Figure 2. Dynamics of changes in the flow of relatively large rivers in the Lake Sanaa basin in 1950-2015. Assessing the vulnerability of changes in river basin flow dynamics, it is clear that in four of the six rivers studied, there is a steady increase in egret water flow (Table 3).
 The highest growth was observed in Karchaghbyur - 0.21 m3 / s or 19.44%, and the lowest - in Dzknaget - 0.03 m3 / s or 2.75%.
A tendency of decreasing river flow was observed in Argitchi - 0.20 m3 / s or 3.69%, և Vardenis - 0.19 m3 / s or 12.02% in rivers.
If we compare with the dynamics of changes in the flow of rivers in the Republic of Armenia [6], it should be noted that the vulnerability of the dynamics of changes in the rivers of Lake Shana basin is relatively small, can have a positive impact on sustainable development of the basin ecosystem.
River-ditaketTrendi gtsihavasarumMijintarekantsakhs, Q, m3 / vGeti tsakhsikhotseliutyun, m3 / vDzknaget-TsovagyughVardenisVardenikKarchaghbyurKarchaghbyurArgichi-VerinGetashenGavaragetNoratusMasrik-TsovakAghyusak 3. The lake basin is relatively large rivers annual mijinhoski change equations and khotseliutyuneAyspisov, complete ecosystem, vorikensunak necessary for sustainable development in the Lake catchment basin It is necessary to monitor all the factors affecting the latter և correct management.
 As a result of the implementation of complex measures, effective mechanisms for the conservation and sustainable use of the biodiversity of the basin will be established, which will ensure the normal development of the ecosystem and its components.
  It is necessary to permanently raise the level of the lake or to carry out current level stabilization measures.
 The proposed "further actions" should follow the principle of not disturbing the balance of the existing vulnerable ecosystem and be aimed at maintaining a sustainable "healthy ecosystem".
LITERATURE [1] Danielyan K. ։ Others, Integrated Assessment of the Ecological Situation of Lake Sana (GEO Lake Sevan), For UNHCR / UNEPCom, UNEP GRIDArendal, HrLusak, Yerevan, 2011, p. 100.
[2] Third National Communication on Climate Change, Yerevan, 2015, p. 191.
[3] Law of the Republic of Armenia on approving the annual and complex programs of measures for restoration, preservation, reproduction and use of the Lake Sanaa ecosystem, 21.06.2014.
[4] RA Law on Lake Sanaa, 15.05.2001.
[5] Convention on Biological Diversity, Fifth National Report, Yerevan, 2014, p. 135.
Ecosystems (Case Study of Lake Sevan), Chapter 29 in.
  National Security and HumanMcCulley, NATO Science For Peace Security Series - C:
  Environmental Security, The Danielyan Eva Vulnerability of NATURAL ECOSYSTEMS IN THE CONTEXT OF CLIMATE CHANGE (EXAMPLE OF LAKE SEVAN BASIN) Keywords: Climate change, natural ecosystem, Shana.
