THE RIGHT TO A SUFFICIENT LIVING STAND IN THE CONTEXT OF SOCIAL POLICY In the history of mankind, it is difficult to find a society where inequality did not exist.
 But it can be argued that inequality leads to the demand for change, which was echoed in the field of human rights protection.
The development of the right to a sufficient standard of living was the result of satisfying one of those requirements.
 This was the first time that the British trade unions made this demand.
 The latter in the 1870s. They fought for workers' rights, demanding that employers bring the minimum wage closer to a decent standard of living.
 During this period, studies on living standards began and continue to this day, the main task of which is to determine the limit of sufficient living standards.
  The existing approaches are quite different. In one case only material security is taken into account, in the other case the level of human involvement in public life is emphasized.
The study of living standards was significantly influenced by the teaching of human rights.
  The starting point of this influence can be considered Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the UN, which stated: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of his family, including food, clothing, housing, health care and basic social services, as well as the right to unemployment, sickness, widowhood, old age or any other existence of his own free will. if funds are needed. "
  The creation of a world where people would enjoy freedom of speech and belief and be free from fear and need was declared a lofty goal.
 One of the conditions for the implementation of this provision is expressed in Article 25 of the Declaration.
Later, the UN also addressed the issue of ensuring a sufficient standard of living.
 By the UN expert group in 1978 A system of indicators was developed, which is currently used at the international level to determine the level of adequate living standards.
  It includes 12 main groups of indicators.1. Birth rate, mortality այլ other demographic characteristics, 2. Sanitary and hygienic living conditions, 3. Consumption of food products, 4. Housing conditions, 5. Education and culture, 1 Dobrenyakov V., Kravchenko A., Sociology, Moscow, 2001, page 350.
6. Working conditions, 7. Income of the population և expenses, 8. Cost of living և consumer prices, 9. Vehicles, 10. Leisure organization, 11. Social security, 12. Human freedom.
These are the aspects of life that largely determine the level of a person's ability to act in society.
Moreover, in 1990 Within the framework of the "Human Development Index" rating survey conducted since 2007, financial opportunities were considered as a means of human development, and human development was interpreted as a process of expanding human capabilities1.
The mentioned actions were carried out at the international level.
  Let us try to look at them from the point of view of explaining the essence of the right to a sufficient standard of living.
  The right to a sufficient standard of living can be considered the basis of human social rights.
 We have other rights to work, social security, education, but to what extent should these rights be exercised, where do the responsibilities of the state begin and end?
  The answer to these questions can be found if we set the standard of living.
1960s English sociologist T. Marshall, by circulating the notion of social rights, defined it as rights which the citizen acquires by the force of law;
By virtue of the RA law, it has provided each of its citizens with a number of social rights, including the right to a sufficient standard of living enshrined in Article 34 of the RA Constitution. "Everyone has the right to a sufficient standard of living for his family, including housing, as well as the right to improve living conditions.
 The state takes necessary measures for the realization of this right. ”
 The implementation of this provision is one of the ways to become a social state outlined in Article 1 of the RA Constitution.
 Of course, the legal field is not limited to this, but within the framework of the article we will not present a long chain of laws related to the realization of the right to a sufficient standard of living.
We will focus on the main steps that are being taken within the framework of the RA social policy for the realization of the right to a standard of living.
  At the same time, we consider it necessary to separate the RA Law on the Minimum Life Insurance Basket and the Minimum Life Insurance Budget from that chain.
  This law is the legal basis for the realization of the right to a sufficient standard of living.
The law defines the legal bases for calculating and approving the minimum living basket in the Republic of Armenia, the minimum living budget, and regulating the relations related to the implementation of the state social policy.
  The purpose of the law is to assess the livelihood of the population of the Republic of Armenia, the use of the indicators obtained as a result of the latter during the development and implementation of state social policy, the assessment of the minimum wage, pensions, scholarships, benefits and other social payments, as well as the amount of non-taxable income.
 However, the application of the law is limited because the minimum subsistence basket in the Republic of Armenia has not been approved yet.
 As a result, the results of the "Complete Survey of the Population Survey" conducted by the NSSRA, in particular, the cost of the consumer basket, are taken as a factual basis for the government to determine the amount of salaries, pensions and other social payments.
Let's talk about the social policy implemented in Armenia. Let's see what its impact is on ensuring a sufficient standard of living.
Still in 2003 The role of social policy in poverty reduction was explored within the framework of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.
 Special attention is paid to the social risks arising in a person's life, so that the state can regulate, reduce and regulate those risks. Three main areas of state regulation of social risks are separated: social assistance, pensions, other social insurance, employment.
  The following steps are appropriate in these areas: • Adjusting beneficiary families to very poor households in the field of state benefits, ending benefits at once, increasing system reliability, assessing household insecurity by income, identifying the poorest by social services, increasing the average benefit rate.
• Implementation of reforms in the field of pensions in 3 directions: increase in the number of people paying mandatory social contributions, increase in the amount of contributions և Defining and clarifying the framework of pension recipients from the means of the RA State Social Insurance Fund.
• Termination of unemployment insurance in the field of employment, financing of employment programs from the state budget, replacement of state training courses with programs implemented by state-funded labor services, provision of unemployment benefits on shorter terms, with more stringent conditions, job creation
2003-2006 The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper has made significant progress, especially in reducing material poverty, but has failed to achieve the projected average pension-to-wage ratio, as well as the projected per capita family benefits.
  There was a need to review, and in some cases change, the priorities set out in the PRSP.
Already in 2008 The Government of the Republic of Armenia has developed a sustainable development program, the priority of which remains the fight against poverty.
 Increasing the welfare of the population, overcoming poverty և eradicating extreme poverty are the main goals of the sustainable development program.
  In general, the main means of combating it is targeted socio-policy, in the framework of which more attention is paid to the spheres of social assistance, pensions, and employment is considered separately as the main strategy for overcoming poverty.
In the field of social assistance, it is supposed to increase the living standards of the poor, to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the family benefits system provided to overcome poverty and inequality in the country.
  The peculiarity here is that the program emphasizes the fact that vulnerable groups are involved in economic life on their own as a possible way out of poverty.
  It is here that, for the first time, the provision of opportunities as a means of overcoming poverty is emphasized, not just financial support.
 The list of priorities also includes the provision of social services both separately and in the form of a package, the expansion of alternative services, etc.
The program aims to implement pension reform, which will be implemented through parametric changes in the pension distribution system and the introduction of a funded pension system.
 The reforms envisage:  Tighten the conditions for granting pensions,  Revise the model for recognizing a person with a disability,  Improve the process of registering a person's pension rights, ապահով Ensure the provision of a package of social services through automated information exchange systems, ել Reform the system of concessional living Compulsory occupational diseases insurance system.
The employment policy envisages the expansion of employment in such a way as to reduce the number of working poor, ie to ensure decent employment, which guarantees a sufficient level of wages, working conditions, degree of formality, as well as the minimum pension security.
 The two main directions of the policy implemented in the sphere are formulated as follows: balanced protection policies of employment and minimum wage.
The above-mentioned goals in the Sustainable Development Plan were in the field of social protection, which, however, were partially implemented due to the effects of the global crisis.
  It should be noted at the same time that reforms are being implemented in almost all sub-sectors of social protection, which are the result of a sustainable development program.
 All these reforms can be described as a transition from passive policy to active policy, which implies the involvement of all stakeholders, resulting in more effective management of state resources.
 This transition highlights the fact that, as in the rest of the world, in the framework of the steps taken to ensure our standard of living in Armenia, we are based on the expansion of a person's capabilities, the discovery and use of human potential.
Tatjik Karapetyan SATISFACTORY RIGHT IN THE CONTEXT OF RA SOCIAL POLICY Keywords: social rights, standard of living, right to a sufficient standard of living, social policy.
