VIOLATIONS OF ARMENIAN JOURNALISTICS 'ETHICS IN THE CONTEXT OF INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE In order to understand the ethical norms of journalistic activity, it is necessary to understand what ethics is, why it is necessary to maintain it.
 Aristotle spoke about the need to observe ethical and moral norms when writing about the concept of "golden mean" in 350 BC.
 The Greek philosopher believed that ethical behavior is manifested by maintaining balance.
  He believed that the orthodox norm, the golden mean, was precisely the point between the advantages and the disadvantages.
Many books have been written on ethics and media legislation.
 Therefore, this phenomenon has many definitions.
  According to the most common use, "journalistic ethics are the norms of behavior accepted in the journalistic environment, which are considered moral" [2].
 Of course, journalists are often confused, because the concept of "morality" is a very subjective category և not defined in legislative acts.
 In order to fully understand the essence of journalistic ethics, it is necessary to first define the concepts of "journalistic ethics" and "legislation".
  Modern journalists working in the media field identify these terms.
  In fact, they are complementary, but different phenomena.
 Ethical norms have no legal force, unlike legislative acts ․ If they do not follow them, the journalist will not be subject to any legal penalty.
 Meanwhile, many acts coordinating the activities of the mass media can be found in the laws of any country.
 There are laws in the Republic of Armenia that refer to the freedom of the press, not to hinder the work of journalists during elections, slander-insult, copyright infringement, plagiarism, non-disclosure of a journalistic source.
    It is necessary to understand that these articles are not ethical norms, but legislative acts.
 Of course, if the ethical norms are observed, the journalist will hardly face legal problems.
Thus, in the course of this research, we will try to take the international experience of ethical violations as a basis, to study the ethical violations of the Armenian media field by the example of mistakes, discussing their consequences.
  The working mission of a journalist is the ability to cover many issues that have a public resonance in a literate and objective way.
 Journalists try to maintain the connection between the society and the "authorities", to play the role of mediator or catalyst in this issue.
  Therefore, it is very important to protect the rights of journalists as well.
 Today, there are a number of organizations in Armenia, such as Reporters Without Borders and the Federation of Journalists, which protect the rights of journalists by referring to violations of ethical norms by the media.
  In addition to the mentioned organizations, there are many media outlets that develop personal ethics regulations.
 The journalist must be guided if he wants to work in the given media.
 The regulation of "Aravot" is more interesting, according to which the journalists of the media should not criticize other media և they should not respond to the criticism of the latter [3].
 This problem is very common in our country today, as one of the main ethical violations is the race of journalists and media outlets in the Armenian media field with ethical violations, as a result of which the reader suffers the most.
Journalists are responsible to their readers, so they should be able to put aside their personal ambitions and, if necessary, apologize by acknowledging and correcting the ethical violation.
Before referring to the ethical violations of the Armenian media field, it is necessary to realize the fact that any media outlet strives to have a rating, as a high rating is a source of income for the media outlet.
  It's just that journalists who are often obsessed with high rankings grossly violate all the principles of ethics, violating human emotions and causing great psychological trauma.
  One of the most egregious violations of international journalism can be considered an earthquake that took place about sixty-six years ago, the news of the death of Princess Diana of the United Kingdom, which caused a shock wave in society.
 In those days, all the media were officially asked not to publish the photos of Diana's body, but the media, in order to have a high rating, exceeded all ethical norms by flooding the newspapers with photos of the decapitated body of the princess.
Sociologist and researcher Marshall McLuhan's "Technological Determinism" had long predicted that the Internet would become widespread.
According to this theory, the media pursues us everywhere, and we can not escape from the Internet և information.
 In this case, the problem of ethical violations becomes more complicated, because the media that satisfies the thirst for information of the society, which publishes a few news items per minute, simply does not have time to think about the observance of ethical norms.
Unfortunately, the Armenian media do not learn lessons from the authoritative international media, constantly increasing the number of mistakes.
 Let us refer to the example of the five born in Yerevan.
  It is clear that the event is of great interest, as a person independently becomes a victim of misinformation or news-information that deviates from the real agendas of daily attention.
 The media received a message from the RA Ministry of Health stating that five people had been born in Yerevan, but that the children were in poor health.
  Now let's present the headlines that the media wrote in those days: "We have already decided on the names of the five" [6], "We will decide on the names, but we have not distributed them yet" [4], etc.
 Such headlines were unacceptable at the time, as only two of the five survived today.
 The parents of the current five may be psychologically traumatized while reading these articles.
Another, more recent example of an ethical violation is the case of a young man who took children hostage in the Armavir region.
  Here we are dealing with a case of child psychology disorder.
  The media should work more carefully, and the best option should be the media's ability to cooperate with psychologists, not the rating race.
After the release of the last kidnapped child, the child's father shoots a video where he և is "in front of the camera". The father says that the child was not afraid, և everything is fine.
 In those days, the child was visited by various journalists and policemen, each time reminding about what had happened.
Today that child can not speak, because in the past no one except psychologists should be allowed to communicate with the child.
 In fact, this was not only an ethical violation, but also a gross violation of the rights of the child.
Noteworthy are the examples of ethical violations in which the titles do not correspond to reality at all or partially correspond.
 For example, the headline reads: "The bus overturned, there are several hundred victims."
 Many will want to read this news to make sure that the bus has indeed overturned, but in the Somali capital.
 In this case, the headline of the media outlet corresponds to the reality, but the media outlet realized that if the headline mentions the name of the country of Somalia, its article will be read less in Armenia.
 There are cases when the title does not match the content of the material at all.
 Usually such headlines can be found in the materials of accidents with famous singers, actors, politicians, with the reference of which we either come across some advertisement or appear on the website of the online game.
It is necessary to pay attention to people with disabilities, because the journalist must be able to protect the rights of people with disabilities, be careful when asking every question, not inappropriately insulting people who are already vulnerable.
 During this research we tried to find examples where Armenian journalists showed unscrupulous attitude towards people with disabilities, but, fortunately, we did not find any.
According to experts studying the ethical field in Armenia, the spread of misinformation is a great danger today.
  Here is the role of the journalist, not only the transmitter of information, but also the fact that he comes to Nahad as a filter.
Media literacy is more important for the society today than for journalists.
 Journalists are already media literate, because they are the ones who create and distribute media content, but the society is not media literate, therefore, it cannot distinguish which material is true and which is not.
Most people do not care at all from which source they get this or that information, very often spreading the information on Azerbaijani websites.
  That is why it is necessary to conduct media literacy courses for different circles of the society, taking into account that we are constantly in the focus of information wars.
 If the society was a media literate, it would demand and force the journalists to write materials in accordance with the norms of ethics.
 In the case of television, radio, newspapers, a person does not have the opportunity to choose. He can only change the channel or browse the page, and in the case of the Internet, people choose from many sources which sites to get information from, so media literacy refers to the Internet media.
 By the way, the international media literacy struggle started by the famous "The Guardian" with its "Fake or Real?" in a series of articles teaching how to distinguish between truth and falsehood.
 Ethical features of military journalism in the context of the April war ․ Today we are waging an information war on two Turkish-Azerbaijani fields at the same time, so we must always be vigilant.
 With this in mind, the RA Ministry of Defense has prepared a guide to military ethics for journalists.
When writing any article about the Defense Army, the military journalist's goal should not be to stone the army, but to protect the state's national interest.
In the press we can often find such headlines: "A soldier died in one of the Martakert military units", "It is reported that more detailed information will be provided later".
 At that time, the parents and relatives of the servicemen in Martakert created panic moods ․ They call and try to find out the identity of the killed soldier, while the media could report the news after clarifying the identity of the killed soldier.
  Journalists often commit ethical violations by publishing photos of the geographical location of military units, weapons, military bases, which can be useful to the enemy.
 In this regard, the Ministry of Defense from time to time organizes trainings for journalists covering the military, but it would be right for such events to be held regularly in all media.
The four-day war in April forced the journalists to "sober up" and solve the problems as soon as possible.
 In those days, the journalists realized that the war could start at any moment, և the enemy's disinformation flows will try to attack our field, and the panicked society, often approaching the messages of its authorities with skepticism, will spread the Azerbaijani news.
 Different assessments were given to the work of the Armenian media during the war.
 Many criticized the Ministry of Defense in those days, saying that the Ministry of Defense was hiding the real number of victims, while the Ministry of Defense was gradually providing information about the victims based on ethical considerations.
 It is not right to tell people under the influence of a cold shower that a war has started, we have several hundred victims, because this will cause psychological trauma and panic in the society.
It is necessary to emphasize the activity of several researchers promoting media literacy during the April war, such as information security expert Samvel Martirosyan, Mediamax News Agency Editor-in-Chief Davit Alaverdyan, RA Ministry of Defense spokesman Artsrun Hovhannisyan, others who tried to teach them how to properly
 They installed programs that allowed journalists և followers to distinguish the location, antiquity and authenticity of the photo լ video.
What is worrying is that the journalists made many ethical mistakes while talking to the relatives of the soldiers who died after the war, asking, for example, "what would they say to the soldier if he were alive?"
Examining the above-mentioned key provisions of the Armenian media field, presenting their analytical picture, we come to the conclusion that the Armenian media field has a lot to do both in terms of media literacy and psychological, ethical observance of ethical norms. We offer the media to organize active cooperation with leading specialists in the field, acting in competent moments with competent approaches.
LITERATURE [1] Aristotle's Ethical Theory.
 'On the Concepts of Virtue and Golden Mean', 25-01-2014, URL.
 https:
//aquileana.wordpress.com (Accessed.
 19.05.2017) .URL.
 http:
//evartist.narod.ru 20.12.2012 (date of address.
 26-08-2017). [3] Code of Ethics, 22.11.2011, URL.
 http:
//www.aravot.am (link made: 04-07-2017).
[4] "We have chosen the names, but we have not distributed them yet, we do not know", 03-05-2017, URL.
 https:
//168.am (the link was made on 14-06-2017).
[5] "After the case of Manushak kindergarten, the child does not speak", 03.11.2017, URL.
 https:
//168.am (the link was made on 14-06-2017).
[6] "The parents of the five have already decided on the names of the children. 7.5 million drams will be allocated to the family ", URL.
 http:
//armlur.am (link made: 14-06-2017).
URL.
 https:
//www.theguardian.com 26/12/16 (Accessed.
 28.07.2017) .URL.
 https:
//studopedia.su (date of application.
 24-07-2017). [9] "The health condition of the five born today is extremely serious," URL.
 http:
//www.7or.am/am03/05/17 (link made: 17-05-2017).
Khachatryan Nelli ARMENIAN JOURNALISTS VIOLATIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE Keywords: media literacy, ethics, law, ethical violations, psychological peculiarities.
