COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DOMESTIC ALIENCE MEASUREMENT APPROACHES The family is one of the most important social institutions in modern societies.
  It is the bearer of various results of various social, economic, cultural and cultural changes.
It is obvious that family dynamics, even intra-family relations, structural, reproductive features are not accidental in any way. They are based on deep social processes, extensive changes and transformations.
  The current family, acting as a focal point for the reproduction of normative structures, social interactions, is a subject of broader social essences and relations.
  At the same time, present-day societies are distinguished by unprecedented dynamism, diffraction, complexity, unprecedented intensity and diversity of social change.
  Only yesterday's integrative, stabilizing mechanisms of the society, its separate spheres, large and small groups, are already weak today, secondary, non-applied, they are constantly being replaced by new unstable instantaneous ones.
 The multidimensional dimension of social alienation occupies a primary place in the above-mentioned, the deep, superficial preconditions of which, the effects of externalities are obvious in all spheres of public life, including the family.
  Social alienation, in this case, intra-family alienation, is voiced in the aftermath of such phenomena as family disintegration, disruption of social solidarity, intra-family, intergenerational relations, degeneration of reproductive processes, "general cessation", etc.
This is becoming more and more relevant in the context of migration processes of great social importance in Armenia, the destructive role of which is sometimes more than obvious.
The issue of family alienation was referred to by a number of soc. in disciplines: sociology, social psychology, social work, etc.
  It should be noted that in sociology in particular, the concept of family alienation is completely based on the theoretical basis of social alienation.
  Thus, intra-family alienation presupposes family (as a unit) - the secularization of a family member from a family unit at the family member level.
 This process can be conditioned by various factors.
  In order to bring the difference to a measurable level, based on the components of the measurement of social alienation proposed by Simen, it is proposed to divide the intra-family alienation into the following components: meaninglessness, abnormality, powerlessness, isolation և cultural alienation1.
 Define each component at the family level.
  Thus, meaninglessness in the family is interpreted as a degree in which family events, events in the family are perceived as chaotic, in the context of a severe lack of connection, difficult and unpredictable.
  Moreover, the focus of meaninglessness is the approach according to which the organization of family events in general և their regulated direction does not make sense for one reason or another.
The abnormality in the family is interpreted mainly in the context of gender, in some cases with the emphasis on the intergenerational vacuum.
Key provisions are the need to maintain secrecy, the conditionally unfairly established dominance, the weakening / breaking of family norms.
 Weakness, in turn, is defined as a low level of participation in family life.
 Moreover, in that context, the aimlessness of participating in it is considered.
  Isolation, on the other hand, is interpreted as the frequency of feelings of loneliness in the family, the lack of family warmth, and the availability of alternative solutions to that lack.
  Cultural alienation is again viewed from the generational-gender perspective.
 Moreover, in order to get a general idea of ​​cultural alienation, it is necessary to make a comparative analysis of pre-marital and post-marital families in order to identify the contradictions that led to the emergence of this phenomenon.
 Of course, on the other hand, it is necessary to take into account the chronological context, because the instantaneous social change that is constantly taking place in the globalized world can also be considered as a factor that leads to the emergence of this phenomenon.
  Although the main components of family alienation are the above, however, considering the external features of the latter at the household level, it is necessary to combine this process with the assessment of the dynamics of family statistics.
Thus, it is customary to use the measurement dimensions of the family for assessment.
 Authors Goral և Olsen single out the circumplex model of family reunification.
The historical roots of the circular model, the basic concepts, the dimensions of measurement are entirely based on system theory.
  The original model was created and developed in 1978 by D. Olsen, R. Belle և Ջ. By the ports 2.
 This model focuses specifically on the relational system և includes three dimensions derived from empiricism ովին fully consistent with the theoretical approaches of family therapy և family sociology.
 The family reunification-adaptation model consists of the following two components with the evaluation of family-marked elements: reunion-flexibility.
 Considering the dynamics of the family in these two dimensions, the authors distinguish three levels of flexibility և association.
  Of course, before referring to applicability, it is necessary to first define the concepts of family cohesion and family flexibility.
  The family, flexibility և communication dimensions emerged as a result of grouping 50 concepts.
 The mentioned picture is summarized as a result of the analytical work of a number of theorists on marital-family systems.
  The variables of family reunification are: emotional connection, boundaries, intra-family coalition, time, space, friends, range of interests ադրություն reproduction.
The focus is on how the system balances segregation as opposed to unity.
  There are 4 levels of association, divided / separated, which in turn implies an extremely low degree of association, somewhat connected (moderately low), connected, highly connected շատ mixed.
 It is generally accepted that the categories in the middle of the range are the criteria for optimal family functioning3.
 It should be noted here that the so-called "balanced" family is distinguished by the relative independence and interdependence of the latter members.
  This type of family has an advantage over other types of families in terms of functionality.
  It is possible to define a balanced family only by considering the time spent by the members of the latter together as opposed to the time spent alone.
 Moreover, the author mentions that in order to get a comprehensive picture, it is necessary to compare the total number of individual friends, the time spent with them, the participation in these entertaining activities.
 It should be noted that from this point of view, the evaluation of these entertaining activities is missed by family members, because having a real picture of the entertainment dynamics, finding out what each family member would like to be, it is possible to make a comparative analysis.
 When talking about family flexibility, the authors mention the dynamics of changing role-playing relationships, leadership, and the rules of the relationship.
 Typical concepts are: control, discipline, negotiation style, role relationships և rules of interaction.
 Levels of flexibility are rigid (non-flexible), relatively flexible, flexible, very flexible, chaotic (extremely flexible).
It should be emphasized that the hard ոտ chaotic types are located in extreme points and show low functionality.
  These types of families are by nature the most problematic families.
  Thus, flexibility focuses on the dynamics of family leadership, changing roles և rules4.
 In general, flexibility shows how the system provides stability in the area of ​​change.
  Let's refer to the types conditioned by the degree of flexibility.
 It should be noted here that each level is distinguished by its own characteristics.
  Thus, the chaotic family is characterized by lack of leadership, abrupt change of role, instability of established discipline, excessive change.
  Flexible type, on the other hand, is characterized by distributed leadership, democratic discipline, role change, situational changes in the role / decision-making sphere.
  The next type, structured, is characterized by sometimes shared leadership, relatively democratic, stable role distribution, making changes only when absolutely necessary.
 The rigid type, in turn, is characterized by authoritarian leadership, strict discipline, rare role changes, low or almost zero dynamics of change.
The third element of the circular model is communication.
  Communication is considered an auxiliary component.
 The latter is attached to the above two years 4 Kouneski E., Family Assessment and the Circumplex Model.
  New Research Developments, allowing general conclusions to be drawn.
  Couples' "family communication" is measured by the following criteria: speaking, listening skills, as well as self-expression, clarity of the communication process, and continuity of the topics discussed.
  Speaking and listening skills should be understood from the point of view of one's own self and not from the point of view of family members.
  Listening skill, on the other hand, is the ability / willingness to listen carefully5.
Thus, the circular model includes three main elements that can be used to characterize families according to the criteria of stability և role relationships.
  As it was mentioned, those three elements are coexistence, flexibility և communication.
  Intimacy is the emotional attachment between family members, and family flexibility, on the other hand, is defined as an expression and quality of organization, leadership.
  Communication, in turn, is defined as the availability of positive communication skills.
  It should be noted that the authors have used several approaches to accurately measure flexibility և coupling.
 According to one approach, a bipolar scale was used in contrast to the Likert scale.
 Apart from the circularity, that model has another problematic side of conceptualization.
  The first is the issue of intercultural applicability.
 The problem is that there is uncertainty as to whether the theoretical basis of the latter ensures its universal applicability6.
  Given the fact that cultural values ​​ված defined norms differ when we look at this or that society, particularly when it comes to the East-West cognitive map, there is a need to define the applicability of this model in the context of this or that society.
 It should be noted that before the development of the Family Assessment Framework model, the linear version of the same model, called the Family Adaptation Assessment Scale, was widely used.
  The initial version of this scale, FACE II և FACE III, allows the degree of family cohesion հար flexibility to be measured in a linear equation where the high degree of coherence և flexibility reflects the balanced operation of the family.
 The low level of these criteria, on the other hand, reflects the extremely low level of functionality that the authors call divisive / rigid.
In addition to this model, a circular model has been developed that allows measurement of flexibility in a three-dimensional dimension by deriving family types according to pre-defined criteria.
The peculiarity of the circular model is that the mentioned model views the family in the context of social dynamics.
  That is, according to this approach, the institution of the family should be viewed in the context of change.
 The direction of family development may change depending on the need of the situation.
 We can talk about the emergence of a crisis situation, the stage of overcoming it, or the dynamics of development.
In addition to the family assessment cycle model, researchers also use the Family Environment Assessment Scale.
The family environment assessment scale is used to extract the socio-environmental characteristics of the family.
  The scale is a table consisting of 90 judgments, which has 10 sub-scales, which in turn allow the platforms for maintaining interpersonal relationships, personality development and the system.
The relationship platform includes correlation measurements, expressiveness և conflict components.
  The five sub-scales of personal development include: independence, orientation of achievements, aspirations, intellectual-cultural orientation, reproductive-moral-religious orientation.
  The component of independence allows us to understand to what extent family members are assertive, self-sufficient, and have the freedom to make their own decisions.
 The orientation of achievements and aspirations shows the extent to which the actor's actions are aimed at maintaining his position in the competitive field, as well as achieving the desired results.
  The intellectual-cultural component, in turn, allows measuring the level of interest in political, intellectual and cultural processes.
  The active-reproductive component, on the other hand, allows measuring participation in social-entertainment activities.
 In the end, the moral-religious component focuses on the measurement of religious, moral values.
 The last two scales are for organization և management system maintenance.
 These two allow us to measure the extent to which families plan their actions, set the rules of their family in order to organize family life properly7.
7 Vostanis P. and Nicholls J., The Family Environment Scale.
  Comparison with the construct ofVolume.
 17. Three different assessment scales are used to accurately assess the family environment: the real, ideal, and expectations-appropriate scales.
  The real egg evaluates the current family environment, the ideal egg the ideal family environment, and the expectation the family's ability to cope with change.
  As practice shows, the family environment assessment scale is valid, as it has been used many times in a number of studies, leading to the extraction of accurate data.
 The concepts singled out in the subscales, as evidenced by the authors Holahan և Mousse, are evaluated by experts և allow to give an objective assessment of the family environment8.
 Moreover, a comparative analysis was made between the assessments given by the parents ", a calculation was made using the Pearson coefficient, as a result of which the connection between the two scales was removed".
 That is, the coincidence of the assessments given by the two sides was observed, as a result of which the objectivity of the scale was proved.
The next scale is the differential of family loneliness.
 The authors of this scale are Schmidt և Sermat (1983).
  This scale consists of 60 sub-scales that allow you to measure a person's sense of loneliness in the context of interpersonal relationships.
 By relationship, the author means: • romantic relationships, • friendships, • family relationships, • relationships within the community.
The above scale is dichotomous in nature (right, wrong, with appropriate versions).
 Thus, a study was conducted in which married couples with or without children participated.
As a result, a correlation was found between women և men մեն loneliness կանանց.
  Generalized և special cases were related to the attitude towards married life, less intimacy, less marital satisfaction, low level of self-expression. Evaluation using these variables allows us to measure the degree of loneliness.
 It should be noted that we are talking about the oneness, which is considered in the context of social isolation, անձն interpersonal relations.
  The scale of loneliness in the family consists of 10 judgments.
  The original of this scale had one judgment, which was deduced as a result of data analysis.
  We are talking about the judgment "I am interested in my family", because the empirical data show that this judgment carries an element of subjectivity, and therefore does not work.
 The scale allows you to measure different types of family relationships - an individual's satisfaction with those relationships, such as a sense of family belonging, support, understanding of each other, the ability to share positive feelings.
  One of the typical judgments of the scale is: "No one in my family is interested in me."
  The reliability of the scale is satisfactory Cronbach's coefficient - 0.87) և it is an acceptable value 46.70% 9.
 Family assessment questionnaires pursue one goal: to assess families based on several criteria.
 As mentioned, these criteria include family cohesion, family resilience / ability to adapt to change, problem-solving strategy, roles, affective response / involvement, behavior management, conflict, warmth, communication և function 10.
  The model is the family adaptation scale, the self-assessment scale, as well as the family assessment tool.
Thus, this model allows us to observe the dynamics of the family in seven levels: family entertainment, decisions, family honor, values, care, communication - high trust.
Anna Atoyan COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FAMILY EXPROPRIATION MEASUREMENTS Keywords: alienation, abnormality, powerlessness, isolation, adaptation, family flexibility, cognitive map, attachment-orientation, kindness-oriented
