IN THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION ORGANIZATIONS, THE FEATURES OF THE APPEALING DECISIONS MADE BY THE APPLICATION
  However, the international trade dispute review system has long lacked a grievance mechanism.
 In particular, "On Customs Trade" 1947. The agreement (hereinafter referred to as the UNHCR) did not provide for a review procedure for the review report, which was put into circulation after the review report was submitted to avoid possible legal errors. (hereinafter referred to as VKM).
In other words, the Dispute Settlement Body, nevertheless, to some extent was reviewing the reports of the examination group; in case of disagreement, it was authorized to reject it.
  But this procedure, in fact, from a legal point of view, could not be considered a review or appeal of the examination group's reports, as diplomacy and politics prevailed in this process.
The procedure for appealing acts adopted during the settlement of trade disputes was established in 1995 within the framework of the World Trade Organization (hereinafter referred to as the WTO). Article 17 of the Agreement on the Rules of Procedure for the Settlement of Disputes, which stipulates the procedure for filing a complaint with the Standing Appeals Body.
The appeal procedure is carried out by the Permanent Appeals Body, which consists of 7 permanent members.
  Members are appointed for a four-year term with the possibility of re-election 1.
The agreement, in contrast to the WTO Dispute Settlement Procedure, contains only one article on the appeals procedure, Article 17.
At the same time, Article 17 9 9 of the Agreement stipulates that the Appellate Body shall develop its working procedures in consultation with the Chairman-in-Chief of the Dispute Settlement Body and shall notify the members thereof.
Thus, within the framework of the WTO, the review is carried out in accordance with the Agreement on Procedures and Procedures for the Settlement of Disputes under the Working Procedure for Review (hereinafter referred to as the Working Procedure).
Taking into account the scope of the working procedures, as well as the functions of the Appellate Body, the fact that being a permanent body, it is necessary to change and improve the existing procedures over time, we find that the agreement is quite reasonable. composition of functions.
Referring to the limits of appeals within the WTO, we can state that the model of restrictive appeals operates in this system, as the agreement clearly defines which issues can be addressed by the Appellate Body.
 In particular, pursuant to Article 17 6 ​​6 of the Agreement, the Appellate Body reviews only matters relating to the legal interpretation of the law by the panel.
 That is, the Appellate Body is not authorized to address issues related to the assessment of facts and the examination of evidence in addition to legal issues2.
In this situation, a logical question arises as to how effectively the WHO appeals body can operate under such narrow limits of appeal.
Before addressing the above issue, we consider it necessary to make a separate review in legal systems in general. See / electronic https.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/appellate_body_e.htm,15.03.2016 /.
2 See Understanding the WTO.
 settling disputes a unique contribution / electronic source: https.
//www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/disp1_e.htm, viewing date: 15.03.2016 /.
Source: Date: Existence of review limits for review or higher instances.
In general, before any legal system that provides for a "second instance" of judicial review of legal disputes, the question usually arises as to what limits the second instance should limit during the review of the dispute, if the lower instance has already ruled on the dispute.
In principle, any review system wants to ensure that the second instance is able to correct the mistakes made by the first instance, but at the same time the legislator does not want the appellate courts to turn the case into a repetition of the first instance.
  For this reason, in almost all legal systems, certain limits of appeal are set, trying to prevent the re-examination of the case of the lower instances already examined by the higher instances3.
At the same time, the existence of a second instance makes the trial relatively longer and more costly, thus not improving the overall quality of the decisions.
  For this reason, it is quite common to impose certain restrictions on review criteria when reviewed by higher authorities.
  In particular, the courts of higher instance sometimes arbitrarily limit the scope of the issues to be reviewed by them in order to reduce their workload, maintain their independence, and have confidence in the lower courts.
 Moreover, the provision of clear boundaries of revision is typical of both Romano-Germanic and Anglo-Saxon legal systems.
 Thus, the fact that within the framework of the WTO the limits of review are provided by the Appellate Body, we find that it is lawful.
  At the same time, we would like to emphasize that both parties have the opportunity to appeal at the same time, regardless of whether the report was made against them or not, if they think that any legal issue has been misinterpreted by the examination team4.
3 See Scope and Funtion of the WTO Appellate System.
  What future after the millenniumround? / electronic source: http.
//www.mpil.de/files/pdf2/mpunyb_ziegler_3.pdf, viewed on 15.03.2016 /.
4 See Understanding the WTO.
 settling disputes a unique contribution / electronic source: https.
//www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/disp1_e.htm, viewing date: 15.03.2016 /.
This possibility is often used by the parties to the dispute, for example in the case of "US Wool Shirts", that the decision was made in favor of India, but India filed a complaint regarding the interpretation of certain legal issues.
5 Considering the possibility of mutual appeal by the parties, we find that such a settlement is quite effective, as often the dispute resolution bodies, ie the court, arbitration or in this case the arbitral tribunal, can give a specific interpretation of the law in which case, even if the decision is made If in favor of that party, then the party may have other problems in the future just for the decision, the legal interpretation of the report.
When referring to the effectiveness of the appeal system, it is essential to study the deadlines set for appeals.
The full extent of the time limit for filing a complaint is of great importance for the full realization of the right of appeal of a party.
 The provision of a clear time limit, as well as the provision of a reasonable time limit for the proper filing of a complaint, is a guarantee of the effective exercise of the party's right to appeal.
It is noteworthy that the WTO Agreement does not provide specific deadlines for appeals, in particular. within 20 days after circulation.
Pursuant to Section 4 of the same Article, within 60 days after the date of circulating the report to the members, the report shall be adopted at a meeting of the Dispute Settlement Body unless either party to the dispute formally notifies its decision to appeal, or the Dispute Settlement Body does not agree. not to accept the report.
  If either party notifies itself of its decision to appeal, the PMC will not consider the report of the review team for admission until the end of the appeal.
Thus, the possibility of a party appealing is limited to the adoption of a report during the meeting of the Dispute Resolution Body.
5 See United States - Measures Affecting Imports of Woven Wool Shirts and Blouses fromIndia https.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds33_e.htm և Prior to the adoption of the report, the party is free to file complaints at any time with the Appellate Body.
In general, within the framework of the above-mentioned legal regulation, the parties can be sure that within 20 days after circulating the report, the Dispute Resolution Body will not convene a meeting, և the report will not be examined.
 In other words, the parties are unequivocally aware that they still have 20 days to appeal the report after reviewing the report.
  However, as a result of the above-mentioned legal regulation, after the expiration of those 20 days, the parties find themselves in an uncertain situation, as in case there is no clear deadline for appeal, it is unknown for how long the party can file a complaint to the Appellate Body.
In addition, paragraph 21 of the Working Procedures of the Appellate Body clearly stipulates that the complaint must contain the grounds for filing a complaint, ie the violations committed by the investigating team, as well as the grounds for the illegality of the legal comments given in the report.
6 That is, the complainant has a fairly large obligation under the WTO, և the complainant must have some time to file a complaint in accordance with the requirements.
Article 16 4 4 of the Agreement provides that, within 60 days of the date of referral to the members, the examination report shall be adopted at a meeting of the Dispute Settlement Body, unless either party to the dispute formally notifies its decision to appeal.
It follows from the above-mentioned legal regulation that the Dispute Regulatory Body is entitled to accept the report of the examination group within 60 days, if the decision on the appeal has not been officially notified.
At the same time, the agreement does not explicitly regulate the frequency with which the Dispute Settlement Body convenes meetings.
  In particular, Article 2 3 3 of the Agreement provides that the Dispute Settlement Body shall hold meetings as often as is necessary for the performance of its functions within the timeframe set out in the Agreement.
In other words, it follows from the above that there is no clear timetable for convening meetings by the Dispute Settlement Body, ումը the convening of meetings is directly conditioned by the Dispute Settlement Body.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/ab_e.htm, viewing date: 15.03.2016 /.
at its discretion.
 However, in the conditions of such existing legal regulation, when there is no clear regulation in terms of terms, the following situation may arise.
 Thus: • The Dispute Settlement Body may convene a meeting within 30 days of circulating the report, as the agreement allows.
 In this case, the party who disagrees with the report has only 30 days before the meeting's approval of the report to be able to formally notify the Dispute Settlement Body of its appeal and, most importantly, to file a complaint against the report with the Secretariat.
• In another situation, the Dispute Settlement Body convenes a meeting 45 or 50 days after the report is circulated.
  In this case, the appellant already has more time to file the complaint properly.
In the above two situations, the Dispute Settlement Body does not violate the law, as the latter is free to convene meetings at regular intervals, at what intervals it is necessary to carry out its functions.
 However, although the actions of the Dispute Settlement Body in convening a meeting are lawful, the situation is unfair, as one party to the dispute may have more time to lodge a complaint than the other party to the dispute, which clearly violates the principle of equality of arms.
Based on the above, we find that it would be more correct to avoid such situations, not to violate the principle of equality of member states, as well as to eliminate the existing uncertainty, if the agreement provided a clear deadline for appeal.
In particular, the agreement may stipulate that the party has the right to file a complaint within 30 days after circulating the report7.
 After the expiration of that period, the Dispute Settlement Body is entitled to convene a meeting within 30 days to discuss the issue of adopting the report.
  That is, in the case of our proposed version, the Dispute Settlement Body is not authorized to convene a meeting within thirty days after reviewing the report to discuss the issue of the report, and the parties to the dispute are clearly informed to file a complaint. to file a complaint.
  Moreover, a study of the legal systems of different countries shows that 30 days is the minimum time to file complaints with such content.
They have 30 days to fly.
 If the party does not file a complaint within those 30 days, the Dispute Settlement Body is obliged to convene a meeting within 30 days after the expiration of the appeal period to discuss the issue of adopting the report.
In the case of the above-mentioned legal regulation, the parties to the dispute will have equal time to file and file a complaint, just as the Dispute Settlement Body will avoid convening unnecessary meetings when a meeting is convened to discuss the issue of a report, but the date of the meeting is notified. to end if there is no question on the agenda other than the adoption of the report.
Thus, based on the above reasons, we find that not providing a deadline for filing a complaint in the agreement is a significant legal loophole, և there is a need to amend the agreement in this regard, setting clear deadlines for filing a complaint.
 At the same time, studying the existing legal regulations on the appeal system within the WTO, we can state that due to the working procedures developed by the Appellate Body, this area has been regulated in great detail, including all the innovations of modern legal systems, and continues to be regularly improved.
Thus, in conclusion, we consider it necessary to state that the introduction of a grievance mechanism within the WTO significantly increases the credibility of trade disputes within the WTO, as well as contributes to the development of a clear legal interpretation culture of WTO agreements.
Ani Atanesyan APPEALS OF REPORTS REPORTING WITHIN THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION EXAMINATION SPECIFICATIONS: Keywords: Complaint, Global Review Procedure
