SOCIAL ALIENATION. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF VIDEO-METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES One of the characteristic features of modern societies is the complex, multidimensional phenomenon of social alienation.
 It is typical of all spheres and levels of today's public life with its deep influences and various manifestations.
 Social alienation is paralleled in one way or another, combined with such phenomena as social disintegration, anomie, individualization, and so on.
 At the end of the 19th century, "especially the intensive industrialization of the 20th century, the intrusion of the logic of market relations into all spheres of life, the consolidation of consumer relations, neoliberalism, interest rate system and continuous, unpredictable developments.
  Thus, using social alienation in modern societies, the article presents a description of the phenomenon, its foundations, philosophies on developments, developments, philosophy, sociology classics, as well as the views, ideas, conceptual structures of modern authors, and a comparative analysis.
Thus, the concept of "alienation" was referred to by Hegel.
The latter noted that alienation occurs when the object of recognition is separated from the conscious person, the philosopher1.
 For Hegel, the main way to overcome alienation is through philosophical understanding.
 It is the understanding of the rational world, and recognizing the world means being one with that world, identifying with it2.
 Thus, for Hegel, overcoming alienation is associated with peace; the solution to this philosophical alienation problem lies in equating reality with rationality.
  Influenced by Hegel's philosophy, two camps later emerged: the left-wing Hegelians, who developed his philosophy to support innovations in religion and politics, and the right-wing Hegelians, who developed his philosophy in a politically-religiously conservative direction.
  Ludwig Feuerbach was a representative of the first camp, left-wing Hegelianism.
In his philosophy, Feuerbach presents alienation as the separation of human consciousness to the outside. One part is embedded in the material world and the other in the world of God.
 The material world, being gloomy and boring, contributes to the projections of the perfect world.
 According to him, as long as these two worlds are separate from each other, no solution to the problem of alienation is possible3.
  Thus, Feuerbach considered the worship of God to be an alienation's belief in religion's "general" because it linked human qualities to external ideas, not to them as part of "himself".
 Horowitz notes that the idealist Hegel is closer to the sociological approach of alienation than the materialist Feuerbach.
The reason is that Hegel's alienation is overcome through a series of activities that will connect the subject of being with the object of the world.
 Feuerbach's solution, on the other hand, presupposes a more psychological overcoming of the projective neurotic aspects of faith4.
Hegel ոյ Feuerbach had their influence on K. On the development of Marx's ideas.
 The latter, in his turn, transferred the concept of "alienation" from the philosophical field to the economic field and presented the alienation of man from his products.
According to Marx, human beings are distinguished from other animals by their consciousness, autonomy, and ability to be effective members of society, which gives them a sense of meaning in life.
  According to the author, this is the human nature, which allows Elnna to control her destiny to a certain extent.
 However, when the individual is in the lower ranks of the capitalist system, ruled by the higher classes to produce as much as possible, he can no longer control the future, there is a space between the individual and his human nature, which is alienation.
  According to the Marxist concept of alienation, workers are separated from what they produce. Why do they produce?
  Alienation is the result of capitalism.
  Workers inevitably lose control of their "self" because they have no control over their work.
 In other words, work makes a person a stranger to his product.
In general, when talking about human relationships, according to the relationships between individuals, two types can be distinguished.
  People have come to the conclusion that in order to achieve the goals, it is more effective and beneficial to unite with each other.
 However, these associations can easily be weakened or strengthened depending on the purpose of the group.
 Thus, in the case of the first type, the union takes place on a conscious level, while in the case of the second type, the feeling of belonging to a group is typical.
  In this type of union, the connections between individuals are strong.
 Its members have a sense of solidarity, these ties are not broken, weakened, if it does not bring any other advantage.
  Alienation can be said to be the result of the first type, when individuals have a weakening of ties, individualization, a sense of belonging may be weakly expressed, there are strong non-community ties.
 Such situations were referred to in their works as F. Tunis, so is E. Durkheim.
F. Tunis distinguishes between Gesellschaft (society) and Gemeinschaft (community).
  The first link is the Gesellschaft, which is typical of social groups that have an instrumental function, that is, they help group members achieve their goals.
 And the only motive for the group members to help others is that in the end they will get the equivalent of what they did5.
  According to Tunis, Gesellschaft relations arise in an urban-capitalist context characterized by individuality, monetary relations are used.
 Gemeinschaft is typical of groups that arise on the basis of affiliation.
  The common goals are used here - the members of that group are the way to achieve them.
When talking about alienation, it is necessary to refer to Durkheim's notion of "anomie", which he introduced in his book "Division of Labor".
  He describes anomie as an abnormal form of division of labor that occurs when that division does not create solidarity in society.
  The author refers to the concept of "anomie" in his work "Suicide", where he mentions how the weakening or elimination of the normative system causes anomie in the society.
 Anomie is described as a situation in which society դիտ values ​​B 5 Bond N., Ferdinand Tönnies' appraisal of Karl Marx.
  Debts and distance, weakening of the normative regulation, including when the old norms have lost their force and the new ones have not yet appeared, which no longer regulate social relations.
  At the general level, anomie is associated with difficulties in individual adaptation, which results in a loss of social orientation, a sense of insecurity, marginalization, growing uncontrollable expectations, a sense of relative deprivation, and a critique of the legitimacy of basic social values.
 When the norms that govern behavior do not work, people no longer know what to expect from other people.
When we talk about the transition from individual to community relations, which is the basis of social alienation, it is necessary to refer to G. Similar works, especially "Philosophy of Money".
  In the work, the author presents how money, individuals, modern society as a whole are inextricably linked8.
 First, the author puts forward the idea of ​​value, connects it with money, noting that it is through money that subjective values ​​perceived by people are objectified.
 Different values ​​can be attached to the same object, but any subjective value can be found in a single object, a complete objective expression or manifestation9.
  Here, value is defined by the desire that people acquire the object, not by the value of its applicability.
 Zimel mentions that in modern society money becomes more functional. it creates relationships through the flow of goods և services, turning it into a faceless cost-benefit relationship.
  Thus, money becomes a tool that is an integral part of people's social interactions.
 Zimel calls this phenomenon the commodification of interactions or the total reduction of quality to quantity 10.
 It is stated that money increases individual freedoms, "it can overcome the physical and social distance between individuals", as it can be absolutely transferable due to the process of individualization.
In modern life, sensibility is replaced by calculus; the process of reification becomes a priority in every sphere.
  Thus, that computability, կենտրոն focus on quantity, leads to the fact that social interactions begin to control 8 Deflem M., The Sociology of the Sociology of Money.
 Through Simmel and the Contemporary Battle of the money, և as a result, money becomes a goal.
 On the other hand, e-money has a liberating function, as it frees people from being forced to join certain groups, հարաբեր relations with those groups are conditioned only by material gain.
  But this freedom, on the other hand, leads to a relative lack of pleasure, feeling, quality.
 Thus, it turns out that in modern society, where there is an increase in individuality, the materialization of relationships, interactions, reification, alienation and isolation occur, at the same time creating a network between individuals, where money circulates. Human relations are considered as relations of gain, exchange.
 As a result, money materializes all social life, including the economy, culture, և leads to the transformation of content, qualitative value into quantitative functionality.
M. also referred to the issues discussed above. Weber in his concepts of rationalization and bureaucratization.
  He saw modernization as a process of rationalization that influenced economic life, religion, disappearing traditional ideas, and customary practices in favor of rational standards.
  The basic premise of rationalization is that individuals begin to use knowledge in the context of relationships that aim to establish control over the environment.
 However, with this, the process of localization, as Weber points out, locks the individual in an iron cage of rationalized institutions, organizations, activities.
  Weber considers bureaucracy to be the main example of erraticization11.
 When the world is demagogic, it finds itself under a bureaucracy.
  Bureaucratic pressure begins to emerge, և bureaucracies treat a person as an ordinary number, not a unique individual.
  Entering any organization, individuals have to sacrifice their personal desires against the goals և of the organization's process12.
 But in doing so, they lose a part of their "self" այս, thus becoming alienated.
Weber's ideas of rationality were developed in his works by his student Ch. R. Mills.
  Mills's sociology focuses on issues of industrial society such as alienation, threats to democracy, human freedom 12 Erwell F., Verstehen.
 The Sociology of Max Weber, Oklahoma, 1996, p. 5. Intolerance, moral indifference, etc., which are interrelated, are all part of the bureaucratic process.
Like Marx, Mills also promoted alienation as a feature of the work process; he studied white-collar workers as dependent on a bureaucratic system.
Most white-collar workers do not have the freedom to make decisions, which leads to alienation from work.
The peculiarity of the alienation of white collars, according to Mills, is that, unlike the workers, their individuality is fully involved in the work process.
  And this "market of personality", which is a major part of white collar work, underscores the widespread distrust and self-alienation that is so prevalent among modern people13.
 But, unlike Marx, Mills does not condition alienation only on capitalism as the possession of the means of production, but also on the modern division of labor.
 The level of alienation varies depending on the degree of autonomy, freedom և skills that the employee has.
  Mills notes that in modern society, almost all jobs are characterized by a degree of alienation because the actions of the employee are subject to the control of other people.
 As a result of the division of labor, the employee does not go through the whole process of work, does not see, sometimes is not even aware of the final product.
 In addition to the above, the reason for alienation is that the employee is not given the opportunity to invest his thoughts in the work, which is a feature of the bureaucratic system.
Thus, Mills sees the source of alienation in the very organization, noting that it removes a person from understanding his work, from control over his work, determines for a person when, how and at what speed they should work.
The concept of Marxist alienation had its influence on the representatives of the Frankfurt school T. Adorno և M. On Horkheimer's "Dialectic of the Enlightenment", the main idea of ​​which is alienation.
  If Marx linked alienation mainly to the development of the liberal economic system of capitalism, focusing on the division of labor, Horkheimer and Adornona began to extend it to a broader aspect than just the division of labor.
  The authors noted that alienation is typical of the mass society.
  The work states that the lighting of 13 Mills CW, White collar.
 the American Middle Classes, New York, 2002, p. 187-188.14 Adorno T., Horkheimer M., Dialectic of Enlightment.
  Philosophical Fragments, Stanford, 2002, the goal was to make education և liberate the masses from myths, witchcraft, irrational forces.
  Rationality, in contrast to irrational myths and magic, was considered the main means of establishing control over these irrational factors, of promoting progress, of rationalizing civilization15.
  But the main meaning of the work is that the enlightenment destroys itself.
 That is the meaning of dialectics.
 Mankind achieves its independence by suppressing its own inner nature.
  That is, when humanity becomes rational, it uses that rationality to get rid of nature, to take possession of it, but at the same time creates structures that then drag it into public captivity.
  Thus man acquires freedom from the external nature, but in the internal sense he becomes a slave again.
 That is, the intellect destroys the humanity that it has created.
Adorno and Horkheimer promote the concept of "cultural production".
  They presented the cultural production of capitalist society as an aspect of the Enlightenment, which allowed instrumental logic to assume the role of human social life.
  Cultural production creates a false consciousness about the world based on myths and distortions.
  It is deliberately spread to benefit the ruling class.
 All patterns of cultural production are created for profit, ացումը thus the commercialization of culture leads to the commercialization of human consciousness.
 People become voluntary consumers ող reproducers of their own alienation, being not producers of culture, but only pure consumers16.
  Thus, alienation is connected with this very cultural production, which transforms a person from a subject into a faceless object, which no longer creates what it consumes and serves the interests of the ruling class.
In his turn. Fromm defines alienation as a form of experience, when the individual no longer feels like the center of his world, as the creator of actions.
 On the contrary, his actions, and afterwards, have become his masters, to whom he obeys, or whom he may even worship.
  The alienated person is out of touch with himself, just as he is out of touch with other people17.
  According to this definition, it turns out that all members of modern society are alienated, և Fromm actually speaks of the alienated society of our time 16 Thompson P., The Frankfurt school, part 3.
 Dialectic of Enlightenment, The Guardian, 2013.17 Geyer F., Schweitzer D., Theories of Alienation.
 Critical perspectives in philosophy and the local peculiarity.
 From this point of view, Fromm's views are pessimistic, he notes, that alienation and automation lead to even greater insanity when nothing else makes sense.
 According to Fromm, the dailyization of alienation is the result of pressure in the context of an industrial society, where instrumentalism and isolation have become the basis of social relations.
 Fromm describes depression, misery as alienation from "himself", nature և from others18.
Referring again to the notion of "anomie", it is necessary to refer to R. To Merton.
  There are no societies where there are no norms for regulating public life.
  However, norms, customs, effective integration of institutional control mechanisms with goals, which occupy a high position in the hierarchy of cultural values, differ from the society.
 This raises the question of which of the available procedures is most effective in creating culturally acceptable value.
 Merton notes that the most technically effective procedure, whether culturally legitimate or not, usually becomes preferable to institutionally defined behavior.
  And if this process shows a tendency of continuity, then the society becomes unstable, anomie or abnormality arises20.
 This has become the basis for the author to single out types of individual adaptation in connection with the connection between the goals և to achieve them, the culturally acceptable means։.
 Thus, Merton puts forward five types of adaptation to the situation of anomie, based on socially accepted, old values, adoption, denial or replacement: conformity, innovation, ritualism, avoidance և rebellion.
Social alienation is also addressed by modern scientists, which means that this phenomenon has not lost its relevance; it is typical of modern society.
  Thus, the representative of the theory of social alienation, more recent times, is the Dutch sociologist-cybernetic F. Gays.
 The latter suggested using a general system theory to study alienation.
 Alienation usually presupposes certain relations with either side of the subject's group of subjects և the external environment: god, nature, work, means of production, "himself", various social structures and institutions, etc.
 That is, these relations presuppose separation from them.
  Gayer views the individual as a separate system that has its own external environment, and it is constantly interacting with Jor.
 This means that the individual selects certain information from the external environment, which should correspond to his actions, at the same time creating information for the external environment.
  Gay focuses on the individual, as it is the only system that can be aware of its alienation21.
 As for the groups and institutes, according to the author, we can say that it is not the group that is alienated, but the members of that group.
Thus, as already mentioned, in Gayer's theory the system is the individual.
 An outsider can see only the external borders of that system, but not its internal structure.
 One can only guess about it from the differences between outputs and outputs, which can be observed by the representatives of the external environment.
 Input is a set of variables that come from the external environment.
 The output, in turn, is a series of variables that assume everything that is seen as leaving the system to its corresponding external environment.
  In other words, the output is the behavior of the system, which is the response or action to the environment.
  Since this is a circular model, ie there is input-output information, it can be viewed from two perspectives, depending on whether the input is the first or the output.
  If we look at the input, we get a stimulus-response scheme, in which case the system is viewed as reactive և not innovative.
 If we consider the solution first, then the initiative is given by the system, it can be considered manipulative and innovative.
  Based on the functioning of the system, Gayer distinguishes two types of functions: situational functions and decision-making functions.
  The first is the set of information that the system has gathered in all the situations in which it has been.
 In this case, the part of the individual's memory is the space, which contains the situational functions. The symbolism of the integrity of the experience data is collected there.
 And the decision-making function is connected with situational functions.
  These functions form the landmark of the system.
The environment is everything that is out of the system.
 However, it is not necessary to talk about the whole external environment, but only the part that corresponds to the given system at that time 21 Geyer F., Schweitzer D., Theories of Alienation.
 Critical perspectives in philosophy and the section և area.
  Thus, Gayer puts forward the following idea. Alienation is typical of the individual, whom he views as a system, which in turn has its external environment.
 In addition to the external environment, the system has input-output, as well as certain functions, which provide the processes of understanding and regulating behavior.
  The present technological age provides so many possibilities and variety of options for the individual that sometimes he is not able to make a suitable choice from all that.
 Gayer put forward the concept of "environmental complexity" to describe this.
  Alienation is the result of this environmental complexity.
In conclusion, it should be noted that these theories show the dynamics of the development of the concept of "social alienation".
  If philosophical approaches connected alienation with the individual and his consciousness, world recognition and separation of thought from religion, then later it was transferred to economic and then social fields.
If at first the emphasis was only on the alienation of labor and workers, later they began to study social relations and the factors influencing their change, such as money, material gain, consumption, mass production, and so on.
 Referring to the modern society, it should be noted that in addition to the above, it is also characterized by the growth of individual freedoms, the variety of alternatives, and so on.
  Evanhat often finds himself in a situation where he has the opportunity to choose from alternatives, the mechanisms of social orientation are lost, the feeling of isolation increases, which can become a basis for social alienation.
The significance of the discussion of all the mentioned theories is that they served as a basis for the American social psychologist M. For Simen.
 He was the first to introduce components of social alienation, through which it became possible to study the manifestations of the phenomenon in society.
 These components are powerlessness, meaninglessness, abnormality, social isolation and self-alienation22.
Shushan GhahriyanSOCIAL ALIENATION. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF VIDEO-METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES Keywords: social alienation, anomie, community, public relations, monetary relations, bureaucratization, rationalization, cultural production, environmental complexity. Summary.
