CRISIS LEGAL SETTLEMENT BECAUSE OF DAMAGE
 Liabilities, which in some legal systems are called delinquencies (mainly in continental European countries), refer to an older type of liability.
  The victim has the right to demand compensation from the person causing the damage, moreover, the amount and procedure of determining the damage may differ depending on the right applicable to these issues.
 The peculiarity of tortious obligations is that their occurrence is not conditioned by the contract, but is connected with the fact of causing damage (violation).
 A civil offense (tort) is a violation of subjective civil rights, causing damage to a citizen or a person or property or a property of a legal entity.
 In private international law, a tort is a civil offense with a foreign element.
1 The "foreign element" can be present in all components of the tortious relationship. may be by the subject's egg (for example, when the person causing the damage is a foreign citizen), by the object's egg (for example, when the damage was caused to a vehicle registered in another state), by the legal fact (for example, when the offense took place in another state).
The parties to a tortious relationship are the offender (causing harm) և the victim (the person whose rights have been violated or whose harm has been caused).
For the occurrence of liability for damage caused by the general rule of liability 1 See Gethman-Pavlova IV, International Partial Law.
  Textbook, -M., Exmo, 2005, page 380.
According to him, there are four conditions: • Existence of illegal behavior by the offender • Causation of damage, which can be both material and non-material (moral); Existence of a causal link between the illegal behavior վնաս damage caused • Existence of guilt of the offender.
Along with the history of the development of private international law, the collision settlement of tortious relations has undergone a certain evolution, from the existence of the only principle defining the choice of tort law to the formation of a collision bond system based on the victim's right to maximum compensation.
In the area of ​​post-damage liabilities, the classical law of the place of damage (Lex loci delicti commisi) can be considered a classic beginning for the settlement of collisions.
2 It is currently enshrined in the jurisprudence of Austria, Hungary, the United States, Greece, Italy, Germany, Switzerland, Poland, France, Russia, Armenia, and other countries, the Bustamante Code, the Minsk, Ki, and Chisinau Conventions, as well as Rome II. also in a number of other bilateral and multilateral international treaties.
The changes in the middle of the regulation of tortious relations have had the least effect on the French case law.
  The principle of Lex loci delicti is strictly observed here.
 The legal source for this connection is Article 3 of the French Civil Code, according to which the laws related to public order and safety apply to all persons living in France.
 Based on this provision, the courts have concluded that illegal acts committed in another state should be prosecuted in accordance with the law of the state where the offense was committed.
  However, the judicial act that was the basis for this provision was adopted by the Court of Cassation only in 1948, in which the principle of Lex loci delicti was finally finalized. Х. Мингазов, Е. А. Кондратьева, Л. B. Morozova, E. В. Barabanova, International Law, Kazan, 2006, p. 75.
 G.K. Dmitrieva, International Partial Law, M., 2009, p. 506.
was fixed.
  At the same time, however, French courts seek to apply national law, as in the case of a harmful act committed in the territory of France, where there are harmful consequences of the act alone.
3 Apparently, a question arises here in connection with the provision of Locus delicti (place of harm).
 It should be noted that the approach to the decision of Locus delicti is not the same, ie the place of the act that caused the harmful effects should be accepted as such, or the place where the harmful effects occurred, if we are talking about different countries (classic example: The river that flows through the territory of the two countries is polluted in the territory of one country, but as a result the citizens of the other state will suffer).
There are countries that accept the place of harm (Austria) as the place of harm, և there are countries that accept the place where the harmful effects have taken place (Switzerland).
  The French jurisprudence has not reached a specific conclusion regarding the Locus delicti, the determination of the place of the delinquency, the question of which state's law should be applied if the harmful act was committed in one state and the harmful consequences occurred in the territory of another state.
  In modern practice, depending on the circumstances of the case, both approaches are accepted, but the first approach is given to the choice of the law of the place of the harmful act.
These issues are also reflected in the Council of Europe's Regulation (Rome II), which applies to non-contractual obligations.
 The first point of Article 4 of Rome II states: "Unless otherwise provided in this Regulation, then the law of the country where the harmful effects occurred shall apply to the relationship resulting from the damage, regardless of where the legal fact on which the claim for damages took place took place, in which country or countries. to achieve the indirect consequences of that legal fact. "
But here one more question arises.
  Is it possible in such cases to make a choice of the applicable law, who can do it, the victim or the court?
  The legal systems of foreign countries try to solve the answers to these questions in different ways.
 For example, Hungary's International Private 3 See http.
//otherreferats.allbest.ru/law/00174221_0.html (14.02.2016).
The 1979 decision on the law stipulates that the relations arising from the infliction of damage shall be regulated by the law in force at the place of the commission of the offense, unless otherwise provided by this decision.
 At the request of the victim, the law of the State in whose territory the consequences occurred can be applied.
 Such an approach is taken by the countries of different continents, such as the Vietnam Civil Code of 1995, the Tunisian Code of Private International Law of 1998, and so on.
 City of Russia, 1991 Article 167 of the Act on the Basis of Legislation stated: "An action or other circumstance which is the basis for damages", which allowed to assume that the law allowed the application of two approaches; և, consequently, the court could apply this or that state law, depending on the specific circumstances of the case.
4 The interpretation of the European Court of Justice on the enforcement of judgments in commercial matters in relation to Article 5 3 3 of the Brussels Convention (1968), which dealt with the jurisdiction of the court which caused the damage in torts, was also very important.
  As a place of causing harm, from that interpretation we can understand "the place of performing harmful actions," the place of occurrence of harmful consequences.
5 In our opinion, the city of Russia. Article 1219 1 1 (first sentence) of the Criminal Code literally repeats the provision referred to in Article 167 of the 1991 Act, from which it was possible to derive both the "place of the harmful act" and the "place of occurrence of the harmful consequences". .
A similar wording is given in Article 1289 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia: "The law of the state where the act or circumstance that served as a basis for the claim for damages is applied to the obligations arising from causing damage", ie Lex loci is fixed as a general principle. delicti commissi, չէ does not interpret what is meant by the place where the offense was committed, from which it can be deduced that both the "place of the harmful act" and the "place of occurrence of the harmful effects".
 However, unlike the RA city. For example, the current city of Russia. There is a definite day when the law of the place of occurrence of harmful consequences can be applied.
  Russian city. of 12194 See Lunz L. А., Марышева Н. I., Sadikov O. N., International Partial Law.
  Textbook, M., 1984, page 216.
5 See Zvekov V. P., International Partial Law.
 Course of lessons, M., 1999, page 363.
According to point 1 of article. "In cases where the damage occurs in another State as a result of a harmful act or other circumstance, the law of that State may apply if the person causing the damage predicted or was obliged to predict the occurrence of the damage in that State."
  A similar norm is provided for in the 1987 Swiss Law on Private International Law.
  The question arises as to whether the victim must substantiate the need to apply the law of the country of the cause of harm, to prove that the respondent predicted or should have predicted the cause of the damage in another country.
  In our opinion, the first point should be interpreted (taking into account the principles of the domestic legislation), proceeding from the interests of the "permissive" victim.
6 Therefore, it must be presumed that the person causing the damage will achieve harmful results, and the defendant must prove the opposite in the event of a violation of the law of that State.
 Moreover, both the victim and the court can raise the issue of applying the law on the place of causing the damage on their own initiative.
 As for the initiative of the respondent in this matter, who considers it more beneficial for him to apply the law of the place of attainment of harmful consequences than the law of the place of the act of harm, then, as we suppose, the law does not exclude such a possibility.
 The final decision on the applicable law is made by the court, taking into account all the circumstances of the case (including the interests of the respondent).
7 In our opinion, RA city. Article 1289 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be amended. The provision enshrined in the first point of Article 1219 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should also be envisaged by the RA legislation (with the above-mentioned interpretations), as a result of which the wording of Article 1289 will be as follows: "The law of the State where the act or circumstance which served as a basis for compensating the damage has been applied shall apply to the obligations arising from causing damage.
  In cases where a significant part of the damage has occurred in another State as a result of an act or circumstance, the law of that State shall apply if the person who caused the damage predicted or should have predicted that such damage could have occurred in that State. "
  It seems that such a wording would bring certainty և would solve the problem of Locus delicti, about which in our legislation in general 6 See Commentary on the Civil Code of the Russian Federation part two. M., 1996. p. 657.
7 See Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation. Part three. Post scientific-practical comments. М., 2001, Авторы комментарии Г. K. Дмитриева и В. Н. Ануров.
There are no comments, it և does not explain what is meant by the place of damage.
After making the choice of the applicable law, a question arises related to the statute of torts, which determines the scope of the applicable law.
 The statute of tortious relations can be defined as a combination of the norms of substantive law applicable to the regulation of tortious relations, to be applied by force of collision norms.
  A number of laws implementing the norms of private international law include provisions fixing the scope of issues to be determined on the basis of the statute of obligations.
The Swiss Federal Law of 1987 separates from these issues issues related to the capacity of the person, the amount and conditions of liability, the obligations of the obligor (followed by the rules of permissible safety and conduct that apply at the place of damage).
Issues related to the scope of the applicable law are also enshrined in Article 1220 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, according to which the following issues need to be resolved: • the ability of a person to be held liable for the damage caused • the possibility of bringing liability to a person who is not the cause • Grounds for liability • Grounds for release from liability, limitation of liability • Means of compensation for damage • The amount and extent of damage to be compensated.
It should be noted that the scope of the above-mentioned issues is not exhaustive, it can be increased based on the country's practice.
8 RA city. The law does not provide a norm for determining the scope of applicable law, with which we do not quite agree, because in defining the applicable law, the scope of action should have been specified.
 It is not so right to settle the dispute for the law of one state elected in accordance with the norms of conflict. 8 See Gerrit Betlem and Christophe Bernasconi. European Private International Law, the 2006, pp. 147-150.
The rest (listed above) should be decided by the law of another state, which in turn will lead to a large number of problems.
 It would be right to envisage issues related to the scope of the law subject to the application of the law (for example, the ability of a person to be liable for the damage caused, the grounds for release from liability or limitation of liability, the amount and amount of compensation to be compensated, the means of compensation). in accordance with practice.
During the development and improvement of the legal settlement of tortious relations, the Lex loci delicti principle was supplemented by more flexible collision ties, which made it possible to take into account all the circumstances of the case և to reach a higher level of fair decision-making.
 The principle of "closer connection" is now more widespread than such collision ties.
 Thus, according to the Austrian law of private international law of 1978, the law of the place with which the legal relationship is most closely applied applies.
  The Swiss Private Law Act 1987 and the UK Private Law Act 1995 define the possibility of a closer connection.
The law of Italy, Greece, Germany and other countries applies to the provision of citizenship of both parties in the same country.
9 There are countries whose legislation mentions only the fact that the parties have a common place of residence as a justification for closer ties.
  Article 133 of the Swiss Law on Private International Law of 1987 separates two situations: • the offender and the victim reside in different states; • the offender and the victim reside in the same state.
In the first case, the principle of Lex loci delicti applies, and in the second case, the law of the common place of residence of the parties.
  It is supposed that both sides are more closely connected with the law of that state.
The 1979 Hungarian Law on Private International Law recognizes only the fact that the parties reside in the same country (Article 32 3 3).
There are states whose legislation ընդհանուր common city 9 See Г. K. Dmitrieva, International Partial Law, M., 2009, p. 508.
provide for the possibility of applying the law of the place of residence; հնարավորություն provide for the possibility of applying the law of the place of general residence (location).
 An example of such wording is given in Article 1219, paragraph 2 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (a similar wording is also found in Article 1229, Part 2 of the CIS Model Code), according to which: "If both parties to the obligation arising from causing damage ( the victim and the offender) have a place of residence or principal place of business in the same State or, if they do not have a principal place of residence or activity in the same State but are nationals or legal persons of the same State, the law of that State shall apply. ”
1993 between the CIS states Article 42 of the Minsk Convention on Legal Assistance in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters (Article 42), as well as Article 45 of the Chisinau Convention on Legal Assistance in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters of 7 October 2002 The article states that having the same citizenship of the victim and the person causing the damage is a basis for applying the law of the state of which they are citizens.
10 RA city. In the Code, as an exception to the Lexloci delicti principle, there is no mention at all of the exercise of a right more closely connected with a legal relationship.
 As we know, according to Article 6 of the Constitution as amended on December 6, 2015, ratified international agreements are an integral part of the legal system of the Republic of Armenia.
That is to say, the provision on the same nationality of the parties to the Chisinau Convention may, if necessary, be applied to the respective relationship.
  However, in the relations arising from the damage caused by the Chisinau Convention, there is no exception for the parties having a common place of residence in the same state, therefore the parties do not have the opportunity to refer to such a norm to make an exception to the Lex loci delicti principle.
 We suggest that such a norm arising from the logic of the principle of closer connection be enshrined in the RA Civil Code, with the following wording: "If both parties to the liability arising as a result of the damage (the offender) are permanently or mostly resident (located) 10 See http.
//www.zonazakona.ru/law/comments/art/15346/ (16.02.2016).
11 See www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=1 (16.02.2016).
in the same state, or if they do not reside (have no place of residence) in the same state, but are citizens of the same state (have the nationality of the same state), then the law of that state applies. ”
 We believe that the existence of such a norm in the RA Civil Code will have a very strong and positive impact, as it will provide an opportunity to take into account all the circumstances of the case և to reach the maximum level of impartial decision-making.
  In addition, we suggest paying attention to the fact that in many countries, as in the above-mentioned international treaties (as mentioned above), there is another reason for the closer connection between the parties, before the emergence of tortious obligations, the existing legal relations, and in similar cases, the applicable legal relations between the parties. subject law (if the relations between the parties arise from different treaties existing; և if they are regulated by the laws of different states, then the tort law may be applied to the law of the state subject to the contractual relationship, which the parties deem more convenient for them);since the parties will definitely be more familiar with that right than with the right of another state, moreover, if they have decided by mutual agreement to exercise that right, we assume that it will be to the benefit of both of them to exercise that right.
Thus, based on the above, we can state that in modern international private law, due to the damage caused by the conflict, the settlement of the conflict of obligations is more developed and improved, which enables the provision of more fair and optimal results in the investigation of a specific case.
Elena AleksanyanVNAS Causing ACT relation KOLIZIONIRAVAKAN REGULATION OF DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL ASPEKTNERUMBanali words: Damage liabilities arising as a result cause, deliktayinharaberutyunner, place of execution of malicious actions, vnasakarhetevankneri occurrence place rules on conflict resolution, conflict of laws connection, kaghakatsiakaniravakhakhtum (delikt), the offender, the victim is a foreign element, vnasipokhhatutsum , private international law, closer connection.
