FUNDAMENTALS AND FEATURES OF ASALA'S REVENGE ACTIVITY The national liberation struggle of the peoples has one goal, which is not subject to certain rules, it does not have the same means of expression.
 All these goals, means and means are manifested in unity or separately, according to the dictates of the conditions and requirements of the given period.
 Many peoples of the world have passed this way, achieved their goal, become owners of their country, created their national statehood.
However, in the history of the national liberation struggle waged by the peoples of the world, we encounter a unique manifestation of that struggle.
 It is the national-liberation struggle of the Armenian-Armenians who were forcibly displaced from the historical homeland, from the native land, found refuge in different countries of the world and were deprived of statehood, the struggle to return to the homeland, to become the owner of the homeland.
 The national-liberation struggle of the Armenians of Armenia, which he waged in the second half of the 20th century, is a forced struggle both in its form and in its content.
Today it is customary to put the Armenian Genocide against the Jews on a comparative level.
 Jews in Europe have been subjected to various atrocities, massacres, lost their lives and property.
  However, the issue of the Armenians was much more complicated and difficult.
 Armenians lost not only the property of their lives, but also their historical homeland.
1 However, the civilized world quickly forgot the tragedy of the Armenians.
 The issue of the forgotten genocide of the lost homeland, the Armenians had to remind the world through terrorism.
1 Ա. Harutyunyan, Armenian Genocide և Armenian Question. Bibliography of books (1860-2010), Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin 2014, page 560.
Gurgen Yanikyan raising the flag of the "individual war" goes down to the unequal battlefield against injustice և disqualification.
The shot fired by Gurgen Yanikyan in the Santa Barbara suburb of Los Angeles, from which two Turkish diplomats were killed, became a guideline for the Diaspora Armenian youth.
One of the remarkable events in the Armenian history of the last quarter of the 20th century is the formation of the ANC.
 The organization declared its existence on January 20, 1975 with the bombing of the World Council of Churches office in Beirut.
 From its inception until December 1990, the ANC carried out about 300 armed operations in various countries around the world, including the main cities of Turkey (Ankara, Istanbul) and Western Armenia.
The ANC was trying to make the dream of the Armenian patriotic youth, who were the third generation after the genocide, come true.
 "A fist called HHGB has been created.
 "That fist is the one who does the work, today the only hope is on it," said Yanikyan from the US cell, where he spent 11 years.
 During the trial, when asked why he killed the Turkish diplomats, he answered: "It is not only the wrath of revenge that will guide our actions, but to prove to humanity that the Armenian individual still holds the spirit of demand in his chest."
2 In the first five years of the ANC's birth, there were more than 150 military operations.
  The lion's share of these actions were directed against the Turkish diplomatic staff inside Turkey or outside Turkey.
The struggle of the ANC was born of historical necessity, it carried the mission of saving historical Armenia.
  Every step taken since its birth has been made in favor of the Armenians. The mentality that some circles called the ANCA a structure based on personal interests is condemnable.
  The case of the Avengers was visible all over the world.
  This is evidenced by the speech of Michael Kwintter, a political science professor at Tennessee University of Technology, in the English article "The Direction of International Terrorism 1982-1983." "The activities of the Armenian terrorist groups are so widespread that almost the whole West had its experience.
  Their geographical video is indistinguishable from other terrorist groups.
 More than 20 attacks took place in 2 ASALA, Van Hayutyan. for the homeland, Yerevan 1995, p. 15.
In different countries, only in 1982-1983 there were operations in 16 different countries.
 "Armenian actions attracted the world's attention and accelerated the discussion of the Armenian issue."
3 Due to the actions of the Armenian patriotic children, the ranks of the devotees expanded, who, leaving all their deeds, became devotees of liberation, they clearly realized that they were not on the path of death or freedom, but freedom of death.
  Along with all this, the military operations became diverse.
 As of 1976, the operations did not go beyond the usual demining.
 The summer of 1980 changed.
 A Turkish diplomat was killed in Athens on July 31, the Turkish consulate in Lyon was attacked on August 5, and an assassination attempt was made on a Turkish diplomat in Paris on September 26, injuring him severely.
 More noteworthy is the March 4, 1981 assassination of two Turkish diplomats by the UNHCR in Paris.
4 With the expansion of the ranks, two possible changes took place in the "organization".
  The first of these was the publication of the official newspaper "Hayastan", which played a role in creating interest in the organization among the Armenian people.
  The second change was the establishment of a permanent presence of the organization in a camp.
 The camp increased the capacity of the ANC to seriously train its members and launch a military operation.
 It is fair, thanks to the training program used in this camp, that military personnel were trained in the ANC.
All the above-mentioned actions were supervised by Hakob Hakobyan, a devoted individual of the homeland (also known as Mojahed).
He paid special attention to each individual in the organization.
 It was under his instructions that a number of operations were organized in different parts of the world, ASALA operating branches were organized in Europe, America and Iran.
 Mujahideen led the operations everywhere.
Prior to the establishment of ASALA, the "Armenian Genocide Justice Fighters" organization, which carried out acts of revenge, focused on the issue of bringing the Armenian issue to international recognition. Ognayan, Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 8-9.
4 Ս. Gpranyan, M. Melkonyan, Reality, Yerevan, 1992, pp. 16-17.
5 R. Hovnanyan, Secret Army, Yerevan, 2015, p. 41.
while ASALA is the ideologue of the widespread Armenian national liberation movement.
 The ARF often mentions that the "Armenian Genocide Justice Fighters", the "Armenian Revolutionary Army" carried out the main operations against Turkish circles, and the ASALA carried out the main operations against non-Turkish parties, but without substantiating the reasons for that.
  But we should not leave behind the fact that the Turkish government was doing everything to present ASALA differently in European countries, as a result of which a number of states supported the Turkish point of view.
 However, we fully justify the revenge after the 1982 On January 30, 2010, Turkish President Kenan Evren called the movement Armenian terrorism, saying that the movement was based on the destruction of the Turkish nation.
 He said. "These degenerates, in whose hearts there is nothing but hatred, who are a disgrace to humanity, attack foreign representatives and offices, which we strongly condemn nationally."
 Such a statement could not go unpunished.
 No matter how much they tried to tarnish ASALA's name, they did not succeed, the freedom fighters continued their actions.
  From three sides: imperialism, fascist Turkey, the backward parties wanted to squeeze the progressive-revolutionary fronts together, but they had to resist, because they understood that in order to stop the White Massacre, they had to return to their ancestral lands, Western Armenia.
It should be noted that there was some cooperation in Iran with the PKK, MIT, but this was due to the fact that the edges of the struggle of all of them coincided to some extent, and such cooperation could be in our interests.
The operation of Ankara Esenpoga Airport was of great importance among a number of actions of the ANC.
  On August 7, 1982, on a special assignment, Zorhap Sargsyan and Leon Ekmekjian attacked the airport with hand grenades and machine guns, killing 10 people and injuring 62 others.
  At least three of those killed were in charge of the airport security staff, and one of them was the director of the security forces.
 Zohrab was killed, and Lon was killed. Ognayan, Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 9-10.
After being kept in prison for several months, he was sentenced to be hanged by the Turkish authorities7.
 This step was possible because it took place in Turkey, it instilled confidence in the Armenian people in terms of their ability to concentrate their efforts in Turkey.
  However, this step is often described as negative, as "innocent Turks" were killed during the operation.
 However, we are trying to understand for a moment what sin the millions of Armenians who fell victim to in 1915 were punished.
  We can say that ASALA's actions were also appreciated in the international arena, as evidenced by the statement of Spanish journalist Jose Antonio Guriaran.
 He believed that his ideological maturation took place in the 1980s, when he lost a leg as a result of ASALA's actions in Madrid.
  As a result, he filed a complaint in court, but soon met the ASALA boys, which later led him to study Armenian history and write that what happened to him was very small compared to what he had done to Armenians.
 (He wrote two books dedicated to Armenians: "La bomba" Bomb, "Forgotten Genocide of Armenians").
In early 1982, the Islamic Republic of Iran banned the traditional April 24 rally.
 In those days Israel attacked Lebanon in order to put an end to the revolutionary organizations.
  He then attacked Northern Iraq, Kurdistan, with the same plan, but in a different direction.
  Using this as a convenient occasion, they attacked the Turkish Embassy in Tehran with a program developed by KHNAB member Karlen Ananyan.
 This caused a great commotion in the Armenian community, all over Iran, he temporarily calmed the situation in the Diaspora.
 But the calm was broken again after April 24 9.
An operation was planned to be carried out in France.
 The operation was called "Van".
 The destination was the Turkish Consulate in Paris.
  After a long planning, the operation was assigned to Hakob Julfayan, Gorg Gyuzelyan, Aram Pasmajyan, Vazgen Sislyan. The latter was the leader of the group.
 On September 24, 1981, at eleven o'clock in the morning, 7 S. with his hand on the grenade trigger. Gpranyan, M. Melkonyan, Reality, Yerevan, 1992, pp. 32-33.
8 New words, the Spanish journalist who suffered from the ASALA explosion dedicated himself to the Armenian Cause, January 26, 2015.
9 E. Nazaryan, S. Torosyan, Unknown pages about the hero, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 206-207.
Vazgen entered the consul's room.
 Taking Turkish Deputy Consul Imam Kayalu out of the common hall, he shouted that everyone was being taken hostage, but would not harm anyone, as the demand was from the Turkish government.
 During this operation, the boys were arrested and transferred to one of the most brutal prisons in France, "Fren".
  Here the boys were treated cruelly, considered terrorists.
The Turkish government promised to buy a French military plane for the boys's imprisonment, bought 28 warplanes, and the avengers, sentenced to 7 years each, were taken to the Fleurimerogis fortress in one of the suburbs of Paris.
They were sentenced to seven years in prison, and not wanting to waste their time, they decided to study, as the French prison provided such an opportunity.
 They were admitted to the Sorbonne University on a part-time basis.
  They were released from prison ahead of schedule in 1986 and returned to Lebanon10.
  However, three of the four fighters came out of prison alive. Aram Basmajyan in 1985 He committed suicide.
Vazgen, Gorg, Hakob settled in Armenia years later, joined the "Mets Murad" detachment, participated in the Artsakh liberation war11.
  Vazgen Sislyan had his contribution in the liberation battles, and to this day he is a living legend for the Armenian youth for his activity and patriotism.
Through its activities, the ANCA clarified that the Armenian question is the liberation struggle of the Armenian people, the just struggle for "the return of the repressed people to the confiscated homeland and the acquisition of the right to free self-determination there."
  The ANC came to prove that the Armenian question is a national-liberation revolution.
  This fact should be addressed to those who accuse the ANC of terrorism12.
From the first year of its establishment, the ANCA has attracted the attention of the foreign press.
 Since 1975, the international media, referring to the activities of the ANC, have stated that the reason for the movement is not the Armenian question.
  There are anti-Armenian materials in the publications, there are also manifestations of a positive attitude.
On December 19, 1980, the Turkish "Hurriyet" newspaper, speaking about the Armenian avengers, wrote: "What happened years ago, then 10 Nare, When revenge becomes destiny, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 30-31.
11 ASALA. For the sake of the Armenians, for the sake of the homeland, Yerevan, 1995, page 20.
12 V. Petrosyan, Secret Army. his ideology, Yerevan, 2015, p. 159.
The blood of the nations of the world will flow, if there is a way to kill a person.
 The Red Americans will spit blood constantly, demanding an account from the Americans, the Jews and the Germans.
  It would not be a human practice in this way.
 "Those responsible for this ugly terror that is growing in the Cyprus war must be exposed through human revelation."
On March 7, 131981, The Calf News reported that the Secret Army confirmed that the killings of Turkish diplomats were revenge for the 1915 Genocide.
  The newspaper referred to the Turkish "Milliet" newspaper, which dedicated a special article to the murder of a large number of Turkish diplomats. "The meaninglessness of their actions should not be attributed to the Turkish Republic.
  "The time has come for state secret organizations to take action to hold the blood of our fallen diplomats to account."
14 Thus, Turkey, always ignoring its atrocities, acted as a claimant.
Today, the tombstones of the famous Pantheon of 39 famous martyrs of the Armenian National Army are placed next to the martyrs of Yerablur, in the Pantheon of Martyrs.
  Tombstones are erected in the names of Gurgen Yanikyan, Hakob Taragjyan, Aram Pasmajyan, Silva Chilinkiryan, Leon Ekmekjian and others.
 Leon Ekmekjian was the last person to be executed in the history of Turkey.
No death sentence has been carried out in Turkey since January 29, 1983.
 Ekmekjyan's grave remains unknown.
 On the occasion of Leon Ekmekjian's death, the Diaspora responded with protests in many countries.
 In 2016, representatives of the Ekmekjian family arrived in Ankara.
  Having received all the permits, they opened L. Ekmekjian's grave and carried out relics.
The lives of the heroes ended in different ways.
  Many of them do not exist, many are alive (Varuzhan Karapetyan, Vazgen Sislyan and others), and many of them are still left behind the opaque curtain.
V. Sislyan said during one of the interviews. "Van operation will continue until we get our rights, this is very important for me.
 I would very much like our struggle to be by peaceful means, 13 Ibid., Pp. 256-257.
14 Ibid., P.
but we have no choice when your enemy is the Turk, and not the Turk who wants to understand you, but to destroy you ”15.
Our research has allowed us to find a fighter whose name is connected with ASALA, Petik Injian.
  He was born on November 3, 1950.
  He was martyred for the Armenian Cause in Paris in 1976.
The avengers of all times have not been forgotten in Armenia.
Books, articles, the song "It was created by you" were written in their honor.
On the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide, the Zoravar Foundation established the "Avengers Arm of the Armenian People - Soghomon Tehliryan" medal, which will be awarded to those responsible for the Armenian Genocide who committed revenge against the Armenian Genocide.
By the order of March 25, 2015, the Zoravar Charitable Foundation posthumously awarded 70 Armenians who took revenge in 1922-1984 (on January 22, 2016, the medal was awarded to the Armenian Genocide Institute-Museum) 17.
  The living ASALA fighters were awarded medals of the RA Ministry of Defense.
18 Marine Sahradyan CHARACTERISTICS OF MAIN AREAS OF RENEWAL ACTIVITY OF SALA Keywords: ArmArmenians, Ottoman Empire, Armenian.
