ARMENIAN ARTIFICIAL FAMILIES IN THE OTTOMAN COURT (XIX CENTURY) In the brutal conditions of the Ottoman rule, the creative Armenian people, carrying out fruitful activities, had a progressive impact on the socio-economic life of the state.
The cultural and economic development of the ruling people of the empire, the Turks, was far behind the development of the non-Muslim peoples under their pressure.
 Armenians, Greeks, and other national Ukrainian minorities, being much more civilized, played an exceptional role in the economic, cultural, and social life of the country, despite the difficult socio-economic conditions, religious persecution, oppression, and inequality in the empire.
The Armenian people, thanks to their diligence, high-quality education and taste, were able to concentrate in their hands, to pass on from generation to generation the most important spheres of life.
  In the Ottoman Empire, handicrafts had become the monopoly of the Armenians.
Craftsmanship was not worthy of a Muslim, so it և was left exclusively to Christian subjects, particularly Armenians and Greeks.
 The Greeks were mainly engaged in shoemaking, masonry and carpentry, and the rest of the crafts were the monopoly of the Armenians.
  In the conditions of stagnation of the economic life of the country, technical backwardness, lack of equipment and working tools, heavy tax policy, Armenian craftsmen were the main drivers of the development of handicrafts.
The mastery of Armenian craftsmen was known throughout the empire, it was not accidental that in 1534 Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent deported many Armenian craftsmen, particularly jewelers, from Van and the surrounding area. Constantinople (Samatia) 1.
 Armenian craft 1 Stepanyan H., The contribution of Armenians in the Ottoman Empire, Yerevan, 2012, p. 584.
Those who moved to the capital later became a tradition.
 As a result, the best Armenian masters gradually concentrated in Constantinople, using the wide opportunities provided by the big city, developing and improving their crafts from generation to generation.
 Already in the XIX century, 150,000 out of the 600,000 population of Constantinople were Armenians - workers, craftsmen, merchants, etc.2.
For centuries, in many fields of handicrafts: blacksmithing, armament, jewelry, silversmithing, carpentry, linen weaving, carpet weaving, tailoring, etc., Armenian artisans had no rivals.
  1889 In the program of "Mshak" newspaper, the contemporary mentions that "Armenian craftsmen build the most delicate and complex products of modern European improved crafts.
  And this is not enough. They work to develop the craft in the national spirit.
 That aspiration is common among Armenian craftsmen. ”3
Gold and silver jewelry, wooden items and sewn clothes made by Armenian masters were very popular not only in the homeland, but also abroad.
  Having an absolute monopoly in this field, Armenian craftsmen created unique works of art.
Many of them worked specifically for sultans, viziers, court women, and high-ranking officials.
  The Ottoman sultans entrusted the task of preparing gifts for high-ranking foreign guests, even emperors, exclusively to Armenian craftsmen, as a sign of gratitude, the latter being awarded medals and many other honors.
XIX century Armenian craftsmen enjoyed special fame in the court of sultans (Mahmud B. Adli (1808-1839), Abdul Majid (1839-1861), Abdul Aziz (1861-1876), Abdul Hamid II (1876-1909)) .
  It is not accidental that at the end of the century only one of the 18 royal craftsmen was not Armenian.
Arming was one of the most common trades in the Ottoman Empire.
  Although the Armenians were deprived of the right to bear arms, they were not prohibited from making or producing them.
  The Armenian gunsmiths were highly skilled craftsmen, repairing and making swords, gun money, weapons called "Persian ark", cannons, etc.
 Nshan Gziryan, Ha2 Melkonyan R., A Review of the History of the Armenian Community of Istanbul, Yerevan, 2010, p. 72.
3 "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), July 9, 1889, No. 84, page 3.
Kob Pontosyan, Khachatur և Sahak Pantazyan և others.
  The Carnet armor masters, who carried out the orders of the sultans, were especially famous.
  One of them, Sargis Achemyan, had brought the weaponry to an artistic level.
  He prepared the swords of Sultan Mahmud II (1806-1839).
  His works have been exhibited in Istanbul's Topkapi Palace, New York Metropolitan Բ Benaki Museum in Athens4.
Palace Architects Members of the Palyan family have set up special carpentry workshops for the buildings they have built, where hundreds of young people have learned a trade.
  In particular, during the reign of Sargis Palyan, European masters were invited to teach European carpentry in these workshops, who brought with them new improved tools, benches, materials, etc., contributing to the progress and development of this craft5.
Traditional Eastern and European furniture made by famous Armenian carpenters and furniture makers, luxurious household items decorated the sultans' court.
 Famous carpenters were the Kemhajyans, Moskofyans և etc.6.
  Odik Kehmajyan, under the auspices of Sultan Abdul Aziz, established a carpentry workshop, where high-quality, expensive wood was used to make musical instruments, high-quality furniture, artistic construction of palaces, and interior decoration items7.
Armenian tailors and weavers were very famous in the court.
  Royal bed linen and wedding dowries were made in Armenian weaving workshops.
 Armenian tailors carried out the orders of foreign merchants և the government.
 European clothes entered the cities of the country through Armenian-Greek tailors.
  At the beginning of the 20th century, Armenian masters spread English fashion widely in court circles8.
The taste of the Armenian woman and the ability to create were manifested in lace-making.
 Europe recognizes these works as Armenian lace: 4 Bakhchinyan A., Armenian figures from ancient times to the present day, Yerevan, 2002, p. 145.
5 Stepanyan H., ref. work, page 599.
6 In the same place.
7 In the same place.
8 Alpoyajyan A., History of Armenian Caesarea, vol. B, Cairo, 1937, page 1520.
With the name "Tantel Armenian".
 These laces adorned the clothes of the high-ranking Turkish officials in the Sultanate 9 harem9.
Armenian jewelers were very famous in the Sultan's court.
The families of the Tuzyans, Chrachyans, Mrmryans, Yeganyans, Galemkeryans, Tulumpachyans, Tosunyans and others were especially famous.
The members of the Tuzian family had concentrated the royal jewelry business in their hands since the time of Mustafa III Sultan (1754-1774).
 Mikael Tuzyan, being of high taste, perfectly combined European and Eastern cultural features and made exquisite stones, pots, flowers, etc.
  The sultan, who had a great love for jewelry, had established close relations with Mikael Tuzyan.
 The latter always carried out the whimsical orders of the sultan11.
 Tyuzyan passed on his craft skills exclusively to Armenian students, who spread and flourished that craft.
The jeweler of Sultan Abdul Mejid (1839-1861) was Mkrtich Benteryan (1835-1901).
 He made the medals of the Ottoman government, diamond-encrusted with precious stones, enameled.
  He was known for his many innovations.
  He was commissioned to make jewelry for foreign rulers, kings' octagons.
 Մ. One of Benteryan's masterpieces is a gold monogram of Abdul Hamid II engraved on a three-carat diamond, the seal of Faud Pasha.
 Mkrtich Benteryan made the expensive wedding jewelry of Fatma, the daughter of Sultan Abdul Mejid.
  The master stamped the Armenian letter "M" on his handicrafts12.
The necklace worth 150 thousand francs sent as a gift to the Queen of France was made by Hoca Poghos, one of the Armenian jewelers of Sultan Abdul Mejid, which is an exceptional work of art.
Kerovbe Tulumpajyan (1858-1929) had a great reputation as an artistic engraver.
 He made expensive covers and cases of ancient manuscripts.
 Q. Tulumpachyan owns Abdul Hamid B9 Siruni H., Constantinople and his role, h. 4, Antelias, 1988, p. 241.
10 Stepanyan H., note work., page 588.
11 Acharyan H., The Armenian Role in the Ottoman Empire, Yerevan, 1999, p. 17.
12 Stepanyan H., note work., pp. 586-587.
medals, expensive glasses and jewelry donated to the German emperor13.
Mkrtich Galafyan was the jeweler of Sultan Abdul Hamid II.
  He made wonderful cigarette boxes with the Ottoman coat of arms emblazoned on one side and K. on the other. A few beautiful sights from Constantinople, which were visible only with a magnifying glass.
 Among the works of Galafyan, the sultan was highly praised for his works "Samson tearing the lion's mouth", "Four seasons of the year", "The tiger and the lion", for which the author in 1888 received the Order of the Sultan14.
Along with jewelry, Armenian craftsmen mastered the craft of watchmaking, became famous for their inventions and innovations in this field.
  The Chukhachyan, Yeramyan, Galafyan, Tzezvechyan and Papyan families had a special place among the royal watchmakers.
One of the most famous Armenian watchmakers was the father of the great composer Tigran Chukhachyan, George Chukhachyan, who was the royal watchmaker of Sultan Abdul Mejid.
  He had invented the singing clock.
  Abdul Hamid II-scribe Mkrtich Galfayan was a watchmaker (1837-1910), his invention was the big watch that was strained once every ten years15.
Under the patronage of the sultans, the royal jewelers produced and sold their watches.
 The royal jeweler-jeweler Papyans produced "Hamidiye" watches, "Pulchyan-Jezvechyan-Arabian company" sold "Pulchyan" brand watches, "Jezvechyan-Ordik" institution produced "Longines" brand watches. .
K. A room at the entrance to the Dolmabahçe Palace in Constantinople served as a museum's watch gallery.
 Here, next to the magnificent works of famous European master watchmakers used in the palace, Ottoman-era watches were displayed, which were not inferior to those pieces of European art and technology.
They are mainly handmade by Armenian masters.
13 Ibid., P.
14 Ibid., P.
15 Ibid., P.
16 In the same place.
The production of household items intended for the palace was considered a separate branch of jewelry and silverware.
The famous jeweler-engraver Papa (or Usta) Adam specialized in this work.
 By means of casting he made the golden, silver handles of the new goods of the palaces.
 Among his handicrafts were the cast works of the Dolmabahçe Palace.
 The Simonyan family was entrusted with making the copper and brass pots and pans of the palace.
The Gazanjyans provided various items of the palace, statues, coffee, silver tea cups, and gold coin scales.
The dishes made by Armenian ceramic masters were used in the palaces of the sultans.
 In the 19th century, the Hovhannisyan, Minasyan, Vardanyan and Minasyan families were well-known in this field, and the products of the ceramic factories founded by them were repeatedly presented in international exhibitions17.
The handicrafts of these artisan families serving in the Ottoman court, being the birth of the Armenian creative thought, have brought great glory to the country, giving an opportunity to the modern Turkish society to present itself to the world.
Rosa GorgyanArmenian artisanal families in the Ottoman court (19th century) Keywords: handicrafts, Armenian artisan families, sultan's court.
