THE ACTIVITIES OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT BODIES For the population of the Republic of Armenia
  The Law of the Republic of Armenia on Local Self-Government defines local self-government as a community-guaranteed right միջոցով ability to act independently through local self-government bodies օր to manage community property, which is done to improve the welfare of the population.
  Taking into account the fact that most of the problems facing Armenian communities today are social in nature, they seriously hinder the increase of the community population, this article examines the possible ways that will enable RA local self-government bodies to act more actively in social protection of the population. in the direction of security.
The role of the community is invaluable in the life of every person.
  A person is born, socialized, expands his life activities in the community.
 The physical, psychological and social well-being of its members also largely depends on the community.
The community has long been in the spotlight of researchers.
This is evidenced by the fact that in the 19th century. Since then, many approaches have been presented for its study, interpretation and classification.
Referring to modern approaches to community analysis and interpretation, it should be noted that they have long since ceased to view the community as a geographical or administrative unit.
  The changes in the approaches created for the purpose of community interpretation are conditioned by new tendencies of community operation and development, globalization, socio-economic crises, technical progress.
  Today, the community is seen as a system of interpersonal relationships.
 With modern approaches, the community is studied in terms of opportunities to serve its members and provide necessary social services.
The participation of the community in the social assistance processes of the members is carried out through formal-informal networks.
 The responsibility for providing formal assistance to the residents of the community rests mainly with the local self-government bodies.
In general, local self-government is an integral part of any modern society.
 Being one of the ways of gaining power by the people, it is aimed at solving local issues through the direct participation of the population or through local self-government bodies, proceeding from the interests of the population, historical and cultural features.
  The rights and freedoms of the citizen are first of all realized where he / she lives, carrying out other forms of work, politics and activities.
  That is why their activity largely depends on the activity of local self-government bodies1.
  The socio-economic rights and freedoms of the inhabitants are exercised in different spheres of the community life.
By successfully carrying out their functions in these areas, local self-government bodies contribute to the implementation and protection of citizens' rights.
Various authors in their works have referred to the basic principles of local self-government, pointing out the key differences between local self-government and the role of local self-government in the process of building democracy.
 One of these authors, Maas և Yilvisaker, applies the following basic principles to local self-government: 2.1. Independence gained through the distribution of power 2. equality when community members have equal opportunities to participate in community governance processes through local self-government; 3. welfare, which implies the provision of necessary social services to the population of the community, distribution of social goods, provision of social welfare.
Returning to our reality, it should be noted that local self-government bodies, being created to implement community self-government, to solve issues of local significance, to overcome the problems facing the community, today do not make a tangible contribution to the solution of such serious social problems. in social protection processes.
  The local self-government bodies of the Republic of Armenia in the system of social protection of the population are limited to providing certain financial assistance or establishing privileges in the system of some state taxes, but that support is not systematic, has no methodology, is not enough to provide targeted assistance to community members.
  In fact, due to gaps in the legal field, lack of financial and human resources, the local self-government bodies of the Republic of Armenia have significant difficulties in implementing the key issues of the system and maintaining the principles of local self-government, as the latter do not have significant in the matter of satisfaction.
  Today in front of the Armenian communities և 1 See Ordyan E., Fundamentals of Local Self-Government, Yerevan, 2000, p. 57.
2 See Sullivan H., Local Government Reform in Great Britain, University of the West of England, 2002, p. 38.
There are serious problems such as extreme poverty, high youth unemployment, unfavorable social and housing conditions, etc.
 These problems are especially acute in the border-highlands or in the disaster zone communities.
  The passive role of local self-government bodies in the current situation is conditioned by several factors.
  There are some gaps in the legal field, in particular, according to the RA Law on Local Self-Government, local self-government bodies have only voluntary powers in the field of social services, a delegated authority to promote the organization of social services in the community.
 This means that local self-government bodies have the right to take a voluntary approach to responding to the social needs of the population.
  As a result, in the absence of relevant specialists in the community budget համակարգ in the local self-government system, the local self-government bodies bypass their main responsibilities in meeting the social needs of the community residents and providing necessary social services, preferring to direct most of the community resources to the state delegated powers.
 Consequently, many issues of primary importance are left out of the sight of local self-government bodies.
Referring to the international experience of operating local self-government bodies in the social protection system of the population, it should be noted that in many countries where public administration is carried out through local self-government, local self-government bodies are responsible for organizing and providing social services based on community needs.
  In the UK, which has a wealth of local government experience, local governments are endowed with a wide range of powers to provide and provide services to the population.
 By adopting the Anglo-Saxon model of local self-government, which presupposes that the relationship between local self-government and central government is "within the bounds of authority", local self-government provides ample opportunities for the community to provide social services.
  Some statistics even show that in the UK, most of the local government budget (around 80%), which is generated through both state and local taxes, is spent on organizing and providing educational and social services to the community.
A similar experience has been adopted by the United States, where local governments operate on a solid financial basis, which ensures their administrative independence.
 They have significant financial resources 1 See Elcock H., Local Government.
  Policy and Management in Local Authorities, London, Taylor and Francis eLibrary, 2005, p. 68.
resources from own sources, state և federal governments.
  It is interesting that the allocations received from the superior state bodies are intended mainly for the implementation of social and economic programs.
Thus, in Western countries, local governments provide adequate minimum social protection to the population through health, education and other cultural services1.
It should be noted that the principle of active role of local self-government bodies in solving the social problems of the population has been adopted not only by developed countries, but also by post-Soviet powers such as Georgia and Azerbaijan.
  In Georgia, where the system of local self-government was introduced in 1990, local self-government units, having a wide range of functions, also have the authority to organize and provide social assistance services, which is not delegated.
 However, when providing leveling transfers to local governments, it takes into account how much funding was allocated to provide social services to the population during the previous budget year2.
In Azerbaijan, where the system of local self-government was formed in 1995. Based on the adopted Constitution, local self-government bodies have a rather comprehensive range of powers, including the implementation of social assistance services, social and economic development programs at the local level3.
  According to experts in the field, the active functioning of local self-government bodies in the social protection system of the population of Azerbaijan is mainly hindered by the existing contradictions and shortcomings between the legal norms regulating the sector or related to the sector.
As we can see, the deepening of decentralization համապատասխան in order to ensure the active functioning of local self-government bodies in the social protection system of the population, the relevant measures are initiated և are implemented step by step.
One of the steps aimed at activating the local self-government bodies of the Republic of Armenia in the system of social protection of the population of the community may be the introduction of a social worker in the institution of community service functioning for the implementation of their tasks and functions.
According to the RA Law on Community Service, adopted in 2004, community service is defined as an independent type of public service, which, being a professional activity in the staff of local self-government bodies, is aimed at carrying out the functions assigned to those bodies by the RA Constitution.
  The community service is a public service institute that implements local self-government bodies. 1 See Beglaryan G., Social problems of municipal administration, Yerevan, 2004, p. 34.
2 See "Local self-government in the South Caucasus", p. 2, sub. OK. В. Movsisyan, Yerevan, 2008, page 72.
3 See ibid., P. 41.
Reserved tasks and functions, is financed from state և community budgets and serves the public interest1.
 The introduction of a social worker in the community service institute can significantly contribute to the solution of the social problems of the community population և to the organization and provision of social services aimed at meeting the needs, which will be more systematic and targeted.
The involvement of a social worker among community servants can greatly contribute to increasing the role of local self-government bodies in providing social protection to the community population, providing real preconditions for the establishment of the community.
Moreover, today in our country serious reforms are being carried out in the social protection system of the population.
 In particular, there is an integration of social services, a transition to the principle of providing comprehensive services to the population.
 It is not yet clear what role the community, represented by local self-government bodies, will play in the organization and provision of integrated social services.
 If today we realize that local self-government bodies are still preparing to undertake and effectively implement the process of organizing and providing integrated social services, then we must also realize that their isolation from these processes will not be effective either.
 Consequently, the introduction and development of a social worker in the community service institution can also contribute to the establishment and development of cooperative relations between the "integrated social services" of local self-government bodies.
Local self-government, being the structure closest to the population of the community, created to solve the problems of the population, acts as a primary support unit that can identify the needy members of the community, provide targeted support to them, direct relevant governmental and non-governmental organizations to receive continuous services. .
Thus, the need for the introduction and development of social work in the community is conditioned by the following circumstances.1. community development, effective operation գործ need to serve as a resource for community members; 2. the need to increase the population's trust and confidence in the community և local self-government bodies; 3. The opportunity to identify the needs of the community և members և to provide services for the effective and continuous satisfaction of those needs that can be provided by the social worker working in the community, 4. the need for local self-government bodies to act as a full-fledged subject of social protection in the social protection system of the population; 5.
1 See Ordyan E., Fundamentals of Community Service, Yerevan, 2009, p. 11.
Evgine Vardanyan ACTIVITIES OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES OPERATIONS OF SOCIAL DEFENSE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA SOCIETY: local self-government, local self-government, local self-government
