RELIGIOUS FLOWERS OF THE CHURCH The Christian church has many rituals, where a number of ritual covers are used.
 In order to understand their practical and semantic significance, it is first necessary to clarify which rituals they constitute.
 Due to the differences in the rites of the Catholic, Orthodox and Apostolic Churches, the ritual covers have certain differences.
 The fact that the Armenian Highlands are still familiar with the fabric is evidenced by the items found during the excavations (one of the oldest was found in the Areniikavardzv in 2010 և dating to the 4th millennium BC).
 There are references to the fabric by historians Yeghishe, M. Khorenatsi, Xenophon, but Kirakos Gandzaketsi (lived in the 13th century) mentions the fabric related to the church.
 He wrote that during the consecration ceremonies of NorGetik (Goshavank) monastery (1197) the wife of Prince Vakhtang from Haterk "made a beautiful curtain with her daughters, covering the holy tabernacle, which amazed the viewers. made of very soft sheepskin, painted in various colors, embroidered and painted with images imitating the humanity of the Savior and other saints, which amazed the onlookers. Churches of Haghpat, Makaravank and Dad Monastery, because this pious woman loved the churches very much… "[1].
 The word embroiderer is not used here, but the description indicates it.
 In addition, we can clearly conclude that the various blankets and curtains donated to the church were the handiwork of the women of the ruling houses.
 The word naևpակk was used to refer to church fabrics [2].
The Holy Liturgy is the main ritual of the Armenian Apostolic Church, which is also called the Bloodless Liturgy.
 The word "liturgy" is of Pahlavi origin and means sacrifice, gift, offering.
 The one who is sacrificed is Christ, whose Body and Blood are distributed to my mortals in the form of a bread omen during the ritual.
The liturgy represents episodes from Jesus' life, from his birth to his Ascension, which are reflected in Bible readings, psalms, hymns, sermons, and prayers.
The book of the liturgy is called the Liturgy or Advice Book.
  The Armenian Apostolic Church uses St. The Barsegh Liturgy brought from Caesarea by Gregory the Illuminator, developed over the centuries by the Fathers of the Armenian Church
 According to the Armenian Liturgy, the Holy Liturgy is divided into four parts. Preparation (dressing, washing, confession, introduction, Narekatsi prayer, nomination).
B. Lunch position (incense, dinner entrance, reading, Belief), G. Rule S. Liturgy (large entrance, greeting, consecration, remembrance, tasting), D. Release.
According to the Constitution of the Armenian Church, St. The liturgy is served in the morning, and S. Birthday և Easter Liturgy in the evening [3].
 The only place is the church, the temple ները the blessed chapels, anointed with the altar rock.
  The liturgy is performed only on Saturdays and Sundays, as during the feasts of the saints.
  Liturgy is not celebrated on the days of Salt, that is, Lent, except on Saturdays and Sundays, on the five days of the seven days of Lent, during the fasting weeks of the five pavilions, because those days are days of mourning and repentance, while the Liturgy is a feast of joy; it is called "Wedding". .
The liturgy is served by the ordained (anointed) priest or the clergyman with the highest rank of high priest, who The symbol of the table is Jesus Christ.
 He prepares for the ceremony a few days in advance, clears his conscience and mind.
In addition to the liturgist, deacons, semi-deacons and scribes take part in the ceremony.
 The scribes represent the people, their activities on behalf of the people, and the deacon is the assistant of the pastor, the servant is the mediator between him and the scribes (people).
Like the liturgist and the others, the people must attend the Liturgy with the awareness and responsibility of the council, be in a state of inner prayer, participate in the ceremony, which is a sign of respect and humility.
 The people may listen to the scribes in a low voice, but not to the priest-deacons.
The bread, the leftovers, must be made of pure flour, unleavened (unleavened).
  It is not allowed to mix that flour with other things, such as barley, beets, etc.
 The sacramental wine must be pure, that is, pure grape juice, without mixing with water.
 The council's formula is Jesus' famous words at the Last Supper.
  And he blessed the bread, and brake it, and gave to the disciples, saying, Take, eat; this is my body.
 Then, taking the wine by the glass, he satisfied the disciples and said: "Drink from it, all of you, for this is the wisdom of the New Testament, which is poured out for many for the remission of their sins" (Matt. 26).
26-28).
There are certain differences in the sacrament in the churches.
During the liturgy, the Apostolic Church uses unleavened bread, unmixed dry wine, and soaks the leftovers in wine.
 The remnant is unleavened bread made of pure wheat flour և symbolizes the immaculate Body of Christ, and the wine without water symbolizes the blood of Christ on the cross as a source of salvation.
Unleavened bread is used in the Catholic Church, water is mixed with wine.
  Catholics do not soak the leftovers in wine without giving sacrament to children.
The Orthodox Church uses leavened bread and wine mixed with water.
Every item, utensils or clothes used in the liturgies can be symbolic.
 According to the ritual rule, all these things are blessed before they are used.
 Some are blessed with a simple blessing by reciting a prayer, some are anointed with water and wine.
 The participation of household items in the liturgy is strictly forbidden.
 During the liturgy, the urns are used, which are sacred vessels made of gold or gilded silver.
The cup is for wine և symbolizes the suffering of Jesus, as well as the cup of wine that Jesus offered at the Last Supper.
  Maghakia Ormanyan commented in her "Ritual Dictionary" as follows: "SKIH" is the general name of a cup, and especially a cup with a foot or a pedestal, and now it is completely used in general and is used especially for the liturgy cup.
 The bowl will be made of silver, if not the pedestal, at least the cup itself, and gilded on the inside, and the shape and the jewelry will vary according to the size and the ability.
 There are very large coffins in the old monastery, in which a relic large enough for the sacrament of thousands of pilgrims can be dipped. ”[8]
It is the lid of the frying pan on which the remains are placed.
 It is a sign of the Savior's birth nursery.
  This is how Maghakia Ormanyan explains the word. "MAZZMAI" - A flat plate that is the companion of the bowl or cup and is placed on it, the part of the mouth of the cup is deeper so that it slides on the cup.
  It serves as a pulp to place the sacrificial relic on it, both before and after the consecration.
  The pulp must also be silver-plated, gilded on the inside.
  The size is in proportion to the bowl, the middle part is about the size of its mouth and the circumference is about 3 or 4 or 5 hundred meters.
 The urns of our church should be deeper in the middle, so that after the consecration, the cover of the bowl is placed on it, so that it does not come into direct contact with the consecrated body. "[8]
One of the most important ritual covers is the cover of the bowl.
  During the preaching, the bowl is covered with a blanket, and the priest says three times, "The Holy Spirit will come upon you ..." (Luke 1:35).
 Therefore, the cover of the bowl is a symbol of the Holy Spirit.
"FLOWER" - In general, any canvas, image and object that he keeps out of sight is called a "blanket", but in the church that word is especially named after the bowl and the election wall spread on the altar during the liturgy.
 The covers are the heaviest and most artistic part of the tableware, and are usually embroidered with gold on silk.
 They are also not very light in weight, because they are double and sometimes they will have a strong fabric in the middle.
 The cover is not forgivable to be used for anything other than that purpose, and the protection must be cautious, especially in our church, because we put on the consecrated relic, without putting another lid, like Latins and Armenians, or put another cross-iron net like a net. We cover it and keep it in direct contact with the remnant.
 We also use the word cover to identify the canvas that covers the rock on the table, but it is not the correct name, but the word in its general sense. ”[8]
Considering the difference between the liturgies of the Catholic and Orthodox Churches, it should be noted that the ritual veils are different.
In Catholic orthodox churches, the coffin is covered with a separate cloth, the coffin with a separate cloth, then only one common, larger size.
The small ski cover is mainly used in the Catholic Church, English: purificator, French le purificatoire.
 It has no ritual significance, only functional.
 It is usually rectangular or square.
 It is put on the eskih after the sacrament to clean the traces of wine, then that cover is put on the filter.
  In the Orthodox Church it is large in size, has the appearance of a cup է is covered separately, so the above-mentioned type of cover is not used.
The medium-sized cover of the skis is typical of the Catholic orthodox churches: Russian: Покровцы́, покрова́, English: Pall, French: la pale.
 At first it had a protective significance.
 Especially in Eastern countries, to protect the wine from flies and dust, the bowl was covered with a small cloth.
  Later, however, it acquired a ritual significance է covered the vase during the sacrament.
 Mostly rectangular or square.
Skih և anchors are covered with one common large covering mainly in the Orthodox Church. Since the urn here was a separate stand of the rye, both were covered separately, then only with a common large cover.
 Greek - ἀήρ, Russian - Воздýх, English - Aër, French - l'Aër, there is no equivalent word in Armenian.
 Unlike the previous small covers, which were decorated with simple embroidered crosses, the large ones were decorated with Old and New Testament scenes, images of saints and angels.
  These are mostly rectangular.
  The earliest surviving specimens of the Armenian skins are from the 17th century (one of the specimens dates from 1688 and is kept in the Treasury of Etchmiadzin, gilded with embroidery).
  The preserved Russian copy dates back to the 14th century (1389, hand-painted icon of Christ, kept in the Russian State Museum of History).
The earliest Greek specimen dates to the late 13th century (in the Benaki Museum, Christ holding a bowl, cherubs on both sides, 1270-1299).
It is difficult to draw a parallel with the coffin of the Armenian Church and the coffin of the Orthodox Catholic Church.
 Which type is closer, Aër or Pall?
For Armenians, the cover is one type, usually circular or rectangular.
 Depending on the decoration, the pictorial themes can be identified with Aër with some reservations.
The corpse (also Gorpura, but this word has no use), in Russian: плащаница, in Greek: Ἐπιτάφιος (epitapios, literally "on the grave"), in English - corporal, in French - le corporal), is placed under the coffin.
 It is used in "Apostolic", "Catholic" and "Orthodox" churches.
 The Armenian Church, unlike the Latin Church, does not put the remnants, even the crumbs, on the body, but only on the wood.
 According to Maghakia Ormanyan, the word "corporalis" means "corporealis" in Latin, but it is more closely translated as corporeal.
 A square white cloth that the Latin watch spreads on the table in front of him and not only puts the bowl on it, but also rests the consecrated relic on the canvas without any nutmeg.
It is even more an honor for the same canvas to have direct contact with the advisory body, and the fragments of the sacred relic to be suspected of being attached to the same canvas. "[18]
"BODY" - The clean cloth placed especially under the skis during the liturgy or decorates the small handle.
  We talked in more detail under the name of Gorpura. "[18]
The body is identified with the body in which Joseph covered the body of Christ.
 This veil is a symbol of Christ's resurrection.
 Then the blood of Christ (the vessel with wine) is placed on the body և The body of Christ (the remnant).
The body is used in the church on Good Friday և Holy Saturdays.
Good Friday is the day of commemoration of the arrest, crucifixion, and death of Jesus Christ.
 In the morning there is a gospel service, reading the Gospels, which contain the last hours of Jesus' earthly life: betrayal, arrest, denial of Peter, approach of Pilate, death sentence, torment and insult, crucifixion on Golgotha, solar eclipse, death, burial.
 No Mass is celebrated on Good Friday because Christ was sacrificed on the cross.
  The evening ceremony symbolizes the burial of Jesus Christ և is called the order of burial.
  The symbolic tomb of Jesus Christ, made of flowers and branches, is circled around the church in the sight of the believer.
The Holy Week of the Destruction of Hell, St. Chragaluytsi It is the day of the liturgy.
 According to church doctrine, Christ went down to hell after his death, destroying it, granting salvation to the souls of the righteous.
  On Saturday evening, St. Liturgy.
 Chandelier St. Along with the liturgy, when the good news of Jesus' Resurrection is announced, the Great Lent ends.
 St. After the liturgy, St. The eve of the sacrament.
Shushpa, holding or sparkling to hold a Cross, Gospel or a bowl.
 According to the ritual dictionary, "SHUSHPA-A piece of clean cloth, which I put under the bowl, serves to clean the bowl, which identifies with the body and the cleaner.
But it is also used in the sense of the word dastrak, sometimes in the sense of a tablecloth. Therefore, we can say that shushpa has a general meaning to know all the paintings used on the table.
Thus, ritual covers are different according to their use.
They can be distinguished from each other in size, especially in decoration.
Each type of cover has its own pictorial features.
The main raw material used was Armenian, as the Armenians had all the conditions for production. They grew flax, cotton, and silk.
 Angora sheep were made of rather thin twisted woolen threads.
They even got threads from goat hair.
LITERATURE [1] Gandzaketsi K., Armenian history, translation, preface և notes by Varag Arakelyan, Yerevan, 1982, p. 157.
[2] Kurdian Y., Armenian Eyepieces, "Zion", Jerusalem, September-December 1968, p. 448.
[3] Aghaniants G., Order of Godliness in the Armenian Church. Church, 6th edition, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1907, pp. 46-47.
[4] Liturgy of the Armenian Holy Church, page 2.
[5] The Holy Liturgy symbolizes the heavenly և earthly life of God, with its rituals, objects and details.
 http:
//holytrinity.am/posts/view/60 (Accessed.
 20.09.2017). [6] Poghosyan V., Mkrtchyan Sh., Armenian national-religious symbols, Yerevan, 2003, page 21.
[7] Baghumyan Z., The problem of the glass in the Armenian Church, Etchmiadzin, 2013, p. 125.
[8] Ormanian M., Ritual Dictionary, Antelias, 1979, pp. 182, 153, 139-140, 106,157, 166.
[9] Treasures of Etchmiadzin, Album, 1984, p. 293.
ONANYAN ANNACHURCH RELIGIOUS FLOWERS OF KEYS Keywords: rituals, liturgy, sacrament, ritual blankets, coffin covers, body, shushpa.
