CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL ENRICHMENT AS A NEW PROGRAM IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA For any state, it is always relevant for the state to implement and implement measures to combat crimes against public service.
 Moreover, the more developed the state is, the stricter those measures are, as well as the criteria, in the presence of which the act is qualified as a crime.
  Naturally, the criminals have the means in that struggle.
 As it is known, from July 1, 2017, the Law on Making Amendments and Addenda to the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia will enter into force, according to which Article 310.1 of the Criminal Code will introduce the institution of criminal responsibility for illegal enrichment.
  In this paper we will try to present the above-mentioned institute as a novelty in the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, the preconditions for its adoption, possible gaps, which, in our opinion, will cause problems in law enforcement practice in the future. Australia, Argentina) attempt to criminalize illicit enrichment.
Let us present the main preconditions for criminalizing illicit enrichment in the Republic of Armenia.
 As stated in the substantiation of the legislative initiative of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Justification), the Republic of Armenia ratified the Convention against Corruption adopted in 2003 in New York (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) in 2007 1.
 For the purposes of the Convention, each State Party to the Convention is obliged to consider other legislative measures necessary to recognize the act of illicit enrichment as a criminal offense2.
 Therefore, it is natural that sooner or later our state should have fulfilled its international obligations.
  Thus, in December 2016, the National Assembly adopted a law, which entered into force on July 1, 2017, the new Article 310.1 of the RA Criminal Code ("Illegal enrichment"), which stipulates: "1. Illegal enrichment - the increase of property և (or) the liability of a person responsible for filing a declaration defined by the Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Public Service” in the reporting period, which significantly exceeds his / her legal income, is not reasonably substantiated by them; other criminal grounds for illicit enrichment Absence is punishable by imprisonment for a term of three to six years, deprivation of the right to hold certain positions or engage in certain activities, for a maximum of three years by confiscation of property.
2. In this article, the amount (value) exceeding five thousand times the minimum wage established at the time of the crime is considered significant. ”
It follows from the analysis of the cited article that the object of the crime is the normal activity of a specific part or structure of the state or government apparatus.
 In other words, the crime is directed against the public relations, which are called to ensure the normal process of high-ranking state officials to act within their powers, as well as their effective state activity.
 The above is the main or direct object of this crime, and as an additional object, depending on the circumstances of the crime, human or constitutional rights և freedoms, property interests of the state or citizen և etc. can act.
 Objectively, illicit enrichment is manifested by two choices, namely: 1) Public Service Hayas 1 See Legislative Rationale on Illegal Enrichment in the Reporting Period.
2 See Article 1 of the Anti-Corruption Convention, New York, 2003.
increase in the property of a person owed to submit a property declaration ով in the manner prescribed by the law of the Republic և (or) 2) decrease in liabilities that significantly exceed his legal income and are not reasonably substantiated by them.
It is clear from the disposition of the article that the increase of property and the decrease of liabilities, both together and separately, are considered a crime.
  At the same time, it is a criminal offense if it does not have the characteristics of another crime based on illicit enrichment, which is defined in Article 310.1, part 1.
 The legislature, by requiring the absence of other offenses for illicit enrichment, presupposes, in the absence of acts which are also directed against the civil service, by which a person may reduce his obligations or increase his property.
 Examples include illegal participation in business (Article 310), bribery (Article 311), and so on.
  The main purpose of the above requirement is to exclude cases of double conviction for the same act, for example, if a person has illegally enriched by taking a bribe, the fact of taking a bribe has been proven, he cannot be held responsible for "receiving a bribe" or "illegal enrichment".
 In this case, criminal liability for illegal enrichment is excluded.
  And if there are features of illicit enrichment, and at the same time it is the basis of the crime, it has not been possible to reveal the features of the crime, then only the person can be held responsible for the illegal enrichment.
 Besides, the legislator, by defining this exception, intends not to cause duplication of articles, which is defined by the RA Law on Legal Acts, to qualify the act with a more detailed and clearly regulating article.
 The above also follows from the idea of ​​competition of general, special norms of criminal legislation, according to which, if the characteristics of the act committed correspond to the characteristics of the crimes envisaged by the two articles of the special part, it should be qualified by the article that is more specific and regulates the legal relationship.
 The above will allow him to avoid the risk of possible confusion related to the crimes mentioned in practice, which, in our opinion, is justified.
Thus, the exception provided in the disposition of the article solves the main problems of qualifying the crime of illicit enrichment, excluding the possibility of qualifying it in combination with another crime. If a person's income has increased or his / her obligations have decreased due to another crime against the state service, the act must be qualified as a specific crime (illegal participation in the enterprise, taking bribes, etc.).
As for the phrase "substantially exceeds his legal income" provided for in the disposition of Part 1 of Article 310.1, it is revealed in Part 2 of the same Article: "In this Article, the amount exceeding five thousand times the minimum wage established at the time of the crime" (value ) ».
 It is mentioned in the substantiation that the envisage of five million drams as a threshold for criminalizing the act is conditioned by the choice of the average version of the remuneration of the persons holding state positions.
 The calculation is based on the salary coefficients of the head of the office of the Office of the President of the Republic of Armenia implementing programs in the sphere of the Ministry. Moreover, the arithmetic average salary of the given positions was calculated, envisaging it for 6 months.
In our opinion, the legislator envisaging a threshold of 5 million drams is not so justified.
 The point is that a high-ranking official may, as a result of actions committed in several episodes, for example, have an illegal income of 4 million 999 thousand drams, which will not be considered a crime.
  We think that the legislator should have set a rather low threshold (for example, 1 million drams) or, taking into account the salary of a specific official, ie the subject of the crime, the declared legal incomes, should have deviated from it, for example, by 5%.
  Let's justify this by saying that for a high-ranking official who has no business, 5 million drams is a rather high threshold, and for an official with an annual income of, for example, 10 million dollars, 5 million drams is simply absurd.
3 See RA Law on Legal Acts, Articles 1, 2.
The justification states that the definition of the threshold is based on the principle of "de minimis non curat praetor", ie "very small inconsistencies should not be pursued" 4.
 We think that we can not agree with that, because as it was already mentioned, depending on the financial situation of the official, even one million drams cannot be considered a "very small" discrepancy.
  The above-mentioned will cause quite problematic situations in the near future, as a high-ranking official with a "low" income will have an illegal income of 4,999,000 drams, will go unpunished, and the one with a high income will have a discrepancy of 5 million drams - will be prosecuted.
Taking into account the above-mentioned, we propose to formulate the provision "The amount (value) exceeding five thousand times the minimum wage established at the time of the crime" mentioned in Part 2 of Article 310.1 as follows: "The amount of legal income of a person obliged to submit a declaration in the reporting period exceeding x% is considered significant."
As for the international practice of criminalizing illicit enrichment (Ukraine, Slovakia, Lithuania, Australia, Argentina), in the acceding countries it is referred to mainly as "substantial", apparently leaving its interpretation to law enforcement depending on the financial situation of officials. from the circumstances arising from it.
The subject of illicit enrichment is special, ie the person who is obliged to submit a declaration during the reporting period under the Law on Public Services.
 According to the Law on Public Services, a high-ranking official և the person affiliated with him (ie the parent living with him, the adult և unmarried child և the spouse) is obliged to submit a declaration5.
 The same law gives the notion of a high-ranking "official" և their list6.
 In fact, the legislature obliges the official performing the most important state functions to submit a declaration. 4 See the Legislative Rationale of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia on "Criminalization of Illegal Enrichment".
5 See Law on Public Services, Article 32, Parts 1 և 4.
6 See Law on Public Services, Article 5, Part 1, Clause 15.
(presidents, ministers, their deputies, deputies of the National Assembly, etc.).
  In our opinion, the subjective structure of the mentioned crime is justified, as it would not be fair to view public servants, those holding lower positions as subjects, due to the reduced capacity of their functions.
A study of our international experience shows (Ocrakina, Slovakia, Lithuania, Australia, Argentina) that other public servants are mainly intended to be subject to illicit enrichment, and in Australia, for example, even a natural or legal person.
  There are countries where the heads of local self-government bodies are involved, but in the Republic of Armenia only the heads of the communities with a population of more than 50 thousand submit a declaration.
  What, as we mentioned, is the choice of the subject of the crime under discussion by our legislator?
The crime is subjectively characterized by a deliberate form of guilt, moreover, the intent here can be only direct, that is, the criminal realizes that the increase in income և (or) the decrease in liability is illegal չեն you are not reasonably justified by legal income.
 The motives of the crime և the purpose are not a mandatory feature of the crime, therefore they can not influence the qualification of the act.
In the framework of this work, we consider it necessary to refer to the existing criminal legal regulations on illicit enrichment of a number of foreign member states of the Convention.
  The Criminal Code of the Republic of Ukraine provides that the acquisition of a significant amount of assets for which the legal basis has not been established, as well as the transfer of such assets by a public servant to another person is punishable by law7.
  That is, unlike the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, the Ukrainian legislature stipulates the transfer of assets to another person as a reduction of liabilities.
 In our opinion, the wording of our legislator is more appropriate in this respect, as the reduction of liabilities is a broader concept, և includes և the transfer of assets to another person.
7 See Criminal Code of the Republic of Ukraine, Article 368.2.
According to the Moldovan Criminal Code, illicit enrichment is the possession of property by an official in person or by a third party, the value of which significantly exceeds his income. Evidence of Jor proved that it could not be obtained legally8.
 The main difference is in the distribution of the burden of proof of the presumption of innocence between the relevant articles of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova and the Republic of Armenia.
In the Slovak Republic the above-mentioned issue is regulated in the field of civil law9.
 According to the relevant article, in case of suspicion of illegal acquisition of property, a report must be submitted to the financial police.
 The state bodies, any interested natural or legal person have the right to submit a report.
  In other words, unlike the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, where only law enforcement agencies should deal with the issue of illegal enrichment, Slovakia has tried to involve the general public in the fight against this crime.
 As for the Australian Penal Code, the addressee of that article is not only an official, but also a natural or legal person10.
It should be noted that the criminalization of illicit enrichment is not unequivocally accepted in the Republic of Armenia, it has given rise to a number of disputes.
 Let's look at the main concerns that were often raised by different people during the discussion of the law.
  The most common of them, unfortunately, was the issue of the law not having retroactive force, that is, according to many, until July 1, 2017, the illegally rich will go unpunished.
 In fact, the answer to this question is clearer than expected.
 Part 1 of Article 72 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (as amended in 2015) literally states that legal acts that aggravate a person's condition have no retroactive effect11.
 According to Part 2 of Article 13 of the RA Criminal Code, "the law defining the crime of an act, aggravating the punishment or otherwise worsening the condition of the person who committed the crime has no retroactive force."
  "Legal Acts 8 See Criminal Code of the Republic of Moldova, Article 330.2.
9 See Article 3 of the Law of the Slovak Republic on Proof of Property Origin.
10 See Australian Crime Act.
11 See RA Constitution (as amended in 2015), Article 72, point 1.
The RA law on "details the mentioned norm in more detail. "No retroactive effect may be given to legal entities restricting or restricting the rights or freedoms of legal entities or natural persons, stricter the procedure for their implementation or establishing liability or aggravating liability or imposing obligations or establishing or stipulating the procedure for performance of duties, as well as their legal status. legal acts ”12.
  Thus, "illegal enrichment" is considered a law defining crime, so it is impossible to give retroactive force to it.
The next possible question in relation to this crime concerns the distribution of the burden of proving a crime, which is inextricably linked to the principle of the presumption of innocence.
 As it is known, the principle of the presumption of innocence has been significantly changed by the 2015 constitutional amendments.
  According to the previous confession, the person accused of a crime was presumed innocent until proven guilty in accordance with the law by a court judgment that entered into force13.
 The accused was not obliged to prove his innocence.
 The unresolved suspicions were interpreted in favor of the accused.
  The relevant provision of the new Constitution states that a person accused of a crime is presumed innocent until proven guilty in accordance with the law by a court judgment that has entered into force14.
It turns out that theoretically the burden of proof can also be placed on the subject of the crime envisaged by Article 310.1 of the RA Criminal Code, which does not contradict the principle of the presumption of innocence.
In addition to the above, let us add that, in our opinion, it would be appropriate to envisage an incentive norm for the crime of illicit enrichment.
In particular, international legal experience shows that the provision of incentives for these crimes makes the fight against them more effective.
  For example, in the Republic of Lithuania, it is stipulated that if a person informs law enforcement agencies about illicit enrichment (before the latter you have 12 See Article 78 1 1 2 2 of the Law.
13 See RA Constitution of 2005, Article 21.
14 See the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia for 2015, Article 66, the occurrence of a crime) և Assists in the detection of a crime, then the person is released from criminal liability.
Taking into account the effectiveness of such a norm, we propose to make an addition to Article 310.1 with the following edition: "A person is released from criminal liability if, before submitting a declaration, he / she informs the law enforcement bodies about a significant increase in assets or a significant decrease in liabilities, assists in the detection of a crime."
Hakob Shahbandaryan CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL ENRICHMENT AS A NEW IN THE CRIMINAL CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: crimes against public service, presumption of struggle
