THE FRAMEWORK OF THE JUDGMENT OF "PERINCHECK v. SWITZERLAND" AT THE ECHR IN THE ENGLISH "DAILY MAIL" PERIOD
 In a broad sense, it is the "snow"!
 According to Irving Goffman, the frame is an opportunity for perception that creates ways of defining the situation.
 As a rule, the framers are not realized by the subject, and the attempt to explain them leads to the disruption of perception.
 According to M. According to Minsk, the framework is a structure of knowledge that provides stereotypes about the situation.
  The frame helps to create stereotypes, and their application allows readers to make judgments about the event through comparison or associations.
In general, any society is not indifferent, especially to the use of various forms of violence, and in many cases the media coverage of it is cautious.
  For us Armenians, any coverage of the world press in 1915-1923 is especially important. From the point of view of evaluating the Armenian Genocide that took place from the historical point of view as a Genocide.
  There are still political actors who still consider the fact of the Armenian Genocide an "international lie", it is circulating in the media.
  In particular, we are talking about Do ղեկավարu Perinçek, the leader of the Turkish Workers' Party, who in 2005 During a conference organized in Switzerland, he described the Armenian Genocide as an "international lie."
  The Swiss court ruled in favor of this statement in 2008. The Turkish politician was sentenced to 90 days of conditional imprisonment or a corresponding fine, as well as a fine of 3 Swiss francs.
  However, in 2013 On December 17, the European Court of Human Rights upheld Dogu Perincek's lawsuit against Switzerland, alleging that Switzerland had violated Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, namely the right to freedom of expression.
2015 The hearing of the case "Perincek v. Switzerland" took place on January 28, 2006 in Strasbourg, ECHR.
 This event was covered by a number of authoritative international media, including the English "Daily Mail" electronic periodical, which covered the trial in three articles.
This British periodical is considered one of the most read both in Great Britain and abroad. Average number of readers in 2013 from October to 2014 September was about 20.7 million 3.
Given such a large audience, it can be assumed that the periodical provides information in the form of a skillfully constructed framework, և readers, not noticing this fact, begin to show a certain behavior towards this or that event, regardless of their will.
"Frameworks, as a rule, have a conditional nature; they describe what is" descriptive "or" typical "in the given society4.
Accordingly, taking into account the fact that Armenia, represented in the ECHR as a third party, was represented by British lawyers, it can be considered natural that the Daily Mail's 1 Goffman I., Analysis of frames.
 All organizations of the General Assembly, Moscow, 2003. p. 42.2 "The ECHR has agreed to appeal the decision in the case of Perincek v. Switzerland", 04.06.2014, available at http: // www.
//www.mediamax.am/am/news/foreignpolicy/10452/.
1.000 individuals) ”, available at http.
//www.statista.com/statistics/246077/reach-of-selected-national-newspapers-in-the-uk/.http.
//yanko.lib.ru/books/cultur/usmanova-eco.htm#_Toc526164834.
In all three articles, the emphasis is on those lawyers, in particular, on the person of Amal Alamuddin Clooney.
 Both from the titles of the articles and "along" the articles, other professional and personal information about this lawyer և his / her supervisor is presented1.
 It is mentioned in one of them. "She speaks three languages ​​fluently - English, FrenchAssange, and taken part in proceedings against General Augusto Pinochet" 2.
In addition to professional qualities, one of the articles talks about Amal Clooney's style.
 His answer to the question in what clothes he will appear in court is especially famous. Clooney had mentioned that he would present himself in a robe.
  Interestingly, with the main emphasis on clothes, the author of the news tried to show (build a frame) that the lawyer, despite his professional skills, first of all thinks about his "image".
It can be assumed that the reader is trying to question the professional qualities of a lawyer, intending to present him as a public figure (Amal Alamuddin married Hollywood actor George Clooney in 2014).
  Constantly indirectly emphasizing Clooney's last name, the journalist builds the circle by forming a stereotype of Amal-Clooney-public position-reputation-style-good specialist, as if aiming to plan the trial backwards.
Looking at the articles published in the "Daily Mail" in a simultaneous way, it can be argued that the frames built around Amal Clooney's face give the reader the impression that the latter is the wife of a famous actor, it does not prevent her from having high professional qualities as a lawyer. Former Prime Minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko, editor-in-chief of the scandalous website WikiLeaks Julian Assange, etc. were involved in such scandalous cases.
Presenting the above-mentioned facts, in the next article, the periodical already uses Amal Clooney to voice the tendency of the ECHR to make a wrong decision, presenting Amal Clooney's speech in court as a fact. "Clooney said that in 2013 In Perincek's favor, the court's "most significant mistake" was "to cast doubt on the reality of the Armenian Genocide."
The frame, which is built around this person, makes the reader think that Amal Clooney, in addition to being the wife of George Clooney, is also a skilled lawyer; It is a step taken by the court.
Let's look at the other frameworks used in these articles.
In general, the media, in addition to verbal frames, uses visual frames (photos, videos), which, influencing the reader on an emotional level, orient him towards this or that object.
In the "Daily Mail" Dogu Perincek is presented both verbally and visually, but the visual, we can say, is more eloquent in this case than the verbal.
 The photo, which depicts Dogu Perincek, is perceived at first glance as an aggressive character, who is surrounded by journalists, and he shouts with a furious rhetorical spirit, raising his index finger.
 Such a visual frame evokes a negative opinion on the reader's emotional level.
  The frame is completed with a comment made under the photo: "Genocide denier.
 The leader of the Turkish Workers' Party Dogu Perin 1 "Amal Clooney on legal team in Armenian genocide case", 28.01.2015, available at http: // www.
//www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/ap/article2 “It's Amal versus the genocide-deniers.
  Mrs Clooney leads Euro-court fight for Turkish MP to be prosecuted for calling death of 1.5million Armenians “a lie” ”, 28.01.2015, available at http.
//www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2929573/Amal-Clooney-takes3 “My robes”.
 Amal Clooney's withering put-down to reporter who asked what she was wearing in court ", 30.01.2015, available at http.
//www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2932280/Amal-s-witty-court-retort-Human-rights-lawyer-Mrs-Clooney-asked-fashion-speculation check claims he has the right to deny The Armenian Genocide, using the right to freedom of speech ”1.
This visual frame is immediately followed by a photo showing a pile of human skeletons with the following comment: "Never forget.
  The people in the photo marked without a date are standing in 1915. Near the fraternal grave of Armenians killed by the Ottoman Turks during the genocide ”2.
The sequential presentation of the visual frames speaks of the fact that the English periodical creates the media frame in such a way that the readers perceive the Armenian Genocide as a historical event, and the one who denies it as an aggressor.
Frames set boundaries that help to understand the content և to form one's own opinion.
 One of the ways to achieve that is metaphor.
 Edelman notes that the once-metaphorical image of the world becomes a formative concept in the light of which people systematize and interpret new information.
In one of the articles the reader of the periodical encounters such a sentence. "1915 The massacres are considered by many historians to be the first genocide of the 20th century և (according to some) are considered a source of inspiration for the Nazi leader Adolf Hitler ”4.
As a metaphor for this article, we can consider the image of Adolf Hitler, who was the main culprit in the mass extermination of the Jews during World War II.
  Perincek, like Hitler, is a party leader and at the same time an aggressor.
Doris Graber, speaking about the impact of visual aids, notes that visual metaphor helps to use information effectively և to activate memory processes by being more persuasive5.
  To readers, the name "Adolf Hitler" is associated with the Holocaust of the Jews, so this frame, which is based on metaphor, again directs the reader to the perception that is necessary not only to understand, but to perceive the historical fact of the Armenian Genocide.
We can say that the frameworks used in the articles of the "Daily Mail" periodical on the hearing of the case of "Perincek v. Switzerland" in the ECHR give the readers an opportunity to think, to form their own opinion.
 As the frame can be considered as a way to guide the readers, we can say that the periodical is honest with its readers, as it presents the Armenian Genocide with the application of reliable facts.
The words "genocide denial", "racial discrimination", "fraternal grave", "Holocaust", "the first genocide of the 20th century" found in the articles evoke pity on the readers' emotional level, but at the same time, revolt.
The "Daily Mail" thus builds the framework one after the other, emphasizing first the high professional qualities of English lawyers, then the historical fact of the Armenian Genocide, Turkey's policy of denial against Dogu Perincek, the human aspirations to achieve historical and legal truth.
  It is interesting that by presenting such facts, the periodical does not refer in any way to the lawyers representing Dogu Perincek's interests in the ECHR.
 This is a framework that can be said to be purposeful.
 In this way, the periodical tries to show its position of adhering to the historical truth through a hidden but frame, contributing to the fact that the reader perceives the Armenian Genocide as a historical truth.
1 “It's Amal versus the genocide-deniers.
… ”.2 In the same place.
3 See Belt T., Political Conviction on the Way of Metaphorical Modeling, (Political Linguistics. - Vol. 2 (22). Yekaterinburg, 2007, pp. 18-25), available at http: // www.
//www.philology.ru/linguistics1/belt-07.htm.4 “It's Amal versus the genocide-deniers.
… ”. 5 See Belt T., ibid.
Alina Nahapetyan FRAMEWORK OF THE CASE OF "PERINCHECK v. SWITZERLAND" IN THE ECHR PUBLICATION IN THE ENGLISH "DAILY MAIL"
