MANIFESTATIONS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS ON THE INTERNET The concept of "Internet public relations" until 2005-2006. It did not need a special definition.
  It was a kind of public relations, at the same time it was considered as an additional tool for transmitting information.
  Everything changed when the Internet strengthened its position not only in the field of competition with the media, but also was able to make its many opportunities available to the masses.
  In 2007, the concept of "Internet public relations" was formed in various branches - today it is already in its current scientific field.
There is such an opinion that in the case of Internet public relations, in general, to give a definition means to be limited, to stop.
  PR will be until the most accurate definition is found12.
 Despite this point of view, different theorists at different times have brought their definition, they have studied the field from the point of view of the given formulation.
If we try to define what Internet public relations means, we can formulate Internet public relations in the following way: it is a combination of methods and technologies aimed at reaching an agreement with the external environment, which is based on accurate, complete information.
The Internet is a new technical means of communication that significantly exceeds the previously discovered means of information transfer speed և 13.
Today we can prove that the Internet is largely considered a source of information.
 Due to its maturity and efficiency, it took over the monopoly of traditional media, becoming another means of sample media, which includes the capabilities of television, radio and print media.
 But the development of online media has further contributed to the widespread use of Internet public relations.
 The three main features of the online media were especially facilitated by the interview of the author of the RA Chamber of Advocates J. Khachatryan, c. Yerjan 25.09.2017.
13 Ն. Melkonyan article - "Peculiarities of public relations on the Internet or PR2.0", // "Banber" № 3 (18) 2015.
Features: accessibility, fast feedback - multimedia14.
The most common means used in Internet public relations is "meme".
Meme is a certain object, a unit of information, which suddenly became famous 15.
 The term was first used by English biologist Richard Dawkins.
The term meme is used to describe conservation processes and to spread certain elements of culture.
 It is a picture, a sentence, a word or an object16.
 Thus, as a rule, the meme does not undergo semantic loading.
The most important thing is the "freshness, novelty" of memes.
All web memes can be divided into several groups 17. I. The first group includes words և sentences.
 In our opinion, the most typical meme in this category is IMNO (abbreviation: In My Humble Opinion) (see Figure 1).
Fig ․1 II. In the second group are media files (videos և songs).
III. The third group is Internet memes in the form of images.
  This group includes demotivators - memes from movies or TV series.
  As a vivid example we can mention the meme called "facepalm", which means shame (see picture 2).
Fig. 214 A. Avetisyan, then, "Internet Media Development - Development in Armenia", c. Yerevan, 2015, p.
15 See https.
//www.lifewire.com/what-are-internet-memes-3486448 // internet resource.
16 See International scientific and practical conference "Collection of scientific papers of theconference" 2012. p.347 // online resource.
17 See International scientific and practical conference "Collection of scientific papers of theconference" 2012, p. 348. // internet resource.
Some internet memes express characters who cannot be included in any of the above groups.
  This image can be from a picture, video, movie or book.
 A vivid example of the latter can be considered the phrase "I am Garegin Nzhde" (Я Гарегин Нжде), which was spread in various ways and was attached to many pictures.
Everyone can perceive memes differently.
 One can perceive it as "information garbage", the other can happily accept each new meme.
 However, it is impossible to deny that the latter have become an integral part of Internet communication. Mem is a unique language thinking, the knowledge of which allows you to access any Internet environment.
 In our opinion, the scientific study of this phenomenon is necessary, because it can become a unique tool (if it has not become so).
Components of Internet Public Relations The components of Internet public relations are many, sometimes they are used interconnected or in parallel.
 But let's try to separate the most frequently used ones.
 These are: Web-PR, NetPR և Online-PR.
 Web-PR - websites, online conferences և available interactive catalogs.
 Now it's pointless to explain the importance of having a website with an "am" domain.
 A website is the most basic way to create an image, but it is also the most important way to communicate with the world.
 And the organization of virtual conferences is a great information opportunity to attract the attention of the mass media.
-Net-PR - this is the electronic distribution of press releases, commercial offers, etc.
  These include various forums, which are a great way to connect.
 Online-PR - this is the access of the traditional media, the public relations realized by the latter in the internet domain.
  Here, Internet information resources are used to keep users informed.
As an example we can mention the holding of PR-promotions, promotions.
It should be noted that Internet public relations is not limited to the components listed above.
 It also includes almost all OFF-LINEPR components that can be spatially delivered over the Internet.
  All of the above, both technically and qualitatively, are considered components; without interfering with each other, they can act together, in parallel, separately 18.
Key points for effective internet public relations To be effective for effective internet public relations, you need to decide what you want, how to achieve it, what is the expected result.
  However, trying to concretize what has been said, we can single out the following points:  Research. Study of the target field to find out how close the expectations are to reality, what are the set of "justified steps" to be implemented and achieve the set results.
 Reputation. This is a very important factor for any organization.
  E-PR is a culture of creating and managing an online reputation.
Ապ Connections. Establish an online connection with an online community that is a potential customer or opinion maker.
 It is a simple but effective solution.
 Capacity. work և to make sure that any post (or, as it is commonly called, mail) posted online has a direct impact on the audience.
 Uniqueness. To be known on the Internet, you need to be և act in a unique way, to be different, in the positive sense of the word.
 Every step taken on the Internet must have a handwriting.
To all these components must be added the human factor, because in the Internet domain communication is more mediated, networked, often it is not possible to understand the contact person or the secondary information carrier.
Therefore, the contact person is also a possible "component", that is, the organization of public relations on the Internet.
  It is possible to be recognizable on the Internet, but in our opinion, it is not the only precondition for success.
 There are a number of other circumstances, the combination and competent application of which will give the desired result.
18 Author's interview Spokesman for the RA Chamber of Advocates J. Khachatryan, c. Yerevan, 25.09.2017.
19 Author's interview Spokesman for the RA Chamber of Advocates J. Khachatryan, c. Happy 25.09.2017.
What are the benefits of Internet public relations? Feedback. The main goal of e-PR is to create an interactive և two-way relationship between the organization և the interested audience և.
 In the case of off-line PR, public relations specialists have almost no such opportunity.
Հասարակ Global society. Spatial-temporal boundaries do not work on the Internet.
 It is possible to communicate freely and easily with an audience provided with the Internet anywhere in the world.
Աց Audience knowledge. As we have already mentioned, due to the interactivity on the Internet, there is a constant feedback with the audience, with a wider opportunity to get to know the latter.
 Permanent connection. The Internet allows you to stay in touch 24 hours a day.
  And through active links, the user is easily transferred to the desired email address.
Հնարավորություն Ability to respond quickly. Ability to respond to questions within seconds.
 E-PR is not expensive. No correspondence, international calls, flight tickets, work with the media, TV advertising, etc.20.
Using the Internet for public relations competently gives its desired result.
  Experts agree that if non-network PR can increase brand awareness by a maximum of 5%, then if the Internet is used properly, the percentage can increase to 17.5 to 21.
Those who want to work in this field should always keep their hands on information technologies, the "pulse" of the Internet, remembering the famous words of Bill Gates. "If your business does not exist on the Internet, then it does not exist in business" 22.
20 М. Hague, "Electronic Public Relations", M.Sc.
  FAIR-PRESS, Mr. Moscow // Per. с англ. В. Каш21 Author's interview Spokesman for the RA Chamber of Advocates J. Khachatryan, c. Yerevan, 25.09.2017.
22 See http: // www.
//www.businessinsider.com/bill-gates-internet-predictions-2015-12/ // internet resource.
Ani Ghahramanyan PRESENTATIONS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS INTERNET Keywords: internet, public relations, memes, efficiency Summary.
