PROBLEMS OF LEGISLATIVE REGULATION OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE, THE NECESSITY OF UNITY TO REMAIN Public radical service is currently considered as a key part of public administration reform, which is a key part of from the provisions of the Constitution.
  In particular, Article 47 of the Basic Law stipulates: "Every citizen has the right to enter public service on a general basis.
  The details are defined by law. ”
 Thus, exercising the right to public service, enshrining it as a fundamental right of a citizen, the Constitution at the same time reserved the issue of regulating the exercise of that right to the law, which suggests that in the end it is necessary to propose clear solutions based on the results of comprehensive research.
In fact, the process of establishing a public service and enshrining its legislative foundations began in 2001-2002, but has been the subject of a comprehensive assessment, including with the participation of international experts, at a later period.
  Thus, in 2009 the experts of SIGMA (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)) started the process of comprehensive assessment of the civil service system in Armenia.
  The purpose of the evaluation was to develop a guide for the introduction and strengthening of a stable and professional civil service system in Armenia.
Thus, only a few years later it became clear that the introduced system of public service is vulnerable in many respects, does not meet international legal standards.
 Moreover, dissatisfaction is registered not only among those who are in contact with the public service, but also among those who have already entered the service and wish to enter the public service. The prevailing opinion is that the public service in our country was not built on the principle of social justice.
 The abundance of unconditional peculiarities between the components of that system is especially felt, undermining the principle of unity of public service.
The fact that there is an obvious distrust of public servants in the performance of their duties by the society gives grounds to think that the public service system existing in our country has not developed as a system enjoying reasonable public trust, which makes the process of implementing the principles of democracy vulnerable.
  In these conditions, the need for scientific research on issues related to the public service as a unified system becomes more noticeable.
Taking into account the skepticism about the role of public servants, we believe that it is expedient to propose new, effective structures of relations with individuals, clarifying the role and significance of public service in the state-civil society cooperation system, limiting the exercise of discretionary powers as much as possible.
Referring to the issue of limiting the scope of discretionary powers, we can take G. as a starting point. The following position with Danielyan. "We do not rule out the need to limit cases of direct contact with private individuals, to make that framework as reasonable as possible, but we can not ignore the fact that certain powers are essential for several reasons: a) it contributes to improving the practical and intellectual abilities of public servants ... , b) gives an opportunity to identify the exact circle of really gifted ենթ promoted officials ...,
1 See G. Danielyan, Current issues of the Public Service in the context of improving the administration, "NKR Judiciary" Legal Information Magazine, No. 2 (10), 2013, p. 12.
Of course, the effectiveness of public service reforms essentially depends on factors such as the identification of key obstacles to progress and the predictable management of the reform process. The study of international best practices can also play a positive role in solving these problems.
The public service is a comprehensive institution, although in 2001-2002. A number of laws regulating state and community service relations were adopted: civil, judicial, diplomatic, military, customs, tax, police service. To date, there are a number of problems with the establishment of an effective management system that hinder the proper implementation of public service and its various aspects. և, thus, the implementation of the administrative tasks set by the state.
 Our scientific and practical research makes it possible to single out some of them: - the framework of the public service institution's relationship with other social institutions in the context of legal culture, - public distrust and skepticism towards public servants, - the social factor promoting improper performance of their duties by public servants monopoly, - long-term retention of low-quality personnel in the system, loss of qualified personnel, - negative impact of departmental interests, negative factors on the legal regulation of public service, - lack of coherence of legal solutions in the system, unnecessary repetitions and artificial complication of the system;- Significant differences between the remuneration and incentives of different types of public service, due to which the public servant seeks not so much to serve the state and society, but to be transferred from one system to another in "wrong" ways.
Since the Republic of Armenia and the CIS member states have commonalities between political and legal institutions and, consequently, problems with the organization of public service, the generalization of the CIS member states' legislation on public service and the study of the practice of reforms in the above-mentioned sphere, in our opinion. They can have a positive effect.
  In this paper, we will focus, especially on the civil service, which is a type of civil service, trying to substantiate the need to have a separate governing body within the current regulations of the RA Public Service, and, accordingly, to ensure the unity of the public service.
The complexity of the Public Service Institute is first of all conditioned by the duality of the legal status of a public servant. the latter, on the one hand, acts as a natural person, who performs official duties in return for the salary to be paid to him, on the other hand, he, holding a state position, performs the functions of the state, so his decisions are mandatory for specific circles of subjects.
  Accordingly, the status of a public servant as an employee is defined by the labor legislation, and the status of a subject exercising certain powers is defined by the administrative legislation.
 From this point of view, there is, of course, a tangible violation of administrative-labor rights, where preference is unjustly given to the regulations of administrative legislation2.
Moreover, the fact that the employer for a public servant is not the Republic of Armenia, represented by a specific state body, but the state body itself, causes a significant impact of departmental interests on the activities of the public servant.
It should be noted that clear structures have not been fully developed to encourage the public servant to work conscientiously, to comprehensively assess the readiness of professional knowledge, to guarantee the promotion of the public servant on the basis of it. , page 23.
http:
//www.sigmaweb.org/publications/Sergei_Rus_SP27_99Rev1.pdf. the legal basis for limiting its discretion in the exercise of unrelated influence.
The effectiveness of public service is largely due to its relationship with other social institutions.
  In fact, it is necessary to pay special attention to the legislative enactment of cooperation between a number of state bodies, thus ensuring both the efficiency of the management system and the joint solution of state problems.
  According to him, in the process of democratization and the formation of civil society, the construction of a public service system on the principle of publicity is of special importance, which implies transparency in the work of public servants, free exchange of information between state bodies անդամ members և Awareness.
  The experience of some democratic countries shows that the more transparent the state bodies are, the more the efficiency of public administration increases.
 In our opinion, the use of levers of public control contributes to that, which becomes available in the case of a transparent, public administration.
 As stated in the publication "European Principles of Public Administration, SIGMA № 27, 1999", the transparency and openness of the activities of government bodies should provide every citizen concerned with the legal basis of the activities of that body, while facilitating the process of external control3.
We believe that further reforms in the public service, in terms of deepening transparency, should include not only the procedures for the implementation of public service, but also the transition to public service.
  Moreover, it is expedient for impartial specialists, well-informed and prepared participants of the society to be involved in those processes.
The existing legal regulations of the public service system allow to speak about the artificially complicated composition of the public servants կազմ unreasonable separation of the system.
3 See ibid., P.
There are no clear structures, for example, in the employment of discretionary officials, which seems to be unfairly largely left to the discretion of the relevant state body.
 Moreover, even in the issue of remuneration of persons holding positions in the same sphere of public service, there is no unity, so the question arises, what are the essential differences, for example, in the responsibilities of persons holding positions in the NA President's staff, what are the considerations of remuneration.
 We think that already at this stage it is necessary to radically reconsider the remuneration system, to interconnect it not with the political significance of the system in which the public servant is involved, but with the nature and scope of public servant responsibilities in any system.
According to the RA Law on Public Service, state positions are political, discretionary, civil-state service positions, which are occupied by the above-mentioned law.
  In this regard, it is appropriate to mention the experience of some European countries. In most EU member states, civil servants have the status of public servants, for example in Belgium, France, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, the Netherlands and Spain.
 In the rest of the country, only a fraction of government employees are considered to be public servants, for example, civil servants in Germany are clearly demarcated from other employees whose responsibilities are not related to managerial powers և state tasks.
The activities of the latter are regulated by labor legislation.
 As we see, not only is there no such, in fact, reasonable division in the Republic of Armenia, but the responsibilities of individual employees are not specified, which in practice leads to cases of abuse of official powers.
  Especially in our country, people are mainly driven by the obsession with having a position; very rarely, the desire to really serve the society, increase their professional knowledge, get an adequate salary for their conscientious work.
  Therefore, to reserve the status of a public servant to all types of work in the field in question, without adequately taking into account the significant differences and functions between their powers, would be to nurture the obsession of holding a position with the majority of members of society.
As a result of a comprehensive study of the legislation of the CIS member states, a number of scholars have come to the conclusion that there is a lack of organization and coordination of the public service organization, which can be ensured by the public service management body.
 In the CIS countries, unlike other countries, the problems of public service must be solved faster than natural, as the legislation of these countries is still in its infancy.
  In the vast majority of CIS member states, the principles of the legal status of civil servants are clearly defined, the scope of persons entitled to perform public service. However, in the current legal regulations of the CIS, the issue of establishing a public service governing body remains a priority.
It is noteworthy that in 2000 On the instruction of the President of the Russian Federation, an "Interdepartmental Working Group" was set up, which developed concepts for the reform of the Russian State Service.
 The main goal of the work is to ensure the unity of all types of public service, the legislative regulation of remuneration for the performance of titles and official duties.
According to sociologist Alexander Turchinov, the formation of the state service, especially the civil service governing body, is directly related to the solution of a number of problems, including the problem of ensuring competitiveness.
 According to the same author, the main reason for these numerous problems is the lack of a state service, and more specifically, a civil service management body4.
  The efficiency of the state activity is conditioned by the active system of management of the state service, and in the case of Russia, both at the level of the federation and the subjects.
 Moreover, it is necessary to develop a governing body that implements the reforms of the public service system, taking into account the large volume of processes aimed at improving and regulating this sphere.
According to the author, the governing body of the State Service in Russia is the governing body of the State Service of Russian Entities 4 See Turchinov A., The State Service of Russia.
  theory, priorities, frames // «Государственная служба», 2007, N 5, p. 34.
Lack of management leads to inefficiency of the management system. The justification is the fact that a number of administrative issues are left to individual ministries, which, however, do not fulfill their responsibilities.
Of course, special bodies on public service are not currently established in all CIS countries, but the example of Kazakhstan is effective and impressive, whose public service system has been recognized by international experts as the most compliant with international legal standards.
  In Kazakhstan, the State Service Agency of Kazakhstan operates on the basis of the Law on Further Improvement of NKR State Bodies.
 In this country, the first public service agency was established with its territorial sub-branches, moreover, the Academy of Public Administration was formed, headed by the president.
  In Kazakhstan, among the post-Soviet countries, the first division of public servants was carried out into civil-administrative servants, and protection structures for administrative servants were envisaged in case of change of civil servants.
 2013 The National Commission on Personnel Policy was set up under the chairmanship of the President.
  Moreover, for the first time in the law, a separate chapter on the maintenance of service ethics and anti-corruption behavior has been added.
We believe that in the case of Kazakhstan, active steps have been taken to bring the public service system in line with international standards.
 In our opinion, such a system can be introduced in Armenia as well, but in order to make the public service management system even more efficient, we consider it expedient to simultaneously introduce administration carried out by public servants, concentrating on a "single window" principle, providing all kinds of services.
  At the same time, we consider it expedient to transfer the whole administration unconditionally on the e-government rails.
2001 On December 4, the RA Law on Civil Service was adopted, which initiated the activity of the governing body in the field of civil service, which was the Civil Service Council.
  The latter, however, was not endowed with a status that would allow it to fully act as a unified center of public service management.
  Unfortunately, some work was carried out with the level of normalization of separate relations.
 RA Civil Service Council in 2002 On May 31, 2006, it adopted a decision "On approving the rules of ethics of the civil servant", which gave the concept of "rules of ethics of the civil servant", defined the rules of ethics of the civil servant.
 In order to ensure the application of the rules of ethics, on September 1, 2004, the Civil Service Council adopted Resolution No. 1050-N "On the Approval of the Charter of Ethics Committees".
  Rules of ethics are norms that regulate the peculiarities of behavior, behavior and relationships of a civil servant based on a universal moral principle.
  In practice, the absence of an investigation by a civil servant on the grounds of violation of the rules of ethics leads to the conclusion that the above rules are purely formal, do not improve the professional and service qualities of civil servants, do not contribute to increased responsibility.
  This, unfortunately, is due to the lack of sanctions as a result of violating the rules of ethics.
Some authors, including Butova, Dunaևan դ Udachin, propose the adoption of a unified code of ethics for the effective regulation of the public service sector, which will include sanctions for violating the relevant norms (currently Article 38 2 2 of the RA Law on Public Service provides that the procedure for conducting proceedings in connection with the formation of ethics commissions and violation of ethics rules is defined by the relevant laws).
 According to the above-mentioned authors, this will allow to form common standards of behavior of public servants5.
We consider that the approach that the disciplinary liability of public servants for improper performance of their duties has no common ground is justified (the issues related to the disciplinary sanction are regulated by separate laws of the civil service), which again led to 5 See Официалциный сайт МВД России [ Сулектронный ресурс] https.
//mvd.ru/upload/site1/document_file/jAJBFLilHh.pdf.
unfair segregation and demarcation in the public service sector.
According to the model decision of the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly "On the Principles of Public Service", "state service is the professional activity of persons holding state positions, aimed at ensuring the implementation of the powers of state bodies."
 Of course, it follows that the implementation of public administration is directly conditioned by the proper implementation of their responsibilities by civil servants, including civil servants, but the agenda is that in Armenia there is still no clear system for evaluating the results of public administration, which is weak. It will also evaluate the performance of the civil servant, promoting the fair promotion of qualified staff and increasing their accountability (currently the performance evaluation of the civil servant is carried out on the basis of the results of the semi-annual performance by the immediate supervisor of the civil servant).
  The performance appraisal of a civil servant is also used when organizing the attestation of civil servants, but the RA Law on Civil Service not only does not have a clear mechanism for performance appraisal, but Article 8 states: “Failure to submit a job description in the manner prescribed by this Article on. "
  In fact, the job description of a civil servant is not mandatory for passing the attestation, while taking into account the sphere of activity of the latter, we think that the personal qualities and the ability of the employee to serve them are possible.
  Presenting a general description of the civil servants subject to attestation would, unfortunately, have a great impact on ensuring the unity of the mentioned field.
According to the decision N818-N of the Service Council of Armenia of October 12, 2010 "On establishing the procedure for obtaining a certificate for holding a junior position in the Civil Service" and defining the procedure for holding a junior vacancy in the civil service " He was elected the least deserving, creating great corruption risks.
 Moreover, among the requirements for a person aspiring to perform civil service, such basic features as the quality of organizational behavior, the level of organizational morality, the presence of interest are not mentioned, which is, in fact, one of the cornerstones of public administration efficiency.
  As a result of all this, high-quality personnel are involved in the field of public service, whose unprofessionalism leaves no room for doubt.
Tat Martirosyan PROBLEMS OF LEGISLATIVE SETTLEMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE, THE NECESSITY OF ENSURING UNITY Keywords: public service, state service, civil service, service, citizen, service
