CONSTITUTIONAL APPLICATIONS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGMENT
 In other words, formal certainty was necessary to present legal acts materially, materially 1.
The decisions of the Constitutional Court are in themselves sources of law, but in the legal literature this opinion is not uniform.
 Many authors believe that the decisions of the Constitutional Court are not a source of law, as that instance acts as a negative legislator, recognizing this or that provision as unconstitutional 2 2.
 However, this opinion cannot be accepted unequivocally.
 In practice, the constitutional courts to some extent avoid declaring this or that provision unconstitutional, as it causes "legal troubles" in the legislative and law enforcement spheres.
 The constitutional courts mainly come out with the revelation of the constitutional content of the disputed provision and / or comments.
In doctrinal sources, including in the practice of international courts of precedent-making decisions, the position has been rooted according to which the legal positions expressed by the court are conventionally divided into two groups, ratiodecidenti (are those judgments of the court that open 1 See Manasyan A. A., The place of the decisions of the Constitutional Court in the legal system of the Republic of Armenia և their role in ensuring constitutional stability, Yerevan, 2013, YSU Publishing House, p. 56.
2 See ibid., P. 77.
declare the legal content of the provision of the Constitution or the constitutional content of the provision of the law) և obiter dictum (such legal positions, which are called to substantiate the interpretation given by the court or the court decision, so-called "commonly stated")
Based on the above, let us refer to one of the decisions of the Constitutional Court (CCP -652), which states that the Constitutional Court has the power to present a final legal position on the provisions of the Constitution when assessing the constitutionality of normative acts.
 The content of those legal positions is the official interpretation of the constitutional norm. "The Constitutional Court states that the legal positions expressed in the decisions of the orphanage are called to ensure a more complete and uniform understanding of the RA Constitution and constitutional legality in law enforcement practice, to apply and apply normative acts aimed at law enforcement practice in accordance with their constitutional content."
  As a potential source of constitutional law, they are of fundamental importance for the legislative (normative) activity arising from the decisions of the Constitutional Court.
  Revealing the constitutional content of the law (norms of its separate provisions) or norms of other legal acts in its decisions, the Constitutional Court expresses legal positions, on the basis of which it decides the issue of legal force of the given normative legal act, declaring it invalid.
  Due to that, there is a need for further regulation of the relationship previously regulated by that act (norms), and consequently, for the legislative (legislative) activity of the competent body of public authority. ”
Another decision states the following: Due to the constitutional status of the RA Constitutional Court and the special nature of the legal force որոշ of its decisions 3 See "Protection of Rights without Borders" NGO "Application of the precedents of the European Court of Human Rights by the RA courts", Yerevan, 2011, pp. 150-55.
The Constitutional Court finds that the legal positions expressed in these decisions: a) are directly derived from the powers of the Constitutional Court, are therefore of a formal nature, b) have a specific legal effect, are addressed both in the specific case and to all subjects of public-legal relations ( are comprehensive), c) have an indefinite validity, can be changed only by the decisions of the Constitutional Court, d) are called in the RA legal system նպաստ to contribute to the elimination of legal uncertainty in legal practice, are the basis for constitutionalization of legal relations in some cases, they are also a temporary means of legal regulationf) official interpretations of the norms of the RA Constitution ”(SDO-943).
Along with all this, it should be noted that the legislative activity of the Constitutional Court is subject to certain restrictions.
It should be noted that no matter how much the Constitutional Court carries out a law-making activity, it will be perceived only in one way, that is, to reveal the constitutional nature of legal norms endowed with impermissibility from the principle of legal certainty.
  However, it does not have the right to carry out law-making activities in the classical sense by virtue of a direct prohibition by law.
 However, in practice there are cases when the Constitutional Court, going beyond its jurisdiction, in fact carries out law-making activities.
 That is, it does not give official interpretations of the provisions of the law, but completes any legal act by creating a corresponding "missing" provision (for example, the decision SDO-1348 can be used).
 It is obvious that the legislative wording on the Constitutional Court contradicts the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court in practice.
  In other words, the Constitutional Court is not limited to making official interpretations of the constitution to determine the constitutionality of the disputed provision, but by expanding the scope of its jurisdiction, it de facto carries out law-making activities.
  In order to decide which to give preference to, the unconditional consistency of the Constitutional Court's jurisdiction enshrined in law or the legal activity often exercised by the Constitutional Court in practice, it is necessary to consider the degree of effectiveness of both.
 The issue raised in the mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court was given a legal solution, which enabled to avoid legal collision, thus filling the gap of the law, which, of course, came from the systematic analysis of the Constitution.
 These other similar cases show that the legislative activity of the Constitutional Court is more practical and effective.
According to the Law on the Constitutional Court, the Constitutional Court does not carry out legal activities.
  According to this law, the activity of the Constitutional Court can be described as an activity that clarifies the way of applying the norms of laws or other legal acts.
  But such a conclusion can be reached only by analyzing the law.
  In practice, the decisions of the Constitutional Court can act as a legal regulator or even a legislator.
In our opinion, the exercised jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court is more effective, as applying to the National Assembly for the amendment of any law may lead to unnecessary delays for objective reasons, as a result of which a number of constitutional rights of the individual may be violated.
Thus, we can make a proposal, according to which the powers of the Constitutional Court can be slightly expanded, allowing the latter to carry out a small amount of legal activity.
It is undeniable that such a position has its negative side, that is, by establishing such a legal regulation, the Constitutional Court can become a legislative body, shaking the authority of the parliament, violating the principle of separation of powers.
  To avoid such a danger, the legal regulation we propose must have certain restrictions.
  That is, to enable the Constitutional Court to carry out law-making activities only in the presence of a legal loophole in the disputed provision of the relevant law, without undertaking the mission of creating large legal institutions and laws.
The next problem that arises when applying the decisions of the Constitutional Court in the system of review of judicial acts is related to the perception of the legal positions expressed in the decisions of the Constitutional Court by the Court of Cassation.
 The relevant articles of both the RA Civil Procedure Code and the RA Administrative Procedure Code stipulate that the Court of Cassation takes as a basis the position expressed in the decision of the Constitutional Court, which is mentioned in the final part of the decision.
 However, these provisions are not justified.
According to Article 4 of the RA Law on Legal Acts, legal acts adopted in the Republic of Armenia are decisions, judgments or verdicts of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, the Court of First Instance of the Republic of Armenia, the Court of Appeal, the Court of Cassation (hereinafter referred to as judicial acts). Individual orders և orders adopted by the Chiefs of Staff.
 Therefore, the decisions of the Constitutional Court are considered legal acts, and the idea contained in the norms of legal acts must be understood in a systematic analysis of the content's common with other provisions.
  And in this case, it is not only the final part, but the exhaustive answer to the "legal question". The latter derives from the legal analysis made in the reasoning part of the decision of the Constitutional Court, which և և և և և և և և և և բովանդակ բովանդակ բովանդակ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
As stated in the decision of the CC-943, in case of neglect of the essence և the content of the conclusions based on the final part, the execution of court decisions can be guaranteed, which undermines the essence of constitutional justice.
The essence of justice, unfortunately, is the following. It is a special type of state activity enshrined in the Constitution, which is carried out only by the court, with the strictest observance of the requirements and order established by the law ensuring the legality, justification and order of judicial compulsory decisions, aimed at resolving constitutional, civil, criminal and administrative cases.
 The main feature of justice is the execution of acts made by the courts, which are an integral part of justice, and if the execution is not ensured, the mission of justice will be declarative, therefore, it will not be implemented - constitutional justice.
The following sub-question is also derived from the mentioned problem. And what should be done if the positions expressed in the reasoning and final parts of the decision of the Constitutional Court contradict each other?
  According to Article 24 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Legal Acts", in case of contradictions between different parts of the same legal act, the provisions of the parts that derive from the essence of the given legal act or the principles of law governing legal relations apply.
It follows from the above-mentioned legal regulation that the causal part should also appear as a new circumstance, as only in case of getting acquainted with the causal part it is possible to understand whether there is a contradiction between the final "causal parts" of the Constitutional Court decision to choose the position based on that decision. from the essence or from the principles of the law regulating the given relations.
As it is known, the practice can be much more diverse than the regulatory norms, which may either not comply or do not contain answers to many questions.
 One of such omissions is the institution of giving clarifications on judicial acts.
The decision of the Constitutional Court can sometimes be vague, uncertain, misleading to the person who has applied to the court.
  This practice, first of all, contradicts the principle of legal certainty enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, and then violates the constitutional rights of the individual, the rights of access to justice, the right to a fair trial.
  Access to justice presupposes not only the unconditional right of a person to apply to a court, but also the possibility for a person to apply to a court to answer questions about his / her allegedly violated right.
It will not always be possible to avoid vague wording, misinterpretations in the judicial act, even the existence of contradictions, that is why it is necessary to include in the legislation the institution of giving clarifications on the decisions of the Constitutional Court.
 It is proposed to introduce this institution, which will shed light on decisions containing uncertain formulations and collision provisions.
Viktorya Hakobjanyan PROBLEMS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECISIONS COURT REVIEW SYSTEM Keywords: Constitutional Court decisions, legal positions.
