THE CLEARANCES OF THE REALITY OF THE KESSABY EVENTS THROUGH THE MEDIA The "Arab Spring" was the basis of the Kessab events.
 The latter is a revolutionary wave of demonstrations and rallies, which started on December 18, 2010 in the Arab world.
 The series of rallies and demonstrations throughout the Middle East and North Africa became known as the "Arab Spring", the "Arab Spring-Winter", the "Arab Awakening", the "Pan-Arab Revolution", the "Arab Uprisings", although not all of them were Arab.
  It started in Tunisia in 2011. The incident took place on December 15, when a young man by the name of Mohamed Bouaziz set himself on fire in protest against police brutality and ill-treatment.
  There were revolutions in Tunisia։ Egypt, a civil war in Libya, which ended with a change of government.
  The regimes of the Arab countries began to fall like dominoes.
2011 On January 26, the first protests began in Syria.
 The situation was getting worse day by day, it was becoming more massive.
  Soon the number of demonstrators increased sharply, and a struggle against the existing regime in the country began.
 The protesters demanded the resignation of the current president և government.
  The fighting intensified when the government of the country decided to fight against the demonstrators, using armored vehicles և heavy artillery.
  If at the beginning of the civil war there were many Syrian Sunnis in the opposition, who really believed in their struggle for democracy, today most of the rebels are made up of international extremist Islamist groups, which often consist of even Arab ambassadors.
 Now the military ranks of almost all terrorist organizations are in the ranks of the opposition.
  Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said in an interview with the Turkish "Aydin Liq" daily and "Ulosal" news channel. "The war in Syria is not an internal war, but an anti-Syrian foreign war, which is related to the regional map.
This war is not fought on religious grounds, but takes place between "pro-Western states" who oppose the West. "
 Aaron Wei Zelin, a researcher at the London Research Center, said that more than 600 terrorists from different European countries have left for Syria in recent months.
"Aravot" daily, citing various sources, 2014 Al-Qaeda-linked Islamic Jihadists entered Syria from Turkey early in the morning on March 21 and attacked the Christian village of Kessab2.
1 See www.armenian.irib.ir/rangarang/item/27882.
2 See http.
//www.aravot.am/2014/03/21/443050/.
2014 On March 30, the Russian news website lifenews.ru prepared a report, which included footage of brutal killings, with the headline that Al Qaeda and Al Nusra terrorists humiliate and brutally kill Christian Armenians.
 And it was mentioned in the message that the Armenians of Kessab are asking for help from all the Armenians in order to raise and condemn this issue in the international arena.
  The Russian website also mentions that if the help of the country's leadership had not come, everyone there would have been killed.
  Later, after examining the footage of the brutal killings on the media, which was directly related to the Armenians, it became clear that the videos were taken from the al-Qaeda's YouTube page, which was uploaded before March 15, and presented an excerpt from the group's Aleppo operations. , when a number of Syrian army soldiers were captured, who have nothing to do with Kessab, especially with the Armenians.
  Shortly afterwards, serious media outlets such as "Россия 24", "Россия 1" joined the case of spreading misinformation.
  After that, one by one the media covered Kessab.
 Many stars referred to it and expressed their deep condolences to the Armenian people.
  The "SAVE KESSAB" initiative was created, which had thousands of followers, including even the world-famous Sherlyn Sargsyan and Kim Kardashian.
 Sh. Sargsyan wrote on his Twitter microblog: "Look at what is happening in Kessab, Syria.
  Innocent Christians and Armenians are killed by the Turks.
  "Save Kessab."
  Q. Kardashian wrote on her Twitter page. "Let us pray for everyone.
 If you do not know about Kessab events, you can search on google.
 It's very sad.
 As an Armenian, I grew up hearing cruel stories about the massacres of the Armenian people.
 Let us not allow history to repeat itself.
 #SaveKessab #ArmenianGenocide »1.
Arabologist Araks Pashayan says in an interview with Aravot.am: "The most delicate point for us, one of the most painful issues was Kessab, which until recently was possible to keep away from opposition militants.
  But the settlement is almost completely empty, what more challenge should there be?
  Turkey's actions are aimed at the implementation of the program to weaken the Armenian community.
 In a sense, Turkey succeeded because it caused great damage to our mother colony in Syria, Aleppo.
  In doing so, Turkey emerged victorious from the Syrian process, weakening Syria as a powerful state. "
  He also added: "We are losing a lot. First, the fate of all Armenians remains uncertain, we are losing the last period of historical Cilician Armenia.
 Kessab was a settlement with a large number of Armenians, a rural town consisting of several villages, a settlement with comprehensive Armenians, where people were engaged in agriculture and other activities.
  Scout camps were held here, Armenian Apostolic and Armenian Evangelical churches operated, Armenians lived here according to Armenian traditions ”2.
Before the end of the Syrian crisis, more than 670 Armenian families lived in Kessab.
  Most of them were evacuated during the attack, their houses were looted.
 About 350 families took refuge in the Armenian Church, where they receive food and other assistance every day, 1 See the relevant pages of social networks.
2 See www.armenian.irib.ir/rangarang/item/27882.
The remaining 320 families were scattered throughout the city.
 Everyone is waiting for the situation to stabilize, for the government army to liberate Kessab in order to restore their economies, for them to return to their daily lives.
  But in addition to the weakening of the Armenian community in Syria, Turkey had another very important problem.
  2012 year. Russia has built a strategic radar station near the Turkish border in Kessab.
  The station allows you to go back to the NATO base in Adana.
The aim of the more than 6,000 mercenary terrorists who invaded Kessab from Turkey was to seize the radar station and deprive Russia of access to information sources in the region.
 And once again the issue of the Armenian Genocide was used for interests, in particular, Russia began to spread misinformation, as if genocide against Armenians was being alleged, but the residents of Kessab had already moved to Latakia.
  Such a step by Russia was directed against Turkey, as the issue of genocide is very delicate for Turkey.
Aram Arakelyan THE OPPORTUNITIES OF CLARIFICATION OF THE REALITY OF THE KESSABY EVENTS THROUGH THE MEDIA Keywords: Kessab, Arab Spring, Syrian War, SAVE KESSAB.
