THE NEED FOR SUPPORT OF AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE INTRODUCTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA The introduction of a viable insurance system in the field of agriculture is one of the main preconditions for the stable and balanced development of the agrarian sector of the country's economy.
  At the same time, agricultural insurance is a precondition for sustainable development of the sector, improvement of the investment field, ensuring the level of food security of the country.
According to international observations, about 13% of the planet's population is currently malnourished, while the potential of agriculture is not always fully utilized.
 For example, currently more than 30% of arable land in Armenia remains uncultivated1.
 It should be noted that the phenomenon is conditioned by a number of reasons, in which, of course, the lack of agricultural insurance plays a key role.
It should be noted that the agricultural sector is developing in the countries where the insurance system of the sector operates effectively, contributing to the effective solution of the existing problems.
  In other words, the existence of an agricultural insurance system is a key opportunity for the development of the agricultural sector, and its absence is a serious obstacle.
  In the insurance system, agricultural insurance is one of the most complex types, which is conditioned by both sectoral features and obstacles to the introduction of this type of insurance.
 The analysis of the international experience shows that the state provides direct support to the insurance dictated by the peculiarities of agriculture.
 Such an approach promotes agricultural insurance, increases the investment confidence of insurance companies, mitigates their risks.
1 Sargsyan H., The Economic Transformations of Armenia հեռ Prospects for Rise, Yerevan, 2014, p. 355.
The idea of ​​agricultural insurance originated in France in 1750, when a group of farmers formed a union with the aim of insuring the risks associated with agricultural activities.
  In 1797, agricultural insurance was introduced in Germany.
  Then, due to the effectiveness of this system, it spread all over the world.
  Agricultural insurance itself is a combination of property and business risk insurance.
  However, in different countries it comes in different forms.
 For example, in Germany, agricultural insurance is mainly provided by associations.
  The majority of farms are founding members of these associations, but farms that are not members of the association can also insure their risks.
  It should be noted that the most common type of agricultural insurance in Germany is hail insurance.
  Here the whole process of collecting insurance premiums and paying compensations is coordinated by the staff of the associations.
 However, it is noteworthy that the assessment of damages subject to compensation is carried out by members of the association, ie farmers.
  A "Disaster Fund" has been set up by the government in France.
 The farms make payments to this fund, and in case of natural disasters (frost, flood, drought, epidemics, other similar disasters) the fund's experts carry out a damage assessment, after which the damaged farms receive compensation.
  By the way, the farms do not participate in this fund in any way, they do not participate in its management.
In Italy և In Spain, agricultural insurance is mainly provided by private insurance companies.
  At the same time, the government և local self-government bodies provide significant financial support to և farms (assuming the share of insurance premiums in the following proportions: in Italy up to 50% of the state budget, up to 10% of community budgets, and in Spain the state reimburses farmers 44% of the insurance premium). ընկեր to insurance companies by sharing the risk of insurance companies through affordable reinsurance.
  In Spain, most insurance companies are affiliated with associations responsible for developing and implementing industry strategies.
 In the United States, Canada's agricultural insurance systems have much in common, which is due to the close economic ties between the two countries and the regular exchange of experience.
  In these two superpowers, agricultural insurance is provided by private companies.
  There are three main types of agricultural insurance: • "Multirisk" (covers almost all natural disasters), • Hail and fire insurance, • Farm-specific risk insurance (for example, frost insurance).
The state support here is that in the case of the United States, and in the case of Canada, the government և local governments take a portion of the multi-risk premium (up to 50%).
  From the bottom, the state also provides significant support to insurance companies, assuming 50% of insurance compensation.
  In the United States և Canada's agricultural development agencies have been running the APH (actual productionhistory) for decades, with the primary goal of providing insurance companies with reliable information on crop and crop production.
  Real insurance companies, based on this information, determine the degree of risk, then the insurance premiums.
Insurance in the Russian Federation, as a financial institution, is in the initial stage of development.
  This situation is typical of most developing economies, including the Republic of Armenia.
 In Russia, the government subsidizes those engaged in agricultural activities during the conclusion of insurance contracts.
 At the same time, a "State Agency for Insurance Assistance" was established under the Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation, whose main tasks are: • to organize measures for state insurance support, Maintain a statistical record (for example, maintaining a "crop register of livestock and animal products"), • generalizing the experience of previous years, presenting sound proposals for improving the system, "for example, developing new state support mechanisms".
It should be noted that in the Republic of Armenia agriculture is mainly under the activity of economic entities that are individuals.
 That is, when running a farm, no accounting, documentation or processing is performed.
 Of course, such a situation complicates the process of introducing agricultural insurance, as any information provided by the policyholder must be substantiated by relevant documents.
  To address the problem of information disparities, the government may organize data collection, processing, storage, and risk assessment processes, as well as provide appropriate advisory and information services to policyholders.
  It should be noted that the "Sustainable Development Strategy of Agriculture of the Village of the Republic of Armenia for 2010-2020" envisages an agricultural risk assessment.
 An attempt was made to introduce agricultural insurance in the Republic of Armenia in the late 1990s with the support of government agencies, but it was not viable.
Agricultural practitioners generally avoided concluding insurance transactions unless they were required to do so in order to obtain a targeted loan.
 This situation was due, on the one hand, to insufficient trust in insurance companies and the tradition of running a business, and, on the other hand, to low solvency.
  According to some calculations, the share of agricultural insurance premiums in the total costs of agricultural production fluctuates in the range of 20-30%, which is a serious reason to avoid agricultural insurance.
  Insurance companies also avoid agricultural insurance, as 70-75% of the insurance premiums collected for the beneficiaries, and in unfavorable years 80-85% are directed to insurance compensations.
One of the main reasons for the low demand for agricultural insurance is that farms are not fully aware of the benefits of insurance.
It is often seen as a non-profit investment as insurance premiums are paid each year and compensation is paid only in the event of an insurance accident.
  The state, in cooperation with insurance companies, consulting agencies and other services, can play a major role in shaping the population's understanding of the benefits of agricultural insurance.
2 Thus, we can state that currently there are the following obstacles to the introduction of the agricultural insurance system in the Republic of Armenia: • Imperfection of the legal framework, • Small size and large number of farms, which complicates the control over the production process by state insurance companies, even agricultural insurance companies. (Farms generally do not keep records, due to which the enterprise will not be able to substantiate to the insurance company that the production processes were organized in a timely and proper manner), • Lack of reliable statistics on the agricultural sector, • Insufficient trust in insurance companies;• Low solvency of most of those engaged in agricultural activities; • Lack of habit / culture of insured, • Lack of qualified specialists.
It should be noted that the efficiency of the process of introducing the insurance system in agriculture is conditioned by the efficiency of cooperation between economic operators, insurance companies and the state.
 It is indisputable that in this context the role of the state in the economic-insurance company relationship is more widely used.
2 Sargsyan H., Socio-economic problems of sustainable development of the village, Agrarian sector, Yerevan, 2011, p. 54.
In the context of economic development, a special place is given to the development of agriculture.
  Meanwhile, none of the insurance companies of the Republic of Armenia takes any risk in engaging in insurance activities in the field of agriculture, which is considered to be a important component of the insurance market in the developed countries.
Naturally, the expansion of insurance activities due to high risk is mainly accompanied by a difficult forecast of income flow.
  Consequently, agricultural production becomes unattractive for investment, slowing down the inflow of capital։ opportunities to attract credit resources.
  In these conditions, the implementation of agricultural insurance becomes of strategic importance.
  However, due to the objective difficulties of introducing insurance in the sphere, it is impossible to introduce it without state intervention and support.
It should be noted that the process of introducing insurance in the field of agriculture of the Republic of Armenia can be implemented only on the basis of a long-term program developed at the state level.
 The state itself should initiate the process of introducing insurance, it should implement it in cooperation with the private sector.
  In this regard, the following steps need to be taken: • Develop an agricultural risk assessment system, • Reach an agreement with private insurance companies, • Plan the procedure and amount of subsidies.
The state can play a big role in eliminating the above-mentioned obstacles to the implementation of agricultural insurance.
 We focus on the implementation of agricultural insurance in the Republic of Armenia, especially the assessment of agricultural risks, subsidizing insurance premiums and operating costs of insurance companies.
  In order to normalize relations with the agricultural insurance line, it is necessary to initiate the elaboration and adoption of the RA Law on Agricultural Insurance.
  We propose to apply differentiated approaches to subsidizing insurance premiums, in which case relatively high subsidies should be provided for crops and regions of strategic importance to Armenia (for example, border and mountainous regions), as well as state quotas for insurance companies. by interconnecting with).
The introduction of the insurance system for the sustainable development of the RA agriculture has social and economic significance.
The introduction of the agricultural insurance system in the republic will allow to reduce the losses of the villagers և to compensate the loss of incomes due to unfavorable climatic conditions և force majeure situations.
Melsida Tovmasyan THE NEED FOR INTRODUCTION AND STATE SUPPORT OF AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: agricultural activity, state insurance, agricultural insurance, insurance
