WAYS OF EFFECTIVE STUDENT COMMUNICATION AND PROFESSIONAL DETERMINATION Today's modern society places high demands on future professionals.
  That is why all the issues related to the promotion of students' professional self-determination are updated, especially in the lower courses.
 A stimulus for adaptation processes related to students' self-knowledge and individual self-development is related to the motivations for admission to the higher education system, the development of their reflection and their impact on professional activities.
Today the most urgent task is to find ways for the future specialist
to increase the efficiency of the training system.
For the welfare of the society it is necessary that the future specialists quickly and qualitatively acquire new knowledge, skills and abilities, actively contribute to the establishment of the path of professional mastery.
It should be noted that the "new directions" aimed at promoting professional self-determination should be applied to junior students, who should be in the earlier stages of specialization, creating a positive emotional mood for their chosen profession, increasing their interest in the educational process.
The above-mentioned process in the university is connected with the determination of the types of activities performed by the individual, with the formation of the system of "student-university" relations in the sphere of higher educational institution1.
Adaptability presupposes the student-individual communication to the social-professional experience, new social functions, university culture, norms of behavior.
 The main problems of student adaptation in the university are distinguished: • according to the student, adaptation to the university system (mastering norms, principles, teaching the system), the amount of work.
 - M., 1999, p. 250. • according to the student's adaptation to the new group (in the group of classmates), • according to the capacity building as an adequate interaction, • according to the motivation of the students' readiness for professional self-determination.
One of the most important motivations for students' professional self-determination is the training of future specialists in the initial stages (first-second year).
The promotion of professional self-determination and individual activity is of great value in the university.
Pryazhnikov singles out four forms of activity that can be relied on in working with students by conducting special courses on the profession of self-identification, and building perspectives on the individual.
for professional growth2.
1. Motivational. It is the formation of emotional, emotional activity (interests, needs), on the basis of which motivations can be created to solve specific problems of professional self-determination.
  Motivation means specifying the goals of professional self-determination.
2. Cognitive-intellectual. This direction for professional self-determination is implemented on the basis of problem-based training: • to include professional orientation problems in joint activities, • to complicate problems, to formulate the demand in parallel, • to solve the problem independently, • to develop the ability to analyze one's own abilities.
3. Practical-behavioral activity, which is formed by the use of methods at work.
  At this stage, young people are given a lot of freedom to do independent tasks.
 Any opportunity is used for the individual to engage in a unique activity (for example, to go to an interview, to work temporarily).
It is necessary to use any opportunity to involve young people in group activities.
 It should promote the confidence of future professionals in their strength. S., Methods of activation of professional and personal self-determination.
և give opportunities to solve their own problems on their own.
4. Moral. At this stage, the self-determined young people, first of all, need to be supported, because they need it very much.
 It is necessary to show the future specialist the readiness to be supportive in difficult situations.
 Successful examples of graduates 'and students' self-determination can be told, it would be good to organize psychological-pedagogical games or trainings to achieve the set goals.
These types of activities are interconnected and formed in parallel.
According to L. E. According to Galaganova, in the process of professional self-determination, the teaching staff - the dean, the head of the chair, the lecturer - play an important role in the professional self-determination of students, in the types of educational, professional activities, research work, acting as a specialist-consultant.
They consult with students on issues of professional self-determination, education, personal development
This function should be actively implemented in the first year, as it is necessary to help future specialists, to stimulate the process of adapting to the educational environment of the university3.
The pedagogue's activity has a significantly higher level if the following directions are implemented: • organization of practical classes, conversation on the topic of relationships in the student group, • discussion of possible professional qualities of future specialists, achievement of development goals, • assistance in professional development of social portrait the formation of strong lines and qualities.
  In this way, the specialist, the dean, the chair manager, the lecturer, acting as a pedagogue, pedagogue-psychologist, promotes the professional self-determination of the students.
According to Mardakha, the educational environment of a higher education institution is a specially organized area for teaching people and groups.
 He gives the general description of the peculiarities of educational institutions in broad and narrow meanings.
  In a broad sense, according to professional educational institutions, there is no university for students.
 - Камерово, 1998, с. 139. Martyrdom, includes the teaching staff, the culture and traditions embedded in it, information opportunities.
In a narrow sense, according to the peculiarities of the immediate educational environment, it includes: classrooms, centers, internships, faculty, traditions of the faculty, teacher-student relations.
Professor L. V. People distinguish the following areas from the educational environment of the university, which are significant for the study of students' professional self-determination issues: (Cultural, professional level of the university administration, faculty, chairs, cultural environment: institution, chairs, classrooms, culture of teacher-student, employee-student relations, university museums, access to the history of the faculty), • educational (educational) organization, direct instruction in the classroom,
By combining these areas, it is possible to anticipate և planning and individual self-determination և development processes in the educational environment
ւմ 5.
The effectiveness of students' professional self-determination is promoted by the family, the society, as well as the conditions accepted in educational institutions, the environment where the student studies.
The educational environment of a higher education institution is a necessary condition, a communication field in the professional system, for students' professional self-determination, contributing to the successful adaptation of a person to a certain environment, thereby guiding them to public life6.
4 Жукова В. И., Методика преподавания в вузе.
 - RGSU, 2006, p. 22-27. Oksana Mardanyan WAYS OF STUDENT COMMUNICATION AND PROFESSIONAL SELF-EFFECTIVENESS Keywords: student communication, professional orientation Summary.
