ANALYSIS OF KOTAYK MARZ RECREATION-TOURISM RESOURCES
  Armenia is a new country in the international tourism market.
 Our republic has a unique potential in this sphere, as the main reasons for tourists to choose it as a tourist destination are the country's nature, historical and cultural values, as well as traditions and the presence of the Armenian Diaspora.
 Tourism (leisure organization is one of the priority branches of the economy of the Republic of Armenia) has been under special attention since 1998, as a result of which leisure and tourism activities have been observed in the country in recent years.
 This activity is a direct result of the program reforms of the sphere, due to which the tourist visits to the Republic of Armenia are dynamically growing.
 In recent years, the program activities within the framework of the marketing policy of the tourism sector have been mainly aimed at the continuous improvement of the image of Armenia in the world market as a favorable and attractive country for tourism.
  About 20 thousand people work in the sphere of tourism in Armenia (1.7% of the total labor force).
  At present, tourism provides about 4.7% of Armenia's GDP, according to 2008. Approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia on February 13, it is planned to increase it to 12% by 2030.
 It is expected that by 2020. 1.5 million tourists will visit Armenia, and up to 3 million tourists by 2030.
 As a result, incomes in the tourism sector will increase significantly.
  For the development of tourism in the republic, the involvement of separate regions is used, as well as the level of development of their infrastructures, the availability of recreational-tourism resources, their correct assessment and use [1].
  Kotayk region stands out with the variety of recreational-tourism resources in the Republic of Armenia, which, due to its central location, a short distance from Yerevan, has favorable preconditions for the development of tourism in the region.
The region is distinguished by a great variety of natural conditions and riches.
  Here in a relatively limited space there are և´ high mountain peaks and deep gorges, և´ wide river valleys and gently sloping plateaus.
  The water absorbed in the volcanic rocks that make up the Geghama Mountains comes out in the form of springs at the foot of the mountains, as well as in Hrazdan and Azat river gorges.
  The springs of Karasunakni, Arzni and Garni have been declared, the cold water of which is supplied through special pipes to the population of the city of Yerevan.
  Hrazdan առանձին Some sections of the Azat River Gorges are wonderful natural monuments.
  Impressive basalt columnar outcrops formed in lavas - hand-made multi-prism prisms [2].
The region is one of the ancient territories of Armenia, it was inhabited thousands of years ago.
  That is the reason why the territory of the region is rich with historical-cultural, caring structures belonging to different eras.
 More than 2024 historical and cultural values ​​and monuments are registered in the region.
 The Garni temple, built in honor of the god Mihr, is a unique gem of Armenian Hellenistic architecture.
 Ayrivank-Geghard is a unique monument of Armenian stone-carved architecture.
 The region is rich in basilicas and beautiful Christian temples of the late period.
 The cyclopean fortress of Abovyan (Elar), the fortress-temple of the god Mihr of Garni (I d), Garni st. Mashtotsimatur, Voghjaberd domed church (V century), Arzni church (VI century), Geghard monastery (XII-XIII centuries), Karenis monastery (VII century), Bjni st. Astvatsatsnivank (XI century), Makravank (XIII century), Kecharis monastery complex (XI-XIII centuries), where the Kotayk Diocese is located, St. Astvatsatsin Church of Yeghvard (V century), Arzakan Strait Astvatsatsin Church (XIII century), Teghenyats Monastery of Buzhakan, Solak Mayravank (VII century), etc.
There are various natural and man-made recreational-tourist resources here, which are of great interest.
 Among such natural resources are: 1. The magnificent view of Mount Ararat from anywhere in the Kotayk plateau, 2. Hrazdan river gorge with beautiful natural basalt columns, 3. The wonderful forests of Tsakhkadzor, Hankavan, Aghveran, 4. Arzni, “Hankavan mineral water springs.
They are most famous from the point of view of man-made tourism.
 Tsakhkadzor has a special role as an attractive destination for international winter tourism.
3) Forested resort and recreation complexes of Hankavan.
4) Forested Aghveran recreation complexes.
Studying and analyzing the recreational-tourism resources of Kotayk region, we can single out 4 recreational zones in the territory of the region, which stand out with their originality and attractiveness.
• Hankavan-Marmarik recreation area.
  Hankavan-Marmarikigoti is the most ecologically clean zone of Armenia, located 7085 km north of Yerevan.
  It spreads in the Marmarik River valley, at an altitude of 1750-1960, including the southern peaks of Pambak, the northeastern peaks of the Tsaghkunyats Mountains and stretches from northwest to southeast.
The highland resort region of Hankavan includes the beautiful landscape of the narrow narrow section of the Marmarik river valley, up to 1957 m high.
  There are natural outlets of mineral springs in the river gorge.
Hankavan is surrounded by mountain ranges up to 3000-3100 m high, which are covered with alpine meadows, forests and bushes.
  The landscape is rugged, mountainous, with fragmented gorges and rivers that have a permanent or temporary flow.
The recreation area is 68 km away from Yerevan, the connection with the capital is established through the highway.
This highland area is of health importance due to favorable climatic conditions, clean air rich in oxygen, dense forest, as well as hot mineral waters.
The resort center of Hankavan is located in a dry semi-desert zone. The climate of the highland forest zone is typical of the area. Extremely dry, wet summer և Extremely cold winter.
  In summer, when the weather is hot in the Ararat Valley, including Yerevan, quite comfortable weather conditions are created in Hankavan for rest and treatment.
  That is the reason why the number of short-term vacationers in the Hankavan-Marmarik-recreation zone is quite large in that period.
  There are a large number of recreation and sanatorium camps.
• Arzni recreation area.
 Arzni resort area is located in the beautiful gorge of Hrazdan river, at 1262 m above sea level.
 It is surrounded by Tsaghkunyats mountains, Aragats plateau և Geghamal mountains.
 This zone is a large hilly area, the relief is divided by deep canyons.
  The middle course of the Hrazdan River divides the left-bank and left-bank parts.
  The resort town with sanatoriums, boarding houses, resort polyclinics is located on the left bank.
  Arzni sanatorium is located 24 km north of Yerevan, in a dry, semi-desert zone.
  The post-transport connection of Yerevan is established through the Yerevan-San highway.
There are certain conditions necessary for health here. Favorable climatic conditions of the temperate zone առ presence of carbonic acid, hydrochloric carbonate, sodium, low temperature mineral water.
  The climate is characterized by cold, sometimes severe, windless winters and hot, dry summers.
  Quite developed climatotherapy here.
 In winter, in January-February, all types of winter climatotherapy can be used for 25 days without restriction.
 In winter, due to the presence of certain natural conditions, you can go skiing.
 In summer, they are also engaged in climatotherapy from May to October.
• Bjni-Arzakan-Aghveran recreational zone.
 This zone includes the middle stream basin of Hrazdan river, here is the beautiful gorge of Dalarget.
 The zone is located at 1500-1700 altitude above sea level.
 Mountain-steppe-mountain-forest landscape zones are spread here.
 It is located 40 km away from Yerevan and is connected to it by a highway.
  Tsaghkunyats mountains are covered with deciduous vegetation, rich in forest berries and mushrooms.
Possible conditions for health are mild, pleasant climate, rich forest cover, the presence of many natural-mineral springs with different physicochemical, microelement and gas composition.
 The climate here is mild in winter and slightly humid in summer.
In the area of ​​this zone is the village of Bjni, on the right bank of the Hrazdan River, at an altitude of 1470-1700 m.
 If Hrazdanver flows into a large river near Yerevan, then here it is like a small calm stream, from the depths of which a cold spring comes out.
  These are cold coal sources of ozone, which have healing properties.
  North-east of Bjni village, on a high hill, is the old 11th century settlement և fortress.
 Preserved in Bjni - 16-18th centuries. Many khachkars, which are a real masterpiece, are of interest to tourists.
In Arzakan և Karashamb villages of Bjni-Aghveran-Arzakan recreation zone առկա there are chloride hydrocarbonate, sodium, calcium mineral waters.
Favorable climatic conditions և snow cover makes it possible to organize winter climatic treatment.
It is possible to organize winter walks, sports competitions, games in the fresh air.
 Here you can plan և´ short-term, և´ long-term vacation [3].
• Tsakhkadzor recreation area.
  This zone is mainly spread on the eastern slope of Mount Teghenis, it is considered one of the leading tourism regions of the republic.
The distance from the capital Yerevan is 50 km (1841 m).
  The city of Tsakhkadzor is a city with well-maintained squares, streets, luxurious night lighting, modern hotels, rest houses - it is attractive both in summer and in winter.
  The ropeway is an inseparable part of the city, 5 stations of which were built in 2004-2007. by the Austrian-Italian company "Lightner".
  All 5 stations meet the current international standards with their technical equipment հ service level.
 The comfortable ropeway will take you to Teghenis in only 40 minutes.
 Slides of different complexity are already stretched from the height of Teghenis.
  The total length of the slides is more than 30 km.
 You can constantly slide about 6,800 m.
  The residents of the republic, as well as thousands of winter sports fans from abroad spend their vacations here during the winter months.
  There are modern hotels in the city providing high quality service. Holiday homes.
  The hotels here are of any taste.
The hotels have experience of organizing international level receptions, they are ready to receive guests in all seasons.
The religious and cultural center of Tsakhkadzor is also the Kecharis monastery complex, which was completely renovated in 2001.
  It is not only one of the favorite places of the population of the republic, but also of the tourists who visited the republic.
  The Kotayk Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Church is located here.
The talented children of the Armenian people are located in the city, the Orbeli Brothers House-Museum, where a large number of exhibits related to their activities have been transferred from Yerevan, Moscow and St. Petersburg.
Tsakhkadzor is the most beloved resort of Armenia, the most famous recreation area outside its borders.
 Tsakhkadzor is unique in that it attracts e-tourists all year round. in winter with the dazzling whiteness of its slopes, and in the rest of the year with its colorful and fragrant nature.
This feature of the city makes it attractive, memorable.
The following routes are offered to travel to regions rich in natural-man-made recreational-tourism resources of Kotayk region: • Yerevan-Garni, Geghard • Yerevan-Charentsavan-Hrazdan-Tsakhkadzor, • Yerevan-Charentsavan-Hrazdan-Hankavan.
The region has a sufficient road network, it fully covers all the communities of the region, as well as the historical and cultural centers.
At the same time, the condition of the national roads and services mainly meet international standards, and the condition of regional and community roads is gradually improving.
Having significant potential and opportunities for the development of various types of tourism, at the same time there are a number of factors hindering the development of tourism in the region, from which we can single out: 1. Disproportionate distribution of tourism infrastructures, 2. Lack of tourism development concept of the region, 3. Lack of advertising information booklets about the region, as well as certain architectural structures, lack of the institute of regional guides, 4. The deplorable condition of separate historical and cultural monuments; Insufficient condition of roads, 6. Uncompetitive competitiveness of tourism services in the international market, 7. Armenia to the international community as a favorable, attractive and safe country for tourism,
In Kotayk region, for more intensive use of recreational-tourism resources, for the development of tourism, it is necessary to be guided by the following strategy.1. A balanced condition for the development of tourism is the balanced development of infrastructure: renovation of hotel complexes, holiday homes, reconstruction, as well as repair of highways leading to historical and cultural monuments. Marmarik Reservoir, built in recent years, has created additional favorable conditions for beach recreation.
3. It is necessary to implement a program that will combine the opportunities of Aghveran, Arzakan, Araler areas, 4. Promotion of ecotourism development in the territory of the region, 5. In parallel with the construction of the Yeghvard Reservoir in the near future, in order to turn this structure into a tourist center, it is necessary to develop and implement a special program, in particular, to build public service, leisure and entertainment centers in the area of ​​the reservoir.
  In contrast to the two-month rest period, they will have the opportunity to spend at least four months on the water surface. directions.
7. It is necessary to create a tourist website of Kotayk region, 8. It is very possible to create a common concept for the development of rural tourism.
In conclusion, we can say that Kotayk region, due to its recreational-tourism resources, has very good preconditions for the development of tourism on the spot.
  To achieve this, it is necessary to study the problems in each recreation area and propose ways to solve them.
Literature 1. https:
//www.e-gov.am/u_files/file/decrees/kar/2015/01/15_0040.pdf2. http:
//www.findarmenia.com/arm/armenia/kotayk3. http:
//fizecomed.com/en/page.php?id=56 Neli Muradyan ANALYSIS OF KOTAYK MARZ RECREATION-TOURISM RESOURCES Keywords: Tourism, recreational-tourism resources
Summary.
