CONFRONTATION RIGHTS DEVELOPMENT ISSUES The right to cross-examination or confrontation is one of the fundamental rights of a person accused of committing a criminal offense.
 Ensuring the latter is an integral part of the criminal policy of any democratic state based on respect for the rule of law.
The content of the right of confrontation is most evident in Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which is the normative source of common sense, according to which anyone accused of a criminal offense has the right to cross-examine witnesses or witnesses. to be interrogated և to have the right to call and interrogate his witnesses under the same conditions as the witnesses who testified against him (part 3, point d).
By February 2016, the European Court of Human Rights had rendered a total of 64 judgments against Armenia, of which 22 concerned the right to a fair trial, և only 2 cases had been discussed և the applicant's right to a confrontation had been recognized.
  However, discussions on this right are more common in national courts, և at least due to the recent possibility that the confrontation will henceforth be enshrined in the Constitution2.
Thus, if in 1995 The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (as amended in 2005) did not guarantee the right of counter-inquiry (confrontation). As a result of the constitutional amendments and supplements of December 6, the Convention law is the same 1 See D. Khachaturyan, The main precedent positions of the European Court of Human Rights on the admissibility of evidence.
2 See the statistics on the official website of the European Court, www.echr.coe.int.
The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia was incorporated, enshrined in Article 67, Clause 4.
As a result, this right received the status of a constitutional normative order, as the right of cross-examination had an inextricably linked with the right to a fair trial, which before the Constitutional amendments also had the status of an element of constitutional value.
In the case of a historical excursion, it becomes clear that the United States of America has followed the same path.
  The legal doctrine proves that the right of confrontation originated from the heart of the Anglo-American legal system3, when as early as 1789. Bill 6 of the US Constitution provided for the right of every prosecuted person to a confrontation, the constitutional content of which was to cross-examine witnesses who testified against him.
U.S. Supreme Court Mattox v. Commenting on this constitutional injunction in the United States case, it states that it serves the following three purposes: (a) to ensure that a witness is questioned under oath, to be aware of the seriousness of the trial; Allow jurors to assess the credibility of the testimony by considering the conduct of that witness4.
The mentioned goals are more generalized “Lee v. The Illinois Supreme Court ruled that the right of confrontation is one of the constitutionally guaranteed guarantees of justice in the criminal justice system by allowing evidence to be challenged in the form of witness testimony.
  In other words, it is an exceptional tool that promotes judicial competition, ensuring the full implementation of the principle of "equality of arms".
  In the European Convention, the term "witness" is of an "autonomous" nature - any information "produced" by a person, whether in writing or orally, if it may affect the outcome of a national court's decision on the guilt of the accused.
  In the context of that interpretation, a counter-inquiry is subject to the object being made by its addressee, the accused, regardless of the boundaries of the domestic system. 3 See Richard D., Friedman, Face to Face.
  Rediscovering the Right to Confront ProsecutionWitnesses, 2004, University of Michigan Law School.
4 See https.
//www.law.cornell.edu/wex/Right_to_confront_witness.
closures (for example, enshrined in Article 86 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code).
The Code of Criminal Procedure, which provides the opportunity to exercise the right of confrontation of the accused, provides both in pre-trial proceedings and during the trial.
 In pre-trial proceedings, it is implemented through confrontation.
The European Court of Human Rights, in paragraph 42 of the judgment in "Mamikonyan v. Armenia", referred to the principle underlying the confrontation, according to which, as a rule, all evidence must be presented with the possibility of having a counter-argument during the public hearing of the case5.
That is, the position of point 42 is the general rule by which the body conducting the criminal proceedings should be constrained.
 However, this rule of securing a confrontation has its exceptions, which prove that the right of counter-inquiry is relative and not absolute.
The criminal procedure law considers the obligation to testify to a key component of a witness' legal status.
 A systematic analysis of law enforcement practice shows that there is a gap between the will of the legislature and the practical reality, as witnesses in some cases fail to perform this duty in good faith.
  In particular, taking into account the timing of the examination of cases, which, depending on their degree of complexity, may even exceed the necessary reasonable threshold, the witnesses give a hint in the pre-trial proceedings, but "disappear" during the trial.
The European Court of Human Rights in point 42 of the case "Mamikonyan v. Armenia" stated that the examination of the testimonies testified during the preliminary investigation as evidence does not in itself contradict Article 6 մասին 1 և 3 (d) if protection is guaranteed. the rights of the party.
  From the combination of the legal position of that legal position և the RA Criminal Procedure Code, it becomes clear that if the criminal prosecution body had a confrontation in the pre-trial proceedings, thus ensuring the exercise of the defendant's right to cross-examination, then later in the trial the court may not be constrained.
 However, we think that such a position is a wrong opinion, which is not applicable in the RA legal system 5 See http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-97668.
In case of pursuing it, the court will violate the essence of the right of confrontation.
 Thus, the study of the legal regulations of confrontation enshrined in Article 216 of the current Criminal Procedure Code proves that the rights of the accused defense are not guaranteed during that investigative action.
 In particular, in the case of current legal regulations, the ombudsman has nothing but "observer" status during the confrontation.
  Even the defender is deprived of the right to ask questions, but many people know that during that confrontation a number of defenders try to build their tactics by "teaching" the possible questions to the client in advance.
  According to our surveys, in law enforcement practice, there are few investigators who build their policy by reserving the right to ask questions to the ombudsman, taking into account the ideology of the right of confrontation, that is, confrontation is not guaranteed when protection is not guaranteed.
 The latter is the stable legal position adopted by the European Court, which is conditioned by the provision of the right to legal aid of a person; it can never turn into a purely legal fiction, and the right of cross-examination can become illusory or abstract.
In fact, Article 216 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code uses the term "participate", which, according to the "Modern Explanatory Dictionary", means "cooperate" or "communicate", but the gap between practice and reality is currently at the discretion of investigators.
 Such a practice, according to the report adopted at the 86th plenary session of the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe, contradicts the principle of legal certainty in the context of ensuring the rule of law6.
At the same time, there can be no question that the right to a fair trial is violated, when the right of confrontation is artificially restricted by the accused himself through the abuse of the right of defense.
Thus, the 2010 decision of the RA Court of Cassation In the framework of the precedent decision No. EKRD / 0063/01/08 of August 27, the main issue was discussed whether the confrontation carried out in the absence of the Defender does not violate the right to a fair trial.
 In this case, the defense attorney did not appear at the defendant's confrontation, after which the investigator informed the defense attorney several times about what was to be done with his defendant. 6 See the report, http.
//www.concourt.am/armenian/news/doc/CDL-AD(2011)003rev-e.pdf.
However, the latter did not appear, as a result of which the investigation failed.
After that, the body conducting the proceedings applied in writing to the President of the RA Chamber of Advocates to inform the Defender about appearing at the confrontation, otherwise, according to the law, he will be replaced by another Defender.
 Due to the non-appearance of the lawyer, a decision was made to replace him with another lawyer, in whose presence the accused refused to inform him that he did not want to have another lawyer besides his lawyer.
 As a result, the confrontation took place in the absence of a defender.
  The Court of Cassation had rightly found that there had been no violation of the right of confrontation.
Agreeing with the position of the Court of Cassation, we find that the violation of the right to confrontation does not affect the fairness of criminal proceedings, when it occurs through the fault of the addressee of that right.
  It should be noted that in all cases where the addressee of the right of counterclaim refuses to exercise that right, then the fairness of the trial is not violated.
  The latter is based on the idea of ​​a waiver enshrined in the European Convention.
 A person holding the right of cross-examination may waive that right, for example, by exercising his right to remain silent during the confrontation or by not appearing at all at the deposition of the testimony of a witness.
The other issue during the confrontation concerns the restriction of the right to defense due to the current criminal proceedings.
  Ex-doctrinal interpretations of the current criminal case show that a fair balance of public-private interests is not guaranteed within that horse7.
 Particularly in the context of the existing semi-competitive horse, where the ombudsman's ability to gather evidence is significantly limited in pre-trial proceedings, there can be no question of the adequacy of the pre-trial confrontation with the confrontation during the trial.
According to the current legal regulation, the Defender gets acquainted with the materials of the case only after the end of the preliminary investigation.
 7 See S. Dilbandyan, Ensuring the Protection of Personal Rights և Legal Interests in the Pre-Trial Proceedings of the Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, YSU Publishing House, 2011, Yerevan, p. 78.
The direction that the ombudsman will have in the pre-trial proceedings is significantly limited.
  Such a conclusion suggests that an adequate շ adequate opportunity for the accused to challenge his or her defense witnesses by guaranteeing a right of defense can be effectively exercised only during the trial, which cannot be replaced by a confrontation in an inappropriate pre-trial.
In general, given the law practice, when we try to assess whether a person testifying in absentia during a pre-trial hearing was guaranteed the right to a confrontation, we have to pass the test with a multi-question test, which is a conditional instrument of the Convention. It is perceived that it develops in the current stage of legal civilization.
Tests to check the violation of the right of confrontation of the accused have been developed in the decisions of the European Court for many years. until 2015 The judgment of 15 December 2006 was summarized by the Grand Chamber of the European Court, Al-Khawaja and Tahery v. the United Kingdom ”judgment 8, however, 2015 On December 15, 2006, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights ruled in Germany 's new judgment on Article 6 3 3 (d) of the Convention 9.
The test to check the violation of the right of confrontation consists of three questions. a) was there a valid reason for the absence of a witness to take the unverified position of the witness as evidence, b) was the previous testimony of the absent witness decisive or solely based on the defendant's conviction There were sufficient counterbalances, including criminal guarantees, to compensate for the defense gaps as a result of the taking of unverified evidence.
  At the same time, each question of the test, in general, the results of the test are generally intended to answer the question of whether the trial was generally fair.
  The latter was given great importance by the European Court, which is why judges Spielmann, Karakas, Sajo և Keller, who had a specific opinion on the judgment, stated in paragraph 19 of their opinion that they had a reasonable fear that the positions expressed in the judgment might Click on one question whether the trial 8 See http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-108072.
9 See http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-159566.
He was completely righteous.
 They stated that the test used in that judgment would be applied in the precedent positions of the European Court under the heading "Schatschaschwili test".
First of all, let us mention that the answer to the first question of the test cannot be self-sufficient to recognize the 6th-3rd violation, excluding referring to the other questions of the test.
  Since the first question is of a preliminary nature, it is subject to assessment in the context of the second question in order to determine whether the conviction of the accused was decisive or solely based on that testimony.
  At the same time, it must be borne in mind that the State owes a positive obligation to take reasonable steps to ensure the effectiveness of the guarantees set forth in Article 6 of the Convention (Gabrielyan v. Armenia § 8110).
  The reason for the absence of a witness during the trial is considered "respectable" if it, in fact, shows the objective or legal grounds for the absence of the objective observer.
 This could be, for example, the fear or threat previously voiced by the accused to the witness or his ill health or other reasons.
  At the same time, a good reason to appear in court cannot be assessed in the conditions when the courts have not taken measures to find out his whereabouts and ensure his presence.
The second question of the test concerns the mass of evidence, the testimony of the missing witness al alia is the only one in the mass of the defendant's conviction that is only decisive.
  The crucial importance of unverified evidence for the conviction of the accused is subject to assessment by examining other evidence in the body of evidence.
  The more the other evidence corroborates the content of the unverified evidence, the less convincing that evidence is to convict the accused.
The RA Court of Cassation, based on the decisions of the European Court, in 2011 According to the decision No. LD / 0212/01/10 of October 10, "On the basis of the established case law of the European Court of Human Rights, the Court of Cassation finds that relying on evidence not provided for the right of counterclaim (confrontation) in the basis of a conviction will not constitute a material violation of criminal procedure law if the evidence is not conclusive.
 In other words, without a counter 10 See http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-110266.
The ban on questioning the evidence as a basis for a conviction is not absolute, so in this case it is possible to ensure the balance of public and private interests with greater involvement of public interests. ”
The third question of the test concerns the possible reasonable steps taken by the state, which will compensate for the absence of a witness during the trial, ensuring the assessment of the credibility of the data provided by the latter.
The Supreme Court of Ireland ruled in IRL-1998-2-005 that there was no violation of the right to a fair trial by giving evidence through video broadcasts and not in the physical presence of the accused.
  Such an approach is also one of the counterbalancing measures to ensure the right of confrontation vis-à-vis (face to face).
  The use of such a counterbalance is also admissible in the European Court (Chmura v. Poland, no. 18475/05, § 50).
  Council of Europe Committee of Ministers' 1997 Declaration on the Protection of the Right to Intimidate Witnesses Recommendation No. R (97) 13 states that while respecting the rights of the defense, witnesses should be given the opportunity to testify by alternative means to protect them from intimidation in the event of a vis-à-vis confrontation with the accused12.
  In this regard, the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code included in the agenda of the seventh session of the fifth convocation of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia in Article 334 envisages rather unique legal regulations.
 First, it is envisaged to interrogate the victim or witnesses outside the visual inspection of the accused, without disclosing the information about them to the accused.
  In addition, taking into account the rights of the defense, guided by the ideology of ensuring the balance of public-private interests, it is envisaged that in order to ensure the fairness of the defendant's right to defense, the court has the right to provide the defendant with real information about .
One of the countervailing measures is the acquisition of other evidence, which in itself reaffirms the content of the unverified evidence. 11 See http.
//www.codices.coe.int/NXT/gateway.dll?f=templates&fn=default.htm.
12 See http: // www.
//www.legislationline.org/documents/id/8111.
thus influencing the assessment of the credibility of its content.
Another counterbalance is the provision of a counter-inquiry in the pre-trial proceedings, which we do not consider acceptable under the current legal regulations, due to the disproportionate limitation of the defendant's defense during the confrontation.
  Finally, in exercising the right of cross-examination, we ensure that the interests of the defense are balanced with the interests of the witnesses or victims called to testify13.
At the same time, it is very important that, together with the right of confrontation, the accused be given the opportunity to present his or her version of the circumstances of the case, to cast doubt on the authenticity of the information provided by the absentee, thus proving the inconsistency of the information provided by other witnesses.
In order to reach a final conclusion after answering the three questions of the test, it is necessary to give a reasoned answer to the question whether the trial was generally fair.
 This question does not pursue a self-sufficient goal, the answer to that question comes from the answers to the three questions of the test14.
We think that the answer to this question should be considered in the framework of the liberal-legal theory of legal understanding, according to which, in the context of the distinction between law and law, justice is included in the notion of "law" 15. not from the letter of the law, but from the spirit of law, reflected in the rational reality.
  As it is not possible to directly fix the exhaustive list of the legal norms in the case of which it will be possible to conclude whether the state has taken all the necessary steps, ensuring the preconditions for the legal realization of the confrontation of a person in accordance with the universal equal requirements of law.
The theory of German common law distinguishes between the concept of "documentation", which means all the prerequisites 13 See Problems of Access to Justice in the Republic of Armenia, edited by D. Avetisyan, "Asoghik" publishing house, Yerevan, p. 139.
14 It is gratifying that the elements of application of this test have already begun to be reflected in the law enforcement practice of national courts, for example, it is noticeable in 2015. Judgment No. SHD / 0172/01/12 of the RA Court of Cassation of February 27.
15 See A. G. Vagharshyan, Theory of State և Law 2, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2011, p. 40.
the completeness that must be present in order for legal action to be taken16.
 The preconditions for the right of cross-examination are the three steps of the test, as a result of which there can be a legal consequence - the violation of the right to a fair trial.
  We think that the delimitation of the counter-inquiry documentation is a pragmatic task. it provides a complete picture of the steps taken to identify violations of the right of cross-examination, which are in fact interrelated.
When the subject of a court dispute is the finding of a violation of the right of the accused to cross-examine, each judge must subsequently pass the test in three steps and make a corresponding conclusion.
  The reasons for recognizing the presence or absence of a violation must be consistent, clear, unequivocal and non-contradictory.
  As stated in paragraph 36 of Conclusion 11 (2008) of the European Judicial Advisory Council (CCJE) on the Quality of Judicial Decisions, they should allow the reader to follow the "chain" of reasoning by which the judge reached that decision17.
It should be noted that the steps of the above test are summarized in the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, in particular under the principle of proper evidence, according to which the conviction can not be based solely or mostly on a person against whom the defendant or his lawyer did not have the opportunity to cross-examine. .
The draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code guaranteed the right of a person to cross-examine within the framework of depositing testimonies, as without that guarantee, depositing testimonies would be unconventional, and henceforth also unconstitutional.
In particular, Article 313 of the new draft provides for the following guarantees: Ensures the exercise of the right of cross-examination during the deposition of testimony.
16 See M. Sachs, Fundamentals of the General Teaching of Fundamental Rights in Germany, Yerevan, 2012, p. 53.
17 See https.
//wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1924745&Site=COE.
Grand Chamber of the European Court, 2015 The violation recognized by the judgment of 15 December 2006 also concerned, in essence, the deposition of testimony, but during the latter the Contracting Party to the European Convention, represented by Germany, did not secure the right to cross-examine the accused, knowing that the witnesses were foreign nationals.
  Despite all the reasonably necessary steps taken during the trial to ensure the right of the accused to cross-examine, it was not successful.
  As a result, the European Court, after going through three steps of the test, came to the conclusion that the trial was not fair in general.
Thus, summarizing the current developments in the right of counter-inquiry (confrontation) in the current context of legal civilization, it is obvious that the documentation of the step of revealing the violation of the right of counter-inquiry presented in this scientific work is developed in a modern way.
Arnold VardanyanCURRENT DEVELOPMENT OF THE RIGHT TO CONFRONTATION (Keywords).
