REJECTING THE REVIEW BY AGREEMENT AS A LIMITATION OF JUDICIAL PROTECTION It is the duty of public authorities to respect and protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of the citizen.
  Among those rights is the right to a fair trial of its special significance.
The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia և "Convention for the Protection of Human Rights և Fundamental Freedoms" 1 enshrines the right to a fair trial.
  Article 61 of the current Constitution stipulates that everyone has the right to an effective judicial protection of their rights and freedoms, and Article 6 of the Convention states: "Everyone has the right to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him."
As we can see, the mentioned norms reflect the rights of a person to judicial protection and a fair trial.
 The European Court of Human Rights has stated in one of its precedents that the Convention does not oblige states to set up courts of appeal, it is the exclusive prerogative of that State, but once the relevant courts have been set up, the State undertakes to ensure that participants in those courts also exercise 6th Convention 1 See the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 04.11.1950, entered into force for the Republic of Armenia on 26.04.2002, RA PA 2002.06.05 / 17 (192).
Of all the basic guarantees set out in Article 2.
  However, the European Court of Human Rights does not consider the appeal of a judicial act as an element of the right to a fair trial, as the state has no obligation to establish courts of appeal or cassation3.
However, if the state has created a superior court, then it has an obligation to ensure the right of a person to sue, then in this case appealing to the court of appeal becomes an element of a person's right to a fair trial.
  The right to judicial protection is not only the right to file a lawsuit to restore the violated or disputed right to the court of first instance, but also the right to appeal the judicial act to the court of appeal when the state has established such a court.
In this respect, the famous Russian lawyer L. is worth mentioning. A. Terekhova's view that the judicial protection of violated rights and freedoms presupposes a set of elements that make it up, that is, the right to apply to a court, to examine a case by making a final judicial act, to eliminate a judicial error ման to execute a judicial act4.
 And the Armenian lawyer Ph.D. Associate Professor Meghryan notes that one of the most important guarantees for the realization of the constitutional right to judicial protection is the legislative fixation of the possibility of seeking protection of the right in at least two courts.
In one of its decisions, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia stated that the institution of appeals against judicial acts is the main essential legal guarantee, which ensures the observance of the main components of the right to a fair trial by the lower court6.
  In the event that a person files a claim for protection of his or her rights in a court of first instance, seeking justice, he or she should be able to apply to the European Court of Human Rights in Sialkowska v. Poland, 22 March 2007. decision made on.
3 See Delcourt v. Belgium, 1970, of the European Court of Human Rights. Judgment of 17 January 1996 և Decision of the European Court of Human Rights 23.10.1996 Levages Prestations Services v. The judgment in the France case.
4 See Терехова Л. A., The right to correct fate fate as a component of fate.Author. diss ... d.J.N., Yekaterinburg, 2008, p. 1.
5 See Meghryan S. G., "Judicial Acts of Civil Cases of the Court of First Instance", Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2010, p. 149.
6 See RA Constitutional Court 2012 Decision No. SDO-1037 of July 18.
to the Court of Appeal to ensure his right to a fair trial.
 For the effective protection of his rights, the person submits an appeal to the court of appeal.
In other words, the state has an obligation to ensure the right of a person to apply to the Court of Appeals, because according to Article 3 of the RA Constitution, respect for and protection of fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms are the responsibilities of public authorities.
 Therefore, the state must ensure the right of a person to appeal in the courts of appeal and cassation.
  It is the duty of the state not only to ensure the realization of a person's right to appeal, but also to establish the necessary structures for that.
 Appealing to the Court of Cassation ensures the realization of a person's rights; provides an opportunity to guarantee the protection of the legitimate interests of the participants in civil turnover, including the receipt of a legal, reasoned judicial act in his case.
When a civilian participant applies to a lower court for protection of his or her rights, he or she must be confident that the court will protect his or her rights and legitimate interests by making a lawful, well-founded judicial act, otherwise he or she must have the opportunity to apply to a higher court. to submit a legal, reasoned judicial act to a lower court, thus protecting its rights.
 The awareness that in the event of an appeal, the decision will be reviewed or overturned by a higher court, forces the lower courts to make legal, well-founded judicial acts.
The right to appeal a judicial act is the strongest guarantee of a fair trial.
 Appealing to a higher court or appealing a judicial act are forms of exercising the right to judicial protection, means of ensuring the right to a fair trial, which are aimed at satisfying the lawful and substantiated demands of the participants in civil circulation, compulsory protection of rights7.
  In this case, the first instance court acts on the violated civil rights 7 See Hovhannisyan V. V., The right to appeal as a means of ensuring the right to a fair trial in civil proceedings, "Bulletin of the RA Constitutional Court", Yerevan, 2011, No. 3 (60), p. 24.
defense, unlike the Court of Appeal, which defends the right to a fair trial that has been violated.
And in any case, if there is a possibility of violation of the right to a fair trial by a lower court, or if it has already been actually violated, then the person should definitely have the opportunity to appeal.
  He is of the same opinion. Մ. Ter-Vardanyan.
  The latter states that the appeal of judicial acts, the effective control over the judicial acts of the lower courts by the higher court should be considered as an element of the right to a fair trial.
The appeal of a judicial act must be secured at any stage of the trial.
  Any judicial act that simultaneously violates any element of a person's right to a fair trial due to erroneous resolution of the case or deprivation of the right to judicial protection must be appealed8.
 In this regard, we consider that the possibility of judicial control should exist for all judicial acts defining civil rights and responsibilities for the parties9.
Part 1 of Article 208 of the RA Civil Procedure Code stipulates: "If the parties have entered into an agreement in the court of first instance to waive the right of appeal, then the appeal filed by the" parties "of the party who signed such an agreement shall be subject to examination by the appellate court in case of the consent of the other party.
An appeal in a civil case with a property claim is permissible only if the value of the subject matter of the dispute in the given case exceeds fifty times the minimum wage. ”
It follows from the above article that the right to appeal to the Court of Appeal is somewhat limited.
 In case the parties sign an agreement to refuse the appeal, they can no longer use the right of appeal.
  A question arises. and in the case when the court of first instance made an illegal, reasoned 8 See Ter-Vardanyan H. M., Constitutional-legal bases of the right to a fair trial in the Republic of Armenia, Ph.D. Degree for requesting a degree, Yerevan, 2009, p. 12.
9 See Grigoryan V., The nature of the decision to be overturned by the Civil Court of Appeal of the Republic of Armenia in case of changing the nature of the decision և The issues related to the appeal.
և The parties whose interests have been infringed do not have the opportunity to apply to the Court of Appeals, will the judicial act enter into force, է will it be considered that the court of first instance has administered justice?
The appellate court seeks to oversee the activities of the lower court by a higher court, but by restricting a person's right to appeal to the appellate court, we automatically restrict the appellate court's ability to exercise control over the court of first instance and ensure the legality of the court.
 Therefore, by restricting the possibility of appealing to the Court of Appeals, we also restrict the right to check the legality and substantiation of the judicial acts of the Court of First Instance of the Court of Appeal.
1995 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe Article 7 (1) of Recommendation No. R (95) 5 on the Improvement of the "Implementation of Procedures" for Civil and Economic Appeals Systems of 7 February 2006 stipulates that, in principle, any decision made by a lower court (first instance court) must exist. Ability to exercise control over the decision by the higher court (court of second instance).
Judicial review should be considered as a structure to ensure the exercise of the right of appeal, which at the same time provides an opportunity to ensure the issuance of legal, reasoned judicial acts, uniform application of the law, protection of the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of civil servants10.
It turns out that by limiting the possibility of an appeal, the role of the court of appeal becomes meaningless and meaningless.
 Naturally, the parties themselves limit their right to appeal to the Court of Appeals, but to what extent is it expedient to legally prevent such an opportunity? 10 See Hovhannisyan V. V., The right of appeal as a means of ensuring the right to a fair trial in civil proceedings, "Bulletin of the RA Constitutional Court", Yerevan, 2011, No. 3 (60), p. 102.
according to the legislation, when the norm is not in the interests of both justice and the participants in the trial.
According to Article 78 of the RA Constitution, the means chosen for the restriction of fundamental rights և freedoms must be suitable և necessary to achieve the goal defined by the Constitution.
 The means chosen for the restriction must be commensurate with the meaning of the Restricted Fundamental Freedom.
As mentioned above, the right to judicial protection, which is an element of a fair trial, also includes the right to appeal, therefore it is a fundamental right that belongs to any person, according to the Constitution it can be limited only if the conditions of proportionality are observed.
 Since public power is limited by the basic human rights և citizen և freedoms as a directly applicable right, Article 3 of the Constitution, the state must recognize the right of appeal as a directly acting right, its limitations are allowed only to achieve the purpose provided by the Constitution, and The purpose and the means used must be proportionate.
The Constitutional Court is one of the relevant decisions. "Part 2 of Article 208 of the RA Civil Procedure Code has been declared invalid, contradicting Articles 18-19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, insofar as it does not provide for exceptions to the restriction of the right to appeal in all cases where the court of first instance has granted the right to a fair trial." Judicial error that undermines the essence, in particular, when Article 1950, Part 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia "On Protection of Human Rights" and Fundamental Freedoms was not observed The procedural guarantees provided for in Article 6 1 1 of the Convention of November 4, 2006 (an appeal in civil cases not exceeding the claim of AMD 50,000 can be brought only if:
That is, in the case when the court of first instance makes a judicial error that undermines the essence of the right to a fair trial, 11 See RA Constitutional Court 2012 Decision No. SDO-1037 of July 18.
then the judicial act is subject to review by an agreement between the independent parties to waive the appeal.
  In case no exception is provided for the restriction of the right of post-bargaining appeal, it does not comply with the Constitution.
The right to judicial protection, as well as the right to appeal, belongs equally to all citizens, as the right of a person to go to court is protected by law.
 That is, the citizen has the right to appeal, and Civil. Part 3 of Article 25 of the Code of Procedure stipulates that transactions aimed at the complete or partial renunciation of a citizen's right to restrict his right are invalid.
  And since the transaction is the actions of individuals and legal entities, which are aimed at creating, changing or terminating civil rights and obligations, the parties perform the action, that is, they agree to refuse the appeal.
 And the agreement to refuse the appeal concluded between the parties is nothing but a transaction between the parties, which restricts the person from exercising his / her legal right.
 Therefore, such an agreement, which in fact restricts a person's right to judicial protection, is null and void.
Thus, in general, we can say that Article 208 1 1 of the Code of Procedure restricts one of the most important rights of a person, the right to appeal a judicial act which is an element of a fair trial.
 As rights are a permissible behavior for the participants in the trial և not mandatory, the participants themselves decide whether to apply to a higher court or not.
 However, in the case when the state envisages such a restriction, although by the will of the parties, it is the same, the right of the person is limited.
 It is not ruled out that the party will sign an agreement to refuse the appeal, but after the publication of the verdict, disagreeing with the judicial act, he wants to appeal in order to protect his interests.
  Besides, the reasons for the strict necessity of defining such a norm by the legislator are incomprehensible.
  If the legislator has taken into account the workload of the courts, defining such a norm, we think that it is not justified.
To get an idea of ​​what has been said, let's bring the following example. The persons participating in the case will sign an agreement in the court of first instance to refuse the appeal, a court decision has been made, with which one of the parties disagrees, finding that there is a violation of his rights, besides, the minutes of the court session are missing.
 It turns out that the party is deprived of the right to protect its rights, moreover, the very essence of justice is disturbed, և, naturally, the court is meaningless.
It should be added that Article 213, Part 1, Clause 6 of the CCP considers that the basis for the return of the appeal is the fact that there is an agreement between the participants in the case to waive the right to appeal; the party that made such an agreement did not agree to examine the case in the Court of Appeal.
 What is more incomprehensible is how the other party will give consent in case the signed agreement is in its own interests.
 It is obvious that the court disputes mainly to the superior court the party to whom the judicial act was made to the detriment, therefore it is logical that the other party, in the interest of which the judicial act was made, will never give its consent to appeal to the other party.
 The draft civil lawsuit also envisages a similar provision, however, the current Civil Code. The Code of Procedure no longer contains the part of the article which defined: "Մյուս The other party that made such an agreement did not agree to consider the case in the Court of Appeal."
 What, we think that the definition of such a norm is meaningless?
It should be mentioned comparatively that the Russian city. There is no norm in the Code of Procedure.
 In other words, the Russian legislature did not find it expedient to envisage such a norm in its legislation, especially since it restricts one of the most important constitutional rights of a person.
One of the shortcomings of the RA CCP is that no structure is envisaged to refuse the appeal.
 That is, the legislator, envisaging an opportunity to refuse the appeal, did not specify the procedure for its implementation.
 Does the court confirm the agreement of the parties, does the court have an obligation to examine the will of the parties or the awareness of the parties that the right to appeal to the court of appeal is restricted?
 In the event that a person has entered into such an agreement under the influence of delusion, is his / her appeal subject to review in the Court of Appeal?
 The absence of such structures is a problem in practice, as there is no uniform application, but the legal act must be determined based on the principle of legal certainty.
In general, it can be concluded that Part 1 of Article 208 of the Procedure Code does not derive from the rights of a person guaranteed by the Constitution, and the Constitution has the highest legal force, և laws and by-laws must necessarily comply with the Constitution.
 In our opinion, the existence of such a norm is meaningless and meaningless.
  We propose to remove the restriction on the judicial protection of a person, including the right to appeal.
Hasmik Nazaretyan REJECTION OF REVIEW WITH THE AGREEMENT OF THE PARTIES AS A LIMITATION OF THE RIGHT TO JUDICIAL PROTECTION Keywords: fair trial, judicial defense, appeal
.
