THE FORMATION OF A TWO-POLOR WORLD ․ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE PRESENT AND THE PAST In order to understand the situation in the modern world, we need to go back to the recent past, when the bipolar world was formed under the leadership of the USA and the USSR, each of which wanted to achieve world domination.
  Examining the events of the 20th century, drawing parallels with our reality, we will see that nothing has changed, only the conflicting parties have changed, today instead of the former USSR, this struggle is carried out by its successor, the Russian Federation.
There have been many wars in different eras of world history և The 20th century is no exception, it is in this epoch that the most important wars in world history took place - the First and Second World Wars, as well as the "Cold War" .
 The fascist aggressor republics (Germany, Italy, Japan) և its allies were defeated.
When World War II ended, the victorious nations of the United States, Great Britain, and France took steps to avoid further wars.
The UN was created to maintain world peace, տեր five powers: Great Britain, China, the USSR, the USA և France had to assume the position of world policeman.
  However, the USSR considered collegial security impossible, and the USSR, based on its pre-war diplomatic clout, was convinced that the United States could ignore international norms, as Hitler did.
 Accordingly, the statutory principles of the UN were seen as a cover to conceal their selfish aspirations.
  The USSR sought to increase its territory, spheres of influence, and the West, in turn, began to pursue a policy of "restraint" of the USSR, which was adopted in 1947. President H. By Truman, էր was known as the "Truman Doctrine."
 It was a transition from post-war cooperation to conflict 1.
 In those years, the United States offered economic aid to European democracies, but received a negative response, as the latter were already under the control of the Soviet Union.
Thus began the division of Europe.
 The interests of the West-East through the USSR became more visible.
 The former allies, leaving each other for political purposes, now sought to increase their spheres of influence, to establish their order in the world. The West affirmed the liberal-democratic-bourgeois values, and the East the socialist-authoritarian.
 The process of forming a bipolar world began in the world, which was a long-term geopolitical conflict, which brought human civilization to the brink of disaster3.
The United States, which was the leader of the capitalist world, came out of the war quite powerful.
  There were no military operations in the United States, due to which the United States avoided huge human "material losses" and surpassed all other countries in economic and political issues.
  His aircraft, the Navy, were the strongest in the world.
  The United States became a powerful superpower claiming world hegemony.
  The United States gave only 300 thousand to the warlords. victim.
 The dollar became the most stable currency, and New York became the largest financial market in the world4.
  The United States not only did not suffer material losses, but also became rich enough.
The second superpower became the Soviet Union, which, inflicting enormous human and material losses, defeated Germany, unprecedentedly increased its influence, prestige and power in the world.
  The political influence of the USSR extended to the part of Poland, Germany, which had come under Soviet control, to Czechoslovakia, Vienna, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Romania.
 The country that went to war 2 Rashidyan S., Modern History, Yerevan, 1996, page 31.
3 Узнародов И., Отечественная история.
 1917-2001, M., 2002, p. 254. It was devastated. It needed peace, economy, restoration of human resources, strengthening of borders, protection.
  According to many American historians, the USSR did not develop an aggressive plan against other countries, particularly the US, because the USSR did not have a corresponding navy until 1948. He did not have aviation until 1949. August - nuclear weapons.
After the Second World War, the balance of power on the international stage changed in favor of socialism.
  The USSR, which had suffered the most losses, not only did not weaken, but came out of the war stronger than before.
 The social and state structure of the Soviet Union was strengthened, the security of the country was strengthened, the international position of the Soviet Union և the influence of the country increased.
 If in 1941 26 countries had diplomatic relations with the USSR, then in 1945 - 52 countries5.
 After the lifting of the blockade, communist-led or partisan governments were formed in Eastern and Southeastern Europe that embarked on democratic and then socialist reforms.
 Similar transformations took place in East Germany, North Korea, and China, which were under siege by Soviet troops.
Thus, if the United States was the leader of the capitalist world, then the Soviet Union was ruled by all the social forces that opposed capitalism.
Two powerful forces of world power were formed, which were conventionally called East-West, two ideological military-political blocs.
 It was the conflict between them that laid the groundwork for the Cold War.
 "The Cold War is a struggle between two military-political blocs, led by the USSR and the United States, which did not become an open military conflict."
 The split between the former allies was based on a speech by British Vice President Wilston Churchill (in President Truman's hometown) in Fulton, USA. March 5.
  Describing the current situation (the establishment of communist rule in Eastern Europe by the Soviet Union) as a threat to Western democracy, he called for restraint in the USSR by introducing the notion of an "iron curtain" allegedly missed by the Soviet Union. pp. 164. From there to Adriatic, it divided post-war Europe into two new opposing camps7.
 And. Churchill stated that they should respond to the USSR, using all the Anglo-Saxon power, that is, uniting the efforts of Great Britain and the United States8.
 He aimed to create a "brotherly union of nations" in English, which was aimed at "the growing danger of Christian civilization" by communist or anti-fascist groups.
 Since the Russians liked only military force, the Western countries had to abandon the previous doctrine of equality of powers and set out to create a more powerful military force than the Soviet Union.
  And. Churchill's speech was intended to cover up the fact that at the time of his speech, the United States and Great Britain had a military force several times larger than the Soviet forces.
 Conclusion U. Churchill added: "I do not believe that the Soviet Union wants a war.
  He wants the fruits of war ում the infinite spread of his power ”9.
 After this announcement, J. Kenan in 1946 In February, he sent a secret declaration to Washington, in which he outlined the main provisions of the "restraint" policy.
 In his opinion, the United States should react harshly to every step of the USSR aimed at expanding the spheres of influence of the Soviet Union.
 According to him, the policy of "restraint" was a means of preventing war, it was not aimed at achieving a military victory over the USSR 10.
  The cities of Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia, the populations of these territories were under Soviet influence, all subject not only to Soviet influence but also to Moscow's growing control.
1947 On June 5, US Secretary of State George W. Marshall delivered a speech at Harvard University.
 The speech became the starting point for the implementation of economic and political measures, known as "Marshall Plan".
  The aim of the Marshall Plan was to stabilize the socio-political situation in Western Europe, to join West Germany to the Western bloc, to reduce the influence of Soviet forces in the region.
  Eastern European countries could partially 8 Кредер А., note. work., p. 165.10 Kreder A., ​​note. p. 165. to be involved in the process of European reconstruction in the event that those countries renounce the Soviet Union.
  In fact, everything was being done to reduce the role of the Soviet Union in Europe.
At the same time, the resources of Eastern Europe were to be used for the reconstruction of the western part of the continent11.
The Marshall Plan was launched in 1948 when the US Congress passed the Economic Cooperation Act, a four-year plan to provide economic assistance to Europe.
 1948 There were no communists in the government of any Western European country.
And. According to Churchill, H. According to Truman's doctrine, a number of other secret documents set out the two strategic goals of the West in relation to the USSR: հասնելafter achieving its weakening և dissolution (in the USSR (policy of ousting communism).
The next manifestation of the conflict between these two countries was the formation of military-political alliances.
 1949 The agreement on the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was signed on April 4, 1912.
 NATO included the United States, Britain, France, Italy, Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, and Luxembourg.
 1952 They were joined by Turkey, Greece, Germany in 1955, and later by several other republics13.
 In creating NATO, the United States violated the UN Charter, the basic principles of the International Organization of Hope, and hoped to secure a dominant position in the world.
 A joint military force was created on the basis of this alliance. Led by Eisenhower14.
In response, the Soviet Union put forward the Warsaw Pact (an agreement on company, cooperation, mutual assistance) signed in 1955. on May 14.
The agreement was signed between Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Germany, 14 Kreder A., ​​note. pp. 167. For the establishment of peace in Poland, Romania, the USSR եխ Czechoslovakia և Peace in Europe։.
 It entered into force in 1955. on June 5.
 1985 ․ On April 26, his term of office was extended for another 20 years.
  In connection with the transformations taking place in the USSR, Central and Eastern Europe in 1991. In February 1991, the member states abolished the military structure of the treaty. On July 1, his activity was stopped.
It was defensive in nature, unlike the treaties signed by the capitalist countries.
 The parties to the treaty were obliged to assist each other in the event of an armed attack by a third country16.
The struggle for spheres of influence continues to this day.
The West, led by the United States, pursues a policy of reducing the spheres of influence of the Russian Federation from the Balkans to the Middle East17.
  The events in Ukraine and Syria are a vivid proof of that.
  In the past, there have been wars for spheres of influence, such as the wars in Afghanistan and Vietnam.
 In these regions, the struggle for world domination between the USA and the USSR has been going on for years.
 The fact that the struggle continues is proved by the anti-Russian propaganda carried out by the West, which never ceased, just if it was previously published in newspapers, announced on the radio, nowadays it is electronic.
The fact that the conflicts of the 20th century continue today is evidenced by the economic restrictions (sanctions) announced by the United States imposed on Russia by US President Barack Obama in connection with 2014. With the events in Ukraine, they were the largest in the history of Russia in terms of the number of member states.
  It is obvious that besides the USA, these sanctions were applied against the Russian Federation by many EU countries, such as Austria, Japan, Canada, etc.
 Examples of such economic sanctions in 1945-1991 ․ There are many, for example, because of the Boeing 747.
 1983 On September 1, Russia shot down the plane, 15 Sobakin V., Soviet Historical Encyclopedia, http.
//dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/sie/2941.16 Сераев С., История СССР.
 Хаpoha socialism, M., 1983, p. 379.//http.
//www.vm.ru/news/2016/03/04/glubinnaya-zamorozka-313485.html. which belonged to the Republic of Korea, US President Ronald Reagan considered it a crime against humanity, which should never be forgotten; he imposed sanctions.
  At that time, the American Harry MacDonald died.
  From September 2 to November, the USSR air force was blocked.
Thus, speaking of the 20th century, drawing parallels with the present period, we can state that everything that happens today repeats the history of the 20th century with one difference. Instead of the former USSR, today that struggle is being carried out by its successor, the Russian Federation.
 Both the United States and Russia, wanting to achieve world domination, are destroying everything that is valuable for other nations on the way to that goal.
Dolera Tumasyan THE DESIGN OF A TWO-POLAR WORLD ․ COMPARISON OF THE CURRENT AND THE PAST Keywords: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), United States of America (USA), sanctions, Truman Doctrine, Marshall Plan, spheres of influence.
