REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS IN MEDIEVAL TAVUSH The cadastral system is data on natural resources engineering facilities that have gone through a centuries-old history of development.
 The lithographic inscriptions, historical sources and rich bibliography found in the territory of the Republic of Armenia prove that there was a prototype of the cadastral system in medieval Tavush.
Most of the information about the prototype of the cadastral system is summarized by the lithographic protocols.
 They include various medieval relations related to real estate, describing their essence, ways of implementation and legal bases.
  The inscriptions were mainly made on the monastic complexes of Tavush, the walls of the adjacent buildings and khachkars.
 These protocols sufficiently reflect the political, economic, military and caring life.
This particularly refers to the prototype of the cadastral system used in the 12th-13th centuries.
 The above system was also based on a legal basis, which, in fact, was M ․ Gosh "Judgment Book".
Here are some articles on some types of real estate and their legal relationship.
  In particular, in the field of land and property relations, it has regulated the relations of inheritance, ownership, alienation, land use, construction, definition of tax liabilities, change, termination, delimitation of borders, defining their legal bases.
  The legal framework in these times was based on a number of socio-cultural features, contained norms and rules coordinating both cadastral and socio-cultural life.
Prior to the establishment of developed feudalism, when Armenia was under the subordination of the Arab Caliphate, the inheritance rights of Armenian lands were conditional.
  The right of the Armenian landowners to inherit was violated, the land was owned by private inheritance, and the Arab Caliphate was considered the main possessor of land and water, as well as the natural owner of Armenia's natural wealth.
 However, at the end of the VIII century, especially at the beginning of the IX century, with the weakening of the Arab Caliphate, the conventional hereditary land was abolished and the large hereditary land ownership was established.
In the first quarter of the IX-X centuries, on the one hand, there was a redistribution of land between the pawnshops and their branches, on the other hand, Armenian monasteries began to acquire large tracts of land [1].
  In the IX-XIV centuries, when Armenia entered the period of developed feudalism, qualitative changes were registered in the field of land ownership.
  Following the collapse of the ministerial system, the land was transformed from a ministerial property into the hereditary private property of individual landowners.
  If before the establishment of the monarchy the right of land ownership belonged only to the nobleman who owned the land on behalf of the whole clan, then after the establishment the younger members of the clan, the "princes" were independent landowners like the nobles, exercising economic and political autonomy in their own domains.
Historical and lithographic sources state that feudal estates and ecclesiastical estates were formed during the medieval Avatadir period, which were new phenomena both in medieval Tavush and throughout Armenia.
  In other words, the land was divided between two large owners, the church "owners".
From this point of view it should be noted that feudal estates were the object of taxation.
The land tax was mainly paid by the villagers, in the amount of 1/5 of the irrigated land and 1/10 of the irrigated lands.
  That tax was paid to the landowner, who in turn paid part of the tax to the state treasury.
  In other words, the state tax and the land rent were merged.
 As for church estates, they were exempt from state taxes.
Despite the fact that the medieval period of land ownership caused stratification in the field of land ownership, the rural communities continued to maintain a strong economic and legal basis and to fight against subdivisions of land, pastures and hay lands. by monks.
 The rural community acted as the owner of the main part of the given land fund.
 The arable lands and pastures under the jurisdiction of the community were considered a part of the community, regardless of who owned the right to use it.
  During the expropriation of the land use right, the united will and desire of the rural community was required.
 However, this fact does not mean that all the lands within the village were indiscriminately under the jurisdiction of the rural community.
 On the contrary, in rural communities, land was subdivided into arable land and pastures, privately owned land, land owned by peasants, land used by monasteries or owned by them, and uncultivated and barren land.
In addition to the land fund belonging to all members of the rural community and subject to regular land subdivision, there were also lands in the village that had been privatized by this or that family or were in the process of being privatized.
  Communities restored their rights to already alienated real estate in the event of the death of the owners when they left no heirs or wills.
Generalizing the description of the socio-economic situation of Tavush region in the XII-XIII centuries, it becomes clear that during the period of developed avatadiriyya the economy was fully integrated into politics.
  The authorities in charge of the local centers were the largest landowners, the full owners of their estates.
  In the past, this position was held only by members of the aristocratic class of society, in this developed society of the Middle Ages, people of financial means, sometimes even of insignificant origin.
Referring to the lithographic inscriptions found in the Tavush region, one can get a thorough idea of ​​the many processes related to real estate in the past millennium, their nature and ways of implementation.
  Mesropatar lithographic inscriptions appeared in the middle of the 5th century, decades after the invention of letters.
Armenian medieval lithographs were engraved in classical Old Armenian, Middle Armenian, dialect mixed with Old Armenian and local dialects.
  In terms of content, Armenian lithography is divided into six types: memoir, construction, donation, legal-canonical, religious-moral, mixed.
 Only four of them have a value in real estate transactions: 1 ․ donation, 2 ․ construction, 3 ․ legal, 4 ․ mixed [3].
Donation-construction content of a large part of the lithographs related to the property relations studied in the monasteries of Jukhtak monastery, Matosavank, Deghdzut monastery, Haghartsin, Goshavank, Makaravank, Moro Dzoro, Srvegh եղի Apostles monasteries of Tavush region.
 Legal lithographs are rare.
  There are mixed lithographic protocols, which are, in fact, the result of construction and donation transactions.
In the lithographic protocols with the donated content, the time of the transaction, the names of the donors, the purpose of the donation, the name of the real estate և witnesses are specially mentioned.
 The donor receives moral compensation for his donation in the hope of being mentioned in liturgies for the salvation of the soul.
  At the request of the donor, the church fathers determine the number of days of the liturgy.
  Lithographic inscriptions There is ample evidence of donations of land, gardens (in whole or in part), mills, olive groves, kiosks, and shops.
Due to the military instability of the country, the authorities often donated their property to the church serving their family, thus trying to insure their property against foreign achievements, as church property, being considered a sanctuary, was rarely attacked.
 For example, several inscriptions donated by the New Getik Monastery have such content.
  Inside the Astvatsatsin Church, a 13-line inscription states that a prince named Atasep donated half of a plot of land called "Tagavarakatsi" to the church.
  The donation protocols specify the taxes and duties from which the new owners will be exempted.
  This is evidenced by the protocol left by Neknek, according to which the new owner of the park, Nor Getik Monastery, is released from tax obligations. [2]
As for the construction lithographs, the fact of construction of this or that structure (church, chapel, vestibule, etc.) was reflected in them.
As a rule, these protocols mention the names of the builders, their relatives, helpers, witnesses, supporters, construction և completion dates and the name of the building.
  For example, the inscription on the construction of the Astvatsatsin Church, which is part of the Nor Getik monastery complex, emphasizes the names of all the supporters. [2]
  It is customary to use the template formulas "finished construction", "built", "completed" and "built" [3].
Sometimes the formulas "built" and "built" were used to repair old or damaged structures.
 In such a case, one must understand the meanings of renovation, reconstruction, restoration.
An example of such a lithographic inscription is one of the Goshavank monastery complex construction inscriptions.
  The inscription, which belongs to Tsar, the son of the wealthy prince Umeki of the time, contains evidence of the renovation of the church.
 According to the inscription, the church was renovated by the teacher և Ignatius with the help of the Tsar.
Contracts or agreements of a legal nature are drawn up in the likeness of donation protocols, which are engraved on temples, temple buildings or individual monuments.
The document was signed by both parties and witnesses participating in the sale, with signatures and a seal ratifying the transaction.
 The king or nobleman signed the legal act with their royal kamishkhan rings, while the others simply "ringed", that is, stamped on the document with a finger.
We have received numerous legal documents of water use (right to use water), to donate mills in whole or in part, to determine the boundaries of villages (through border or border crossings), to approve taxes and duties, to reduce or eliminate them, and to settle numerous disputes over water and land.
 There is a number of evidences in the lithographs that when taking into account the difficult social situation of the people, the highest authorities of the country and the local pawnshops reduced or exhausted the taxes and duties collected from the population.
  These humanitarian acts were carried out with the secular աշխարհ with the consent of the secular leaders և through joint efforts.
  For example, the leader of Haghartsin Monastery, Hovhannes Armanetsi, based on the social conditions of the people, exempts Getik Monastery և its people from tax obligations. [2]
Mixed content related to land relations are called lithographic protocols, in which there are evidences of construction, donation, legal-canonical nature, which appear in a logical close connection, forming an original whole.
 These types of lithographs have carried and maintained transactions that contained a combination of several transactions, such as a set of transactions for the purchase of property, construction, or donations.
  Such examples are often found in the medieval cadastral model.
 One of them states that Mr. Umekin, an emigrant from Karin, bought the new Getik monastery complex, monastic villages and gardens from the Zakaryan princes and donated them to the church.
 One of the donation protocols with similar content of NorGetik Monastery belongs to Prince Neknek.
 According to the Neknek protocol, he bought a garden in the village of Arinj and donated it to the monastic complex.
The mixed lithographic inscriptions are relatively extensive, being engraved mainly on the visible parts of the walls of monastic monasteries and tribal churches.
The rich historical heritage, the considerable base of lithographic inscriptions, the Armenian bibliography and the legal bases in medieval Tavush show that in the Middle Ages such real estate transactions were carried out as: 1. hereditary relations (according to the will և according to the law), 2. Donation relations, 3. construction relations, 4. multi-step transactions, 5. rental relations, 6. Purchase and sale relations, 7. Taxation, reduction and termination of taxes, 8. Separation of borders տեղադր Placement of borders.
 Numerous arguments about hereditary relations have come down to us through medieval historiography.
 Kirakos Gandzaketsi in his work "Armenian History" presented arguments about the hereditary relations between medieval Tavush and Armenia.
  They mainly refer to the transfer of paternal inheritance.
 This refers, in particular, to the inheritance transferred by law.
According to the information provided by Gandzaketsi, after the death of Prince Zakare, his inheritance was passed to his only son, Shahnshah.
 Due to his son's small stature, his hereditary estate was temporarily ruled by his brother Ivan, who took over custody of the brother after his brother's death.
  Growing up, the boy inherited his father's "native power".
 Evidence of hereditary relations has been preserved about the passing of the kingdom from father to son.
 According to that, during the reign of the Kyurikyans, Tashir Dzoraget inherited the inheritance directly from father to son.
 After the death of King Gagik, the founder of the kingdom, the throne was inherited by his eldest son, David, and then by David, Kyurike I. [8]
We learn about donation transactions in medieval Tavush mostly from lithographic records.
The donation protocols mainly mentioned the name (s) of the donor (s), the names of the witnesses of the supporters of the transaction, the year of the transaction, the purpose of the donation, the name of the real estate (not in all cases).
  In the lithographic sources of medieval Tavush, there are a significant number of donation protocols, mainly referring to donations made to monastic complexes by government houses.
 In the lithographic sources of Tavush monastic complexes, lithographic protocols fixing various donation deals have been preserved.
 For example, one of the donation records kept in Gohar Khatut Monastery in Nor Getik Monastery testifies that he donated a garden to a monastic complex in the village of Tsagom - a free peasant.
 The fact of alienation of peasants can be found many times in donation protocols, which, apparently, is conditioned by the establishment of the slave-owning system.
Among the donation protocols, the lithographs registered as construction are of great interest.
  Lithographs containing such elements have been preserved in Haghartsin Monastery և Jukhtak Monastery.
  The two lithographs expressing the same content of Jukhtak Monastery show that in the Middle Ages donors could make their donations as if buying separate parts of already built buildings.
 Sarkis the Motherland, paying the approximate value of the southern and northern deposits of the Astvatsatsin Church, concluded the transactions as construction assistance. [2]
In other words, the donors bought the undeveloped real estate and made a donation.
 As a result, the transaction of donated content became constructional, without actually expressing it.
  From this we can conclude that this fact of registration of transactions was connected with socio-economic or legal circumstances.
The main evidences of the construction relations of medieval Tavush are preserved in the construction protocols placed in the monastic complexes.
  These protocols, as a rule, contained information about the construction, the date of its implementation, the implementers, and sometimes the economic situation of the political event.
 There are several dozen such protocols, mainly documenting the churches built by the mansions of the period and the auxiliary units needed to service them.
According to the inscription made in Matosavank in 1247, a rich man named Jordan built a church in St. Matosavank. Astvatsatsin Church.
 According to another inscription, during the leadership of Khachatur Vardapet Taronatsi, Khalt built St. Haghartsin. The Catholic Church.
  Evidence of its reconstruction has been preserved in lithographic sources.
  According to the inscription made in Haghartsin in 1681, the Zitaghayans living in Tbilissi (Georgia) renovated Khojgyul from Pahrapet to St. Gregory և The Divine Churches.
Kirakos Gandzaketsi testifies about that land use horse in medieval Tavush.
 His work "Armenian History" on the tenancy relations has been preserved.
 According to this, Astvatsatur, a resident of the town of Archesh, who was a rich and kind man, rented his shops to use the proceeds for charitable purposes (buying sheep skins, sewing cloth, and distributing clothes from them to the poor).
 Evidence of alienation through the sale of real estate in medieval Tavush has been preserved in lithographs placed in monastic complexes.
One of the inscriptions of Goshavank, written during the reign of the Mongol emperor Arghun Ilkhan (1283 / 4–1291) և Georgian Demetrius II (1275–1289 / 91), which was compiled in detail by the compilers of the 6th volume of the Divan of Armenian Lithography, testifies to the New Getik monastery վ about the sale and purchase of real estate.
 According to the compilers of the 6th issue of the "Divan of Armenian Lithography", this inscription of Tsar, the son of the famous rich Mr. Umek, is the only source that reports N. Getik monastery, the villages belonging to the monastery, about the sale of their estates by the Zakaryan princes to Umekin, who migrated from Karin.
"My father Umek bought a red duchy in Getik's Khr (40,000)," Tsar writes.
 Considering the enormous value of this sum at the time, it must be assumed that Umek acquired the monastery within the boundaries established by the Zakaryans, as well as the other villages and estates that later became the property of the monastery.
 Ն. This purchase and sale of Getik Monastery in 1242–1250. It was done between Zakaryan Avag "Umek".
 As for the rights of Amirspasalar, Atabek Avag Zakaryan (1213–1250 ․) to the Nor Getik Monastery, which put that religious institution up for sale, we find the answer in Kirakos Gandzaketsi.
 According to the historian, the area for the construction of the monastery was allocated in the gorge called Tandzut by the great prince Ivane Zakaryan, the elder father [2, 7].
Later, in 1283, the monastic complex was bought with its estates (for 4000 ducats) by Tsar, the son of Umek, and then donated to St. Goshavank. Astvatsatsin Church.
The principle of delimitation has been used to describe both real estate and the boundaries of property, in particular, the delimitation of property belonging to a monastic institution.
  The most complete document on the borders in the Tavush region in Armenian historiography is the document of the borders around the Nor Getik Monastery, which has reached our days through lithography.
  The lithographic inscription, which describes the complete borders of Goshavank, is the same inscription describing the purchase and sale of Goshavank.
  It also presents the description of the borders established by the Zakaryan princes for the monastic complex: "and they offered the border of the church from the mountain to the mountain" [2].
  Later, due to the donations of the princes և rich landowners, the borders of the monastery complex were expanded, making it a large landowner of the period.
References on tax relations have been preserved in "historical sources" and lithographs, and on the legal regulations on their definition, collection and termination, M. In Gosh "Judgment Book".
  Ս. Khachikyan's work "On Armenian Rural Communities" reports that in rural communities, in the areas belonging to the landowners, the taxes were set, reduced and stopped by the landowners.
 The tax collectors were officials appointed by the landlords, the handmaidens, who were members of influential families.
These feudal-dependent officials forced taxable objects in their subordinate villages or districts, determined the amount of the tax, and controlled the taxation process.
Evidence of tax cuts or reductions has been preserved in historical and lithographic sources.
 For example, one of the records of Nor Getikivank, which belongs to Hovhannes Armanetsi, the careful leader of Haghartsin նի Goshavank, states that in 1260 he exempted the inhabitants of NorGetik Monastery from the obligations of the villagers belonging to him.
  It is difficult to understand from the lithographic inscription what kind of tax we are talking about, but it is supposed that it refers to the secular tax paid to the church by the inhabitants of the secular, administrative tax paid to Gonza Khatun (Zakaryans) by the villagers. "By God, I, TR Yovanes Armanetsi, wrote freely to the people of Getka that they should give the throne to Gontsa Khatun of power, at the request of Kirakosvardapet ..." [2].
 It is more probable to think that the abolished tax referred to the church tax paid to the church, as the grounds for its abolition are connected with the diligent leader of the church.
As a rule, donors were exempted from tax liabilities when donating real estate units.
  They sometimes waived the tax liabilities of the new owner of the property alienated from them (mainly through donations).
  This is evidenced by the lithographic sources.
 According to one of the inscriptions of Nor Getik Monastery, Neknek, the son of the local prince Vasak, bought a garden and donated it to the church for further cultivation.
 Another inscription of the same monastery states that the famous representative of the Dsegh Mamikonians, Martspanishkhan, and his four sons, Aslanbek, Grigor, Amiran-Sargis, donated a garden-plow land in the village of Voghjaberd to the NorGetik monastery, eliminating the taxes levied on that property.
The essence, content, procedure of implementation and the fact of use of the multi-step transactions in the sphere of medieval Tavush land relations are indicated by the lithographic inscriptions of the mixed nature preserved in the monastic complexes.
 In essence, these transactions are a combination of several forms of land relations, as if a legal whole.
 Such transactions were carried out in order to ratify the various relations on one legal basis.
 We have received numerous examples proving that these transactions were carried out.
According to 1206 Khalt, the son of one of Haghartsin's lithographers, bought a plot of land in Kanaker and donated a plot of land to the monastery.
 Similarly in 1201 ․ The father-in-law bought և donated a garden or a plot of land to Jukhtak monastery, the original name of which has not been preserved.
Studies of historical sources, lithography and bibliography of medieval Tavush prove that the foundations of cadastral system history are connected with that period.
  First of all, the prototype activity of the cadastral system is evidenced by the protocol protocols, which comprehensively present the land and property relations that took place in medieval Tavush, describing the procedure of their implementation, the subject of the transaction, the parties to the transaction, their rights and obligations, their legal bases.
 The analysis of the records shows that the construction and donation relations prevailed during the period.
 Compile other legal transactions, one of which is the implementation of tax relations.
 As for the donation relationship, it can be said that it was due not so much to a highly developed society as to the influence of Christian beliefs and property insurance tendencies.
  As we have seen, this period of tyranny contains elements of substantive stability both in socio-economic and military terms.
  The emergence of a new land-owning system caused stratification in the society, which conditioned the socio-economic instability, and the external enemy caused military instability.
  These unstable situations had to be conditioned by the huge donations of the upper classes of the society.
 On the other side of these deals always stood the monastic complexes, which is explained both by the influence of Christian beliefs and by the "inviolability" of the ownership of the evangelical complexes as a place of worship.
  This is the reason why the church property was growing and expanding next to the big feudal lords during the period of the establishment of the avatadir system.
Due to these processes, land ownership was divided into two major, secular, caring branches.
 The king and his family were the subjects of property in the secular branch, the avat owners with their clans, the avats dependent on Tsirents and the citizens with financial means.
 The monopoly of the church spread in a strong branch.
As for the legal substantiation of those relations, it is proof that Mkhitar Gosh's "Book of Judgments" was the basis of the legislative regulations of the period.
  Gosh's work regulates socio-economic, religious, cultural, family and other relations of the society.
  From the point of view of land relations, it has regulated such relations as property rights, donations, construction, sale and purchase, inheritance, lease, pledge, determination of borders and installation of borders, etc.
  All real estate transactions in medieval Tavush were carried out on that legal basis.
Summing up the research work, we came to the conclusion that a prototype of the cadastral system operated in medieval Tavush, which, in fact, was based on legal grounds.
 The activity of this system is best evidenced by the lithographic inscriptions, historical sources and rich medieval bibliography.
LITERATURE [1] Arakelyan B. N ․, Aghayan J., Galoyan G. A., Yeremyan S. T., Khachikyan L. S., Hakobyan A. M., Nersisyan M. G., History of the Armenian people, 3rd volume, Institute of History of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1976, pp. 14-7.
[2] Avagyan S. A. , Janpoladyan H. M., Divan of Armenian lithography, Prak 6, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Institute of Archeology and Ethnography, Yerevan, 1977, pp. 44, 645, 67, 71, 74, 76, 82, 105.
[3] Grigoryan G. M., Armenian Lithography, Yerevan, 2000, RA NAS Publishing House, pp. 67-78.
[4] Gandzaketsi K Հայոց, Armenian History, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1909, pp. 171-3, 175-6.
[5] Khachikyan L. S մասին, On the Armenian rural communities of XIV-XV centuries, Yerevan, 1958, Historical-Philological Journal, pp. 9-10, 12-4, 131-33.
[6] Manucharyan A. G., Lithographs as a Source of Political History of Armenia, Yerevan, 2015, p. 5.
[7] Manucharyan A. G., Cases of buying and selling monasteries in Armenia in the XIII century, Historical-Philological Journal № 2, pp. 15, 153-65.
[8] Shahnazaryan A., The strengthening of the emergence of the Kyurikian kingdom of Tashir-Dzoraget, Historical-Philological Journal, № 2-3, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 1-10.
[9] Sukiasyan A. C ․, Mkhitar Gosh և "The Armenian Textbook", Yerevan, 1965, pp. 105-7.
Mnatsakanyan REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS IN THE MEDIEVAL TAVUSH Keywords: lithographic protocols, cadastre, property, legal base, property legal relations.
