THE FEATURES OF MNDZURI AGRICULTURE “The beginning of the 20th century was marked by a bottomless and shocking tragedy in the life of the Armenian people.
 Due to historical catastrophic circumstances, a prosperous country was destroyed, a whole talented nation was killed.
  The pages of Armenology were painted with blood "[1].
The literary works of Hakob Mndzuri are related to this historical period.
  In his works, the country of Western Armenia and the people of Western Armenia were integrated with the essential aspects of their historical-ethnographic description.
The collections "Blue Light", "Armtan", "Crane, why are you coming?" Have just opened a new page in Armenian literature, turning the artistic biography of ordinary people into a prose word that has never been seen before.
We know G. Zohrab's psychological novels with the features of a prose story, with restrained lyrical lines.
 The heroes of Hakob Oshakan's stories are poor and humble, but the writer pursues racial, gender and subconscious features from the characters.
  The constellation writes about the life of the Armenian-Armenian village, especially from pre-genocide times.
 In his memory, his native village remained crystal clear.
Mndzuri is unique with its exceptional creative warmth and directness, transparency of human psychology and lyricism.
Mndzuri brings a person closer to his intelligence, to his non-violent role in the community.
 The apple's hero is "unloaded" from the writer's emphasized tendencies.
He is in his natural title, like, somewhere, the heroes of Tumanyan's prose.
The characters are distinguished by the ability and irreplaceability of details, they have national and individual colors, are integrated with the environment, bear the influence of color.
Hakob Mndzuri occupies an important place in Armenian literature.
  He is the last prominent representative of Naarmt Armenian's geography, with Hamasteghihat Tlkatintsi, Musho Gegham, Hrant and R. The successor of Zardaryan's case.
A number of literary critics have studied the work of Mndzuri.
 Interesting studies have been done.
 Only one letter. Gegham Sean, paying tribute to the ideology of the time, tries to expand the social point of view, while Mndzuri's heroes are in human relations.
His stories are not large in volume.
 A short story, two or three heroes, the author creates impressive characters, living characters.
 A couple of dialogues, a couple of landscapes, a slight plot, ամբողջ the whole environment is shaped.
 Mndzuri does not tempt the reader with interesting stories, does not invent conflicts and solutions, does not condense colors to create positive and negative images, simply tells in a calm and peaceful style what people were doing, how they were happy and sad, what worries they had.
 Everything that was their life.
 It often represents the environment more than the hero.
  His heroes are "small" people.
In Mndzuri literature, the villager speaks to his animal like a relative, lavishing the same or even more words of tenderness and love on him, as, say, he should have said to his son or wife.
 "You are not surprised or laughing, if you have never been a child of the village, because you know, you have heard and read that the animal was the first helper of the villager, the relative.
Reading Mndzuri, you only understand the great Komitas better, can you not be moved by the emotional depth of the people that was yours, if you are a duha who sang and dug the ox and said, "Dear garbage." [2]
In the short story "Our Red Ox", the grandfather dreams of their red ox on the mountain at night and wakes up worried. "Do not let trouble come to you."
 He asks his grandson and daughter-in-law to go to the oxen early in the morning to see the ox.
 "For a dream, let 's go to Eznots for a century before Ghara-Srt," the grandson complains.
  But the grandfather raises his voice. "Akob, you have no mercy on the beast, you have no love, you have no love for beef, they are lost, they are rolled, somewhere they are broken, they are sick, you do not care, the sea is ours, if there is no ox, the ox is the earnings we eat "If there are no cows and sheep, where will we find the milk and yogurt?"
So much, և before us անում comes to life the old villager who loves land and animals.
 Mother and son, measuring the field and oxen of different villages all day, finally find the red ox, which was beautified and made bright by the mountain's.
 And the grandfather's love for the ox seems to be transferred to him. "It was our ox.
  What was this, the mountain, what an ox with a shining eyelashes, a shining forehead and eyes changed, it was radiant.
  If the sculptor of the most famous name had been to build a statue of an ox, he would not have been able to give this beauty to this man, who was squeezing my eyes.
  In the dream, my grandfather rubbed my face like a lizard… "[3].
Apple stories, images, tales do not go beyond a few pages.
 These little stories, which are separate little "models", being stories of the life of people from the same village, the same province, as if they join together, complement, complete, և The whole work of Mndzuri becomes a great unique novel, a story of a great life with many heroes, with a pronounced environment.
Almost all of Mndzuri's works, which are based on the mystery of the inseparable unity of land, man, work, and man, are addressed in this issue by Hamastegh and Bakunts's spiritual brother.
He looks around, tells about what he has seen, or rather, remembers events and faces, retells them.
  His story is so natural, so simple and accurate, that it seems that he speaks exclusively about real people, his acquaintances, relatives, with the same names, tells about the events that took place.
 Maybe it was just like that, maybe the author did not invent anything.
 But these real stories are not documents, Mndzuri, through the artist's insightful view, subjected them to artistic elaboration, even to create skilled structures in short stories, such a development of the course of action that allowed the development of the hero.
 Mndzuri mainly strives to complete the episode, the image, but many of his works are masterfully constructed stories in terms of action development, novels that suggest that the author also created them in the writer's imagination or, if they are real cases, then refine, elaborate and give a purposeful direction. their.
"The works of Mndzuri are like hymns, hymns mixed with sun and earth, which weave the praise of honest and fair work, the pure life of the motherland…" [4].
The author's stories are characterized by epic calmness, graphic simplicity of images and easy accessibility.
 "The longing and grief-stricken pain of the lost homelands, repeatedly refined and honored in the pre-writer's imagination, is the beginning of the unspoken tragedy of an individual and a person who feels well in his own homeland, the embryonic Diaspora, the ever-unknown mystery."
In his words, "tragedy, there is no drama in what I wrote," Mndzuri described where he went that day, what he did.
 Mndzuri could have put "tragedy, drama" in his stories, but he did not do that. He did not do so, in my opinion, because of or out of deep respect for the material.
  He knows the country well, his people, he is one of them, his conscience as a villager allows him to exaggerate the descriptions of his fellow villagers, the conscience of a fine esthetician forbids him to put a tragedy where that tragedy, as a foreign body, would not be tolerated.
Hakob Mndzuri differs from his predecessors in his style.
 A style that is exclusively independent has no precedent.
 Mndzuri's agriculture is "swan song", "nostalgia literature".
  This unique style is as independent as the world he imagined and drew, which was only for him, his native village.
 If Hamastegh's "Chalo" is as much a living "hero", it defines a complete, complete hero story, as the heroes of each of the stories in the "Village" and "Rain" collections, which make up Hamastegh's's geography, are the opposite for Hakob Mndzuri.
 However, this does not mean that Hakob Mndzuri does not have complete, complete stories.
 But if graduation is an understanding of style and art for a particular story in the works of the Constellation, Mndzuri can begin to tell about something, then skip it, move on to another, in another story "to return the half-left questions to the heroes."
  And the uniqueness of his art lies in that typical half-baked, incomplete, tasteful-smelling narrative.
The story of the apple gives an inner warmth to even the driest material, for example, when talking about ordinary bread or lavash, the reader feels its aroma and taste և more. He reads with "hunger".
 Let us give at least an example that is the best proof of a writer's ability to describe.
"Our breads were thin sheets without a core.
 We would roll out the dough balls, spread them on the rapat, stick the tonir on the ribs, knead them, and brown them.
 We would take it out with Akish.
 We would carry the bakery, and we would hang two ropes from one wall to the other, we would hang them on the ropes, their appetizing smell would go from house to house until two streets away.
 They were not as white as the city's bread, that is, we would add water… "[6].
Mndzuri has created many heroes in his story-images, who are vivid, accentuated characters, prominent literary characters in our literature, some human personalities, who are at the same time types, characters that condense the typical features of different layers of the Armenian peasant.
 With their thinking, behaviors, life, work, and great love for human animals, they complete the image of the Armenian villager, who localizes and concretizes in the context of nature and time. perfect, complete.
The heroes of Mndzuri are people connected to their land and water, their centuries-old history, traditions, their every movement, action, word is an expression of a native element.
 Each sentence uttered by the heroes bears the deep stamp of the people's life and everyday life.
  But the alarming and strange thing is that after all that, after all that is reflected in us, the unexplained longing remains.
 That longing belongs to the author, who is next to his heroes.
 And the most important thing is that even in the most negative hero, the author can show even the slightest good, the positive - to say, insist, prove, confirm the human, that one can not be disappointed even with the worst person, if there is something in him. is good, the human embryo, the particle.
 A circumstance that can not exist but not exist ից "Hence the positive of Hakob Mndzuri's healthy patriotism, his geography, the constructive source of his literature" [2].
Of course, there are not many people who fight against negativity, bad, perversion in literature, but if we mean the environment, Mndzuri's sympathy is naturally on the side of fair and kind people, on the side of the village, the province, the kind, simple, simple and hard-working, և Such heroes make up the majority of the work.
  And yet their deluded, open-hearted, direct faith is manifested in human consciousness, albeit a passive rebellion sometimes against the "god" who is supposed to be the supreme justice ("St. George").
 In Mndzuri's work there are, workers, և´ rich villagers, but there is no pronounced social contradiction.
 All of them are farmers, one is poor, the other is rich, peasants with their worries, pains and grief.
 Mndzuri does not try to create particularly negative characters for two reasons.
 First, the village depicted by Mndzuri was not really a place of socially emphasized contradictions. It was a patriarchal village to some extent, then there is a subjective circumstance.
 Mndzuri talks about people who are mostly real people, who no longer exist.
Speaking of his close friends and acquaintances who tragically passed away, as a tribute of remembrance and respect, Mndzuri speaks in soft tones, longing and kind, impartial love.
 The writer tells about his lost nature, the tragic loss of his loved ones.
Mndzuri does not pay tribute to the most popular aspiration of the literature of the time - the artistic condition, the conventional environment and the characters.
 The writer has not distorted the realities artistically, his characters are not imaginary or fictional, they are real, in tune with life and reality.
Hr. Wrote an interesting conclusion to Mndzuri "Yerker" (1986). Matosyan.
He notes that the people of Armand "saw their homeland, their country, their statehood in their community, in their village."
  We think that the same is typical of Matosyan's "Tsmakut" heroes, of course, in modern times.
 "Bernadzies" are the heroines of Mndzuri, like Aghun.
 This should be considered as a new and interesting approach.
 Of course, the heroines of Mndzuri are silent, accommodating, humble, and Aghun is rebellious.
 The comparison of Mndzuri heroines with Aghun aims to emphasize the responsibility of the Armenian woman in the family.
 The woman fulfills her responsibilities without hesitation, because she knows nothing but strives for nothing.
LITERATURE [1] Darbinyan G., ArmArmenia in the Prose of the Apple, Yerevan, 1994, pp. 3, 25.
[2] San G., Hakob Mndzuri, Yerevan, 1981, pp. 52, 61, 63.
[3] Mndzuri H., Works, Yerevan, 1986, pp. 236, 238, 533.
[4] Gisak V., "Singer of Armtan", "Lraber", 22-47, New York, 1977.
[5] Matosyan H., "The World of Hakob Mndzuri", "Spring", vol. 7, Yerevan, 1971, pp. 54-56.
[6] Mndzuri H., "Crane, why are you coming?", Istanbul, 1974, p. 219.
Grigoryan AlvinaMUNDZURI FEATURES FEATURES Keywords: Mndzuri, village writer, peculiarity, description of Armenian-Armenian villagers.
