DANIEL VARUZHAN'S HEROIC NOVELS Daniel Varuzhan's collection "The Tribe Heart" (1909) includes three sections: "Bagininvra", "In the Circus", "Heroic Novels".
"If in the first part of the book (" The Heart of the Tribe "collection - SG) (" On Bagin "series) the poet depicts suffering with faith in the future and the call to struggle, then in the second part (" In the Circus "series) he shows struggle in poems For example, to the struggling Armenians, the image of the poet glorifying them, who is a mystic-poet, the trumpeter of the freedom struggle…. "The socio-political situation in Armenia is depicted with the artistic symbol of the opposition of a peaceful spirit," Vazgen Gabrielyan wrote.
Varuzhan is the full-fledged successor of his predecessors, particularly Siamanto, on selected topics.
 He raised the topic of the liberation struggle to a new level, outlining the path of the struggle aimed at the struggle for the freedom of one's own country and people.
Varuzhan's epic novels are three: "The Shepherd", "Armenuhi" and "Eukit Tonel", which, according to him, are epic poems.
 The authorial tendency to describe the poems as "Heroic Novels" is remarkable, as the mentioned works are epic novels, in other words, novels about heroes, epic novels.
 The concept of "heroic novel" is understood as an epic, a viper, which embodies the struggle of the people for their freedom, their lofty ideals, beliefs and customs, manners and heroic heroes.
  This means that D. Varuzhan created a literary epic.
Varuzhan's epic novels depict not only events that characterize the time lived by the author, as these works can be said to be "devoid" of the stereotype of time. It depicts such cases և describes such faces that are relevant even in our day, in the period we live in.
 Contemporary themes were used here, for example, devastation, abductions, duel Gyle, which we see in the "heroization" of the embodiment of the Armenian-type struggling characters created by the author.
Heroic novels stand out with the deep expression of the will of the heroes, the tendency to achieve a specific goal.
 «…. Varuzhan strives to create a unique undifferentiated poetic language, bringing the poetic image to an unusual sound, touch, visibility.
 And Varuzhan's poetry, created with plastic molds specific to sculpture and work, with the painter's elegant brushstrokes, is the best example of an artistically differentiated word, ”writes Silva Hovhannisyan2.
D. One of Varuzhan's epic novels is the work "The Shepherd", which consists of four sections.
  Yeghishe Petrosyan mentions about this file. Varuzhan portrayed the heroism of the character in the poem "The Shepherd", combining eloquent, beautiful landscapes.
  The dominant here is the poetic pathos, the variety of colors and shades ”3.
Varuzhan begins the poem with a description of idyllic peaceful images, which follow each other, creating the illusion of a peaceful life. Once a year he came to the village only with his flock.
 I could hardly see the face of the khashin on the mountain, I was still walking, I was still running, the shepherd was running to meet me, my grandfather was behind me… .4 It seems that the author depicts an ordinary rural everyday life: .
 Varuzhan presents this peaceful life 1 Varuzhan D., Works, Yerevan, 1984, page 8.
2 Hovhannisyan S., The social-aesthetic views of Daniel Varuzhan, Yerevan, 1997, p. 62.
3 Petrosyan E., Daniel Varuzhan, Yerevan, 1987, p. 64.
4 Varuzhan D., Works, Yerevan, 1984, page 173.
According to the seasons of the year, winter ("B" section), when the field work is over, և people have nothing to do but sit in the tonratan and tell tales, spring ("C" section), when life begins to circulate, wakes up The nature that fell asleep in the winter, the green mountain land invites the shepherds to them, the whole Armenian nature is being reconstructed.
  Well, these three sections are followed by the picture of autumn (section "D") with a direct quotation from the word "evil", which predicts և symbolizes the course of the following events. Why didn't they play Veg Street that day? Why didn't old Heg sit on the threshold and pray?
The shepherd soon saw the ruins of houses, the broken huts of the door, where there was no sound or fire.
1 The pastor, who has patriotic thoughts and reflections, cannot leave unanswered the ruined village and his own house, which he saw with his own eyes, because "the wolves used to make the house their own."
  This is the case when the advice of "Eye to eye, tooth to tooth" is revived in time, receiving the wording "You are a tooth against the tooth, a toothpick against the toe" 3, which, in fact, is not out of date to this day.
  The author's figurative expression "werewolves" involuntarily leads us to a relatively late period, H. Tumanyan's famous quartet "cannibal beast" that the poet wrote in direct response to the Genocide.
 The massacre and the ruthlessness force the shepherd to take the child, with whom he had not even taken a mountain shepherd, full of vengeance to the mountains, but this time not to be a shepherd, but to join the defense of the homeland and to punish injustice.
Before our eyes, the image of an Armenian endowed with a consciousness of revenge, the shepherd, who is ready to take the gun hanging under the cross of Christ (which, of course, contains the symbolism of his middle class), becomes the shepherd of wolves, so that "J. The Turks should know that they have blessed this country, they should not let them eat the broken bone. ”4
 The image of a shepherd reflects everything that a working Armenian includes. This is a collective image, a collective image of the people that is ready to consolidate the freedom of their own land and people with weapons.
In the epic novel "Armenuhi" D. Varuzhan refers to the Shahbasas period, which, as we know, was reflected in H. In Tumanyan's famous poem ("The King and the Charchin").
  And here, here, Varuzhan, using the same theme, is the story of the forced deportation of Armenians by Shah Abbas, reveals new horizons of Armenian history through the image of Shah.
This is a story about the suicide of an Armenian girl, Armenuhi, which is accompanied by a reference to the deportation of Armenians, a story (beginning of the 17th century), as well as hints of the destruction and massacre that preceded it.
Here, Varuzhan presents the resilient spirit of an Armenian girl, the attempt to save her own honor at all costs, the drive to fear the most powerful, the fearless, the story of immortality and defilement.
The poet uses the words "Armenuhi" and "Hayuhi" in his work, which, in fact, have the same meaning, and the word "Armenuhi" (the author's choice of this word should not be considered accidental), we think, should not be considered as a girl's usual famous use of the name, but substitutes a simple name ("Armenian woman", which is found in the capital letters in the poem) with a special name - "Armenuhi" with the interpretation of an Armenian woman.
In the epic, there is a remarkable և symbolic image-scene of a human-beast, Abas և the Lion (note the fact that the last word is not accidentally written in capital letters), in other words, the fight of two powerful kings, which was fought for Avar, to take that Avar She was an Armenian woman. Seven times, sniffing the animal, she put her paw on Abbas' shoulders, and mixed it up seven times. 1 Varuzhan D., p. 177.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P.
The beard of one և the hair of the other.
And he stirreth up the river in the midst of it, and stirreth it up.
But the goal of both seems to be the same. Both of them want to devour the body of the immortal in order to satisfy their animal hunger.
  In the fight, of course, the strong one wins - the Lion King. The beast of Kostni and the young woman in it are taken out of the river. The white hand of the virgin is taken out. The white hand of the virgin, the lily of the valley falls, It falls dead on the animal 2.
As it is known, many Armenian women have suffered the fate of Armenuhi (we mean being captured, taken to a harem, forcibly expelled from relatives and homeland, etc.).
 It can be said that in this epic novel, as before, the main character is a collective, embodying, uniting a character of the high qualities of the people (decency, patriotism, perfect morality, consciousness of self-dignity, etc.).
  In this regard, E. Petrosyan mentions. "Armenuhi is the cherished love symbol of the high virtue of an Armenian woman.
 In the poem, the Beautiful and the brute force are constantly in struggle.
 Love և the mighty power, glory, pleasure և the native hut and the sacred traditions, to which Armenuhi is faithful.
  And despite the tragic end of the poem, it is nevertheless deeply optimistic, because the winner of the truth is Armenuhi ”3.
As N. Gogol Al. From a small anecdote told by Pushkin, he created his wonderful comedy "Rizor", as well as D. Varuzhan created his epic novel "Armenuhi" from a small but important story, where the author's intermittent comments add additional detail to the general ideological content, making the author a direct participant in the events. A) "O Shah, come. "Behold, passing through the moon, they will open the door to Vran, which is softly sinking. It will flood your prey with its radiant rays."
… But the virgin cries - what a pity - every virgin cries When the forehead of the celestial crown is torn off, Or the thread is cut on her pearl necklace, O Shah, come.
 - »4, b)" Escape, the hour, virgin, this is the time "5 և etc.
D. Varuzhan expands his ideas and raises them to a whole new level in the other epic novel, "Eikit Tonel".
In the footnotes of the book about the above-mentioned poem, Vazgen Gabrielyan left a significant mention, writing: J. The protagonist of the hero of the epic novel "Eukit Tonel", the brave Igit Tonel, was the grandfather of the poet's mother, Daniel (Tonel), whose heroic deeds were told legends.
  He was transporting cargo in a caravan of mules, often fighting with bandits. ”6
 As it can be noticed, Varuzhan used the above-mentioned theme in this work, presenting the story of the heroism of one "hero", achieving epic monumentality, especially in the episodes of the description of the heroic deed of the latter in the image of Eukit Tonel.
The description of the relationship between Eukit Tonel և's son, Stepik, inadvertently reminds of the connection between the pastor of the previous epic novel and his grandson. Both elders are brave and honorable, both juniors sing (the song is not a coincidence in the epic novels at all; we consider it as evidence of the supposed victorious end of the chosen work) - his 1 Varuzhan D., p. 194.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Petrosyan E., Daniel Varuzhan, Yerevan, 1987, p. 67.
4 Varuzhan D., Works, Yerevan, 1984, p. 187.
5 Ibid., P. 191.
6 Ibid., P. 536.
The first sings the praises of the shepherd with the song, and the second "the song sung sweetens the father's ear" 1.
Here, Tonel and Cello Pay are a completely opposite couple, remembering which Tonel feels revenge and shame.
 Under all this, of course, old pain and bitter memory are hidden.
As in the previous epic "Armenuhi", here too there is an epic battle-like scene, where in one bowl were the lion Tonel and Koryun Stepik, and in the other bowl, the robbers of Cello Pey. dagger dashno, breast breast.
Bring foam, eye flames erupt 2.
It is not for nothing that the author called this work a heroic novel, because here we have this heroic character, which fully corresponds to the name.
In this epic there is an eternal conflict of life and death, where the priority is given only to the winner, the strongest at the moment.
Hero Tonel dies a heroic death չէ It is not accidental that the latter's grave later becomes a place of pilgrimage. "A place of pilgrimage where heroes visit" 3.
  "And despite the poetic-poetic ending, it is imbued with optimism, because Tonel's spirit is not dead, the living lion-hearted son, Stepan, the new generation, under whose breast the hope of the homeland's rebirth is beating" 4.
  In fact, the tomb of Tonel, which has become a place of pilgrimage (also Tonel itself), we think, symbolizes the proximity of the people and does not break the harmony of the spirit.
As for the events depicted by the poet, all this would later become part of the suffering of the people of the genocide, lived and unlived moments, as, for example, an ordinary Armenian puts down the shepherd's cane, replacing it with the only guarantor of the liberation struggle, the gun, which They were accompanied by endurance and readiness to fight.
Thus, each of Daniel Varuzhan's epic novels is a significant and lasting value of patriotic upbringing in the Armenian reality.
  This is the reason for the significance and firm place of these works in Armenian literature.
Srbuhi GasoyanDANIEL VARUZHAN'S HEROIC NOVELS Keywords: epic novel, poem, epic, literary epic, ideas, prototype, liberation struggle, stereotyping of time, temporal themes, symbolize.
