Nikoghosyan Kristine THE ROLE OF SOCIAL PARTNERSHIP IN THE CONTEXT OF SOCIAL POLITICS OF RA The mosaic of the historical development of the Armenian reality makes clear the fact that in Armenia the transition to capitalist relations took place due to the external and external negative effects of the revolution.
  For post-Soviet societies, new developments in the social sphere radically transformed public relations.
  Social stratification and the consequent sharp decline in the standard of living of the society make the use of such a tool as social partnerships imperative.
 In other words, social partnership was seen as a mechanism for ensuring social stability և mutual consent as a basis for sustainable public development։.
Social partnership is a system of relations that is formed between employees and employers within the framework of state mediation.
 It presupposes a set of institutions, mechanisms and processes aimed at ensuring a balance in the negotiation process, where the parties discuss issues related to the principles of employment, remuneration, employment and employment.
  The negotiation process will, in fact, lead to a compromise to achieve the realization of corporate և public interests [1].
Agapova thinks that social partnership is a tool to solve the existing problems in the society.
  In addition, it aims to form new alliances and coalitions that will centralize the governance of the community.
  Volgin views social partnership as a system of relations between state employees and employers through state intervention aimed at reconciling economic interests in the social and labor spheres and resolving social-labor conflicts.
The above definitions make visible the fact that the social partnership is aimed at the normalization of labor relations, the settlement of conflicts and problems.
 In other words, the scope and reality of labor, labor law, and emphasis are emphasized.
 Labor law և Labor rights are not only the core of socio-economic but also fundamental human rights.
  The common denominator of human rights related to work is, in fact, work.
  The material basis of any society is the labor activity of people.
Considering the foundations of social partnership in the Republic of Armenia, it is first of all to study the historical foundations of its formation, which will make clear the main necessity of its origin.
 In the first decades of the 19th century, Eastern Armenia, as well as Georgia and Azerbaijan, were finally liberated from the "yoke of the Ottoman Empire" and joined Tsarist Russia.
 Favorable conditions for economic and cultural development were created for Eastern Armenia.
  However, all the peoples that entered the Russian monarchy, including the Armenians, were subjected to the brutal colonial regime of tsarism, brutal national persecution and ruthless exploitation.
  The post-reform period was marked by the rapid development of capitalism in both Russia and Transcaucasia.
 Capitalist relations began to develop in Armenia as well.
  Industry and trade began to grow slowly.
 Favorable conditions were created for the peasantry of Armenia especially in 1870. After the agrarian reform, although the situation of the Armenian peasantry was still very bad, the landowners continued to oppress the liberated peasantry as before.
As a result of the development of capitalism, a new class appeared in the Transcaucasia - the commercial-industrial bourgeoisie.
 The bourgeoisie is the result of a long process of development, of the revolution of means of production, of exchange, with the emergence of which the working class is formed.
 Thus the bourgeoisie gave birth to its antithesis.
The concentration of capital in the hands of a certain class of society, in this case the bourgeoisie, led to a transformation of relations.
In the early stages of the development of capitalism, the interaction of the two classes led to the emergence of conflicting interests of those classes.
 From the very beginning of the origins of capitalism, capitalists, for their own benefit, forced the worker to work beyond their means, in extremely difficult and harmful conditions, without a time limit.
In such conditions, it is obvious that not only the use of the term labor protection is missing, but also the creation of appropriate guarantees for its provision in practice.
 In such conditions, it becomes imperative to create a mechanism within the framework of the operation of the two entities, which would prepare fertile ground for the overcoming of the conflict.
 Initially, such a mechanism was formed quietly, as a result of which the working hours were reduced and the salary was increased.
 In such a situation, the power և opportunity of the hired workers was greater than that of the capitalist.
  However, it should be noted that in the initial stage of the development of capitalism, they were supported by the state, whose main role was the legislative regulation.
  It was widely believed during this period that the state had taken on the role of "night watchman" with the intention that no one would violate the order of things.
 In such a situation, the workers could not rely on a state pursuing a policy of neutrality.
 It was necessary to unite in order to achieve the adoption of laws in their interests.
  This explains why in many countries there were laws prohibiting the formation of trade unions.
 As a result, it was not until the end of the 19th century that they legalized their activities.
 This was followed by the amendment of labor codes and the creation of trade unions.
 This is how the foundations of trade union activity were laid.
 1919 The International Labor Organization was established, but the social partnership was not yet operational.
 It took about half a century to form an idea of ​​social partnership on a theoretical and practical level.
  Naturally, certain socio-economic changes took place in this region, as a result of the observation of which the imperative of the emergence of social partnership will become obvious.
 During this period, capitalism entered a new stage of development, the scale of production expanded, and production was internationalized.
The competition was obvious both inside and outside the country.
 The strikes organized by these unions temporarily stopped the production, as a result of which the owners faced more serious problems than 20-30 years ago.
 The internationalization of production ունենալ having access to foreign markets further complicated the situation during the strikes.
Due to the strikes, the owners were directly defeated in the competition, which led to a reduction in profits.
 Thus, the owners had no choice but to cooperate with the unions.
 In such a situation, after the Second World War, the trade unions were already a significant force to be reckoned with.
 This changed the nature of social-labor relations, contributed to the formation of relations between employees and employers.
  The role of the state will change.
In the first half of the 20th century, the state moved from the role of "night watchman" in the economic sphere to active activity.
 The intervention was obvious not only in the economic but also in the social spheres.
  Under the influence of this wave, after the end of World War II, a new concept was introduced - "Welfare State" (WelfareState).
 The concept of a "common welfare state" was based on the creation of an accessible education and healthcare system using social security, the minimum wage, and other tools.
Thus, the role of democratic procedures և mechanisms in the process of public administration began to be strengthened.
 Through collective negotiations in 1919. Within the framework of the International Labor Organization, the foundation was laid for the operation of a catalyst such as social partnership.
The ideology of social partnership is based on the principle of compromise, cooperation, mutual responsibility, moving from a radical confrontation of labor disputes to legal, conciliation and reconciliation procedures [8].
Volgin calls the system of social partnership (hereinafter CC) "tripartism" due to the presence of three parties in it [3]: Organizations that represent the interests of employees - trade unions, Employers, employers' unions, the State.
State Bodies NegotiationsEmployersEmployeesSmolkov views the SG system in the context of a tripartite agreement, seeking to find acceptable tripartite solutions in labor's socio-economic relations.
 Such a definition emphasizes only one aspect of GC, in particular that GC is an expedient method մեթոդ toolkit for regulating social-labor relations.
 In other words, it has become a part of public relations, և today the strengthening, development և improvement of that mechanism is primary. [9]
Thus, summarizing the role of social partnership, we consider it as the actions of the entities that are part of it, which are aimed at implementing social policy, changing the situation of the population and its individual parts, solving the existing problems in the social sphere.
 This definition views social partnership as a way to solve existing problems in the social sphere by changing or maintaining the social status of the population and its individual groups.
  From this definition we can conclude that social partnership is viewed in a broader sense as a means of representing the interests of a social group.
 Social partnership, as an internationally recognized concept ոլոր field of practical activity, has been adopted by both developed and developing countries of the world.
  In the process of transition to a market economy and the establishment of democratic institutions, social partnership is considered one of the key concepts, the operation of which will ensure the smoothness of the establishment of the welfare state, as well as the development of the business environment.
  As a unique type of public relations և regulatory mechanism, the scope of the conceptual concept of social partnership has expanded today.
 Initially, the emergence of social partnership was associated with the normalization of social-labor relations.
  However, to make the necessary Social Partnership (CSP) toolkit applicable in a number of other areas.
First of all, referring to the economic sphere, it should be noted that the use of the SG toolkit in this sphere is mainly aimed at providing a cooperative environment of mutual understanding in the business sphere.
 The following image is obtained. Employers և the institutional bodies representing their interests տնտեսական are economically at the heart of the GC regulatory mechanism.
 It is necessary to mention the fact that the businessman, as an employer, is one of the parties to the CC, and as a result of such actions, the employer-employee relationship is formed, the balance of which can only become a basis for the implementation of labor and economic policies adopted by the state.
  However, the settlement of such relations first of all presupposes the existence of a component of territorial spatiality.
 In other words, the development of such relations should take place not only in a specific center, but also in the peripheral regions of the country, ensuring the formation of balanced partnership relations.
We should consider the importance of the role of SG in the environmental sphere with the development of business.
 As a term concept, let's use the term corporate social responsibility - CSR.
 This term is based on "the ongoing commitment of business to act in accordance with ethical norms, to promote economic development while improving the quality of life of the workforce, their families, communities, and society in general."
  The advantage of being socially responsible is the coincidence of the direction of business movement and public expectations.
  Companies, being economic entities, are obliged to take care of the efficient use of the resources under their control.
  Guided by the fulfillment of the mentioned obligation, the companies produce products or provide services, provide jobs to the citizens of the given society, pay dividends to the shareholders.
On the other hand, companies are more than just the economic whole.
  In this case, the companies are part of the outside world. The success of their activities depends on the nature of relations with the outside world.
 It turns out that companies need to take responsibility in areas such as environmental protection, development of local communities, public safety, etc.
 In other words, the businessman will bear social responsibility for the employee, his family and the community.
Through CSR, it is possible to achieve economic development, social stability and environmental security.
Social Partnership in Vocational Education (VET) in Armenia.
  The main goal of ensuring cooperation in this sphere is to ensure the order of the education system through the labor market-economy-social infrastructure links.
 As a result, the qualified personnel-labor market model is a very necessary measure for any country with a developed economy or aspiring to it.
 The program is implemented in the secondary vocational education system in Armenia.
 One of the most important issues in the field of VET is the improvement of the quality of education, the effective operation of the system, ensuring equal conditions for citizens to receive education in accordance with their aspirations and abilities, and competitiveness in the labor market.
 The problem is that a large part of those with higher education work in non-professional professions, doing work that requires lower qualifications than professional qualifications, occupying the place of VET graduates in the RA labor market.
  The formation of social partnership is a common problem in the field of vocational education and training.
 Vocational education and training should be developed based on social partnership.
  The decision-making of the social partners is a guarantee of compliance with the requirements of the labor market, and their large-scale long-term investments in different levels of the VET system can ensure the sustainable growth of the economy and the vocational education system.
 All this presupposes that the education system must be reorganized, transformed, become more efficient and dynamic, and its order can be given only by the developing or knowledge-seeking economy, which is formulating a new content demand.
When making perspective observations, we consider it necessary to study the circumstances related to the role of the state.
 The circumstance of the state's interest is used as the first precondition for the establishment of SG in the Republic of Armenia.
 The role of the state is mainly related to the activities carried out in the legislative field, but it would be an omission not to mention the issues related to financing.
 An important aspect of ensuring the activities of employers and trade unions, which is a subject of SG, is the availability of necessary financial resources, which should be formed not only from membership fees, but also from state transfers.
  The guarantee of achieving all these goals in the Republic of Armenia is the effective public-private partnership և harmonious development of the trilateral social partnership.
 Particularly when there are harmonious legal balances for the state as a representative of the public interest, for employers as a provider of goods and services, for trade unions as a guarantor of social protection.
 In other words, CP is the basis of the PPP (public-private partnership), which can ensure the effectiveness of the latter.
LITERATURE [1] Хохлова М. M., Social Policy.
 Учебное пособие, Krasnoyarsk, SFU, 2010, [4] Vardapetyan A. V., History of Trade Unions of Armenia, Yerevan, 1969, Page 5.
[5] Vardapetyan A. V., Lenin on the role and problems of trade unions, Yerevan, 1970, p. 3.
URL.
 www.encyclopedia.com (Accessed.
 16.08.2017). [8] Sorokin S. A., Social Partnership.
  Current Problems of Vedi [9] Kiselev V. Н., Смольков В. G., Social Partnership in Russia.
 specifics and [10] Holostova E. I., Social policy.
 ուսбное пособие, Москва, СТИ, МГУС, Kristine Nikoghosyan THE ROLE OF SOCIAL PARTNERSHIP IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL POLICY OF RA:
