The deepening of integration processes all over the world leads to an increase in trade volumes, which leads to an increase in the work of customs authorities.
 At the same time, the uneven economic development of the countries leads some countries to become more dependent on the leaders, which, of course, leads to trade disputes, contributes to the emergence of customs risks.
Experience shows that today the international trade turnover is several times higher than the customs services of the most developed, experienced and technically equipped countries.
  The customs service, on the one hand, must protect the interests of consumers, and on the other hand, satisfy the interests of the business environment by eliminating administrative barriers.
  In this case, the traditional methods of operation of the customs authorities make the work of the customs authorities inefficient.
  In this regard, it is necessary to use completely new approaches, such as the risk management system in the customs service, which contributes to accelerating trade, reducing costs, increasing the efficiency of foreign economic activity, which leads to improving the state of the national economy.
In the economic literature, the concept of "risk" is interpreted differently by different authors1. As a result of their study, we can present the "risk" in the following way: the risk of getting a positive, negative result or whatever. A. Bayankin interprets risk as an opportunity, danger as.
 According to M.N. According to Lepeshkina, the risk is uncertainty in relation to possible losses.
According to IT According to Balabanov, risk is the danger of possible loss, which arises from the types of activities of human society and the peculiarities of this or that phenomenon of nature.
 According to B.A. According to Reisberg, the risk is that the economic entity will incur losses in the form of additional costs under the pre-planned action plan, or will receive lower-than-expected revenues.
 According to MV Grach's risk is the probability of losing some of the resources, the incompleteness of income or the incurrence of additional expenses, or, conversely, the possibility of receiving a significant benefit (income) as a result of certain targeted activities.
  According to A.M. Stolyarenko, N.D. Amaglobeli's risk is the probability of threatening to achieve the desired result in conditions of uncertainty.
is the probability of not getting a result, or it is the probability of deviating from the result expected by the subject.
According to the Customs Code, the risk is the probability of violating the customs legislation of the Customs Union կամ (or) the CU member states1, and risk management is the regular work on the development and practical implementation of risk prevention and mitigation measures, evaluating the effectiveness of their application and customs clearance. , continuous updates, analysis of information available in customs authorities - review.
We believe that risk perception is one of the primary tasks of improving the risk management system in both the Eurasian Economic Union and the customs sector of the Republic of Armenia2. The risk is not only the possibility of violating the customs legislation, there may be risks in the customs system, which will not be considered as a violation of the customs legislation.
  The risks of the customs system should first of all be derived from the main tasks of the customs authorities, which include issues such as economic sovereignty, economic security, protection of economic interests, internal market, support for the development of foreign economic relations, support for quality assurance of imported goods. There may be risks that are not considered a violation of customs legislation.
 In this sense, we believe that the risk is the probability of an accident occurring during the implementation of foreign economic activity in the customs area.
At present, the RA customs system pays more attention to such risks that may cause losses in customs payments. in particular, the risks of incorrect declaration of the customs value of the goods, the country of origin, the risks related to the classification of goods.
  Risks worthy of special attention may appear in the customs service, which are never given enough attention, they are: In a number of countries (USA, Singapore, UK), a risk management system has developed so much that when carrying out any activity or activity in the customs service, it is first analyzed in that system, identifying its risk aspects, and then developed. The main directions of implementation.
Risks of import of goods, risk of reduced competitiveness of local producers (depending on import), import of risky goods. In particular, in developed countries, much attention is paid to products that are imported for domestic consumption.
 We believe that when developing a customs policy, in the process of risk management of the customs authorities, it is necessary to study, pay more attention to such risks, and direct the customs policy to the protection of consumers in the internal market.
  In particular, powerful tools for managing these risks are product certification և non-tariff regulation tools.
  The certification of goods imported to Armenia was removed in 2012, but after the EEU membership, this institute was re-introduced.
  We believe that in order to protect consumers, ie to prevent consumer risks, the quality of certain goods imported should be subject to special control at the customs border, which is not always exercised over time. For example, such products can be soft toys, upholstered furniture, cosmetic products, etc.
 Of course, the quality of such products can be controlled when they are sold in the domestic market, but we believe that this may not always be effective, as imported goods may not always be sold in the domestic market, or certain products may be left out of control. from the field of view.
FEZ risks (from the point of view of economic entities) Risks of the customs system of non-compliance with the customs legislation. 1. Risks of customs system risks We think that risk factors should be considered not only from the point of view of the state, but also from the point of view of foreign economic entities, as the risks of their activity may lead to risks of the customs system (Figure 1).
At the same time, from the point of view of the economic entity, customs risks are the risk of introducing additional types of customs payments, the risk of increasing the rates of existing customs fees, the risk of cooperation with foreign customs and tax risk partners;
Let's consider some opportunities to increase the efficiency of the risk management system in the customs service.
One of the problems of the RA customs bodies is the attraction of foreign investments, for which the simplification of customs procedures, the acceleration of customs clearance, which is of great importance for the quality of service of FEZ participants և business.
 In particular, in order to simplify customs procedures, the "One Window" principle is being introduced in the customs system, which allows trade information "and / or documents to be submitted only once from a single point, ensuring access to information - rapid processing.
  It also reduces the contact of economic entities with officials, thus reducing corruption risks.
Experience shows that the general risk management system is not very effective, due to the fact that specific risks may arise at different customs points, and they may have different levels.
  In particular, we think it would be more effective to carry out risk management in the customs system at four levels. united - against the EEU, centralized against the RA Ministry of Defense, territorial - in the form of customs, local - in the form of customs points.
 It assumes that each customs house will have a separate risk management unit, as well as a separate risk management subsystem, which will allow them to identify and manage the specific risks specific to the customs point or region, as each customs point has its own specific geographical location. with the types of transported goods, means of transport, violations, according to which special risks arise.
A customs control system is now being introduced in different countries, according to which customs officials must know in advance what goods must be transported in which directions and in what volumes, through which it will be possible to counteract the risks before they become real.
  The purpose of introducing such a system is to և facilitate trade և transport և increase border security.
  In order to effectively manage risks, it intends to carry out risk assessments for each commercial organization individually, և most importantly, to receive preliminary information on goods transported through customs և to carry out effective control of cross-border transportation.
In the EEU customs system, there is a pre-declaration institute, which is used on the initiative of a person transporting goods1.
 In this regard, we take the opportunity to improve the pre-declaration institute.
  In particular, to make the initial declaration mandatory for the main participants of the FEZ (especially for the large participants of the FEZ), to create appropriate conditions for the further development of this institution, which will be a means of ensuring prior information, which in turn will enable to counteract the risks before they become real.
One of the capabilities of the risk management system is post-release control based on risk analysis.
Introduced for this purpose in 84 countries, the ASYCUDA system selection module also envisages the "blue route" procedure, which assumes control at a later stage through customs audit.
  Prior to joining the EEU, post-release control operated in the Republic of Armenia2. There is now a customs inspection system, which assumes a chamber և outgoing customs inspection after the release of the certificates.
  Improving post-clearance control can minimize customs border controls at the time of import, և facilitate the phasing out of certain customs functions, սահման localize them within post-clearance control.
 In this sense, we consider the introduction of the "blue way" procedure in the system of selectivity, the improvement of the customs inspection institute.
 Improving the risk management system in the customs service allows to speed up customs procedures, while not reducing the effectiveness of customs control, ensuring its implementation based on the principle of selectivity, to optimally use the financial, technical and "human resources" The improvement of the management system contributes to the acceleration of the trade turnover, the reduction of the expenses, the attraction of the foreign investments, the increase of the efficiency of the foreign economic activity, which leads to the improvement of the state of the national economy.
2 RA Customs Code, Chapter 21, Article 1501, adopted on 10.07.2000.
Lia Hayrapetyan OPPORTUNITIES TO INCREASE RISK MANAGEMENT EFFICIENCY IN THE CUSTOMS SYSTEM OF RA: Keywords: customs risk, risk management, efficiency increase.
