DEFINITION OF PATHOLOGICAL AND NON-PATHOLOGICAL SORROW CRITERIA OF DIFFERENTIATION IN PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES The death of a loved one is an inevitable phenomenon in the life of every person.
 It is a psycho-traumatic event, which has a significant impact on a person's mental activity, the study of the process of living grief, its course and consequences is of great importance in the field of clinical psychology and psychotherapy.
 It is not accidental that for the last 10 years the International Union of Psychologists (IUPsyS) has been organizing a continuous workshop "Loss. research և practice "
The concepts of "loss", "grief", "mourning" are often distinguished in the psychological literature, which are often used as synonyms.
  Loss is the objective fact of death, grief is a person's emotional, cognitive-behavioral reactions to the death of a significant person, and grief is the socio-cultural manifestation of grief.
 According to A. Wolfelt's grief lives inside the loss, the thoughts and feelings associated with it1.
 K. Parks notes that truth is the price of love and attachment, it is the most intense and painful of human feelings2.
  Still in the 1960s. K. Parks, studying people with loss, came to the conclusion that the loss of a significant person, such as distress, could be the cause of mental disorders 3.
  According to R. Nymer's loss violates a person's notions of worldview, it forces man to rediscover his own Self և world4.
  Grief is mostly defined as a process during which a person works with the mental pain associated with loss, restores mental balance և normal life activity5.
According to R. Moody և D. Archangel: Grief is not an expression of emotions, but a process that involves a variety of emotions — feelings such as abandonment, loneliness, anxiety, fear, anger, depression, sadness, regret, guilt, love, as well as consolation.
  The loss of a significant person, as noted by S. Umansky, subjectively perceived, is accepted by each person, this effect is subjected to subjective psychological elaboration in the person's psyche, then the person's thoughts. Living experiences of a significant person are unique, individual, which is conditioned by the situation as a stressor and the person. 24, 2004, http.
//www.psyobsor.org/1998/24/7-1.php.3 Maercker A., ​​Znoj H., The younger sibling of PTSD.
  similarities and differences between complicated grief and posttraumatic stress disorder, http:
//www.eurojnlofpsychotraumatol.net/index.php/ejpt/article/view/5558/html_59. from individual psychological features: individual-typological features, adaptation mechanisms, coping strategies, etc. 1.
 However, being an individual process, the process of living in grief has general patterns, which refer to certain stages of it, հաջորդ the successive transition through those stages takes place in a certain period of time2.
 There are no theories today that can clearly explain the individual reactions to a loss, how a person copes with the loss and adapts to reality without the existence of a significant person.
 Thus, some authors have described grief as a process that has certain stages that a person must live in order to overcome grief.
  Moreover, different authors distinguish different stages of grief, from 3 to 12 (shock ում rejection, search, acute grief, recovery և end), each of which describes the emotional, cognitive-behavioral reactions of a person associated with loss (F. Vasilyuk , E. Kubler-Ross, J. Reynouter, T. Rando, J. Bowlby, etc.).
 However, given that there are no clear criteria or boundaries between these stages, the line of these stages and the peculiarities of manifestation are individual for each person, some authors consider it more important not to look at the process of living in grief, but to the problems that should be In the normal course of grief, the person overcomes the fact of loss;
Clinical psychologists studying the process of living with grief note that it may have a normal or pathological development.
  Accordingly, the concepts of "normal grief" and "pathological grief" are distinguished.
Still in the 1940s. E. Linderman, who was one of the first to study acute grief, referred to the concepts of "morbid grief" and "delayed grief."
  The concept of "complicated grief" is widely used by Western psychologists, which is characterized as traumatic, delayed, absent, pathological, morbid, distorted, depressed grief, etc. 4.
In order to avoid terminological confusion, in order to understand and differentiate the essence of the mentioned phenomena, it is necessary to clearly separate normal, non-pathological grief from pathological grief.
  Thus, as a rule, in the normal course of grief, a person has intense reactions after the loss (phase of acute grief), which gradually weaken over time (K. Parkes, H. Prigerson, T. Rando, K. Sanders, etc.).
  That is, in case of normal grief, a person is able to overcome the mental pain associated with the loss after a while, accept the loss, and adapt to reality.
  In the case of a pathological process, grief is prolonged, it has mental disorders as a result of not overcoming grief, which is due to various personal and situational factors5.
1 Уманский С., Тяжелая утрата и горе. Psychological and clinical aspects, http.
//psyfactor.org/lib/psycho3 See Umanski S.
5 Malkinson R., Cognitive-Behavioral Grief Therapy.
  The ABC Model of Rational-Emotion Behavior Therapy, Psychological theories differentiate between normal, non-pathological and pathological ways of living with grief.
  Let us present the main approaches of the theories aimed at the study of the problem.
F. Freud was one of the first to address the process of experiencing grief in his work Grief Melancholy, noting that loss causes intense mental pain, a sense of loss of a certain part of a person's self, and reflects a connection to a significant person.
  The process of living in grief is aimed at overcoming that mental pain, during which a person cuts off his mental energy from the object of lost attachment (decatexis), invests that energy in the formation of new relationships.
 However, the process of living in grief can have a pathological development if there was a dependent, ambivalent, conflicting relationship with the deceased.
In this case, the "work of grief" is unfavorable or does not end, the person is fixed at a certain stage of grief, grief can lead to "melancholy" - depression.
  In the pathological process of living grief occurs with the object of love that has lost its identity, as a result of which the person directed anger and blame towards the Self, which in turn leads to depression, which is characterized by the emptiness, inferiority և guilt of the Self. contrast of sorrow, in which case not the self but the world is empty and meaningless1.
  That is, Z. According to Freud's psychoanalytic approach, in the normal case of grief, a person is able to sever his mental energy from an object that has lost its արդյունքում consequent attachment as a result of "grief work".
  In case of pathological grief, grief prolongs and depression occurs.
E. Linderman writes in his book "Symptoms of Acute Grief" that as a result of living grief can be preserved "residual grief", which can last for years, which can not be considered normal.
  The author does not consider the distortion of the grief response to be abnormal, which he called "morbid grief reactions", during which there are delayed reactions, deadly behavior, manifestation of disease symptoms, development of psycho-physical symptoms (disorders, interpersonal relations, depression, aggression, aggression). Feeling of emptiness, guilt, insomnia.
  He described acute grief as a manifestation of normal grief, accompanied by physical and psychological symptoms that gradually weaken, while pathological grief was seen as "distortion, distortion, delay" of normal grief2.
Ջ. Bowlie's attachment theory attaches great importance to the role of "separation distress" or "separation anxiety" that results from separation (temporary or permanent) from a significant person in early life in the development of normal loss or pathological reactions.
  Ջ. Bowlby views attachment as a particular mental structure of a person, an "internal model" that includes, on the one hand, a person's perceptions of the object of attachment;
Reliable և secure attachment to a significant object contributes to normal grief reactions, while unreliable attachment (alarming, evasive, destructive) leads to pathological reactions to living in grief.
  Ջ. Bowlby considers the pathological reactions of grief to be the suppression / ejection of grief, which is the absence of grief reactions, the delay of grief reactions, the onset of reactions 2 weeks after the loss, the prolongation of grief / chronic course, in which grief reactions are significantly more intense for 6 months.
  In general, the pressure or delayed response to grief is due to the type of self-avoiding attachment, and the chronic manifestation of grief is due to the type of ambivalent attachment.
  According to J. Bowlby's ambivalent relationships develop when a child is unable to internalize ideas about a "good" object due to rejection or insufficient care.
  Therefore, the loss of a significant person in adulthood is accompanied by pathological developments, which reflect the desire to restore the positive image of the significant person ("good" object), which is often accompanied by hatred and enmity towards the deceased person1.
 Parks notes that a person with chronic grief has a certain predisposition to have similar reactions, it is due to the strong fear of losing contact with a significant person at an early age.
 Chronic grief, as Parks points out, "is the constant search for something that is impossible to find in yourself."
  Lazarus considered pathological reactions to grief to have intense grief reactions when remembering a lost person, frequent conversations on the subject of death, manifestation of symptoms characteristic of the deceased's disease, abrupt changes after loss, self-destructive behavior, phobias, more years of grief.
According to M. The unfavorable course of Horowitz's concept of stress response - the process of living in grief - is due to the activation of latent negative self-images of a person after loss, associated with feelings of vulnerability, weakness, helplessness, negative and incompetence.
 The activation of these distorted beliefs significantly affects the process of living grief, leading to pathological reactions - a sense of meaninglessness in life, inadequate guilt, long-term sadness, etc., which can be maintained 14 months after the loss.
  Մ. Horowitz's definition of pathological grief is based on a cognitive approach.
 However, cognitive psychology emphasizes the role of a person's destructive beliefs and attitudes in the development of psychopathological symptoms, which characterize a person before experiencing a certain mental trauma.
 Meanwhile, M. Horowitz views the activation of negative perceptions in the context of interpersonal relationships with the deceased3.
 Մ. Horowitz, N. Zilberg, D. Weiss և a number of other authors consider that post-traumatic reactions are natural և can not be considered pathological until 2 See Kravchenko N.
until there is no prolongation of the reaction, inhibition or exceeding the permissible intensity.
 That is, the differentiation of the norm և pathology is conditioned by 3 factors: the time, the acceptance of the fact of trauma in the cognitive system of the person ության the intensity of the symptoms 1.
 It is quite difficult to determine the time factor of living and overcoming an injury.
 Even after overcoming the trauma, traumatic symptoms may appear.
  As a rule, the norm is associated with the rapid onset of acute grief, and the pathological manifestation is associated with chronic course and prolongation, when the diagnostic process becomes more complicated, as the pathological process develops, differential diagnosis becomes difficult.
  The differentiation of the norm և pathology depends on 3 variables: the nature of the traumatic stressor, the person և social support2.
H. Prigerson introduced the term "traumatic grief", which is characterized by symptoms of separation distress: the search for the dead, a strong desire to see him, longing, symptoms of traumatic distress - loss of rejection, difficulty in accepting death, sticky thoughts - feelings of guilt, memories Feelings of anger, evasive behavior, alienation from people, emotional indifference, emptiness of life, meaninglessness, inability to plan for the future, change of belief system, symptoms of dysfunction in the professional, social spheres, which persist for more than 1 year after the loss.
There are no separate researches on living with grief, analyzes in the field of cognitive-behavioral psychology, psychotherapy, but A. By cognitively conceptualizing the development of Beck's mental disorders, we can conclude that the loss activates a certain chain of negative irrational thoughts in a person, which can affect the intensity of grief reactions, prolong the process of grief, especially for those who have a predisposition to perceive the world. from the point of view.
  For example, the death of a significant person can be interpreted as a deliberate rejection due to a feeling of inferiority, social isolation, alienation, which increases the feeling of sadness and loneliness.
  From the point of view of cognitive psychology, in case of normal grief, a person is able to change his ideas and thoughts in order to adapt to the new conditions of life.
 When a person has difficulty adjusting, it means that he / she has irrational beliefs related to the perception և interpretation of the death of a significant person, which increases the probability of pathological grief և prevents the acceptance of the loss.
  Studies by Janoff-Bullmann, Boelen, and Neimer, among others, focus on the relationship between irrational thinking and emotional-behavioral maladaptive responses after loss.
 A study by Boelen և co-authors confirmed this view, showing that people with pathological reactions to grief predominate 2 Ibid., Pp. 55-56.
irrational thinking, as well as negative beliefs about the meaning of one's own life's meaning of life1.
 However, in the field of cognitive psychology, the problem has been studied to a limited extent, in particular, the role of a person's deep negative beliefs and cognitive patterns in the emergence of pathological reactions to grief.
A number of modern researchers have challenged the definition of normal grief, that a person should break the attachment to the lost և memories associated with it some time after the loss, as mentioned by early theories of grief.
  According to the results of the clinical practice of some researchers, after the loss, the person forms an internal, unique relationship with the deceased and maintains it for many years.
 As a result of 1 year, a person is able to reinterpret death և his life, to regain the meaning of life (R. Nymer, N. Kess, B. Fortner, D. Klass, P. Silverman, L. Nickman) 2.
  According to M. Maintaining the emotional և psychological և psychological connection with Stroub's dead relative is a manifestation of complicated և pathological development3.
  In addition, some modern studies show that the absence of intense post-traumatic reactions cannot be considered unambiguous on a pathological basis, as well as the onset of pathological grief in individuals with intense antigen և maintenance due to personal characteristics և factors that contribute to chronic grief.
  The above-mentioned psychologists came to the conclusion that there is still a need to review and adjust the criteria of normal pathological grief, as well as to study risk factors4.
Psychologists M. Osterwiss, F. Solomon և M. Green writes that, as a rule, the process of living in grief takes 1 year.
 However, this is not the limit of the norm և separation of pathology, but the limit of the number of reactions անձ intensity of the person.
 In addition, there are various concepts in the literature on the end of the grief process: restoration, adjustment, end, etc., which do not fully describe the outcome of the grief process.
  In other words, there is a need for precise definitions of the process of living grief ի its end, due to which we will be able to understand the favorable և unfavorable consequences of grief.
  Moreover, in case of a favorable end to the process of living grief, the person never returns to the pre-loss state of his operation. he may have some unfavorable emotional, cognitive-behavioral changes or, conversely, personal growth5.
Summarizing the approaches of different psychological theories related to the definition and differentiation of normal և pathological forms of grief, we can say that the following factors contribute to the emergence of pathological grief: gender (ig), sudden death, child rejection or cruelty, violence, death of child, parent 6, child separation 2 Ibid., pp. 294-295.
3 Stroebe M., Bereavement research and theory.
  Retrospective and prospective, American Behavioral Scientist, the presence of anxiety, insecure attachment style 1, ambivalent, dependent, conflictual relationship 2, lack of social support 3, attitude towards death, death situation, untimely death, personality traits (flexibility, stressful, resilient) Peculiarities of coping mechanisms, experience of having other losses 4, the possibility of communication with the lost person, the significance of his person, the generality of destinies և life experience, the presence of mental disorders in the person, as well as the involvement of the person in the life of the lost person, the existence of childhood traumas 5; styles related to loss perception,with a change in attitudes towards life 6.
Summing up the concepts, we can make the following conclusions: կոր The loss of a significant person is a psycho-traumatic event in human life, the impact of which is conditioned by a number of situational-personal factors.
 Grief is a person's natural response to the loss of a significant person, which is a process mediated by individual socio-cultural factors.
Գործընթացը The process of living in grief can have a normal or pathological development, the differentiation of which is conditioned by 3 main criteria. • The time factor for the onset of symptoms. Normal grief lasts for 1 year, after which the person overcomes the mental pain, and in case of pathological grief the grief reactions are suppressed, delayed (2 weeks or more) or prolonged (2 years or more), mental disorders appear.
• Intensity of symptoms. In the case of normal grief, after the loss, the person has strong mental reactions, then they weaken and disappear, and in the case of pathological grief, some reactions of grief continue to be expressed with expressed intensity.
• Acceptance of loss by the person. In the case of normal grief, there is a realization of the fact of the loss of a significant person, its cause, its significance, the formation of an attitude towards what happened, the integration of that experience in the person's cognitive system, the redefining of life, in contrast to pathological grief.
The analysis of the theoretical approaches to the criteria for the diagnosis of pathological, non-pathological grief shows that the causes and factors of pathological grief are still limited, the problem needs to be researched and further analyzed.
  Thus, some factors contributing to pathological grief are less studied by researchers, in particular, a person's deep beliefs, cognitive patterns սխ their change after loss, as a factor in the development of pathological reactions to grief և preservation, which will allow to predict the course of grief and consequences և psychological Develop a support strategy.
1 See Bowlby J.
3 Barry L., Kasl, S., Prigerson H., Psychiatric Disorders Among Bereaved Persons.
 The Role of Perceived Circums4 See Osterweis M., Solomon F., Green M.
6 See Osterweis M, Solomon F., Green M.
Հետազոտ Modern studies of grief կենտրոն focus on the study of pathological manifestations of living in grief, the detection հոգ of mental disorders resulting from loss և study.
Researchers have overlooked the changes in a person's emotional, cognitive and behavioral spheres that occur after a significant loss of life և occupy an intermediate place between norm and pathology և, but have a significant impact on a person's future life.
 Therefore, the mentioned changes need to be examined.
Marie Avetisyan DEFINITION OF NON-PATHOLOGICAL AND NON-PATHOLOGICAL SORROW AND DIFFERENCES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES Keywords: loss, grief, pathological և non-pathological grief, criteria for differentiation.
