THE EXPRESSION OF THE MULTIPLE TERRORISM IN ITS DEFINITION PROCESS Terrorism is not a new phenomenon in human history.
  There are many scientific works dedicated to the study of this issue, some of which are related to the issue of classification.
 Despite the extensive and multifaceted work on this issue, the definitions contained in them (there are currently around 400 definitions of "terrorism" in national legislation 1), there is still no comprehensive, acceptable common definition of terrorism.
  This is due to a number of factors that prevent us from finding a definition that identifies the nature of this phenomenon and meets the requirements of the claims raised in connection with it.
  The problem is urgent, it has theoretical and practical significance, because first of all, the effectiveness of the fight against it depends on it.
  Needless to say, international terrorism is at the forefront of modern world security threats.
  It is clear that the fight against worms is one of the most important issues of the world community.
 However, the lack of a comprehensive definition of this phenomenon has a significant negative impact on coordinating the efforts of states in the fight against terrorism.
  Due to the existing differences, different definitions and approaches, what is presented to one side as terrorism may receive a completely different assessment from another subject.
  Hence, in order to understand the nature of terrorism, in particular international terrorism, the essence of this phenomenon is the same as the need and necessity to clarify the definition.
One of the reasons for the multiplicity of terrorism is that studies dedicated to it are carried out in different fields (political science, sociology, law, etc.), each of which has its own research methodology. The problem is viewed from its own point of view.
  Thus, for example, Russian researcher Yu. Avde believes that there are two main approaches to explaining the concept of "terrorism" in world scientific circles.
  The biological approach explains it by the "tyrannical" nature of man, the "natural" desire of people to threaten the interests of others, to use all possible means to achieve that goal.
  The social approach is based on the crucial importance of social processes, although it is characterized by the great variety of mechanisms and mechanisms for assessing the role of these arbitrary social factors, which are conditioned by terrorist acts.
  This approach is prevalent in the various approaches to revealing the essence of the concept of "terrorism" 2.
According to another approach, the diversity in the definition of terrorism is conditioned by the peculiarity of the region, national and historical traditions, the level of democracy, the degree of stability of the political situation in this or that country, the peculiarities of law schools3.
It is not by chance that researchers have different approaches to the possibility of defining terrorism.
 According to some of them, the efforts to find a common border for a number of reasons (which will be discussed below) can not lead to a final result.
 The other part, confirming that the universal definition of terrorism has not yet achieved great success in scientific circles, nevertheless trusted 2 Grachev S., Terrorism and counter-terrorist activity.
 вопросы теории, Нижний Новгород, 2010, с. 9. They say that it is not impossible at all. Moreover, without an acceptable definition of the phenomenon, the international cooperation in the fight against it becomes extremely difficult, therefore, the researches in that direction should be continued.
A possible reason for the diversity of the definition is that terrorism has undergone significant changes in its historical development, acquiring new qualities and expanding its scope and means of expression.
 This is what the American researcher Walter Luckyor points out, claiming that all attempts to find a universal definition of terrorism are doomed to failure.
 "The interpretation of terrorism is complicated for a number of reasons.
  Even during the last century, the nature of terrorism has changed significantly.
  This refers not only to its methods, but also to the nature of the goals of the struggle of the people involved in it ... Terrorism cannot include all the types of terrorism that have taken place throughout history ... ”1.
  The same complexity is emphasized by the American analyst Bruce Hoffer. "The difficulty of defining terrorism is that the content of the term has changed frequently over the last 200 years."
  Noting the difficulty of succeeding in defining terrorism, the proponents of this approach in any case believe that there are features of terrorism that exist in the case of any terrorism, but they are also not enough to provide a universal definition of the phenomenon.
Proponents of the other approach, agreeing with the many obstacles to the definition of terrorism at present, with the difficulties in overcoming them, are convinced that it is necessary to continue the work in that direction, to reach a common definition.
  "Objective definition of terrorism is not only possible, but a necessary element of any serious counter-terrorism experience," said Boaz Ganor, director of the International Anti-Terrorism Institute.
 Professor Alex Schmidt, a researcher at the Center for Terrorism and Political Violence, advocates the same approach.
  Moreover, both authors insist that research should be conducted to find a definition that will answer the questions of the academic, strategic legal spheres4.
 In this case, the diversity of the definition of terrorism highlights the diversity of approaches to its study տարբեր differences in research areas. Depending on the direction of the study, the questions may differ significantly, which creates additional difficulties in defining the concept of "terrorism".
The complexity of defining terrorism is also evident in the difficulties encountered by international organizations in defining it.
 It is noteworthy that when in 1937 The League of Nations introduced such a draft definition, it was adopted by only one country, India, and the other member states avoided adopting it.
 The UN has been trying to find such a definition since 1972, but failed.
 The situation is the same in the International Law Association, where those efforts are also in vain.
 Many countries prefer to determine the borders of terrorism on their own.
  Such an approach is explained by a number of factors, one of which is that some of them do not want to be constrained by a certain definition of terrorism, as it may hinder their actions in specific situations.
  At the same time, part of the world community is concerned that the fight against terrorism may be directed at all opposition groups, some of which are fighting for their rights and freedoms, so they are exercising considerable caution, trying to prevent the adoption of relevant laws.
  Naturally, in addition to the above, there are a number of factors that in one way or another have a significant negative impact on similar processes.
Among the problems pointed out in the definition of terrorism, the weighty role of sensory approaches to subjectivity and assessments plays a special role.
  According to researcher Epstein, "The term terrorism is extremely complex http.
//www.transnationalterrorism.eu/tekst/publications/WP3%20Del%204.pdf.
4 Ibid., P.
p. 8, is available to define because it carries a variety of content overload.
  Moreover, it carries an emotional veil, which adds to the complexity of its definition ”1.
  At the same time, it is obvious that the same organization, depending on subjective approaches, can be called a terrorist by some of those who assess its activities, qualify as fighters, fight for their rights, or something like that on the other side.
 Moreover, each of them, as a rule, has its reasoned justification and gives its own assessments, which depend on subjective approaches.
  In particular, finding a common definition of terrorism acceptable to the international community is extremely difficult, as often the same phenomenon can be given different qualifications based on political expediency or differences in worldview.
 Its vivid expression is, for example, the various versions of the assessment of the situation in the south-eastern regions of Ukraine. In Western political circles and in the media, the same locals are called "separatists", while the Russian side describes them as "militants" and the Ki government as "terrorists".
  In this regard, the Russian researcher Ovchinnikova points out that among the difficulties in defining terrorism and conducting internationally agreed measures in the fight against it, he singles out the extreme politicization of the existing assessments in this issue2.
The existence of diversity in the definition of terrorism is significantly influenced by the fact that the definition of this concept by different agencies aimed at combating it adapts to the implementation of its own functions.
  For example, the US Federal Bureau of Investigation defines terrorism as: "Illegal use of force or violence against persons or property for social or political purposes, to intimidate or coerce the government or civil society or part of them" 3.
 Meanwhile, in the same US Department of Defense, terrorism is defined as follows: "The use of unlawful violence or the threat of unlawful violence to spread fear, to intimidate governments or societies, and to pursue political, religious or ideological pursuits as a rule" 4.
 This phenomenon can also be found in other countries. The definition in this case is in line with the goals and functions of the department.
 Naturally, all this has an impact on the formulation of scientific definitions of terrorism, because in this case, the definition plays a significant role in terms of effective fight in practice.
The lack of a common definition can be explained by another reason: "Researchers of the concept often focus on the methods used in terrorist acts", ignoring the fact that one must first find the commonalities specific to any terrorist activity, rather than its common denominators.
 Despite the above-mentioned problems and the diversity of definitions in the definition of terrorism, there are certain characteristics of terrorism that are most often pointed out in the work of researchers.
For example, most researchers tend to use the terms "violence", "use of force", "political", "fear", "threat", "publicity", "purposefulness" in defining terrorism.
  From this point of view, the differences between the existing definitions can be found in the selection և accents.
 If an attempt is made to theoretically formulate the phenomenon of terrorism, which will be applicable to any terrorist act, then, in our opinion, we must take into account the fact that there is a conflict of interest or interests in any terrorist act (religious, political, nationalist, etc.). contradiction.
 Therefore, the issue of direction should not take precedence in the definition; preference should be given to the provision of conflicts of interest, conflicts of interest.
 Page 1 Epstein W., Terrorism.
  Problem of Determining Money, TISBI Newspaper №2, 2001, Kazan, available at http: // www.
//old.tisbi.org/science/vestnik/2001/issue2/vest2_6[1].html.4 Ibid., p. 31.
The definitions of "politically motivated" and "politically motivated" can be seen in the meanings, while "political intent" is inherently identical to the existing interest.
 At the same time, it is known that terrorism is considered a weapon of the weak in the fight against the strong (here, of course, the principle of justice or legitimacy is not considered).
 Consequently, the terrorist party is convinced that there is no other way to achieve its goals, to make progress in its own plans.
 Moreover, we believe that the "mass" or "individual" nature of terrorism should not be given priority in the scientific definition, it is more applicable in the case of reflecting this action in the legislation.
If we try to combine the above, to combine our point of view, we will get the definition of terrorism: At least one person finds it impossible to reach an agreement in another way or to succeed in achieving their own goals. ”
We believe that this wording can more fully reflect the essence of the concept of "terrorism", be useful in overcoming the obstacles to its multifaceted nature, facilitate its practical analysis.
Aram Manukyan THE EXPRESSION OF TERRORIST CONTENT IN ITS DEFINITION PROCESSES Keywords: terrorism, definition of terrorism, terrorism
diversity, threat of violence, international security
.
