TATEV-GORIS-KHNDZORESK GEOLOGICAL MONUMENTS AS A PRECONDITION FOR TOURISM DEVELOPMENT Tourism is considered to be one of the priorities of the RA economy.
  The Republic of Armenia has the necessary conditions for the development of tourism.
  Geological monuments occupy a special place among them, especially the unique geological monuments located in the Tat-Goris-Khndzoresk triangle.
  In the geological period, due to the influence of internal and external factors, special relief features have emerged, which are of great aesthetic and scientific value.
  These monuments play an important role in the sustainable development of tourism.
Natural monuments are classified according to genealogy into the following types: lava covers, caves), tectonic 1. Geological: are natural natural objects or natural complexes of unique geological, aesthetic-aesthetic value, which are volcanic (volcanic cones, craters (arches, fractures, rare minerals, minerals և rocks), outcrop (soil) Special reliefs formed as a result: gorges, remnant pyramids, cliffs, caves, windmills, caves, tunnels, bridges, stone sculptures), archeological (fossil plant և animal remains, petroglyphs, inscriptions or nudes).
2. Hydrogeological: separate natural objects or natural complexes of unique hydro-geological origin, of scientific-balneological value, which are: natural outlets (springs) of mineral-fresh water, karst caves, gorges, canyons, glacial circuses.
3. Software (volcanic, tectonic, dam-glacial-unique, scientific-aesthetic value separate (glacial, crater, wetland), waterfall, wetlands.
  Aquatic objects, which are: glaciers, lakes. .
5. Natural-historical, geological, hydro-geological, hydrographic-unique natural objects of biological origin, of scientific-aesthetic value, natural complexes, which are harmoniously connected with valuable historical and cultural monuments, their complexes, settlements, or historical events and legends.
       The typological classification presented by natural monuments is conditional, as many of them may be heterogeneous in origin, but such a classification contributes to the implementation of conservation work, the creation and classification of databases [6, p. 5].
Green waterfalls, velvet Syunik region is a region of high mountain ranges, deep gorges, fast-flowing rivers, picturesque plateaus, forest-mountain slopes, fresh-mineral waters, natural, historical-architectural monuments, rich mineral and natural resources.
  From the geological point of view, the territory of the region is included in the Alp Himalayan young corrugated zone, which is characterized by active mountain-formation processes, volcanic phenomena.
  Geological complex structure մեծ Large fluctuations in the heights of the area condition the diversity of natural complexes և Clearly expressed supernaturality.
  Due to the complex geological structure and diversity of Syunik, a rather complex relief has been formed.
 Wrapped and folded, highly fragmented mountain ranges, volcanic plateaus, plateaus, cones, which are composed of different ages.
  Paleozoic and Paleogene-igneous rocks predominate in southern Syunik, Mesozoic volcanic-sedimentary, Paleogene intrusive-volcanic rocks in central Syunik, and Neogene lake, Pliocene-Quaternary 6-4 volcanic volcanoes in northern Syunik [2], 2.
Syunik region is rich in geological monuments, but in this paper we will discuss the unique land monuments of Tat-Goris-Khndzoresk area, which are of great importance for the development of tourism in that area.
Figure 1. Vorotan Gorge Tat-A very solemn, wonderful view of Vorotan Gorge opens from the road leading from Goris to Tat Monastery.
  Here, from the height of the eagle's flight, one can see how one of the largest rivers in Armenia, Vorotan, dug a gorge up to 700 m deep.
 The sides of the gorge are composed of large rock outcrops of peculiar և volcanic rocks [3, p. 14].
The "TAT" ropeway passes over the Vorotan gorge.
  The picturesque gorge is rich in healing springs, ancient caves and hermitages.
     In the gorge of Vorotan, on the road to Tat, is the bridge of Satan, which amazes with its beauty, which has been formed over the centuries from the deposits of carbon dioxide, travertine, hot mineral water, the source of which is in the same place.
  Accumulations of travertines formed on both sides of the river, forming an arched bridge, below which hung many large dripping stonewalls with wonders.
 Natural naturalness is 60 meters, length is 30 [3, page 17].
 In the lower part of the picturesque Vorotan gorge, villages abandoned in the middle of the last century were hidden on the slopes.
  Beautiful hiking trails stretch from one village to another.
 The gorge is full of natural and historical and cultural monuments.
Figure 2. Old Khot village Old Khot village was one of the ancient settlements of Syunik region.
The village is located on the rocks, or more precisely, in the rocks.
  The caves formed in the tuff volcanic rocks have been adapted for human settlement here.
 Later, the cave dwellings were expanded at the expense of stone carvings. This gives the impression that houses are growing out of rocks.
 The settlement is located on the left side of the Vorotan river, on a high plateau, about 1500 meters above sea level, surrounded by gardens with inaccessible rocks.
 The village was inhabited until the 1970s, then the locals moved to a new, more comfortable, flat area, north of the old village, which is now the village of Khot.
  Near the old village there are m. թ. a. Tombs of 2-1 millennia, old cemeteries, in the territory of one of which the ruins of the Red Monastery built in the 12th century will be preserved.
  According to the tradition, the name Zangezur of the whole region originated from the bell of this church.
 According to one of the hypotheses, this bell had a very powerful sound, և The name Zangezurtgegan came from the words "Zang Zor", that is, a powerful bell.
  According to another version, it originated from the phrase "Calls are in vain".
An example of a Goris-windmill is the natural tunnel on the Goris-Kapan highway near the village of Karahunj, near the village of Goris, which was caused by Neogene windmill processes.
Figure 3. Goris Natural Tunnel A unique example of intensive windfall processes is the Goris suburb with its many remnants, which give a unique look to the surrounding landscape.
  The city is located in a concave, crowned with a forest of pyramid-shaped remains, magnificent cliffs and cliffs, which descend for centuries near the silver ribbon of the river.
  The Neogene-Quaternary coarse-grained volcanic sediments have been blown away by the most diverse and magnificent forms: pyramids, cones, towering towers, needles, rocking stones.
  A summary system of people living on the slopes, in which the inhabitants of old Goris lived [3, pp. 15-16].
Figure 4. Burger town, Old Goris. The current network of rural settlements in Khndzoresk-Zangezur dates back to the last century.
 The villages are located mainly near springs, in river valleys, where there were natural shelters.
  Professor Lisitsyan wrote about the arrangement of houses in the villages: "The villages of Zangezur go deep into the valleys, clinging to their sides.
 There are apartments that are completely cave-dwelling.
  Its typical example is the village of Khndzoresk.
 There were similar accumulations of cataracts in the vicinity of Goris, the former Kyores, Tegh, Khnatsakh, Karahunj [1, pp. 133–
134].
Figure 5. Old Cave Khndzoresk 13 km south-east of the town of Goris, on the right and left slopes of a mountain valley cut by deep valleys on the north-eastern edge of the present-day Khndzoresk village, lies the Old Khndzoresk village.
  According to the legend, due to the fact that the hordes were built in, it was originally called Khordzorkam Khordzoresk, later becoming Khndzoresk.
  At first, most of the houses in Khndzoresk were caves, later stone-built ones were built.
The flats were also original shelters.
  In addition to the caves, there are also caves with caves of different heights.
  Cave-apartments at a height of 20-30 m (locals with named ropes.
 Over time, houses were erected on the façade of the caves, which were arranged for centuries on a steep hillside. The roof of one house served as a yard for the other house.
 The village from afar left the impression of a huge multi-storey building stretching up the hillside.
Khndzoresk Fortress is one of the most famous monuments, it is a complete complex of hard-to-reach caves.
 The fortress in 1728-1730. It was the military base of Mkhitar Sparapet.
  2012 year. In June, a 160-meter-long, 63-meter-high swinging bridge connecting the two gorges of Old Khndzoresk (Ghanduntsnov and Nerkin Tagh) was put into operation.
  It is a unique, beautiful և sightseeing bridge.
 Today the village can be considered a tourist center.
  The latter is rich in many sights that will satisfy those who want to discover Armenia anew.
The Tat-Goris-Khndzoresk triangle can become a tourist destination, which in turn will create conditions for the socio-economic development of the area, employment, reduction of emigration, cultural activity, as well as the development of infrastructure in the surrounding areas.
   Below is a two-day route: • "Tat-Goris-Khndzoresk", • "Yerevan-Tat-Satan Bridge-Old Khot-Goris-Khndzoresk-Yerevan".
The beginning of the route is announced in Tat, where from the ropeway, admiring the beautiful gorge of Vorotan, you will reach the monastery complex of Tat, where the shelters of Harants hermits on the right bank of the Vorotan river (Syunik desert), where you have to go through steep bends.
 The return will pass through the "Devil's Bridge", where they will see the mineral spring and the travertine waterfall, then they will continue the way through the village of Hin Khot, exploring the cave settlements.
  Then the road continues to Goris, staying at the "Mirhav" hotel, which has become a business card of Goris.
  In the morning they move to the tunnel that is part of the Goris-Kapan highway.
  Returning to Goris, the next stop will be the Goris observation point, from which a wonderful view opens at all times of the year.
  The scene opens to Last և Armenisar, which charms Goris, where the famous film "Zangezur" was shot.
  Old Goris (Kyores) with its stone pyramids, towers and small cave-dwellings, where the Bakunts days are spent every year in autumn, grows in both mountains.
 Then they move to Khndzoresk, և, crossing the "Swinging Bridge" 160 meters long, meet the Old Cave Khndzoresk, near which is the church of St. Hripsime մանը the tomb of Commander Mkhitar.
  Summing up the two-day visit, we can conclude that the tourist who visited the Goris region will leave to return with great pomp.
LITERATURE [1] Aslanyan A., Avetisyan Kh., Zangezur, Yerevan, 1975, 143 pages.
[2] Manasyan M., Grigoryan A., Potosyan A., Syunik region, Yerevan, 2002, 155 pages.
[3] Avanesyan A., Malkhasyan E., Nazaretyan S., The monuments of the geological language of Armenia, Yerevan, 2000, 159 pages.
[4] URL.
 https:
//www.armgeo.am/old-khot/ (Link made on 02.10.18).
[5] URL.
 https:
//hushardzan.am/archives/5905 (The link was made on 02.10.18).
[6] URL.
 http:
//www.zikatar.am/download/final_report_natural_monuments_2012.pdf (Link made: 02.10.18).
Manucharyan MarinetATJ-GORIS-KHNDZORESK TRIANGULAR GEOLOGICAL MONUMENTS AS A PRECONDITION FOR TOURISM DEVELOPMENT Keywords: geological monument, natural destination, tourist destination, tourist destination
