VIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS NGOs' VISIBILITY AND DIALOGUE WITH MEDIA DIRECTLY AS WORKSHOP
 The new media package, which today is accepted by theorists as a new voluntary media, set completely new rules of the virtual game for all actors in the field of communication.
  One of the main features of the new media is that its toolkit is almost equally accessible, applicable to both the mass media and organized, unorganized units of state, private, and civil society.
  "When we talk about media, we should not only talk about the technologies that make up that media, but also about all kinds of activities, experiences and social arrangements related to that media, which concern both the media content providers and the consumers of that content.
 In the case of new media, we are getting closer and closer to a reality when the provider and the consumer are the same entities. ”1
This new media toolkit dictates completely new rules of the game to NGOs, both in communicating with stakeholders and in the process of media relations in public relations and communication with media representatives.
The Internet has become the main tool of this relationship, and the use of its individual components is the most important precondition for successful work.
  The new public relations strategy has been adopted by theorists as PR 2.0 (linking Web 2.0 to the concept of web 2.0, which symbolizes the second generation of Internet development).
  This new term and the interpretations of its application are intended to help communication professionals make effective and efficient use of the opportunities provided by new media and to develop new mechanisms for providing key public relations functions, including working with the media.
 Virtual social networks have a special role in these relations.
 Especially today, when due to its nature it is not only a communication environment, but also a platform for interconnection of other new media tools and other similar networks.
What is the role of virtual social networks in the formation of civil society, the promotion of public initiatives, the effectiveness of working with the media, how do NGOs use them? What impact does the content they develop have on the creation of media news?
  Examining these issues is possible not only from the point of view of modern media relations, but also a necessary precondition for understanding the role of new media, especially in the context of virtual social networks in raising issues of public importance, commenting on them, transforming and seeking solutions.
In one of his expert articles, media expert Samvel Martirosyan states: "Taking into account the overactivity of social networks in the public and political spheres, one can get the impression that state institutions are actively using these platforms.
 This does not correspond to the reality.
 Government agencies almost do not use the potential of social media, mainly using it as another platform for posting press releases. ”2
 Logan R., Understanding New Media is almost the same picture.
 Extending Marshall McLuhan, Peter Lang Publishing, 2010, p. 7.2 Martirosyan S., "State structures և social networks. application experience ", http.
//media.am/Armenian-Government-on-social-media link).
(Available resources): Few Armenian media outlets carry out any other visible activity other than spreading material links from the media outlet of the same name on the virtual social platform.
  Let's try to understand the peculiarities of the working style of Armenian public structures in virtual social networks.
Today, in the development of public life, virtual social networks have become a serious and effective tool, especially in countries with problems related to fundamental human rights.
  This new media tool allows you to bypass the barriers to accessing information - television control, print media restrictions, etc.
  "In recent years, a number of examples have been registered in Armenia, which allow us to claim that if the social networks are used properly, the result can be quite positive for a person or a group of people concerned about this issue."
.
 It is interesting, however, that these positive examples of public mobilization through social networks, as a rule, are connected with this or that civic initiative, while the non-governmental organizations, which are continuously active, continue to carry out more business card activities in the networks.
In order to get a general idea of ​​the Armenian NGO sector working in the virtual field, it is first necessary to understand in which networks the public structures are involved.
  Odnoklassniki, Facebook, YouTube և Twitter continue to be the most popular social sites in Armenia.
  According to media expert S. According to Martirosyan, according to official data, YouTube ranks 3rd (according to some estimates, 4th) in the number of visits to Armenia, but it is difficult to say what percentage of those visitors, in addition to being passive, also register and download videos.
 Odnoklassniki continues to be the most visited network. The number of active visitors of this network from Armenia has reached 1 million.
  However, this site is mainly used for communication, and all the information content is collected in the Facebook domain, which already has about 800 thousand active users.
 This is where the Armenian non-governmental organizations carry out their main information processes.
  The movement is also active on Twitter.
  It is not possible to check the official data in this case, but according to experts, Twitter has 10-20 thousand users in Armenia.
  Content activity is also registered in the newly discovered Tsu.co. Thanks to the advertising campaign, the site increased the number of users to 7 thousand in a matter of days.
  However, the behavior of users in Tsu is not very adequate, as it is mainly due to earning money, which is why people on this platform mostly write but do not read 2.
  A cursory examination of the above-mentioned sites even provides an opportunity to prove that their main activities are carried out by Armenian NGOs on Facebook, providing communication with the media through this network, and in some cases, using YouTube as an additional tool to provide visual information.
It turns out that in the virtual field, public organizations and journalists find each other on Facebook as a rule. Here the NGOs carry out the main work aimed at the visibility of their activities և communication with the beneficiaries մյուս other target groups, so monitoring the activity of the NGO sector in this network will provide an overview of the general situation in the field.
There are no official data on how many Armenian NGOs are registered on the Facebook platform.
 However, today it is difficult to imagine a modern NGO operating without a page or account bearing the name of the organization on Facebook.
 Their official websites are linked to virtual social networks, and readers have the opportunity to share the information contained therein.
  Many NGOs often create separate pages in parallel with the home page for the organization's branch, specific initiative, and / or event.
At first glance, each of these pages, very similar to each other, has its own working style, which is conditioned by both objective (nature of the organization, main target groups of activities, motivations for working in social networks) and subjective (presence of a special specialist in social network coordination). , "Civil movements in social networks" / "Social media in the field of human rights protection" expert articles /, Yerevan, 2012, page 6.
2 Martirosyan S., "Social Networks in Armenia in the Spring of 2015" (available at http.
//media.am/Social-networks-in-Armenia-in2015 link).
degree of literacy, experience in working with social networks) circumstances.
In general, the picture is very multi-layered, it is difficult to give unequivocal assessments.
However, we can single out the main factors that affect the work style of Armenian NGOs on virtual social networks, particularly on Facebook.
One of the indicators of the organization's work efficiency is how many people clicked the "like" button on the Facebook page of this or that NGO.
 In the Armenian Facebook world, this number usually does not always show the rating of the given NGO.
 Rather, they are the result of an organization's virtual business strategy, or sometimes its absence.
  The number of likes can be increased from one to several thousand in a matter of hours, if there is not enough money.
 However, such artificially inflated numbers are at best indifferent to any user who more or less understands the work of networks.
 This also does not ensure the addressability of the information provided by the NGO. In this case, the group of several thousand people who like the NGO's page has many users representing other countries.
  The latter not only do not relate to the policy pursued by the NGO, but literally do not understand what appears on the walls of the NGO page.
Today, the number of followers can also be an indicator of public reaction. Facebook allows you to simply become the follower of this or that user or page instead of liking it.
 In the network image of Armenian NGOs, one can see the official pages of structures trusted by the general public, with which the official number of Parents' Friends does not exceed 1500.
 To understand how visible the NGO's page is to the Facebook community, և how much that community is interested in the topics raised by the NGO, one must first look at the number of views of the posts.
 An interesting example. The official page of Transparency International Anti-Corruption Center has 974 followers on Facebook. The Freedom of Information Center has almost as many followers (967).
 In contrast to these structures, 5126 users clicked the "like" button on the page of World Vision Armenia.
 At first glance, this impressive number loses its value when we look at the number of users who respond to the materials posted on the page. World Vision Armenia - 45, Transparency International - 23, Freedom of Information Center - 17.
 It turns out that the interactivity index of a page with about five times more likes is only 2 times higher than the same index of the first two NGOs.
 These numbers present the general picture that the flow of information on NGO pages is mainly one-way, from NGO to network.
The fact that the NGO has an official website or not has a significant role on the work style of the NGO in virtual social networks.
 As a rule, NGOs that do not have an official website make more posts on virtual social networks, the main informative messages are relatively longer, sometimes complete materials about the current event are posted.
  There are incomparably more photo albums on such pages, which are accompanied by descriptive texts.
 Depending on the team working for the page, all this is done competently or not so much, but the tendency to provide as complete information as possible is obvious.
 Most of the Facebook pages of more or less active NGOs with official websites are business cards. It is almost indistinguishable from the official website of the NGO, here are the links to the media publications about the materials posted on the website ՝, at best informative or, to a lesser extent, with accents or emotional comments.
 The vast majority of these links have very little dissemination, and comments are almost non-existent.
 The impression is that these NGOs use social media simply as an additional platform for publicizing the information on the site, without changing either their style or their accents.
The main reason for the cold attitude of the public towards the links spread through the pages of NGOs is the incorrect comments that accompany the incorrect links, and more often, their absence.
 This is evidenced by the fact that sometimes certain episodes of the material that did not find any visible response on the page can be the subject of much discussion by users due to their related statuses.
The virtual social network is people-centered media, և in order to convey the message to the addressee, one must speak in his language.
  If we conditionally separate the groups of the main addressees of non-governmental organizations, consider the communication of the NGO with those addressees through virtual social networks, then the visible picture shows that the majority of NGOs spread the message to the general address.
  In other words, the same material is addressed with the same interpretation to partner NGOs, beneficiaries, as well as to state bodies responsible for the field.
 The issue is partially resolved when the NGO, in connection with the topic of the message, disseminates it in thematic groups, for example, in the group of journalists covering the field.
  It is not ruled out that the NGO will work separately with those recipients outside the virtual world, even registering positive results, but the Facebook pages of the NGOs allow to state that the majority of NGOs, being in virtual social networks, are not able to fully use their network potential. to work with target groups.
In some cases, the structure reaches its addressee not due to the official page, but due to the personal network activity of the manager.
  A typical example is the page of the "Asparez" Journalists' Club in Gyumri, which has 1489 members.
  The absolute majority of the materials posted on the page have no likes, there are up to 5 distribution rates.
 Instead, almost all the statuses and pictures of Leon Barseghyan, the president of the club, who has 4999 friends and twice as many followers, almost always find a response.
 The problem here is definitely not only the number of friends, but also the emotional, pronounced sociable style in which Leon Barseghyan comments on the material in the same club or its separate episode.
  This is one of the ways to make one's NGO activity visible, to gain new supporters.
  Experts advise users of social networks as a tool to become one of their users to better understand the current situation and the rules of the internal game to use them for their own purposes in the future1.
 To what extent it is acceptable for an individual to identify a "structure" in a network domain, each entity's head must decide for themselves based on the entity's strategy.
  However, that decision may be well-thought-out and well-founded.
Some journalists prefer to deal with structures. Depending on the topic, communicate with different experts and beneficiaries of the organization.
  Others prefer to work with easy-going managers with extensive experience in communicating with journalists, who associate themselves with the structure they lead.
  When working with both first and second tier journalists, it can be not only a reliable source, but also accessible, including through virtual social networks.
 After all, traditional media, despite the various mechanisms of disseminating information on social networks, continue to be one of the most effective tools for raising issues of public importance.
 And to find them today there is no need to even leave the virtual social networks, because they are a tool for obtaining information for journalists.
 "Internet" social media communities are a pretty good resource for the media.
 They contain a tremendous amount of real-time "real-time" messages from people who are the focus of events.
The fact that virtual social networks are one of the most effective platforms for communicating with the media today is confirmed by the results of a survey conducted by the Region Research Center among 100 representatives of 50 different Armenian media outlets in the summer of 2014.
  "Social media - a source of information for the Armenian media. 91% of the journalists who took part in the survey entitled "Developing Standards և Applied Practice" mentioned the social network as the main means of communication used in everyday work3.
  94% of them are convinced that hunting networks are a source of information of public importance, they use it both to spread and receive information4, and Facebook is their main communication network.
And how do the NGOs registered in the networks use this circumstance?
 Two main groups of non-governmental organizations can be distinguished for monitoring the work of journalists with journalists on social networks by Armenian NGOs.
  In the first group there is 1 See Дейдра Б., PR 2.0.
 New media, new audiences, new instruments, Exmo, 2010, p. 190.
2 Grigoryan A., "Media Policy in Social Media" / "New Alternative Media: Ethical and Legal Issues" /, Yerevan, 2012, p. 13.
3 See Region Research Center, “Social Media Information Source for Armenian Media. Developing Standards և Applied Practice ”research results, Yerevan, 2014, p. 9.
4 See ibid., P.
are institutions that work with the media or the NGO launches special media.
 Such structures, depending on their activities, work in the media sphere, and in the team, as a rule, the main representatives are the traditional-alternative media representatives.
 In the other group, there are structures for which the media, the journalist, is simply a tool to inform the public about their own activities, and in some cases, to influence state structures and their decision-making.
  If on the official pages of the organizations representing the first group you can find examples of targeting your own message through various media outlets, and Youtube resources are actively launched, then in the case of the second group the situation is not so clear.
 Several large social organizations, which can afford to hire communication specialists, take full advantage of the opportunities provided by virtual social networks.
 This, in turn, gives an opportunity to start an effective and literate dialogue with journalists representing different media, to become for them the main source of information on thematic materials, sometimes the "giver" of the material.
  However, Armenian NGOs rarely use the virtual social network to send public messages to journalists, and although theorists have long developed a press release format for social media, even if NGOs post press releases online, they are not emailed messages. differ.
More often than not, Armenian NGOs, which operate on grants from time to time, refrain from hiring special communications specialists.
  This has both objective and subjective reasons.
  On the one hand, the main part of the provided grants, although it requires visibility of activities, but, as a rule, does not provide for the position of public relations manager - salary.
  In this case, the head of the structure decides for himself or to find a communication specialist who will be able to be included in the team implementing the project as another function, choosing a cheaper and more effective option at first glance, placing the communication function on one of the most communicative team members.
  One of the reasons for this situation is that virtual social networks are used by almost everyone using the Internet today, so there is often a false impression that a person who writes interactive statuses on his own page will easily be able to run the official page of a public organization.
  "Sometimes the situation gets worse when the responsibility of the page is not shifted to one, but is divided among several team members."
 In this case, especially if there is no clear strategy for running the page, there is no clear handwriting in terms of the content of the page.
 The experts assure that 5 minutes per page of the NGO is enough, կլինի it will be clear whether a specialist deals with it or not.
  However, even in the case of specialized NGOs, effective work is not guaranteed.
  Employees in the industry themselves note that the main reason for these problems is the lack of knowledge in social media management.
 In addition, the vast majority of network administrators learn the basics աշխատանք / or continue to learn from everyday experience, learning from their own mistakes.
It is also interesting what language the NGOs that receive international grants but work in the local community for the local community work in.
 Some NGOs combine Armenian and English, others prefer to work in Armenian, taking into account the specifics of the main target group.
 This is talked about in what language the name of the NGO is written, the official information about the NGO.
For example, the Facebook page of the Armenian Young Lawyers Association, which has about 2,000 followers, is the English version of the NGO, the Armenian Young Lawyers Association.
  The official information about the NGO is in English only.
 However, most of the content on the page is presented in Armenian.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that regardless of the NGO's work style, the more or less interesting news often finds its journalist.
  However, very often it already depends on the media strategy of working with virtual social networks: the material appearing on the networks will be published on the media site, or the given information will become an informational occasion for preparing a relatively comprehensive material on the topic.
 In this case, the NGO already working with the media should be able to find interesting accents for the given media outlet և to persuade the journalist to cover the issue in a more comprehensive way.
Today, however, when working on virtual social networks, it should be taken into account that next to the main sites there are sites with completely different strategies for information, the main function of which is not to prepare material, but to reproduce statuses of public importance on social networks.
 This is a reality that should be taken into account especially by the NGOs whose leader or members are active users of social networks.
 Of course, the NGO can allow its employees to write what they think on the wall of their page by internal agreement, but we should not forget that at that moment that post can become a topic of discussion for hundreds of thousands of users.
 In many cases, this has a direct impact on the image of the NGO. Some users can identify the author of the comment with the NGO and attribute the position to the structure.
Under these conditions, the media outlet, in conjunction with the frequent search of time-honored websites, develops mechanisms to deliver reliable, accurate information just as quickly.
 Taking into account this fact, the NGOs further strengthen the ability of the's experts to work competently in the networks, to provide networking with journalists.
  This allows journalists to quickly find experts who are well aware of the problem և get their comments.
  However, it should be noted that in this case, virtual social networks are only for the first stage of joint work. Most journalists prefer to talk on the phone if it is not possible to meet.
  NGOs that are serious about their work are also often the most effective mediator for journalists to find stakeholders in the field.
  It turns out that the social media use of social media contributes to the more professional work of journalists working in the same field.
Visual tools have a special role in virtual social networks. Sometimes one can do more than just a few precise words.
 The photos that appear on the page of Armenian NGOs mainly appear after this or that event, some of them in one message.
 There are few cases when they are singled out in photo albums with clear names. more often they are placed in the general archive of NGO photos.
 There are very few NGOs whose photo albums have a description. There are no descriptions of individual photos, the hero presented there and the action depicted there next to the individual photos.
  As a rule, photos receive a wider response than text messages, but it should be taken into account that especially in the comments of youth NGOs, one can more often find the opinion of the photo hero և his friends about the appearance of the photo hero, than the goals of the event.
Photos are the most useful tools for presenting to beneficiaries. The official pages of the Armenian NGO use tools that promote interactive communication, do not create an environment for public discussions or exchange of views.
 Sometimes this is due to the specifics of the target group. We should not forget that a large number of NGO beneficiaries are out of the Facebook community.
  The latter more often use the Odnoklassniki website, where, however, NGOs do not carry out information activities.
It should be noted that during the active discussions of the Facebook community, there are few cases when NGOs present their position in the comments section of a specific topic.
  At best, they are NGO representatives or leaders who are perceived here, first and foremost, as individuals.
The control function is also poorly developed.
  If we do not take into account the experience of several NGOs working in the field of transparent management in the networks, then NGOs, as a rule, present themselves exclusively in the context of their programs, and different information flows related to the same programs usually leave no comment, responding only to journalistic questions.
  Unfortunately, the resources of public reporting or public online monitoring created by these NGOs are not widely available on the net, while any example of updating the information contained in them, any new data entered could be a reason to talk about those resources and the information contained in them.
The picture of the use of virtual social networks by NGO representatives is changing day by day, but at the moment, the general observation made on the basis of the Facebook social network shows that a significant part of Armenian NGOs do not use the potential of social media.
  The flow of information on the official pages of the NGO is usually one-way, from the NGO to the network, there is little or no use of interactive tools, the posted materials are not targeted, they are often not accompanied by emphatic comments.
  In general, virtual social networks are considered by NGOs as a tool for providing visibility, which, as a rule, duplicates, at best, complements the work of the official website.
  For some skilled organizations, the network is also a platform for regular communication and exchange of information with the beneficiaries, but in this case, it is really effective to provide work only when the target audience of the initiative or program coincides with the Facebook community.
 The most reassuring aspect of this observation is that Armenian NGOs still have many untapped opportunities to increase their efficiency in virtual social networks and to develop cooperation with the media community.
Mane Madoyan VIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS ENVIRONMENTAL ENVIRONMENTAL ENVIRONMENTAL DIALOGUE CONTEMPORARY.
