SOME DETAILS OF THE WEDDING RITUAL PROCEDURE DO NOT CONFUSE TO IRAN AND BAKHTIAR, LURISTAN STATES Iran is characterized by the diversity of Iranian ethnic communities.
 More than 30 groups live here: tribes: Kurds, Bakhtiaris, Lurks, Laks, Talyshs, Baluchis, Gurans, Gilants, Mazandaran, Semnans, Khorasanians, etc.
  In addition to the Iranian communities themselves, there are also representatives of other national features in Iran: Armenians, Arabs, Turkic groups.
  The study of the history and current situation of Iran is possible without a comprehensive study of the culture, way of life and traditions of the tribes living in the country.
  In this article, we have referred to the summary study of the wedding rituals performed in the Bakhtiari provinces of Lorestan, Chaharmahal and Bakhtiari, Iran.
Lakers, news and Bakhtiari are a separate branch of Iranian tribal unions and are the bearers of Iranian culture.
 V. Minorski mentions that the lacquers are the southernmost branch of the Kurdish tribes in Iran, sometimes they are confused with the news.
 However, these are completely different tribes1.
 Only in terms of way of life can these Iranian groups be seen in the system of begging with the Kurds.
The wedding rituals of Lacquer news, traditional rituals are based on ancient customs.
When young people become seventeen or eighteen years old, they have the problem of choosing a spouse.
 To convey the message of wanting to get married to their parents, young people use a number of means, indirectly.
 When the boy intends to get married, he does not help the father enough in the agricultural and household chores, trying to explain it to the parents.
  And since it is morally unacceptable for lacquers to raise this issue, the parents turn to people with great authority in marriage matters, mediators.
 During this time, someone aware of the problem, acting as a mediator, talks to him about the marriage.
 The father announces his readiness to hold the wedding and orders the mediator to go to the girl's house for custody together with two other people.
  It should be noted that the young people living in the village choose a girl according to their position and property.
  Children unequivocally obey the will of their parents.
  Then the persons chosen for guardianship go to the bride's father to inform about the problem.
 One of the groom's relatives, addressing the girl's father, says: "You must accept that man's son as your servant and give him your daughter in marriage."
The girl's father is silent at first, as if he does not agree with their offer2.
 However, at the urging of one of the mediators, he starts talking about marriage expenses, the amount paid (mahriye).
  In the meantime, each of the guardians, according to the tradition, reduces the expenses envisaged for the wedding ceremony.
In order to solve the financial problems, the fathers of the bride and groom meet separately, specifying the size of the headdress given to the bride ("shirbah տր").
 The night before the engagement, the groom hands over a portion of the pre-determined amount to the girl's father so that he can organize the wedding հանդես buy his daughter dowry ("jahizye").
Then the engagement ceremony ("namzadi") begins, with the groom going to the bride with gifts.
 Since decency prevails in families, before marriage the groom does not have the right to look up to his future spouse, like the bride does not have the right to look at the groom.
 After dinner the groom returns home և can only visit the bride once a month before the wedding3.
On the day of the engagement, the groom's relatives come to the bride with gifts, songs and music and hand over the prepared gifts.
 The union of the bride ես is established by a ceremony called "aqd" (engagement) 1.
After deciding on the wedding day, the preparations for the wedding ceremony begin.
 The bride's family sends a sheep as a wedding gift to the village head, which is highly respected among the villagers.
 The boy's family then informs the village mullah to make invitations to invite relatives, as musicians are invited, to accompany the wedding magazine with local instruments, mainly the zurna-dhol.
Upon receiving the invitation, the relatives hurried to attend the wedding ceremony.
  The groom's close-knit youths, the lively ones, ride horses and go to the bride's house.
Arriving at the venue, the young men organize horseback riding demonstrations to show their courage and strength, and the bride's relatives greet them with reverence.
 The guests celebrate the wedding night in the bride's hearth.
The next morning the women take the bride to the bathroom, bathe her, and decorate her with rituals.
  Henna has an inviolable role in this cult.
  Before taking the bride out of the house, the marriage contract ("aqdname") is placed in front of the door, through which the bride must pass.
  The significance of this is as follows. "According to this document, you are someone else's life partner; you must be faithful to him throughout your life."
Before the bride leaves her house, her brother or father ties a silk belt around her back, under which she puts sweets.
 After entering the bride, the groom should open the belt and distribute the sweets to the young people present as a gift.
  The presence of sweets in the zone, on the other hand, testifies to the happy, peaceful and harmonious life of the newlyweds.
The ritual of tying the belt is connected with the Zoroastrian tradition as a new symbol of work.
  The daughter, entering a new, responsible stage of life, undertakes the obligation to remain faithful to her husband forever.
 The bride is dressed in white.
 The color white symbolized purity and sincerity.
 In Zoroastrianism, "white" symbolized purity and purity, when at the time of joining the Zoroastrian community, a child was dressed in a white T-shirt as an episode of white significance.
When the bride enters the house, the groom's parents organize a shabash ("āšdbāš", "šābāš"), that is, they sprinkle money on his head and face.
 At this moment, a woman approaches the bride, holding a copper tray with a burning fire on one side and barley, water and a lamp on the other.
 First, spray the bride's face and head with barley and water. This symbolizes the bride և groom being full of love for each other.
  Then they put salt on the fire to protect the bride from the evil eye.
 The burning lamp has the symbol that the whole life of the couple is bright.
When the bride enters the groom's house, a baby boy is first given to her so that her firstborn will be a boy.
The whole evening continues with spectacular games of riding and archery, as well as dancing with sticks, which are a significant part of the wedding magazine.
  It should be noted that these types of game competitions have been widespread in Iran since ancient times.
  These are still described in Pahlavi works (Shapuhi Hajiabad's inscription, "Memory of Bells", etc.).
Upon entering the bride's village, the groom and several friends stand at the entrance, sprinkling sweets on the bride's head as a sign of her husband's constant dominance and patronage.
 The newlyweds give each other a piece of sweets, և they grind two pieces of sugar on their heads, so that their whole life will be sweet and full of love.
Thus, the wedding ceremony continues until late at night.
  Then the groom goes to a specially furnished room for the newlyweds - "hejle".
 After entering the hejle, he should look to the gheble 3, kneel, pray, ask for happiness for the rest of the married life, and ask for well-being.
1 is the marriage contract, which is held at the bride's house.
 See Betteridge A., Javadi H., Aqd, Encyclopaedia Iranica, 1986, http.
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/aqd-marriage-contrucl-rnarriagc-contruct-ceremonv.
2 Modi J., The navjote ceremony of the parsis, http.
//www.avesta.org/ritual/navjote.htm. 3 Muslims turn their faces to Mecca or al-Kaaba while praying.
 In the early years of the spread of Islam, Jerusalem was a sacred city.
  However, in 622 Seventeen months after the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) made the pilgrimage from Mecca to Medina, Muslims began praying face to face with the Ka'bah.
 See Rezvan E., al-Kibla, Islam. Клонциклопедический словарь, Москва, 1991, с. 136. Among the Baktayars, when the groom is ready for marriage բոլոր all negotiations with the bride's family to arrange a rather large wedding are over, the groom or his brother goes to the clans who are somehow connected with them, the buruzi (wedding a gift that includes a sheep, a goat, etc.) to collect.
 These animals are used to prepare the wedding dinner.
  This helps the bride and groom to avoid the financial burden.
 Thus, it can be said that this is one of the unique traditions that has been preserved among the Bakhtiaris, it is part of their social and cultural activities.
  After these preparations, family members and relatives gather on the wedding day.
  Women։ men ride, walk, saz, dholnvag.
The wedding, like all family ceremonies, is attended by members of the entire tribe.
  According to tradition, they gather և discuss wedding expenses ("pul-e arusi").
 However, poorer families have to save money for years to celebrate their wedding.
 The weddings of khans, chiefs, clan leaders are celebrated with great luxury and last for 2-3 weeks 1.
Among the Bakhtiaris, the wedding ceremony is accompanied by traditional various games and dances, some of which are mentioned below.
Dance with a handkerchief ("dasmal bazi"). In this type of dance, women and girls իկ form a circle of men, shake two handkerchiefs in their hands երաժշտ to move their legs to the music.
  Women և men dance in the same group, as their participation in one dance group is allowed during the wedding ceremony. They can join hands with the other dancers to the music of dhol և saz.
Women's dance is quite impressive, as they wear colorful clothes, jewelry և handkerchiefs2.
Slow dance. During this dance, the dancers take three steps forward և three steps back in rhythm.
 Here the rhythm is slower than in other Bakhtiar dances.
Fast dance. The steps in this dance are the same as in a slow dance, except that the rhythm is stronger.
  The dancers quickly move the handkerchiefs around their heads and put them on their shoulders.
 They are taking steps forward.
Statue dancing. This dance is performed to the sounds of saz.
 When the music stops, the dancers stand still where they are at that time; they do not move until the music continues.
  Experienced dancers who stand and move at the right moments.
On the way to the groom's house, saz / dhol music is played, women sing a song called "dovally", and men ride horses and shoot.
 During this time, the groom "steals" the bride's veil while riding and leaves.
 The other riders fall with the groom to take the veil.
 When someone manages to take it from the groom, the others chase after him; this continues until they reach the groom's house.
The game called "choo bazi" or "tarke bazi") is played by two men who show their courage to defend the territory belonging to the tribe.
  This gives the members of the tribe a sense of security և prevents possible attacks by external enemies.
 For Chubazi, two wooden sticks are used, which are called "tarke" և "darak".
 "Tarke" is a thin wooden stick cut from the branches of a pomegranate, willow or mulberry tree, which is placed in water to make it more flexible.
 "Darak" is a thick, oak tree that is used to protect against attackers.
  The game starts with the music of Sazi Jdhol.
 A person with a thick cane moves forward more than a participant with a thin cane, while performing dance movements, they hold the sticks on both shoulders, holding both sides of the sticks with both hands, and walk several times.
  When a man with a thin cane attacks, the other turns to protect himself, placing one end of his stick close to his feet and the other end resting on his shoulder.
 The participant goes forward with a thin stick and hits with his stick. If the blow hits the opponent's knees, the game continues, and if it hits a thick stick, the participants exchange canes.
 Everyone present at Sazi's music applauds in a standing ovation.
When the ceremony is over, the groom prepares to take the bride to his home (this process is called "arusbarun").
 At that moment, the bride's brother, wrapped in white clothes, fastens candy to the bride's back.
  This is a symbol of the sweetness of life.
  Then the bride wears a white headscarf, covering her head and face with a silk veil ("burqa").
The Bakhtiaris believed that the addition of sugar or candy to the bride's back would bring her a blessing.
 When the bride arrives at the groom's house, she does not enter until she has received a gift from the groom's father.
 This is called "ger zanon".
 After receiving the gift and entering the house, sheep are sacrificed for the bride.
  Sheep's blood is rubbed on the bride's shoes to bless their lives.
After the party և after the reception, according to the tradition, the guests give presents to the bride (the Bakhtiaris call this gift "yuzi").
Among the Bakhtiaris, folk dance symbolizes solidarity և unity, they dance hand in hand, side by side.
 Dance with a group of members of the tribe shows that all orphans are united against any external attack and are determined to preserve their cultural values1.
Thus, the rituals and rituals of the painters, the news, the Bakhtiari reflect the pan-Iranian reality in general.
  The roots of their traditions are quite deep; over time, they have undergone certain changes, partly in terms of content, which are mainly due to the influence of Islam.
Hasmik GalstyanSOME DETAILS OF THE WEDDING RITUAL PROCEDURE IN IRANIACHABLE AND BAKHTIARI, LURISTAN STATES Keywords: Iranian tribes, brides, peoples, news
ritual, guardianship, engagement, customs, traditional games և
dances
.
