SANCTIONS AS A TOOL FOR FOREIGN POLICY Implementation In recent decades, sanctions have become widely used as a tool for regulating international relations.
Sanctions are applied by one or more states as well as international organizations (UN, EU) and transnational corporations.
The Republic of Armenia is in a difficult region, it has borders with the two neighboring countries, so there is an objective need to expand and deepen relations both with the two neighboring countries and with Russia, a strategic ally.
 However, complications arise here, as after the 1979 revolution in Iran, various states and international organizations imposed sanctions on Iran, which were tightened in 2006. [1]
 The pile of sanctions against Iran continues to be one of the most difficult issues in world politics "facing international relations", minimizing the prospects for possible cooperation between neighboring countries.
The effectiveness of cooperation is also affected by the application of anti-Russian sanctions.
 Still in 2014 In March, the EU began imposing sanctions on Russia.
 These sanctions were imposed after the deployment of Russian troops in the Crimean Peninsula.
 Following the example of the EU, a number of other countries followed suit, and later, in parallel with Russia's support for separatist forces in the Donetsk-Luhansk region, sanctions were tightened.
In this situation, it is very important for us to understand the nature of sanctions, the objective-subjective aspects of their application, scientific approaches և explanations.
 It is necessary to understand how sanctions have become an instrument of foreign policy, what evolutionary way they have gone.
The comments of both the implementing and the accepting parties on the sanctions are quite interesting.
 Sanctioning entities justify the application of sanctions in violation of international law, setting the main goal of its restoration due to the pressure of sanctions.
There are some discrepancies between the "encyclopedic explanations" of the definition of sanctions in the professional literature.
 In the Meriam և Webster Dictionary, sanctions are defined as "economic or military coercion by one or more States to compel another State to cease a violation of international law and to bring it to justice under international law."
The following definition of political sanctions is given in the Cambridge Dictionary: "Formal action aimed at stopping or restricting trade or communication with a State by forcing it to comply with international law".
There is a clear emphasis in these definitions to emphasize violations of international law, but in recent decades we have witnessed a number of conflicts where interpretations of international law are twofold.
 Furthermore, it is difficult to understand the extent to which the sanctions are in line with international law, whether the imposition of certain sanctions is in itself a violation of international law.
In his work "On the Impact of International Economic Sanctions", Johann Galtung describes sanctions in the following way: "Actions taken by one or more international actors (senders) to punish one or more other actors (recipients) by depriving them of certain opportunities (or recipients) and forcing them to follow certain norms that the sender deems possible" [6] .
 The above definition is more complete in the nature of the application of sanctions, as the interpretation of international law can be twofold, for example, the right of nations to self-determination and the territorial integrity of states are sometimes incompatible.
  Therefore, the supporters of "one" and the other can impose sanctions against each other for their own political gain, describing it as a measure aimed at restoring international law.
David Baldwin separates economic sanctions (according to the author, a synonym for economic coercion) from economic confrontation, separating the terms "embargo" and "trade wars".
 According to D. According to Baldwin, economic sanctions are a form of economic confrontation.
Through economic war, one subject of international relations seeks to weaken the economic potential of another, its military capabilities, both in peace and in war.
It has a long-term approach, while economic sanctions have short-term, immediate goals.
 In principle, we can agree with some of the approaches proposed by Baldwin, that is, not to equate economic sanctions with economic wars, but it is impossible to fully agree.
  We think that economic sanctions are one of the ways of economic war, but they are not the only ones.
In our opinion, a sanction is considered to be "a set of punitive actions" measures taken by one or several subjects of international politics against another subject, which are aimed at influencing the policy of the objecting state and exposing the desired political behavior by the latter. "
In order to better understand the effectiveness and institutionalization of sanctions, as well as to understand how sanctions have become a tool of foreign policy, it is necessary to understand the history of sanctions, distinguishing the main periods when sanctions as a political phenomenon, institutional structure և development trends. had.
In modern professional literature, the first institutional manifestation of the application of sanctions is mentioned in 432 BC, when at the initiative of the Athenian city-state Pericles, the Athenians were forbidden to trade with the neighboring Meheryan city-state, which eventually ended. to the war [8].
 It is logical that before that it was possible for one city to impose sanctions on another, but it was only during this period that it imposed economic sanctions on one city-state against another city-state for non-fulfillment of its allied obligations.
The second stage in the development of sanctions was the Middle Ages.
 During this period, sanctions were applied by a number of small commercial organizations and states.
  There was no systemic development in this period; sanctions were viewed exclusively in the context of achieving their own economy and political aspirations.
 As a rule, sanctions did not have scale in this period.
As a third stage, we single out the events that took place in Europe in the early 19th century, when Great Britain was subjected to a continental blockade on Napoleon's initiative.
  In terms of scale, the sanctions applied during this period were much higher than those applied in the past.
 In fact, in this period the scale of sanctions covered almost the whole of continental Europe.
Within the framework of scientific work, as the fourth stage, we single out the beginning of the 20th century, in particular, 1914-1940. Institutionalization within the framework of the League of Nations.
 1919 Woodrow Wilson introduced a comprehensive boycott plan to the League of Nations that would block communication, depriving the citizens of an aggressor state of the opportunity to trade.
 V. Wilson was a supporter of non-violent struggle, he believed that it was possible to defeat the state without the use of non-military force.
 According to Wilson, "The state subject to the boycott is in the stage of ownership.
 If these economic, peaceful, silent and deadly means are successfully used, there will be no need to use force.
  These are terrible means.
  They do not demand the sacrifice of extraterrestrial life from the boycotted state, but put pressure on the exercise within that state, which, in our opinion, no modern state will be able to resist. "[11]
 It is necessary to take into account the fact that Wilson made this statement in the period after the First World War, when the people still had all the horror caused by the scale of the war and the disasters.
 Thus, Wilson viewed sanctions as a preventive measure against the Alternative War.
 At the time, through fairly applied sanctions, it was possible to prevent the strengthening of the aggressor state.
As is clear from Wilson's quote, the main purpose of sanctions is to put pressure on the authorities of that state քաղաք by the citizens of the host country to change its course or foreign policy.
 However, in modern international relations, this approach is not always successful.
 In particular, if in 2013 Russian President V. V. Putin's rating was 45%, then in 2015. it was 72%.
 For the success of the Wilson resolution, it is necessary to take into account a number of factors, such as national, ideological features, the degree of economic self-sufficiency, international prestige and the current international situation.
  Sometimes the imposition of sanctions can have the opposite effect: ել uniting the forces of the sanctioning state to meet the challenges that have arisen as a result of the imposition of sanctions on that State.
Thus, we can state that for the first time in the League of Nations, sanctions became systemic in nature and began to be used to protect international law.
  The founder of the modern nature of sanctions is US President V. It's Wilson.
 The League of Nations imposed sanctions five times, in 1921. v. Yugoslavia, 1925 v. Greece, Paraguay և Bolivia, 1932; against Italy in response to the invasion of Abyssinia (now Ethiopia).
 It is necessary to emphasize the fact that the League of Nations was not a universal structure like the UN is today. Fewer states were members of the League of Nations, therefore, the sanctions adopted by this structure could not represent the interests of all world powers.
As the beginning of the fifth period, we single out 1945, when the UN was created, and sanctions, as an instrument of international relations, received their final form, enshrined in the UN Charter.
 According to the UN Charter, the Security Council can impose sanctions on the facility only if none of the UN Permanent Members (US, UK, France, Russia, China) has voted against the draft.
 This period continues to this day, և has sub-regions, which we have divided into two main directions: Cold War և Post-Cold War.
The first sub-phase covered the Cold War period, from 1945 to the early 1990s.
 As already mentioned, according to the UN Charter, the member states of the Security Council must have a consensus on decision-making, including the imposition of sanctions.
  It was difficult to imagine a consensus between the United States and the USSR during the Cold War.
  It is noteworthy that in this period, the UN Security Council imposed sanctions only twice, in 1966. V. Rhodesia և 1977 Against AUA [14].
 Bilateral sanctions were more common during this period, as major rival camps could not impose sanctions on allies through the United Nations.
  Thus, the United States and its allies imposed sanctions in order to stop the economic and technological development of the other states of the USSR և socialist camp.
  With the end of the Cold War, the imposition of bilateral sanctions came to an end.
 Sanctions began to be applied by the UN.
The second sub-phase began after the end of the Cold War.
  During this period, the UN developed a number of projects that would increase the effectiveness of sanctions and develop mechanisms to reduce the possibility of humanitarian catastrophes in the host country.
 It is noteworthy that in 1990-2000. The UN Security Council alone imposed more than 30 specific and global sanctions: Iraq in 1990, Yugoslavia in 1991, 1992 and 1998, Somalia in 1992, and Rwanda in 1994. Against Sudan in 1996, against Afghanistan in 1999, etc. [14]
 The large number of sanctions imposed by the UN Security Council during this period can be linked to the failure of the so-called bipolar world order.
 Russia, which came to replace the USSR, was busy with internal issues և did not have enough resources to resist the United States.
 The harmful effects of sanctions in some cases will become apparent during this period, in particular the anti-Iraq sanctions of 1990, which to some extent weakened Iraq's military-political capabilities but left an irreversible impact on the lives of civilians.
  Ordinary citizens suffered the most from the sanctions, while the elite continued to live in luxury.
 At the same time, it should be noted that any anti-government uprising in dictatorial regimes is doomed to a bloody end.
  The above once again proves the need to analyze all possible consequences before the application of sanctions.
The last five years have seen a new wave of sanctions.
 Sanctions have been imposed on Russia since 2014, and Russia, as a host country, imposes reciprocal sanctions on the EU.
 One circumstance can be emphasized that the sanctions imposed by the EU do not target Russian President Vladimir Putin either. V. Putin, not Prime Minister D. Moreover, the sanctions imposed on Medvedev do not restrict the export of energy - the main driving force of the Russian economy - energy - minerals.
There is a contradiction here between the methodology of application of the classical perceptions of sanctions, in particular, V. In between Wilson's approach.
 However, it is also understandable that the main consumers of Russian energy, minerals, are the EU member states, and the blocking of the latter will have a huge economic impact on the economies of the applicant country.
 Here it is necessary to take into account the interests of transnational organizations operating in Russia, which could suffer significant losses as a result of the imposition of full sanctions.
  As a result, it becomes clear that the sanctioning State or organization must be convinced that the sanctioning party is dependent on the sender.
  If the sending party is more dependent on the recipient, or that dependence is equal for both parties, the effectiveness of the sanctions is called into question; it may do more harm to the sending party.
Thus, once we can conclude that sanctions in modern international relations serve not only the restoration of international law, but also a tool for the implementation of foreign policy of states.
LITERATURE [1] Iran Sanction, US Department of State.
 Diplomacy in Action, URL.
 https:
//www.state.gov/e/eb/tfs/spi/iran/index.htm (Accessed.
 19.02.2018). URL.
  http:
//www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/sanctions/ukraine-crisis/history-ukraineURL.
 https:
//moderndiplomacy.eu/2017/12/21/geopolitics-sanctions-russia/ (Accessed.
[4] Definition of Sanction, URL.
  https:
//www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/sanction(Accessed.
 23.02.2018). [5] Sanction, Cambridge Business English Dictionary, URL.
https:
//dictionary.cambridge.org/ru/%D1%81%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D1%80
B8% D0% B9 / sanction? Q = sanctions + (Accessed.
 24.02.2018). [7] Baldwin D., Economic Statecraft, Princeton, NJ.
 Princeton University Press, 1985, [8] History of Sanction, Special Project "Kommersant FM", 03.08.2017, 19.
25, URL.
 https:
//www.kommersant.ru/doc/3374130 (date of application.
 28.02.2018). URL.
https:
//law.yale.edu/system/files/documents/pdf/Faculty/Langbein_The_Historical_Ori
gins_of_the_Sanction_of_Imprisonment.pdf. (Accessed.
 28.02.2018). URL.
 https:
//piie.com/publications/chapters_preview/4075/01iie4075.pdf. (01.03.2018). [11] Hufbauer GC, Schott JJ, and Elliot KA, Economic Sanctions Reconsidered.
History and Current Policy, 2nd edition, Washington, DC.
  Institute of International [12] тиналекторальный рейтинг Putin for 15 years. Infographics, March 26, 2015, 00.
08, URL.
 http:
//www.aif.ru/dontknows/infographics/1475392 (date of application.
 01.03.2018). [13] Charter of Unites Nations, Chapter V, URL.
    http:
//www.un.org/en/sections/uncharter/chapter-v/index.html. (Accessed.
 02.03.2018). 1, URL.
  https:
//www.globalpolicy.org/global-taxes/49076-learning-from-the-sanctionsdecade.html (Accessed.
 04.03.2018). [15] Veebel V., and Markus R., At the Dawn of a New Era of Sanctions.
 Russian-Ukrainian Petrosyan EXECUTIVE MEASURES AS A TOOL FOR FOREIGN POLICY IMPLEMENTATION Keywords: sanctions, international law, United Nations efficiency, institutionalization, international organizations.
