THE ARMENIAN ISSUE IN THE POLITICAL PERCEPTIONS OF KEMAL TURKEY IN 1920 PERIOD COVERING MAY-DECEMBER The defeat in the First World War and the consequent real danger of the division of Turkey caused the opposite movement of the latter, the Mill Movement.
It was simply a national movement that did not pursue revolutionary goals; it sought to restore Turkey, to fight against its partition, to re-establish its sovereignty where possible.
 That struggle had to be directed with its sharp end against Armenia, which was trying to return to its historical homeland.
The nationalist movement was led by former Young Turk activist Mustafa Kemal.
 After the San Remo conference, convinced that the Entente countries were going to provide significant territories to the Republic of Armenia, Kemal decided to make the Kemalist-Bolshevik cooperation material and to invite Russia to the Transcaucasia.
  Thus, Kemal tried to create a counterbalance to the Entente, as a result of which, by occupying tightrope walking positions, he avoided losses and, even more, had new achievements.
1920 On April 26, 1945, the Turkish Grand National Assembly adopted its first foreign policy act, a letter addressed to Lenin, which was signed by Kemal and sent to the government of the USSR.
  It was proposed to wage a joint struggle against foreign imperialists.
  In that case, Kemal took on the struggle against the Republic of Armenia, and the war against Georgia was left to Soviet Russia.
  It was mentioned that everything was Turkish to persuade Azerbaijan to accept Soviet rule.
 Turkey asked for "first aid" gold, weapons and ammunition worth 5 million Turkish lira.
  Armenia referred to the part where it was mentioned that the National Assembly made a decision by which Turkish Armenia, Kurdistan, Lazistan, Batumi, Eastern Thrace, territories with a mixed Turkish-Arab population were given the right to decide their own destiny1.
  On April 30, Mustafa Kemal issued a special notice to the Entente governments stating that they would not recognize or accept any agreement aimed at establishing Armenia at the expense of Turkish territories.
On April 28, Musavat Azerbaijan became soviet.
  It seems that the points of the above-mentioned letter are valid, in fact it should be noted that the letter reached Moscow only on June 1, therefore, what happened could not have anything to do with it.
  However, the Sovietization of Azerbaijan is another proof that the Turkish-Bolshevik interests coincided.
Despite having interests in cooperating with Turkey, the Soviet Russian government did not fully agree to the terms of the letter addressed to it, which is reflected in the 1920 agreement. In a reply letter written by Chicherin on June 3.
 Chicherin writes about Turkey's proposal to start a war against Armenia. "The Soviet government hopes that the diplomatic negotiations will allow the Grand National Assembly, on the one hand, between Turkey and on the other, between Armenia and Persia, to establish precise boundaries that require justice, the right of peoples to self-determination."
1 Simonyan H., From the history of Turkish-Armenian relations, Yerevan, 1991, p. 369.
2 Zohrabyan E., Soviet Russia և Armenian-Turkish relations, Yerevan, 1979, p. 16.
3 Kirakosyan Ts. (ed.), Armenia in International Diplomacy ով Soviet Foreign Policy Documents, document 248, Yerevan, 1972, p. 448.
As we see, as a basis for the settlement of the problems, Soviet Russia accepts the peace negotiation process, offers its readiness, at the invitation of the interested parties, to assume the duties of a mediator.
As for the decision of the National Assembly that the territories with mixed population are given the right to decide their own destiny, the Soviet side comments as follows. "The Soviet government, of course, understands this decision in such a way that a free referendum will be held in the mentioned places with the participation of the migrants-exiles, who in the past were forced to leave their homeland for reasons beyond their control, which must be returned to the homeland."
The ethnographic principle of resolving border disputes was put forward by the government of Soviet Russia, which was to be based until 1914. Based on an existing description of nationality.
  In other words, the lands with a predominantly Muslim population had to pass to Turkey, and the lands inhabited mostly by Armenians had to pass to Armenia.
  In fact, if this scheme worked, the provinces of Van իթBitlis could pass to Armenia (before the First World War Armenians had a majority only in these two vilayets).
During this period, Turkey was actively engaged in concentrating its main military forces against Armenia.
 Kyazim Karabekir Pasha was appointed commander of the Turkish Eastern Army.
  Already in 1920 In April, Karabekir telegraphed to Kemal Kemal in Ankara. "In the coming days I will be able to inform that Armenia has been deleted from the world map" 2.
 We see that it was planned to conquer Armenia in just a few days.
1920 In the spring, the Kemalists concentrated an army of 22,000 on the borders of Armenia with 69 cannons and 200 artillery pieces.
  That army was ready to invade Armenia3.
 The number of Turkish forces increased in the summer, when an army of 50,000 was concentrated on the border with Armenia.
  This is in the case when in June-August they had withdrawn 15 thousand troops against the 60 thousand Greek army moving in the depths of Thrace and Anatolia4.
 This proves that the main thing for the Kemalists was the Eastern front.
As we can see, the Turkish army was ready, and Kyazim Karabekir was waiting for an order to start military operations against Armenia.
 1914 At the August 14 sitting of the National Assembly, Kemal Pasha announced that the Arelyan army had been ordered to prepare for the start of hostilities on June 6, with the aim of capturing the Sarighamish-Soghanlu gorges, establishing control over the Brest-Litovsk-Batumi territories. ել thus preventing a possible Armenian attack on Karin (Erzurum) 5.
A question arises. Why did the Turkish invasion not take place?
  As the facts show, it was conditioned by the position of Soviet Russia (this was admitted by Mustafa Kemal).
 First, we saw that in the letter of June 3, Chicherin was against any military action.
  1920 After Khalil Pasha Chicherin's talks with Karakhan in Moscow on June 4, 2010, Mustafa Kemal reported: "We have been informed that it is necessary to renounce actions against Armenia."
Kemal writes the following about the reasons: "A Russian agent arriving in Karin met with our delegation.
 "Immediately after that visit, we were forced to stop our attackers."
 From all this we can conclude that the Soviet Russians played a significant role in the further normalization of the Armenian-Turkish relations, therefore, it was necessary to find ways to normalize and make friendly relations with it.
1 Kirakosyan J. (ed.), page 448.
2 Simonyan H., page 369.
3 Zohrabyan E., page 36.
4 Simonyan H., page 380.
5 Msirlian Z., Three Covenants, Beirut, 1979, p. 40.
6 Simonyan H., page 374.
7 Msirlian Z., page 40.
1920 The response of Bekir Sami, a member of the Executive Committee of the Turkish Grand National Assembly, was received in Moscow on July 4, 2010.
  It was written in a more militant style; it set definite requirements.
  It was mentioned about Armenia. "We do not pursue aggressive goals, we do not think at all about imperialist expansion.
"Mediation based on the principles of equality is the solution that best corresponds to the principles adopted by us, which have been implemented by the Russian Soviet Republic since the signing of the Brest-Litovsk Reconciliation and the Batumi Convention."
  As we see, the Brest-Litovsk-Batumi agreements are accepted as a basis for a fair settlement of the borders with Armenia.
  This showed conquering tendencies; in fact, the idea of ​​the right to self-determination was pushed out.
What was the reason for this change?
  During this period the negotiations between Armenia and Soviet Russia were underway.
 The Armenian delegation headed by L. Shant demanded that Russia recognize Armenia's independence, at least accept the fact that Western Armenia joined Armenia, that Russia undertook not to interfere in Armenia's affairs, to provide assistance, and so on.
 The Russian side (Chicherin, Karakhan) agrees to meet the requirements if Armenia rejects the Treaty of Syria and sever ties with the Entente countries and allows it to use its railways to connect with Turkey.
 In response, the Armenian side says that it is not authorized to discuss such issues.
As a result, the negotiations are interrupted on the condition of continuing in Yerevan.
  We think that as a result of the failure of these negotiations, Turkey took a tougher policy towards Armenia.
The tough policy was deepening more and more; already on July 8, the Ankara government announced in an ultimatum memorandum to the Armenian government that the relations between the two countries were based on the Brest-Litovsk and its continuation Batumi pacts, which extended Turkish power to Kars, Ardahan and Batumi. in the states where the "popular referendum" was held2.
1920 On July 19, 1945, Chicherin sent a telegram to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia stating that "Except under the influence of the Soviet government's peace-loving aspirations, the Turkish nationalists stopped their conscription, which aimed to strike a new blow at the Armenian people." "In the process of exchanging views with Legrand, the Armenian government will be convinced of the justice of the path taken by the Soviet government, will find it possible to conclude a final agreement with him on all issues and a peace-friendly agreement with him." about relations ”3.
On July 19, the Kemalist Turkish delegation headed by Bekir Sami arrives in Moscow and starts talks with Karakhan and Chicherin.
  According to the Turkish author Salahin, Chicherin demanded to provide territories from Armenia to the provinces of Van and Bitlis.
 This demand was accepted with deep dissatisfaction by the Turkish delegation, which demands a meeting with Lenin.
 The meeting takes place on August 14.
 It is not known what conversation they had, but Chicherin, who continued the negotiations after that, continued to insist on his views4.
 As a result of the talks, a "draft agreement between Russia and Turkey" will be signed on August 24.
 According to this, the parties were obliged not to recognize all the peace treaties or international acts, the adoption of which will be opposed by the other party.
  By Turkey was meant all the territories that were included in the Turkish National Covenant.
 All contracts previously concluded between the parties were considered null and void.
 The parties undertook to take all appropriate measures by mutual agreement to ensure unimpeded rail transport between the two parties և և other condition 1 Kirakosyan J., p. 449.
2 Msirlyan Z., page 41.
3 Kirakosyan J., pp. 453-454.
4 Galoyan G., Armenia և the great powers in 1917-1923, Yerevan, 1999, p. 264.
which are not directly related to Armenia1.
  We see that the parties refuse to recognize both the Treaty of Sri Lanka and the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
  Earlier, on August 14, Mustafa Kemal refused to recognize the Treaty of Syria, declaring that not only did he not accept it, but that Turkey was obliged to annex Kars, Sarighamish, Ardahan and Batumi.
According to G. According to Galoyan, this agreement was not the basis for the Turkish invasion.
  He claims that before Bekir Sami arrived in Turkey, taking with him the text of the draft, the Kemalists, taking advantage of the situation and fearing that Russia might in the near future insist on its offer to give some territories of Western Armenia to Armenia, sought to clear their accounts. by destroying it with 2.
  Salahin testifies that the Kemalists decided to "destroy the government of Yerevan or reduce the territory of Armenia to such an extent that it annulled the Treaty of Syria, recognized the government of the Turkish nationalists, opened the way between Russia and Turkey and stopped the persecution of Muslims."
A decision was made in 1920 to start a war against Armenia. The first congress of the peoples of the East convened in Baku on September 18, 1918, with the participation of 1,891 delegates from 37 nations.
 Here the view is put forward that the view that the victory of the world revolution in the East is hindered by "imperialist Armenia", therefore, its destruction is a major task.
  And since Turkey and Azerbaijan had been declared pioneers in the struggle for the liberation of the oppressed peoples of the East, they should have had the mission of striking a deadly blow at Armenia4.
  And at that time, when Armenia would find itself in a desperate situation, the Soviet forces would enter the country as liberators.
1920 Kyazim Karabekir Pasha is coming to Ankara on September 7.
  The next day, the Supreme Military Council convened under Kemal's leadership, where the need to launch military operations against Armenia was discussed.
 Kemal, being sure that even Georgia would not help Armenia, ordered an invasion of Armenia5.
Going through such a preparatory period, the Turkish army started military operations against Armenia on September 23 without declaring war.
  Life showed that the Armenian army was not ready to resist the Turkish attacks.
  On September 29, the Turkish troops entered Sarighamish, on October 1, Kaghzvan.
 On September 30, the Armenian government appealed to all citizens of Armenia to stand up to free the homeland from the "nightmare of the Tajiks."
 Requests for help were constantly sent to the Allies, which remained "the voice of the dialect desert."
  Feeling the inability of the Armenian side, the Turkish army was constantly moving forward, making new achievements.
 On October 30, Kars fell in disgrace.
  In November, the Turks entered Alexandropol and occupied it.
  On November 18, after the failure of the first attempt, a ceasefire was signed, which ended the hostilities.
A question arises. Why did the Turks go to the ceasefire when they did not face any serious resistance?
  We think E. brings true arguments. Zohrabyan.
  He claims that the Ararat Valley is the heart of Armenia, its cradle, therefore, the invasion there could not have been associated with a certain risk.
 It could be repeated in 1918. for example.
 Then, the Kemalists could not ignore the position of the Soviet government in the issue of Armenian-Turkish relations.
  Soviet Russia did not want the annexation of Armenia by Turkey.
  Finally, the Kemalists were well aware that the Armenian question had long been an international issue: "Under the pressure of European public opinion, they had to come to terms with the existence of small Armenia."
1 Galoyan G., pp. 265-266.
2 Ibid., P. 269.
3 In the same place.
4 Simonyan Hr., Page 390.
5 Msirlian Z., page 48.
6 Zohrabyan e., Pp. 84-86.
On November 24, the Armenian-Turkish talks started in Alexandropol.
 The Armenian delegation was headed by Al. Khatisyan, and the Turkish one - Kyazim Karabekir.
 On November 30, the Turkish delegation was introduced to the Turkish conditions, and the next day, with the help of an ultimatum, threatened to start a war.
 On the night of November 30, a special meeting was convened, which was attended by members of parliament, the government, the ARF bureau in its entirety, individuals and the military.
 Here it is decided to accept the Turkish demands.
  Finally, on the night of December 2-3, the Armenian-Turkish reconciliation agreement was signed, the terms of which were terribly difficult for the Armenian side.
The treaty ended the war between Armenia and Turkey, Kars, Sarighamish, Ardahan, Oltin, Surmalu province, Kaghzvan and Alexandropol passed to Turkey.
The regions of Nakhichevan, Sharur and Shahtakht were temporarily placed at the disposal of Turkey until the referendum was held there.
  Armenia also recognized that these territories had indisputable historical, ethnic and legal ties with Turkey.
 Armenia could have a detachment of 1,500 soldiers with 8 mountain-field cannons and 20 machine guns1.
This is how the relations between the first republic of Armenia and Turkey end with the signing of an agreement that has no legal basis.
Thus, the above emphasizes the fact that Turkey was able to use the alignment of forces created in international relations to achieve at the expense of Armenia.
 Turkey made a turn from the forces leaving Transcaucasia, making efforts to normalize relations with Soviet Russia and find the edges of "cooperation".
The Republic of Armenia was not able to correctly assess the changes taking place in the region; the hopes were connected to the end with the Sword Treaty adopted by the Entente countries, but accepted at the moment.
  He did not accept the fact that the role of Soviet Russia is decisive in the final settlement of the relations between Armenia and Turkey.
Once we were convinced that Turkey is committed to its policy, which is to ratify what happened only after the military achievements through agreements.
  He did not expect the Entente or Soviet Russia or any miraculously conquered territories from Armenia to give him, but used the contradictions between the international forces and their removal from the region to resolve the issue through their own armed forces.
Georg Kesoyan THE ARMENIAN ISSUE IN THE POLITICAL PERCEPTIONS OF KEMAL TURKEY IN 1920 PERIOD COVERING MAY-DECEMBER Keywords: Kemalist movement, crossing of territories, outgoing and returning forces, assessment of political forces in the region.
