SOME FACTS OF THE INFORMATION FIELD OF THE EURASIAN INTEGRATION PROCESSES Integration projects or supranational formations implemented in the Eurasian area in recent years at the initiative of Russia: the Customs Union, the Common Economic Space, and in 2015 The Eurasian Economic Union, which will replace them from January 1, 2012, in addition to the expected participation in geopolitical-global economic developments, also submits an application to form a common information space.
  Of course, they are not systemic yet, they are partial, situational, sometimes natural, they are expressed mainly in the official or expert opinion on this or that integration issue.
 However, in the most important political and economic events and realities for the region, the media of at least three countries - the current members of the Customs Union - Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan - show mutual solidarity and agreed coverage of problematic topics.
 The last such point, which has been storming for almost half a year, is Ukraine, conditioned by the change of power in that country and the status of Crimea.
Although Russia seems to have achieved its far-reaching geopolitical goal by proving its belonging to Crimea, it nevertheless suffered significant losses in the information field. In addition to the Eurasian Union, almost all the world's news media, especially the American and European media, criticized Russia's position on the Ukraine crisis, using the whole arsenal of information campaign - official and expert opinions, sociological polls, historical references, revealing the dark pages, economically possible Preliminary calculations of losses, etc.
 The reality is that in the coverage of the Ukrainian issue, the Russian media isolated themselves from the world, presenting their own perception of the situation to the internal audience, and trying to oppose the foreign language media resources with almost the same content messages.
  Those attempts failed mainly due to the information flow directed by the Western news machine.
 In fact, by convincing the Russian audience of the truth of their position, moreover, by motivating the residents of dozens of large cities to support the state position and take to the streets, the information effect of the Russian media on the public opinion of the outside world was minimized and provoked strong resistance.
This is where the most important, vital issue for us arises - the protection and resilience of the geographical participants of the Eurasian area (including Armenia) in the event of information-driven campaigns, blockades or war.
  The latter is familiar to us by the example of our eastern neighbor, but even the information confrontation over the Artsakh conflict, being a major issue for us, has local, territorial significance.
 The creation of such information deadlocks for Armenia, which is preparing to join the Customs Union, contains much more serious risks and threats, which must be carefully calculated.
 By and large, the Customs Union itself did not offer a large-scale information tool to either the EU or its Eastern partners during the implementation of the Eastern Partnership program.
  The actual failure of the EU program and the restoration of Russia's position in the region were not accompanied by an information campaign aimed at European partners.
  Moreover, the members of the Eastern Partnership lost themselves for a moment in the throes of controversial media flows from Russia and the EU.
It is this crisis of information on Eurasian integration projects that is causing a crisis of confidence in Russia and its partners in the Euro-Atlantic community.
  Even in economic calculations, foreign investors are not able to truly assess the potential of the Customs Union market or its investment opportunities due to lack of information.
  However, even before the opportunities of economic, even political, partnership, in this case we are talking about a significant decline in the rating of the Eurasian space, which is sometimes filled with whispers, myths and experimental "bubbles", a circumstance used extensively by the Western media to cover developments in Ukraine.
In its turn, the Russian և Eurasian media in general is still actively looking for a universally acceptable ideology that will direct the flow of information in the region.
  For the time being, the so-called Eurasian civilization, often presented in the Russian electronic media, is seen as such, with its various manifestations, from the general awareness of the victory in the Great Patriotic War to the covert open calls for inter-ethnic "inter-religious solidarity."
  The director of the EurAsEC Institute Vladimir Lepekhin thinks that the whole Eurasian media is not able to create a better unifying idea1.
Russian official circles do not hide the need to introduce a general, systematic policy of coverage and promotion of Eurasian integration processes in both domestic and regional countries.
 The dispute arises over the issue of creating a regulatory body and controlling the thematic media flow.
  Thus, according to Tatiana Moskalkova, Deputy Chairwoman of the Russian State Duma Committee on CIS Affairs, only the positive news related to the Eurasian Union should be reported to the public, leaving no room for sharp and scandalous 1 See http.
//www.rosbalt.ru/exussr/2013/12/24/1215154.html.
for news 1.
  Other parliamentarians or executive bodies take a softer stance and do not see the need to introduce a targeted media and propaganda element.
 For example, Galina Povazhnaya, a representative of the Russian Foreign Ministry, believes that "soft power" should be used in media activities in the context of shaping the factors of culture, art and education2.
However, almost the entire Russian social-political elite is unanimous on several issues. The information field plays an important role in the formation of a common space, and the essence of the current integration processes is little understood.
 The same Moskalkova explains it by the fact that sharp, scandalous, negative news immediately attracts the audience, and deep, serious and analytical opinions are not required.
 And here, too, arises the task of Russia's information policy in the Eurasian space: to develop and implement media tools that will effectively connect the societies of the member states of the supranational structure to be created, inspire a real sense of community, and carry out a socializing function.
If we withdraw from the information confrontation over the Ukrainian crisis and outline the perception of Eurasian integration in general by the Western media, it should be characterized as cautious and pessimistic.
 In particular, the Western press, for example, the Guardian, the Financial Times, the National Interest, along with the intensification of integration processes in the 2000s. last և 2010 At the beginning of the 19th century, they consistently advanced the hypothesis of Russia's "imperial ambitions" and the attempt to revive the USSR, based on Russian President Vladimir Putin's statement that "the collapse of the USSR was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe."
  By the way, not only V. Putin, as well as the leaders of the other two members of the Customs Union, Nursultan Nazarbayev and Alexander Lukashenko, prefer to publish large-scale articles on the nature of integration in the press, often refuting the accusations of Western opponents.
The Eurasian information space is not yet decisive in counteracting the rumors and myths actively circulating in the Western media.
  The most vital of them, as already mentioned, is the attempt to present the Eurasian Union as a USSR 2.0 project.
  Moreover, the administrations of the western countries regularly declare such attempts inadmissible. Thus, in 2012 In December, former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced that the United States would do everything possible to prevent the creation of a new Soviet Union in Eurasia.
  In this context, American TV channels like to quote especially Russian President V. Putin once said that "people who do not regret the collapse of the Soviet Union are heartless," taking the idea out of context and not continuing that "the supporters of its reconstruction are also headless."
1 See http.
//newskaz.ru/society/20121210/4434425.html.
2 See http.
//www.grenada.md/post/mejdunarodnaya_konferentsia_roli_media_po_integratsii_evraziiskogo_soiuza.
3 See http.
//www.geopolitica.ru/Articles/1476/.
4 See http.
//vz.ru/news/2012/12/7/610688.html.
5 See http.
//www.aif.ru/politics/world/251189.
From these assertions follows the no less popular thesis in the second Western media that the creation of the Eurasian Union is Russia's geopolitical project.
 The role of Russia is mentioned as an avant-garde of the idea, while still in the 1990s. Kazakhstan, which has been proposing the idea of ​​a Eurasian Union and still living it faithfully, is hardly covered by the Western media.
 Instead, Belarus, a third member of the Customs Union, is often portrayed as a country with a dictatorial regime and anti-democratic methods of governing.
  In fact, the infographic of the CIS-Eurasian Union, which experts call the "club of illegitimate presidents", is perfectly formed in the field of Western media.
In the end, these assertions are added to the "forced geopolitical choice of the European" Eurasian Union "member states of the Eastern Partnership, the information pressure of which puts those two countries in a difficult position."
It is obvious that the future political, economic, social and humanitarian competitiveness of the Eurasian Union will be predetermined by the release of a new generation of information products, which will be able not only to remove media outlets from post-Soviet countries, but also to use mechanisms to influence public opinion in the outside world. By the example of "Rasha Today" TV channel.
  The member states of the Eurasian Union themselves report on other countries in the region in the framework of international news, that is, the common information policy of the countries united on the common interest is not yet significant.
In general, the information field and media regulations of the candidate countries participating in the Eurasian integration processes are varied.
  Apart from this or that level of state intervention (for example, there is no private press in Belarus as such), which, by the way, has sometimes taken diametrically opposed approaches, the internal markets and institutions have different positions in covering Eurasian integration.
  It comes mainly from the interests and interests of the media owners և editorial management.
  Not only the private, federal electronic media, but even the structures of the Customs Union do not have media policy institutes.
  In the European Commission, for example, a whole department is engaged in public relations and dissemination of information.
  The Eurasian Economic Commission has neither information promotion nor alternative media resources.
  However, "Eurasian official" and "private" expert opinions envisage the launch of large-scale information projects, such as a 24-hour news channel և Internet portal, which will give a significant impetus to the information component of integration processes.
Davit Sargsyan CERTAIN REALITIES OF THE INFORMATION FIELD OF EURASIAN INTEGRATION PROCESS Keywords: Eurasian integration, information processes, Customs Union, Eastern Partnership, western media field, world myth.
