THE CAUSES OF THE THIRD CENTURY CRISIS IN ANCIENT ROME In the history of Rome, the third century was a turning point.
 It was the Samanid period, at the end of which the Roman state structure had to be completely changed, համակարգը The system of Principality had to become Dominant.
  This transformation, however, took place over decades, due to a reality that historians call a "crisis" 1.
 Its beginning dates back to 235.
 It reached its peak around 260. և gradually receded due to the activities of the Reformer emperors, ending during the reign of Emperor Diocletian2.
Various authors have called the nature of the crisis political 3, internal Foreign policy 4, social 5 և etc.
 Even the issue of the existence of the crisis of the III century was touched upon.
 1870s A number of authors have suggested that the crisis is an exaggerated term.
 This opinion, however, was rejected6.
Many scholars have considered the crisis of the 3rd century as a decisive period in the transition to the medieval historical period.
 Մ. According to Rostov, the 3rd century was a period of social and political revolution in Rome, and the 3rd century. The crisis was not political, but exclusively economic.
  In the Roman Empire III c. He considers the contradiction and conflict between the urban bourgeoisie and the "rural population" to be the driving force behind the unfolding of events.
  The interests of the latter, according to the prominent historian, III c. In the political struggle they represented the army, gathered from the rural population, և the emperors who ascended the throne through it7.
Գ. Ferrero III c. He considers the crisis to be political; it presupposes the sharp decline of the authority of the Senate among the barbaric legions of the Roman army, by which every principle of the legitimacy of imperial power in the empire has disappeared.
  The legions began to ascend the throne to their allies, but they were not recognized by the whole army, which led to frequent changes of emperors.
 Decline of Senate prestige G. Ferrero connects it with the revolution carried out by Septimius Seros8.
F. According to the Altheim concept, III c. The course of Roman history was not determined by class struggle, և social problems could not be primary 2 In the same place.
6 For more on this, see Blois L., The Crisis of the Third Century AD in the Roman Empire.
 A ModernMyth ?, In.
 "The Transformation of Economic Life under the Roman Empire", Brill, 2002, pp. 204-271. to matter.
  He is looking for the roots of the crisis in the field of foreign policy.
  According to him, the difficult situation within the borders of the empire made the army a decisive factor for the survival of the state.
 Representatives of barbaric tribes began to play an important role in the army, which gradually weakened the ranks of the Italians in the army1.
In the modern Western literature they tend to think that in the search for the causes of the crisis of the III century it is not necessary to exaggerate the influence of any particular factor.
  The development of the empire was influenced by various factors, the significance of which was not the same in places2.
Thus, III c. There is a wide variety of approaches to the crisis.
 This shows the ambiguous attitude of historians in clarifying the causes of the crisis.
  The crisis was, in fact, the result of deep controversies that were evident in the Roman Empire during the reign of Marcus Aurelius (161-180).
 They appeared in the II century. Due to the conventional policy of the Roman neighbors, when the empire easily ruled over them.
  But this could not last long.
  Already before the accession of Marcus Aurelius, the inevitable turn of relations between Rome and its neighbors was being outlined.
 It soon became apparent that the empire was not a ruler but a victim.
I-II centuries During that time the emperor personally controlled the raids only in exceptional cases.
 However, the external pressure on the borders intensified, barbaric invasions became more frequent, so the emperors had to be present on the battlefield in person.
  Even Marcus Aurelius, a prominent opponent of military intervention, was forced to spend almost half of his reign on the Danube border, waging two difficult and costly wars (166-172 և 177-180).
  Imperial and leadership qualities became more important, and the relations he maintained with the army, both on a personal and symbolic level, now became even more important4.
 From that time on, the soldiers reserved for themselves the choice of the person who would be able to assume that responsibility.
  In the conditions of these military norms, the logic of the August legacy increased the probability of a civil war5.
The issue of succession to the throne was a serious problem for Rome.
 This issue became relevant after the assassination of Commodus, son of Marcus Aurelius (December 31, 192).
  A hot struggle for the throne began in the empire.
  Almost at the same time, the powerful armies proclaimed 3 generals in different areas: Septimius Seros, Claudius Albinus and Pescenius Niger.
The struggle for supremacy turned into a civil war, which ended in 193. With the victory of Septimius Seros.
Settling on the throne, Septimius Serus needed to legitimize his rule first.
 To that end, he proclaimed himself the son of Marcus Aurelius.
  Thus was founded the dynasty of the Seros (193-235), whose 3 In the same place.
4 In the same place.
The overthrow of the rulers through upheavals and political contradictions revealed all the weaknesses of the empire, the shortcomings in the system of government, in the army, in the economy.
The Senate occupies a special place in the system of government of the Roman Empire.
  In the early empire this position was explained by the political structure of the time, the Principality.
 Q.h. I-II centuries The rights of the Senate are changing significantly.
  On the one hand, the powers of the Senate are increasing due to the weakening of the role of commissions. II century Late Roman jurists considered the decisions of the Senate (senatus consulta) as laws1.
  On the other hand, the role of the Senate in governing the state was weakening due to the formation of an imperial bureaucracy and the abolition of princely power.
  During the reign of Septimius Seros, the Senate played another role in governing the Roman Empire.
The army played an important role in the life of the Roman Empire.
F. Engels called the Roman army "the material support of the government."
  In turn, each prince was well aware of the need to support the army.
  They always tried to ensure the loyalty of the army, they did not allow any individual who did not belong to the imperial house (Domus Asugusta) to enjoy too much prestige in its ranks.
III century The problem of the social origin of the army and the relations with other strata of the society can be fully understood in the correct understanding of the socio-political developments of the empire.
 I-III centuries Significant social and ethnic changes took place in the empire.
 Among them is the Roman provincial army, including its main cell, the legion.
 Already in the time of Hadrian (beginning of the 2nd century) the Romans completely passed through the provinces of recruiting legions, where they were located 4.
  The social affiliation of the army leaders also changed.
 By order of Septimius Seros, high military positions became available to ordinary legionnaires, whereas in the past the centurionate was the pinnacle of possible progress.
 The high positions were occupied by the representatives of the equestrian class5.
There is a "barbarization" of the army in the region of the principality.
 In August the Germans were allowed to settle in the territory of the empire and serve in the army.
 This policy continues in the following centuries.
 Information has been preserved about the presence of barbarians in the army during the reign of Emperor Caracalla6.
  In time, the number of barbaric military units in the Roman army increased significantly.
The tense situation at the borders caused significant changes in the army7.
 It is known that in the Principality region the empire pursued a highly defensive policy, and the main task was not to conquer new territories, but to defend what had already been conquered.
  This strategy justified itself until the II century. In the middle of the 19th century, however, the vulnerabilities of Marcus Aurelius emerged.
 The Romans would have succeeded if the barbarians had not tried to penetrate the empire within the limits of their weakened defenses.
 When Marcus Aurelius took three legions from the Danube-Rhineland to the East during the war with Parthia, new clashes broke out on the northern frontier before the end of the war.
 R. According to Smith, these events marked the beginning of a crisis in the former Roman military and defense system.
II century recently և III c. That crisis deepened.
 If in the past the main enemies of the empire on the Rhine and Danube borders were small and irregular barbaric groups, and in the East - not so militarily powerful Parthia, now the situation has changed dramatically.
 Large tribes were formed in the northern parts of the empire, and they looted Roman territories much more frequently3.
 Sassanid Persia became the new city of Rome in the East with its aggressive aspirations.
  The changed situation led to the establishment of the empire in the II century. From the middle of the 19th century he was at war with the people of the North East.
  As a result of the hostilities, large numbers of soldiers and residents of the border areas were killed or taken prisoner.
 Serving in the army had become more dangerous than before4.
Roman political power was greatly influenced by the political situation of the empire.
 The rule of changing military emperors III c. He was constantly accompanied by civil wars and relied on the support of the army5.
  As a result of these problems, the emperors began to worry about the implementation of reforms in the army.
Contrary to the efforts of the first Seros, the state of the empire was not good.
  Founding the first dynasty of non-Italian origin in Roman history, Septimius Serus had to overcome many obstacles.
 All revolts in the provinces had to be suppressed.
  We have even received reports from Africa and Asia of the "deadly conspiracies of the enemies of the state."
The reign of Septimius Serus played an important role in the development of the Roman Empire.
 Among his positive achievements were the establishment of order, the preservation of traditional Roman state structures, the establishment of a regular system of succession to the throne.
  He was not an innovator or a reformer. he did not try to change the traditional principles of the Principality, to upset the balance between the Italian provinces, or to reduce the role of the Senate.
 Nevertheless, the rule of Seros was quite different from the principles of the rule of Augustine ին Antoninos7.
 The main difference is that for the first time in 124 years the military leader conquered Rome and caused a "long civil war".
  This was, in fact, a violation of the traditional peaceful succession to the throne and the Pax Romana, և Seros had to overcome those problems.
 The connection between the emperor and the army was more obvious.
  The Senate and the electorate of the society did not want anything else! 5 In the same place.
7 In the same place.
To serve the emperor, controversy was brewing in all walks of life, and the unscrupulous policies of the next Seros deepened the discontent.
  Emperor Caracalla Constititio Antoniana in 212 It granted Roman citizenship to all the liberated inhabitants of the empire.
Until 235 During the last assassination of Seros, Alexander, the situation in the empire worsened.
 The young and weak emperors ruled through advisers, being personally unaware of the developments in their own country, and the rise of individual military commanders left no other way to avoid a crisis in the army.
235 Julius Verus Maximinus killed Alexander Seros and proclaimed him emperor.
 He was the first truly "military emperor" to fight in the ranks of his soldiers.
  The era of military anarchy began, which raised the imperative of being or not before the Roman Empire.
  The empire entered a catastrophic period, in the words of Latush, "in a long tunnel to get out of it only during the reign of Diocletian, during the reign, and when we are born again, a completely unknown country lies before us."
Nina Hayrapetyan THE CAUSES OF THE THIRD CENTURY CRISIS IN ANCIENT ROME Keywords: Third century crisis, political instability, the influence of the barbaric factor, the state of the Rhine և Danube borders, the dynasty of the Seros, the military era.
