COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RECREATIONAL POTENTIAL OF THE REGIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA AS AN IMPORTANT PRECONDITION FOR THE FORMATION OF RT
 The solution of these problems requires discussing the recreational regions of the Republic of Armenia և the spatial differences of their recreational potential.
 Below is a brief description of recreational areas.
The recreational region of Shirak is spread in the north-west of the Republic of Armenia, it is distinguished by a great variety of natural conditions.
  Akhuryan gorge (columns with basalts, pebbles, unique rocks), unique volcanic relief ագ Aragats massif (crater, small glaciers near the summit, small mineral gorges, small mineral springs, which are unique to visit գեղեցիկ create beautiful landscapes).
 One of the possible recreational resources is the climate of Shirak, which allows to develop many forms of "summer" and "winter" recreation, բազմ the diversity of vegetation, which can be an object of interest for eco-tourism, cognitive tourism այլ other types of recreation.
The recreational area of ​​Shirak has the greatest potential for recreational activities for the following types: walking-aesthetic, walking-sports, skiing-skiing, alpine skiing, sun-air bath, ecotourism.
 That is, it is surrounded by a significant recreational potential, which is confirmed by a usefulness factor of 1 (K = 2.1), but currently 5-10% of the total potential is used [2, 78].
  The recreational region of Lori is spread in the north of Armenia, which is characterized by the diversity of natural conditions, the presence of forests, which increases the recreational importance of the area.
  Important objects for ecotourism and geotourism are the mountains of Javakhk, Bazum, the Armenians of Georgia, and for mountaineering, the Urasar peak.
 The mountain passes of the mentioned mountain ranges are convenient for conducting hiking routes.
 The Lori concavity has unique natural conditions, which is divided by river valleys and creates a beautiful landscape.
The concave climate is favorable for the organization of medical and health recreation, for the development of ecological and cognitive tourism [3, 146-149].
 That is, in Lori recreational region, the possible types of recreational activities are: walking-aesthetic, walking-sports, ecotourism, mountaineering, resort, as well as ski-sledding (western region), picking berries, mushrooms.
  The recreation coefficient of Lori is 2.2 [2, 90].
The recreational region of Tavush occupies the north-east of the Republic of Armenia and is distinguished by a great variety of natural conditions.
  It is the most forested recreational region of the Republic of Armenia (50%) [2, 90].
The mountain ranges in Tavush are almost completely forested, which increases their recreational significance.
  These mountain ranges can be an object of interest for ecotourism, mountaineering, mountaineering and geotourism.
  When determining the recreational suitability of the Miapor mountain range, it is necessary to determine the extent of its operational significance.
By calculating the number of functions, it is possible to derive the recreational fitness factor of the given region, with the help of which the recreational potential of any territorial unit is estimated.
  The calculation of the recreational fitness factor was made according to E. A. The formula proposed by Kotlyarov is as follows: K = C1 / C2, where K is the recreational fitness factor, C1 is the number of recreational functions of the subregion, and C2 is the number of recreational functions [2, 76-77].
In the central part there is a sanctuary, the purpose of which is to preserve redwood or cannabis.
Pine forests have been preserved in some places near Dilijan, which have eco-ecological and sanatorium significance.
 The Bldan valley with its rich mineral springs is unique here.
  Dilijan is notable for its pastures, thanks to which the health resort complex can work all year round.
 Sunbathing is possible.
 The valley regions are unique.
  The middle stream of Aghst is distinguished by its forestry and high aesthetic assessments of the landscapes.
 The coldest conditions in Tavush are in Getik valley, which is suitable for summer recreation.
 There are no winter-water recreation types in Tavush, but there is 90% of the potential of possible recreational activities in Armenia.
 The recreational fitness factor of the area is 2.2 [2,104].
The recreational region of Aragatsotn is arched and spreads around the Aragats massif with a variety of natural conditions and unique natural complexes.
 On the plateau near the peak of Aragats, there are stepped steps, excision surfaces, which are important for the development of geotourism.
 Amberd gorge also creates a beautiful landscape, which is suitable for summer hiking routes.
 The Arkashen valley is beautiful, which creates the most important tourist object, Lake Kari.
  The sub-alpine and alpine zones of Aragats, Ara (special preparation for routes are required here), Pambak-Tsaghkunyats mountain ranges, where the routes can be cognitive-eco-tourist, are distinguished by unique vegetation and multifaceted aspect.
 Kasakh gorge has a natural historical significance, the depth of which reaches 150 m near Saghmosavankim.
 Aparan Reservoir can become a potential recreational facility for water sports.
 That is, in Aragatsotn there is a great opportunity for the development of ecotourism, geotourism, partly agro-tourism.
  The recreation coefficient of the region is 1.2 [2, 117].
The recreational region of Kotayk extends in the central part of the Republic of Armenia, where the Marmarik և Tsaghkamarg gorges can be distinguished with steep rises.
 The recreational potential of the Marmarik Valley is increased by the forests that spread here, which are significantly different from the rest of the forests in Armenia.
The Hrazdan region (particularly Tsakhkadzor) has a great potential for winter recreation due to the height of snow cover, stability, and the structure of the slopes.
 An important object of mountaineering is Mount Hatis, which is devoid of forests.
 The opportunities for geotourism are great in Gutanasar and Menaksar.
 Endemic առ The presence of plants listed in the Red Book is a prerequisite for the development of ecotourism.
  The possible types of recreational activities of Kotayk region are: walking-aesthetic, walking-sports, sun-air bath, ecotourism, mountaineering, sanatorium, skiing.
  The western slopes of the Geghama Mountains are suitable for hiking routes.
  The target can be volcanic cones, mountain lakes (Akna, Zeynal, Bishari), the surroundings of which have a unique biodiversity.
 Recreational infrastructure in Kotayk is incomparably well developed, and the coefficient of recreational fitness is 1.5 [2, 131].
The recreational region of Gegharkunik extends to the east of the Republic of Armenia, including Lake Sanaa.
 It is a deep depression from Aynire, the bottom of which is Lake Sana, and all around it - mountain ranges.
 The landscapes of the eastern shores of Lake Sanaa have the highest aesthetic ratings in Armenia.
 The lake-sloping slopes of the Areguni-Sևn mountain ranges (juniper relict forests are remarkable on the slopes of the two chains), the eastern part of the Vardenis mountain range, as well as the Artanish peninsula, where the reserve of the same name is organized to preserve the reserve, have great eco-tourism potential.
 The destination of the routes here can be the peak of Artanish, from where the lake with all its charm can be seen.
The western shore of the Sean has considerable potential for recreational resources, where the fragmentation of the slopes allows for uncomplicated mountaineering ascents, and the exarchate relief preserved at the headwaters of Gridzor is very famous for geotourism, where a beautiful landscape of the central Vardenis plateau appears in summer.
 The hiking route passes through the foothills of Maraldagh անդ Sandukhtasar և Sotk area (Tandzut waterfall), and the slopes of Ghghasar are suitable for amateur mountaineering։ mountaineering.
 The presence of the lake mitigates the climate of the Sang depression, one of the features of which is the abundance of solar radiation.
 There are good opportunities for outdoor recreation in Gegharkunik, and the swimming period lasts longer in the western-south-western zone.
  The shoreline of the lake allows to make circular routes of different types (pedestrian, by car).
  With the exception of a few species, all types of recreation can be carried out in the Swan Basin.
  By developing and organizing water recreation, it can be made one of the best regions of international tourism.
 The recreational fitness coefficient of Gegharkunik is 3.1 [2, 147].
The recreational region of Armavir occupies a small part of the south-western part of the Republic of Armenia.
  The northern part of the region is oshindra semi-desert, the gray color of which changes only in spring.
  Here are the agricultural arable lands, the harsh terrestrial climate, the long period of high temperatures, due to which it becomes unfavorable for the organization of rest.
 The conditions are relatively favorable for the development of ecotourism, cognitive-historical-cultural tourism.
  In other words, the possible types of recreational activities in Armavir are: walking-aesthetic, sun-air bath, ecotourism, and the coefficient of recreational fitness is 0.8 [2, 155].
The recreational region of Ararat occupies the south-eastern lowlands of the Ararat Valley, the surface of which is divided into two distinct parts: northern (mountainous) and southern (lowland).
  Hiking routes can be organized in April-May-October due to the severely terrestrial nature of the climate.
  Despite the seeming uniformity, the Ararat valley is distinguished by a great diversity of vegetation, the best preserved areas of which are included in the "Khosrov Forest" reserve.
  The semi-desert բնական desert natural complexes (in Yeraskhavan plain) have been preserved, which are a subject of great interest for eco-tourism.
  The object of ecotourism is also the animal world (particularly the bird world).
  The natural conditions are unique in the mountainous part.
 Azat Խ Khosrov Forest Reserve is spread in the Vedi river basin, in some parts of which it is possible to carry out eco-tours.
 There are many spectacular caves, springs of mineral water, as well as the sparse forests of Nagihu.
  The columnar basalts of the Azat River gorge, the forty springs of its upper stream, the two small waterfalls of the Sjur river, the wild fruit trees can have a recreational role.
 Urts mountain range is suitable for non-complicated mountaineering exercises, adventure tourism, ecotourism, as well as hiking routes.
  There are wide opportunities for geotourism in the cozy gorges of Urtsadzor և Aratso rivers.
  The vegetation of Dahnak mountain range may be of interest for ecotourism.
 The possible types of recreational activities of Ararat are: walking-aesthetic, walking-sports, sun-air bath, ecotourism.
 The abundance of sparse forests ensures the high quality of the environment; the coefficient of recreational suitability is 1.2 [2, 167].
The recreational region of Vayots Dzor extends in the south-east of the Republic of Armenia and has a typical mountainous relief.
 In the recreational period (especially in Vayk) the changes of climate փոփոխ vegetation take place in an upward zone over a very short distance, which is a surprise for the viewer.
 Daykas in the south-eastern part of the Vayk mountain range are good preconditions for adventure tourism and mountaineering.
  In many parts of the northern slopes of the mountain range, summer hiking trails can be implemented, the main purpose of which should be to visit caves.
  The largest of the caves is the Bear Cave, which is given aesthetic value by the diverse formations of stalactites and stalagmites.
 It is also interesting - Mozrov Cave, which is very accessible.
Magel և Bird caves also have a unique organic world և aesthetic charm.
The river valleys stand out with their recreational potential.
 In this respect, Yeghegis with its irvats and Sulema amphitheater-like pool, which have beautiful nature, are possible.
  Goghtanik waterfall and cave are also spectacular in this region.
  Vankasar, Tsaghatsar, Muradsar, Darb ս Jahuk river valleys are suitable for mountaineering "geotourism".
 For those who prefer ecotourism, the valleys of the Arpa and Darb Jahuk rivers can be interesting, as well as the rare plant species growing in the Sulema mountain pass.
  The southern part of the region has a significant potential for the development of mountaineering and agro-tourism.
Vayk has favorable conditions for organizing winter rest.
 Jermuk has excellent climatic conditions for the annual and uninterrupted organization of skiing and sports events.
  In addition, it has a great potential for health resort recreation.
 The big medical-health complex of Jermuk has been created.
That is, in Vayots Dzor, except for water recreation horses, it is possible to organize all types of recreational activities.
  The recreational fitness factor is 1.5, which is greatly affected by the small size of the area [2, 184].
The recreational region of Syunik occupies the extreme south-eastern part of the Republic of Armenia, the diversity of natural conditions of which is a good precondition for the development of different types of recreation.
 The most powerful mountain system in the recreational region of Syunik is the Zangezur mountain range, the mountain passes of which are located at a great height.
 It makes the mountain range accessible in the east-west direction, it is a precondition for the organization of pedestrian routes.
  The northern part of the region, Syunik Highland, Bargushat mountain range, Kaputjugh ուտ Tsghuk peaks have excellent opportunities for the development of hiking, geotourism and mountaineering.
 Vorotan gorge, Kaler և Geghi river valleys are suitable for mountaineering.
 A hiking trail can be organized along the Sisian River valley, where the Tolors Reservoir creates a beautiful landscape, and the destination may be the Gyadik mountain pass, which is distinguished by its unique vegetation and unique relief ridges.
 The peak of Mets Ishkhanasar stands out with the potential of conducting sports routes.
Syunik region stands out with great eco-tourism potential.
 In the southern part of Zangezur, in order to preserve the unique ecosystems, which are the main precondition of ecotourism, the "Zangezur" sanctuary was organized.
 The most important object of eco-tourism is the Shikahogh Reserve, which is rich in endemic and rare biomass.
 The Syunik plateau, the valleys of the Ayriget, Geghi, Tat, Aramazd, Lernashen rivers have excellent eco-tourism conditions with unique landscapes and unique biomass (fruit trees are common).
Thus, the possible types of recreational activities in Syunik are: walking-aesthetic, walking-sports, sun-air bath, ecotourism, mountaineering, sanatorium, to some extent, ski-sledding, but there are more favorable conditions for ecotourism, which, if properly organized, can should become the leader of this branch in Armenia.
  The recreational significance of forests is great here.
  The coefficient of recreational fitness of Syunik is 2.3 [2, 208].
Assessing the potential of the recreational regions of the Republic of Armenia, we can say that out of more than 40 types of recreation existing in the world, only 13 can be implemented in the territory of Armenia.
  In order to make tourism a priority in the Republic of Armenia, to ensure the intensive development of recreational activities, it is necessary to create recreational spatial complexes (RTS), which should be multifunctional systems.
The development of the recreational sphere should be based on the ecological approach.
 In other words, the development of RTH should be based on a reasonable policy aimed at the ecology of certain recreational areas of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, as the main precondition for the development of tourism is the pristine nature and the existence of SPAs.
 At the same time, the large influx of tourists, in itself, becomes dangerous for large-scale misappropriation and pollution of the natural environment.
  The formation of the RT should be based on the elaboration of mutually agreed "substantiated" provisions as a result of a comprehensive and thorough study of the natural conditions carried out by highly qualified specialists, qualified personnel (geologists, environmentalists, sociologists, psychologists, engineers).
The priority issues for the formation of RT should be: 1. Recreational scientifically substantiated zoning of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, which will have a further taxonomic division: district-sub-region-center.
 The borders of the largest spatial units, the regions, generally coincide with the administrative borders of the regions, which makes the management of the sector more efficient.
 Regions, in turn, are divided into sub-regions, within which the diversity, interconnectedness, complementarity and completeness of recreational resources are more pronounced.
 The center of each sub-region can become larger, socio-economic, culturally developed settlements with convenient geographical location.
It is necessary to consider the recreational resources in the following aspects: medical, sports, cognitive, to evaluate people from the point of view of their recreational needs: medical-biological, psychological-aesthetic, technological.
Table 1. Comparative Characteristics of Recreational Fitness Recreational Fitness Coefficient (K) ShirakLoriTavush AragatsotnKotayk 6. Gegharkunik 9. Vayots Dzor 10 SyunikArmavirAraratAs shown by the analysis of the coefficients of suitability of the recreational regions of the Republic of Armenia (Table 1 [2, 208]), Gegharkunik stands out with the greatest recreational potential, Syunik, Tavush, Lori and Shirak regions are almost equal.
 However, all the regions have equal potential for high-spin-aesthetic, walking-sports, sun-air bath, mountain tourism, eco-tourism for the development of species, and for the types of health resort, water-winter recreational activities it is necessary to separate the regions with strong potential.
  Moreover, the health resort, in its turn, depending on the climatic conditions, the nature of the mineral waters, the presence of peat, should be classified according to the regions.
 All this will ensure the cycling of procedures, covering different regions, throughout the year.
Taking into account the mentioned peculiarities, it will be possible to create complexes of tourist services or to compile tourist packages with different lines.
 The packages should be based on the purpose of the recreational activity, the nature of the use of resources.
  Combine with the main goal - other types of recreational activities - include as many areas as possible, which will ensure a full rest.
 The decisive factor is the compliance of the prices of tour packages, as well as the quality of services with international standards.
2. Comprehensive study of agricultural farms, development of ways of agro-tourism development.
 To develop crop production, increase livestock production to provide visitors with ecologically clean agricultural products, as well as to solve the internal needs of the local population.
  The development of agricultural production will not only contribute to the solution of the employment problem of the local population, but will also be a basis for the development of rural tourism.
3. Establishment of a recreational network in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, where the sub-regions of the RTC should operate in a highly interconnected and interconnected manner.
4. Supply of sub-regions with high-quality service-accompanying staff, as well as a powerful information base on the natural-man-made recreational resources of the Republic of Armenia in the form of guides, maps, DVDs.
5. Regulation of transport issues (correct choice of vehicles, organization depending on the type of recreational activity, natural conditions, etc.).
It is possible to prove the fact that the recreational regions of the northern part of the Republic of Armenia - Shirak, Lori, Tavush - stand out with the most convenient transport-geographical position.
6. Powerful advertising activity on a national-international scale, making "discount" cards widely used.
 That is, to present with a flexible discount system.
7. Establishment of external-internal relations և development.
 The RTC can be established, fully operational և provide development only with the close cooperation of state and public agencies, as well as with the financial support of the state.
And the foreign relations with well-known international tourism organizations are more decisive, especially those who will be more interested.
  This will not only bring a large flow of tourists to Armenia, but will also provide a large outflow from Armenia.
8. Implement changes and improvements in the legislative field.
 Laws should be adopted that encourage the development of tourism and the involvement of foreign capital in the organization of this sphere.
  To pursue a reasonable, soft tax policy.
  In addition, the creation of joint tourism organizations is one of the effective ways to attract additional capital from abroad.
9. Control of the tourism market, separation of the most profitable branches.
10. Defining the permissible relations between the recreants և the number of the population, the recreants տնտեսական the economic possibilities of the area և.
 As these are dynamic, they can change frequently.
 It is possible to fix and compare the balance of recreants at different time intervals.
11. Establishment of strict control over deforestation. The presence of forests increases the recreational importance of the area.
12. Utilization of the potential of the local population in the service system, which implies organization of food, hotel business, as well as production of tourist attributes (local souvenirs, local handicrafts).
13. Rapid development of infrastructure (parallel to the hotel-restaurant complexes to boost the construction of campsites in different regions with all amenities) ևDiversification of services.
Thus, the creation and development of the RTU will become a serious impetus for the development of the Armenian economy, as natural-man-made recreational resources will be effectively used, inter-regional-interstate socio-economic and cultural ties will be developed.
 Infrastructure և The development of the service sector will proceed equally in all recreational areas, այժմ the current strict concentration will not be observed.
 As a result of all this, the volume of investments will increase, sufficient preconditions will be created for the dynamic development of the sphere in Armenia.
Literature 1. Hayrapetyan E., Harutyunyan L., Fundamentals of Nature Protection, Yerevan, 1983, p. 382.
2. Martirosyan L. Recreational geography, Vanadzor, 2014, page 277.
3. Mnatsakanyan B., Tadosyan G., Lori climate և waters, Vanadzor, 2007, page 290.
4. Astashkina M., Kozyreva O., Geography of tourism. Учебное пособие.
- Moscow, 2010, p. 134. Nare Gyozalyan COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REGIONS OF ARMENIA AS AN IMPORTANT PRECONDITION FOR THE FORMATION OF RTR Keywords: recreational, recreational potential
coefficient:
.
