SOCIAL WORK AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN RA Human rights are inherent in human nature, without them he can not exist as a human being.
 Human rights and freedoms enable us to be fully developed, to use our human qualities, our talent, our conscience, and thus to satisfy our deepest needs.
  Refusal to exercise human rights and freedoms is considered not only a personal issue, but also creates conditions for social and political unrest, leading to conflicts in societies and states.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted three years after the founding of the United Nations in 1948. on December 10, in Paris. That day is considered International Human Rights Day.
The Declaration has been translated into more than 350 languages ​​and is the most widely translated document in the world1.
 It is the cornerstone of current human rights law, developed in non-political language, establishing relationships that anyone around the world can rely on.
 In its 30 articles, the Declaration defines the rights of all people - freedoms, including civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.
 However, the declaration has no legal force, it is a collection of moral norms2.
The concept of "human rights" was first used in the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, adopted in 1789.
 The Declaration establishes fundamental human rights and freedoms.
 Human rights form the basis of a person's legal status3.
As stated in Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, fundamental human freedoms, social justice և world peace are dignity.
  Respect for human rights must be accepted regardless of the conditions under which they are implemented or the political system.
The idea of ​​the "Third Generation" of human rights became widespread and widespread.
  The first generation includes rights such as civil and political rights.
  The second generation includes positively enshrined rights aimed at social justice, active participation in economic, social and cultural life, and the provision of freedom.
  The third generation includes "collective rights", according to which each person has a social 1 1 See "Basic Facts About the United Nations", Yerevan, 2002, p. 24.
2 Aziz N., The Human Rights Debate in an Era of Globalization, in “Debating Human Rights.
 Critical Essays from the3 See http:
//www.km.ru/magazin/view_print.asp?id/ 10.03.14.
has the right to national law, under which the exercise of the rights enshrined in the Declaration ապահով freedoms can be ensured.
Social work is a profession of human rights protection.
  The professional activity of social workers is aimed at the protection of human rights, the prevention and violation of human rights violations, and the implementation of anti-discrimination practices.
 The definition of social work given by the International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) դպրոցի International Association of School of Social Work (IASWS) emphasizes the principle of human rights և social justice.
  This approach affects the practice of social work. The Code of Ethics for Social Work, which is influenced by the ideology of human rights ակարգ is the regulation of the practice of social work in full, fully reflects the ideology of human rights.
The concept of "need" is more applicable in the framework of social work instead of the concept of "human right".
 In the first case, the profession focuses on difficult situations, overcoming needs, leaving the protection of human rights to others.
 The USA is an example of the second case, where in 1947 The American Association of Social Workers has adopted a fundamental assertion (reflected in Article 25 of the UNHCR), which was enshrined more than a year and a half later.
In the description of social work, however, the word "need" is used instead of the word "right".
Needs և rights are often rediscovered because the satisfaction of one is in no way incompatible or less important than the other.
Social work can be considered a profession of action.
 Unlike other professionals, social workers are called to interpret a number of philosophical concepts, but their activities are more focused on solving social problems and responding to needs.
  It is common ground that a social worker is a human rights worker, as evidenced by Article 25 of the UNHCR, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICCPR), the Concept for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CCPA), and the Concept for the Protection of Children's Rights ( ԵԻՀ).
  In the field of human rights, the social worker has the potential to make significant contributions to human rights movements.
  First of all, social workers clearly understand the aspect of the inalienability of rights, as in their daily practice they meet without adequate housing, food, mental health beneficiaries.
  They realize that the violation of citizens' political rights harms human well-being.
Social workers carry out activities that ensure the realization of the rights of individuals, groups and communities.
However, there is a lack of awareness that social work is a human rights practice, a way.
The global human rights platform is a huge structure.
  As Gore mentioned in 1968, social work will be enriched, it will have a huge profit if its connection with human rights is re-consciously retrained.
  Probably in 2028. The discussion of the centennial of professional organizations will show that the profession has really specified and strengthened its human rights obligation1.
Human rights are inseparable from the theory, values, ethics and practice of social work, so the protection of rights must be inseparable from social work.
  Even in authoritarian countries, guaranteeing the realization of human rights is possible for social workers.
However, social work, being a profession guaranteeing the realization of human rights, can not ensure full protection of rights, non-discrimination.
  Referring to the situation in the world, it becomes clear that: 1. According to international estimates, more people have died from economic and social deprivation in the last 20 years alone than during World War II. Every year, 12.9 million children under the age of 5 die in developing countries. In developing countries alone, more than 1 billion people live in poor housing conditions, and 100 million are completely homeless. There are an estimated 17.5 million refugees worldwide2.
All this also affects the problems of the Republic of Armenia.
  By gaining independence, the Republic of Armenia was given the opportunity to participate in international treaties on human rights protection, to join agreements, to join international organizations, and to participate in international conferences.
  Armenia has joined the basic international documents that have been signed at both general and regional levels.
Armenia has joined the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which has greatly contributed to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country.
  The steps taken by the Republic of Armenia in recent years to protect human rights are the abolition of the death penalty, the improvement of the system of places of imprisonment, the improvement of the legal system of protection of the rights of persons evading compulsory military service.
  2002 Armenia was elected in 2005. Re-elected Member of the UN Commission on Human Rights, 2003 Homosexuality was decriminalized in 2004. The Institute of Human Rights Defender was founded in 2005. As a result of the referendum held in November, the new Constitution of the Republic of Armenia was adopted, etc.
The Republic of Armenia has become a member of the most important international human rights instruments, as well as the Council of Europe Treaties on Human Rights, accepting, among other issues, the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
 Cooperation has been established with all human rights bodies ակարգ procedures (UN agencies, Council of Europe, OSCE).
The protection of human rights in the public sector is facilitated by some structures established in recent years: Administrative hearings 2 See http.
//www.un.org/rights/ 25.01.14.
The Commission, the RA Control Chamber, the RA Department of Labor վարչ Social հարցերի Monitoring ողության, which, by constantly monitoring, aim to identify the violated rights of visitors և to restore them 1.
Taking all this into account, it can be noted that social workers today have a lot to do in Armenia, in many other countries, to ensure the fair, dignified realization of human rights.
Liana MkrtchyanSOCIAL WORK AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN RA Keywords: social work, human rights, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, social justice, social need, United Nations.
