TATEV MONASTERY COMPLEX AS AN OBJECT OF WORLD CULTURAL HERITAGE "Obviously important for humanity"
 Objects of cultural heritage can be considered monuments, buildings - those groups of structures that are of historical, aesthetic, archeological, scientific or ethnological value.
Unique natural, biological-geological formations, rare բնական endangered flora and fauna, as well as areas of scientific, ecological or aesthetic value can be considered objects of natural heritage.
Inheritance is the property we have inherited from the past, which we are going to pass on to our future generations.
  Cultural և natural heritage is an irreplaceable source of inspiration for life.
  It is a criterion for us, it is our starting point և our emphasized characteristic feature.
  Heritage belongs to us, to all mankind, regardless of which of us is in it.
The motive for preserving the heritage originated after the end of World War II, based on the rescue of the temple of Abu Simbel, one of the treasures of ancient Egyptian civilization.
  The decision to build the Aswan Reservoir in Egypt was a source of concern to the international community, as the construction posed a great threat to the valley on which the temples were located.
  In 1959, an international scientific expedition was launched to save the object.
  The most shocking thing in this story is that Abu-Simbel is divided into 1036 fragments weighing 20-40 tons, completely removed from its place of location, moved to a safe area and collected in the same way.
 All this costs $ 80 million, half of which was provided by more than 50 countries.
 The salvation of the Abu Simbel temples clearly emphasized the responsibility of the nations to each other.
As a result of all this, on the initiative of UNESCO, with the support of the International Council for the Protection of Monuments (ICOMOS), the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) is preparing a World Heritage Agreement.
 As a result of the final agreement, the agreement on the protection of cultural and natural heritage was adopted on November 16, 1972 at the London General Assembly.
The most important feature of the agreement is that all the concepts related to the protection of nature and cultural values ​​are included in one document.
 The agreement recognizes the interaction of human nature with each other and considers it necessary to maintain harmony between them.
  The agreement clearly defines which natural and cultural objects can receive the status of world heritage.
  The agreement sets out the obligations of states towards these facilities, as well as their role in the maintenance of the facilities.
By signing the agreement, the state undertakes to preserve not only the objects included in the list in its territory, but also the entire national property.
The main task of preserving the world heritage is taken by "UNESCO", which, as we all know, is a special agency of the United Nations, established more than half a century ago, in 1945.
 The main mission of the organization is peacekeeping, poverty reduction, development of education, science, culture, communication and information through intercultural dialogue, the right relationship of countries with each other.
  The primary task of the organization is to maintain the peace of the human mind.
"Since wars first of all appear in the human mind, that is why the protection of peace must be carried out in the human mind."
  This idea is included in the "UNESCO" charter, it best reflects the activity of the organization.
The UNESCO Intergovernmental Body, the World Heritage Committee, meets once a year and is made up of representatives of the 21 States Parties to the Convention, who are elected for a term of six years.
  The agreement requires the committee to provide frequent reports on the protection status of the facilities, as these reports assess the condition of the facility և develop programs to address current issues.
  The committee manages the heritage fund և distribution of financial aid.
 The decision to include or remove the object from the World Heritage List belongs to the committee.
 The Committee also has the right to postpone the inclusion of the object in the inheritance, to request additional information about the object from the given state.
The agreement encourages activities by the states that will contribute to the increase of the value of the object in the eyes of the public, the strengthening of protection through educational and information programs.
One of the main advantages that the state receives by signing the agreement is cooperation with the international community.
 Three million dollars are allocated annually to states for the protection of heritage.
  The endangered World Heritage Site is immediately in the spotlight and receives financial assistance from both the national and international communities as soon as possible.
 Additionally, specialists can provide technical and information assistance.
The Pyramids of Giza (Egypt), the Royal National Park of Chitwan (Nepal), the Architectural Monuments of Delphi (Greece), the El Viscaino Reserve (Mexico), Mount Kenya National Park and the Forest Reserve are just a few examples of the survival of the fittest.
Being included in the world heritage helps to spread information about the object, which in turn is a great impetus for the development of tourism.
  If the information dissemination is well-planned and organized, this object can become one of the financial resources of the local economy.
Only the signatory states can include the objects in their territory in the list of heritage.
  The first step that the state has to take is to list all the cultural and cultural objects in its territory, which is called the preliminary list.
 It contains all the candidate objects, which, in the next 5-10 years, have the opportunity to be included in the list of heritage.
 The initial list can be updated at any time.
 Being included in the preliminary list is a very important step, as the Committee will not accept the objects that were not included in the preliminary list earlier.
The World Heritage Center offers consulting assistance to States in developing a nomination that should, as far as possible, be exhaustive and include all necessary documentation, including mapping.
 In this case, the center submits it to the relevant consulting bodies, so that the latter can evaluate the data.
 ICOMOS, IUCN (International Unionfor Conservation of Nature) and ICCROM (International Center for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property) are consulting firms.
In order for an object to receive World Heritage status, it must meet at least one criterion.
  The criteria are included in the agreement acceptance guide.
  They are conducted periodically to properly reflect the development of World Heritage concepts.
  Until 2004, the facilities were accepted on the basis of 6 cultural և 4 natural criteria.
 But today, after the guide came into force, there is one general list consisting of 10 criteria.
Thus, the candidate object of World Heritage should be.1. Be a masterpiece of human creative genius, 2. Reflect the significant impact of human values ​​on architectural or technological, monumental art, urban planning or landscape planning in a given period or in a particular cultural area; 3. Be a unique or exclusive evidence of existing or already extinct civilizations; 4. It is an outstanding example of a building, architectural, technological complex or landscape, which will represent a significant period of human history, 5. Be a vivid example of a traditional human structure, which includes traditional soil and water, which in turn will be a model of human interaction with culture or the environment, 6. Be directly or substantially related to existing customs, ideas, beliefs, artistic or literary works, events, have a unique significance for the whole world, 7. Represent a unique natural phenomenon or an area of ​​exceptional aesthetic significance, for example, it is a symbol of geological or physical-geographical features that occur as a result of traces of the past, relief, 9. Be a vivid example of ecological or biological processes that take place during the evolution of the soil-aquatic ecosystem, as well as the flora and fauna, 10. Includes biodiversity,
The inclusion in the World Heritage List is not over yet!
  Facility management և Local authorities are constantly working to improve facility management, monitoring ությունը protection.
  States are obliged to report regularly on the state of protection of the facility.
If the object loses its quality, which was its nature of world value, the Committee may decide to remove the object from the list of heritage.
  To date, only two sites have been removed from the World Heritage List: Dresden's Elbe Valley and the desert area called the Oman Arabian Sanctuary.
The Republic of Armenia signed the World Heritage Agreement on September 5, 1993.
 The initial list was compiled, from which Haghpatavank ստացել received the status of world heritage և Sanahin monastery complex, according to the second և fourth criteria, in 1996, Etchmiadzin Cathedral with three churches, the ruins of Zvartnots temple according to the second և third criteria, in 2000, Geghard Monastery above the river գետ Azat River և In accordance with the second criterion, in 2000 [10].
In 1995, a number of objects were included in the preliminary list of the Republic of Armenia, which have not yet received the status of world heritage. Dvin և Archaeological sites of Yereruk, Noravank և The upper valley of Amaghu.
  The Tatvan complex was also included in the preliminary list, along with the Tat desert և Vorotan valley, in accordance with six criteria: (i) (ii) (iv) (vi) (vii) (ix), but to date this process has not been continued [ 10].
The Tatvan complex itself meets the highest number of criteria in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, preliminary, as well as in the list of objects included in the World Heritage List.
  Located in the village of Tat, 35 km south of the town of Sisian in the village of Tat, the famous Armenian medieval medieval monastery complex, Tat, has a great potential to become a center for the development of various forms of tourism.
Tat is a rather rich historical-architectural complex with a combination of secular and secular structures. The oldest preserved structure of the complex is Poghos-Petros temple, in 1087, St. Astvatsatsin church was built as a second floor, and in 1787, in front of the southern entrance of the temple, Grigor Tatat was built. .
The Tatvan complex has the opportunity to develop in terms of cognitive tourism.
  The well-known medieval educational institution, Tat University, was developed in its time, had a greater reputation and high progress during the years of the teaching of Hovhan Vorotnetsi and Grigor Tatatsi. In addition to careful education, secular subjects were also taught.
Tat's architecture stands out with a number of features. On the eastern front, divided by niches, are the statues of Prince Ashotgaherets and his wife, Princess Shushan.
 In the crowns of the niches there are sculptures of dragon snakes, traditional conservative aliens, which testify to the unique beliefs of the local population.
The Tat monastery complex generally consists of three churches, a bookstore, a refectory, a bell tower, a mausoleum, and economic and auxiliary buildings.
  Outside the complex, there are a number of structures, the fountain, the Tat school, as well as the four-room oil mill built by Archbishop Hovakim, located northeast of the monastery wall, which is the best preserved of such medieval structures in Armenia.
  The secular structures of the late medieval, which are very different from the ancient churches in nature, not only do not disturb the general complex, but also, being low-lying, monotonous, emphasize even more, highlight the main, slender volumes of the complex.
In the center of the yard of the monastic complex is the swinging monument of the 10th century, which is better known as Gavazan.
  It is the only structure that has been preserved intact, despite numerous earthquakes.
  This fact speaks about the great constructive skill of Armenian architecture.
There are many old khachkars and tombstones near the village of Tat, not all of which have been studied.
The 93 inscriptions of the Tatvan complex, which are found on various monuments and paving stones, stand out mainly in the walls of St. Poghos-Petros Church, in the most prominent places.
The inscriptions were made during the construction, therefore, they date back to the 9th-10th century.
 They contain, in particular, the names of the builders, the clients, provide information about the construction of the monastery and adjacent buildings, repairs, donations, estates, abbots և intellectuals.
 [5] In May 2008, the Tat վերած Revival project was launched, the three main components of which were the restoration of all buildings in the Tatvan complex, which is expected to be completed in 2017; The third component is the Tat Gates project, which aims to develop the Tater ropeway tourism complex by creating the necessary infrastructure.
The latter was built with the funds of the foundation, and the opening took place on October 16, 2010.
  "Tater" is the longest reversible ropeway in the world registered in the Guinness Book of Records (5752 m), with a record construction period of 10 months.
  The modern engineering solutions of the ropeway were made by the Austrian-Swiss organization Doppelmayr / Garaventa.
 The ropeway stretches from Halidzor village to Tatvan monastery complex.
 Since the launch of the ropeway, more than 250,000 tourists have visited the Tatvan complex. Prior to the construction of the cable car, the number of visitors to Tat exceeded 7,000.
Inside the Tat complex, in the 500-meter gorge of the Vorotan River, is one of the natural wonders of Armenia, the Devil's Bridge.
  It was formed over millennia under the constant influence of water and wind, which polished and dug frozen lava masses.
  The width of the natural bridge is 60 meters, the length is 30.
The beautiful gorge of Vorotan is rich in healing springs, ancient caves and hermitages.
  In the lower part of the gorge, villages belonging to the middle of the last century are hidden on the slopes. Shinuhayr is one of the ancient villages of Syunik, where the 17th century St. Stepanos church is preserved in good condition.
 There is a cemetery with many tombs in the village, among which the three-meter khachkar of the 13th century stands out.
  The other is the village of Yeritsatumb, which is famous for the church of St. Minas, a waterfall and a pool.
  Mrgadzor Khach Church has been preserved in the village of Hin Khot.
 At the beginning of the 10th century the village was donated to Tat Monastery, until the 19th century it was the property of the monastery.
The old village of Halidzor is famous for its ruined chapel, tabernacle, 10th century khachkars, 17th century St. Minas church.
 Here the rock houses are a continuation of each other.
  They are typical structures of the mountain villages of Armenia, when the roof of one house is the yard of another house, creating a cascade of houses descending into the gorge.
 [10] Thus, the Tatvan complex is a cultural landscape composed of a combination of cultural, historical-architectural, historical-archaeological, aesthetic "natural elements", a joint creative product of nature and man, a historically balanced system in which natural "man-made elements" are inseparable under long-term interaction.
  The Tatvan complex is complete with its inseparability and harmony with the surrounding mountainous nature.
  The Tatvan complex has all the features with which it can attract tourists of different interests, ages, nationalities, and make them want to visit.
Included in the World Heritage List, information about the Tatvan complex will be intensively and effectively penetrated into the field of international tourism, the active flow of tourists will increase, and in case of danger it will receive immediate financial, technical and informational assistance from the international community.
Literature 1. Julian Huxley- Unesco its purpose and its philosophy, Paris 1947, pages.
 64. 1972, pages.
 16.3. Unesco World Heritage Center- World heritage information kit, Paris 2008, pages.
 32.5. Ս. Գ. Barkhudaryan, Divan of Armenian lithography, Prak 2, Goris, Sisian Ghapan regions, Yerevan 1960, 244 pages.
6. S.T. Saghumyan, Newly Discovered Lithographs, Social Sciences Bulletin, № 1. pp. 93-103, Yerevan 2001, 11 pages.
7. Tat վերած Revival Project Report - Tat Gates, April 1, 2013-September 30, 2013.
8. Ս. Kh. Mnatsakanyan, Tat և, Yerevan "Armenia" 1987, 15 pages.
9. URL.
 http:
//www.tatever.am/en- Tat-rope official website.
10. URL.
 http:
//whc.unesco.org/- Official World Heritage Site.
Marie MelikyanTATG MONASTERY COMPLEX AS AN OBJECT OF WORLD CULTURAL HERITAGE Keywords: UNESCO, World Heritage, Heritage Site, Jute.
