BUILDING A COLLECTIVE MEMORY BY HISTORY TEACHING. SOCIOLOGICAL REFLECTION OF THE PRESENTATION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN ARMENIAN HISTORY TEXTBOOKS In the conditions of globalization processes and huge migration flows, the national identity of the representatives of any nation is endangered.
  The danger of the assimilation of nations raises the need to use the process of reproduction of national identity among the younger generation.
According to the constructivist paradigm of national identity, identity is not born to every representative of the nation, but is constructed under the influence of certain factors throughout life.
 Մ. Speaking about the connection between history and the formation of collective memory, Halbwachs notes that history is a set of facts that occupy a prominent place in people's memory, but the problem is that history begins to be recorded when it is already past, there are no witnesses. The history written in books and taught in schools is the result of a choice of events1.
  History և The teaching of history plays a crucial role here, depending on how historical events are presented, what aspects are emphasized, what interpretation is given to the latter.
H. Marutyan refers to the role of memory in the structure of national identity, noting that memories are not static phenomena, but are subject to changes, which can be due to both internal developments and external influences.
  Regarding the latter, he quotes E. Smith. "Introducing new members of a society to its past in terms of their involvement in that society is an integral part of that society."
  Thus, in Israel, Armenia, Mexico and Poland, the teaching of national history is a major part of the state's overall efforts to develop a national identity. ”2
Collective memory needs to organize the intergenerational communication of external ways, from oral stories to the transmission of printed texts.
 It is the latter that ensure the fixation of successive changes3.
  In this regard, the article refers to the study of the Armenian Genocide in textbooks of Armenian history, considering it as a factor in the formation of collective memory.
In general, there is a special interest in general education due to the functions performed by the latter.
 Being one of the primary agents of socialization, the school transmits to the student the socially acceptable value system;
The transmission of behavioral models, the teaching of the history and language of a nation affect the formation of an individual's national identity.
 The school performs its most important function, passing on to the generations of the given nation the behavioral models typical of the nation, cultural peculiarities, showing the importance of state symbols, as well as giving knowledge. Theoretical questions, Yerevan, 2006, page 6.
about the history, religion, rituals, traditions of the nation, teaching the mother tongue.
  The above elements are important components of national identity.
  E. By distinguishing between the criteria necessary for the existence of ethnic communities, Smith singles out the need for historical memory and traditions.
  It is at school that the most important elements of national identity take root within the individual.
Historical memory exists only in a collective way. it builds the common past of the social community, extends beyond the life of individuals.
It is even transcendental, because the memory does not disappear after the death of the representatives of the given generation, but continues to live in the memory of their successors.
  In this sense, historical memory becomes a strong guarantee of collective identity, public construction of history.
 Historical sociology approaches, the first of which considers the construction of historical memory as a process of intentional reproduction, and the second as a non-intentional repetition of "even if you want to forget, the power of the past is stronger" 2, interpret memory as selective , a process under construction.
Traumatic memories especially lead to the past, point out the harms of the community and emphasize the collective identity.
  If regular memories lose their emotional significance over time, traumatic events become more popular over time3.
The observation of the Genocide case in the Armenian history textbooks in this respect completes the opportunities to study the formation of collective memory, which is a component of national identity through the teaching of history.
 Within the framework of the work, all the textbooks of Armenian history for the 5th-12th grades, which were put into operation in the 2013-2014 academic year of the RA secondary schools, were analyzed.
Students first came across the content of the Genocide in the ninth grade, when in the 1890s. The massacres of Western Armenians qualify as genocide4.
  The events of the same period are presented in more detail in high school, interpreting them as the beginning of the implementation of the Turkish program of the genocide of Western Armenians.
 Before that, in the 6th grade, speaking about the administrative-territorial divisions of Armenia, the Genocide is presented as a precondition for the volume changes of the territory. "..But over time, due to the genocide committed by the Ottoman Turks in the homeland of the Armenians, most of Armenia was deprived of Armenians.
  Armenians have lost most of their ancestral lands. ”5
In general, the articles on the Genocide in the textbooks are related to the description of the actual event (essence of the Genocide, stages of implementation, consequences, etc.) or the description of the steps following the Genocide (presentation of the international issue, the position of different states on the Genocide, recognition of the Diaspora). .
The article describing the Armenian Genocide is presented within the framework of the Caucasus Front of the First World War under the title "The Armenian Genocide" 6.
  The definition of genocide is given, representing the actions taken for the complete or partial annihilation of a national or religious community.
  These include: (a) the killing of members of a group or community; (b) the infliction of serious bodily harm or mental disorder; and (c) the transfer of children from one human group to another.
  In high school, a more complete and comprehensive version of the definition is given, adding to the above-mentioned series of actions: d) such living conditions for the group 3 See ibid. 8th grade, textbook for secondary school, Yerevan, 2013, page 93.
5 Melkonyan A., Movsisyan A., Danielyan E., Armenian history. 6th grade, textbook for secondary school, Yerevan, 2013, Page 15.
6 Melkonyan A., Simonyan A., Nazaryan A., Muradyan H., Armenian history. 8th grade, page 122.
7 Ibid., P.
the creation of a group aimed at the partial or complete destruction of that group; e) measures to prevent intrauterine group 1.
The article presents the Turks as an enemy, presenting the Genocide as a pan-Turkish state program.
  Referring to the Young Turk program of the Armenian Genocide, the following idea is especially emphasized:
When describing the stages of the Great Genocide, attention is paid to the two main stages, the elimination of the Armenian youth, the national, political and caring leaders of the Armenians, summing up: "..So, the Armenian Genocide actually started in 1914. at the end of October, continued until 1916. summer. "
The aftermath of the Great Genocide is emphasized: the deportation of Armenians, the formation of the Armenian Diaspora, material loss, the destruction of thousands of historical and cultural values.
From the point of view of the formation of national identity, the following idea deserves attention: "Finally, the genocide has left its mark on the formation of the life activity, character, national description and worldview of all generations of Armenians."
 To this day, to condemn Turkanch և to recognize the Armenian Genocide.
 And the generations of Armenians who survived the Armenian Genocide, in general, all Armenians continue to fight not only for recognition, but also for the nationwide goal of worthy reparation and the restoration of the whole homeland. ”3
In addition to the "Questions and Tasks" section that follows each topic, this topic also contains the "Discussion Question" section, which assumes a discussion on the significance of Turkey's recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
It should be noted that the following articles on the Genocide, following the main article on the Armenian Genocide, refer to events outside the country: international reactions to the Armenian Genocide, the emergence of colonies, the preservation of the Armenian identity, the emergence of the Diaspora, the further struggle of Diaspora Armenians for international recognition. Improving and strengthening the Diaspora ties, the process of recognizing the Armenian Genocide.
 And only in the context of the National Awakening is a reference made to the issue of the Genocide inside the homeland.
 It is noteworthy here that speaking of national awakening, national preservation, we see the following thought. "1965 would mark the 50th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide.
  Յ. Zarobyan in 1964 He instructed to develop a program of events to celebrate this anniversary.
"Based on the received proposals, the Armenian leadership is sending an extensive letter to Moscow on the occasion of the 50th anniversary, asking for permission to implement it."
  In fact, when presenting the policy pursued by the Turks, in the context of the national awakening, one speaks of being dependent on the central body while being part of the USSR.
1960-1980 When talking about architecture, reference is made to the construction of memorials perpetuating the famous events of history և a picture entitled "The Genocide Memorial in Tsitsernakaberd" is posted4.
 If we pay attention to the visual means of presenting the Genocide, the related posts are combined with "UN Headquarters in New York", "On the Road to the Chronicle", "Daniel Varuzhan", "Kurdish Armed Bandit", "Grigor Zohrap", "Forced Place of Armenians" , With pictures bearing the names "Komitas", "Armenian orphans".
  In addition, a map is presented, in which with separate markings there are 1. 1915. The ways of deportation of Armenians, 2. The ways of exile and places of martyrdom of Armenian-Armenian intellectuals and public figures starting from April 24, 1915, 3. The concentration and extermination of forcibly displaced Armenians 1 Melkonyan A., Chobanyan P., Simonyan A. և others, Armenian history. 11th grade, textbook of general natural sciences and mathematics streams, Yerevan, 2010, page 132.
 The same interpretation is available in the textbook for the humanitarian flow: see Melkonyan A., Barkhudaryan V., Harutyunyan G. և others, Armenian history. 11th grade, humanities stream, Yerevan, 2010, p. 263 (due to the identical references in the textbooks of humanities, natural sciences and mathematics, only one of them will be given from now on).
2 Melkonyan A., Simonyan A., Nazaryan A., Muradyan H., Armenian history. 8th grade, page 122.
3 In the same place, Armenian history. 8th grade, page 127.
4 Gorgyan E., Khachatryan K., Virabyan A., Armenian history. 9th grade, textbook for secondary school, Yerevan, 2013, page 139.
The main camps (the size of the circles is proportional to the number of forcibly displaced Armenians killed), 4. The borders of the states in 1914, 5. The regions where the Armenian population was saved from the Armenian Genocide due to self-defense actions1.
Describing the steps towards the international recognition of the Armenian Genocide, the role of other states becomes obvious, in particular: a) Immediately after the end of the First World War, the Entente countries demanded that the new Turkish government file a lawsuit against the Young Turks.
  At the initiative of the Russian side, on May 11, 1915, Great Britain, Russia and France issued a statement of protest in connection with the Armenian massacres.
 b) 1916 In February, the US government expressed its protest against the violence against Armenians3.
  c) Recognized and condemned the Armenian Genocide by about 25 countries (Uruguay, Russia, Canada, Cyprus, Greece, Lebanon, Argentina, etc.).
 Belgium has passed a law condemning those who deny the Armenian Genocide.
  2007 Such a law was adopted by Argentina.
  2012 year. The French Senate also passed a law criminalizing the denial of the Armenian Genocide, but it was rejected by the Constitutional Council4.
  d) The international recognition of the Armenian Genocide was of vital importance for the newly independent Republic of Armenia.
  1991 On December 10, 1948, Armenia joined the UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. to the convention.
  With that, the Republic of Armenia confirmed that the crime is not only the tragedy of the Armenian people, but also the gravest crime committed against humanity5.
 e) Imperial Germany և Austria-Hungary did not take practical steps to prevent or stop the genocide committed by their ally.
 The intervention of Germany could be especially influential, but the state-political circles, with a few exceptions, supported the Young Turks or adopted indifference.
  The absence of German intervention even in this case presupposes an indication of the necessity of that intervention.
When mentioning the contribution of the Diaspora in the international recognition of the Genocide, the Genocide is presented as a precondition for the emergence of the Diaspora.
 1965 Hundreds of thousands of Armenians in all communities of the Diaspora raised their voices in protest and demand7.
 He also points out the need for the three parties to work together to jointly present the problems of the Diaspora Armenians in the international arena and to develop a joint action plan for the recognition of the Genocide.
At the present stage, the articles referring to the Genocide have one main direction - the process of recognition of the Armenian Genocide, which is presented as one of the important directions of the foreign policy of the Republic of Armenia at the end of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st century.
 In the 12th grade textbook, when talking about the Declaration of Independence of Armenia, the existence of an article on the Armenian Genocide and the indivisibility of territories is emphasized.
  The importance of the recognition process by other states is reflected in: ".. Initially, the Armenian Genocide was recognized by the countries where there were Armenian communities. At present, recognition takes place in the absence of the community. ”8
The assassination of Hrant Dink is considered a key point in terms of international influence on Turkish society, after which, however, Turkey's position has not changed. It continues to place the struggle against the international recognition of the Genocide among its foreign policy directions9.
1 Melkonyan A., Simonyan A., Nazaryan A., Muradyan H., Armenian history. 8th grade, pp. 122-127.
2 Melkonyan A., Chobanyan P., Simonyan A. և others, Armenian history. 11th grade, general և textbook of natural sciences and mathematics streams, page 127.
3 See ibid.
4 Gorgyan E., Khachatryan K., Virabyan A., Armenian history. 9th grade, page 161.
5 See ibid.
6 Melkonyan A., Chobanyan P., Simonyan A. և others, Armenian history. 11th grade, general և textbook of natural sciences and mathematics streams, page 128.
7 Melkonyan A., Hovsepyan Y., Gorgyan E. և Others, Armenian History 12th grade, general դաս textbook of natural sciences and mathematics streams, Yerevan, 2011, page 88.
8 Ibid., P. 66.
9 Ibid., P. 66.
Later, the term Genocide is emphasized in the context of the Sumgait massacre, describing what happened as genocide. "..The Azerbaijani authorities, using the permission of the central authorities, wanting to stop the Armenian people's liberation movement, organized the genocide of the Armenians of Sumgait."
It is interesting that when discussing the issue of preservation of the Armenian identity, in the context of the dangers of assimilation of Armenians living abroad, it is quoted:
 Armenian education, science, printing, press, in modern times, especially in its first stage, have mainly developed outside Armenia.
 The culture created in the colonies has significantly contributed to the development of national culture in Armenia, as it has served to preserve the national identity both in the homeland and in the colonies.
  In our days, too, the problems faced by the Armenian diaspora, the Diaspora, are facing the issues of national preservation, survival and strengthening of the homeland. ”
The text is accompanied by the picture "Armenian protest march in Lebanon aimed at the 91st anniversary of the memory of the victims of the Armenian Genocide" 2.
Thus, there are articles on the presentation of the Genocide in the textbooks of Armenian history.
 The first refers to the description of the actual Genocide, presents the essence of the Genocide, the consequences, the stages, etc.
 The second direction is completely connected with the recognition of the Genocide, in particular, with its external possibilities: the role of the Diaspora, the entry of the problem into the international arena, the position of other states, etc.
  It is noteworthy that in both cases the Armenians are presented in the role of the victim. If when discussing the actual case it is objectively clear what should be presented, then in the second case the dependence on other states, the importance of their position is fully emphasized.
  In general, the activities of Armenians in this direction after the Genocide are presented, pinning all their hopes on external forces.
 Whether the external forces are other powers or the Armenian Diaspora or the representatives of the communities living in those powers, the indication of the external orientation strengthens the expression of the image of the victim, respectively, influences the national will.
However, it should be emphasized that the rooting of the victim's mental state is accompanied by the formation of an enemy image, which is especially expressed during the division of "we" and "them" on a national basis. The unity of "we" »national self-perception increases in the conditions of the existence of" they "3.
  The last provision is closely connected with the power of the national will, and consequently, again, the interdependence of all these components դ the role of teaching history.
In addition, the great theorist of collective memory M. Halbwachs mentions. "During my life, the national group to which I belong has become the stage of a number of events, about which I speak when I learned about them from newspapers or heard from the people. they have a place in the history of the nation.
 I was not a witness myself.
 When I think about them, I have to trust in the memories of others, which do not strengthen my memory, but become the only source of information. ”4
  What will be served to the generations is crucial from the point of view of their memory formation and national self-perception.
1Gorgyan E., Khachatryan K., Virabyan A., Armenian history. 9th grade, page 141.
2 Melkonyan A., Simonyan A., Nazaryan A., Muradyan H., Armenian history. 8th grade, page 178.
Ophelia GrigoryanBUILDING A COLLECTIVE MEMORY THROUGH THE TEACHING OF HISTORY. SOCIOLOGICAL REFLECTION ON THE PRESENTATION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN ARMENIAN HISTORY TEXTBOOKS Keywords: Armenian Genocide, collective memory, national identity, historical memory.
