CERTAIN ISSUES OF INHERITANCE BY COMPULSORY HERITAGE UNDER ARTSAKH CIVIL LEGISLATION The right to inherit from one of the civil law institutions.
 It is known to all modern legal systems, which undoubtedly emphasizes its important role in public relations.
 For this reason, the study of current issues of the right to inheritance is important both in a number of states and in the Republic of Artsakh for the simple reason that the right of inheritance ensures the inviolability of intergenerational relations and stable civil circulation.
Despite the fact that inheritance has ancient origins, known from the ancient Roman law (jus civile), but it was the subject of human discussion, it has not lost its relevance. Scientific works on the right of inheritance can be found at various conferences.
 And now, with the transition to private property market relations, there is a need for legal regulation and clarification of the right of inheritance.
Both Constitutions of Artsakh enshrine the fact that a person, his rights and freedoms are the highest value.
Among those rights is the right of inheritance, which, according to the Constitution, is guaranteed in our republic.
  In parallel with the constitutional enshrinement of the inheritance law, there was a need for normative enshrinement, as in the RA 1998 The NKR Law on the Implementation of the Civil Code in the NKR ”as well as the NKR Civil Code of February 24, 2016 regulate inheritance relations (Articles 1193-1261 of Chapter 72 of the Code are dedicated to it).
According to the Code, in case of inheritance, the property of the deceased (inheritance) in an unchanged state, as a whole, passes to others (comprehensive legal succession), unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Civil Code.
It follows from the content of the norms regulating the legal relations of inheritance in the Civil Code that inheritance in the Republic of Azerbaijan is carried out on two grounds, according to the law - will.
 A will is a citizen's will to dispose of his property in the event of death, and if there is no will, or it does not provide for the fate of the entire inheritance, the inheritance is made in accordance with the law.
Both according to the law and the will, the legal relations of inheritance are regulated in detail by the civil legislation, but in the article we will refer in detail to the legal regulation of the law of the obligatory part of the inheritance in case of inheritance.
It is clear that if the inheritance is made according to the will, it expresses the will of the testator to dispose of the property belonging to the latter after his death. Համապատասխան The testator, in accordance with Article 1202 of the Civil Code, can indicate in the will the circle of any of his heirs.
 However, with the advent of the testamentum, the so-called "portio debita" gradually emerged in ancient Roman law, giving the rightful heir the right to inherit at least one-fourth of what he would have inherited by law.
This is the reason for the disputes and disagreements in both the theoretical and practical spheres, in particular in the fact that the legislator has fixed the right of compulsory inheritance, as in the case of a will the testator expresses his will to dispose of the property belonging to him after death.
 In addition, he voluntarily defines the circle of heirs, but the framework of heirs is fixed by law, which in such cases must be included in the list of heirs (right of compulsory division of inheritance 1).
 Subsequently, a number of theorists of civil law have expressed the opinion that the will should be drafted in accordance with the will of the testator, that the legislator cannot in any way restrict it.
  However, another group of theorists believes that such a fixation has, first of all, a moral-legal significance, is aimed at ensuring the minimum standard of living for the family members after the death.
1 This term has different names in different countries, for example, "inheritance regardless of will", "restriction of freedom of will", "necessary inheritance", etc.
Theoretically, not only the fact that the right of the obligatory share is an obstacle to the expression of the will of the testator, but also the question of what is called "the right of the obligatory share of inheritance" is disputable.
In general, the right to compulsory inheritance is one of the traditional institutions of civil law, which has socio-economic and moral significance.
 The essence of this is that by virtue of the direct fixation of the law, regardless of the content of the will, the relevant persons in case of death of their spouse (parent, child) get the right to inherit at least half of the share that would have reached them if inherited by law.
Several views have been expressed in the theoretical literature on the definition of the obligatory part of the inheritance.
 Thus, R. I. Vinogradov, G. K. Dmitry, V. Ս. According to Repin, the obligatory share is the part of the inheritance mass, which, regardless of what is bequeathed, must pass to the respective heir.
V. V. Gushin և Yu. A. Dmitry thinks that the obligatory share is the part of the inheritance which strengthens the inheritance rights of the persons who are considered heirs, regardless of the content of the will.
O. is more intimate. Ս. Ioffe's position on the concept of compulsory section.
 According to him, the right of compulsory division presupposes the guarantee of minimum conditions for the necessary heirs [3].
Theoretically, the issue of the circle of persons with compulsory inheritance is more controversial.
  In this respect, the views are different.
 For example, according to T. D. According to Chepag, the expansion of the circle of heirs with compulsory division is an urgent issue.
  According to him, to add disabled minors who lived together with the heir until his death for one year among the heirs entitled to a fair executive share.
From this point of view, Russia Article 1149 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia defines as heirs with compulsory share as the minor, incapacitated children of the heir, the incapacitated spouse-parents, the persons entrusted to the care of the heir2.
 Such enactment of the law presupposes, first of all, the recognition of the right of inheritance of such persons, which aims at the scope of the persons having the right to the obligatory part of the latter 2 is the same in the civil legislations of Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan.
to ensure the minimum standard of living for those dependent on the testator after death.
  Moreover, the circle of heirs entitled to a compulsory share is the RF Civil Code. This is news for the day, the meaning is to focus on the most socially vulnerable people.
The picture is different in a number of European countries.
 In Germany, the person entitled to a compulsory share is not an heir, but acts as a creditor to the heirs of the will, has the right to demand the fulfillment of a corresponding obligation from them.
 The English Civil Code does not recognize the "concept of heirs entitled to compulsory inheritance." It only provides for the possibility of the heir's spouse, a minor child with Disabilities, claiming reasonable compensation in court from the estate, if it is not secured by a will.
The right of compulsory inheritance is also enshrined in the Civil Code of Artsakh, which is mainly regulated by Article 1203 of the Civil Code.
 The right to a compulsory share is also mentioned in Article 1220, which establishes the rule of isolating unworthy heirs from the right of heirs entitled to a compulsory inheritance, and Article 1240, part 2, prohibits the renunciation of the compulsory share of the inheritance in favor of another person.
Article 1203 of the Civil Code provides for the concept of the right to a compulsory share (regardless of the content of the will, a compulsory share is considered to be at least half of the share of the heir who would inherit it by law) և the circle of heirs entitled to it.
 These are 1. the minor children of the heir, 3. Children recognized as incapable, 5. Husband who turned 60, 6. Parents who have turned 60 years old.
Adults with disabled children, children over 60 years of age3, the number of persons entitled to compulsory inheritance shall be exhausted, therefore, the right of compulsory division cannot be exercised by the second, third and fourth line heirs according to the law.
 The consent of the heirs mentioned in the will is not required to receive the right of obligatory share.
3 Armenian SSR On the day (04.06.1964) the word child is used instead of the word child, which is more expedient in the given context.
That is, in any case, when the heir, according to the law, there are the mentioned persons among the first heirs, then if there is a will, if they are not mentioned as heirs in the will, at least half of the part of the inheritance is inherited, which they would inherit as first heirs, if not the corresponding one.
The right to compulsory inheritance was enshrined in the Civil Code of the Armenian SSR, according to Article 538 of which the minor or incapacitated children of the heir (including the adopted), as well as the deceased's incapacitated spouse, parents (adoptive) at least two-thirds of the share of the inheritance that would have accrued to each of them in the event of inheritance by law (mandatory section).
Current համեմատ Comparative analysis of the civil legislation of the Armenian SSR allows us to state that the definition of compulsory inheritance is a novelty for civil legislation, as the Civil Code of the USSR defined only the scope and size of compulsory shares without specifying what the compulsory share is in general.
Besides, the change of the circle of persons entitled to the compulsory section is also obvious, as according to the legislation of the Armenian SSR the circle of persons having such a right was narrower. They were the minor or incapacitated children of the heir (including the adopted ones), as well as the incapacitated spouse of the deceased, the parents (adoptive parents) or the caregivers.
 Such a position is more correct, because if a will is drawn up without the involvement of the above-mentioned persons, then the institute of compulsory law provides them with a minimum standard of living to maintain their financial stability, while a 60-year-old child, spouse and parent can support themselves. In case of incapacity or disability, it is logical to include them in the list of persons entitled to compulsory division.
 In addition, a comparison of the civil law of different countries in terms of the number of persons entitled to a compulsory inheritance allows us to state that these laws provide for a narrower circle of persons entitled to a compulsory inheritance.
Therefore, taking into account the principle of freedom of will անհրաժեշտ the need for its proportionate restriction, we propose to include in the scope of mandatory entitlement to inheritance only minors, adults with disabilities, spouses and parents, and the provisions on children, spouses and parents over 60 years of age. .
The right to compulsory inheritance can be separated from the above. The right to compulsory inheritance is not subject to inheritance. Some features of inheritance by right of compulsory inheritance have been defined by the legislature (such a right is reserved only to the heirs of the 1st line of law). that is, the transmission of the inheritance is excluded, the rule of isolating the unworthy heirs from the inheritance applies to the heirs entitled to the obligatory share of the inheritance, the consent of the other heirs is not required for the persons entitled to the obligatory share of the inheritance; that is, it can be done without taking into account their will. Such legislative fixation is aimed at ensuring the financial stability of the most socially vulnerable;
 For example, in the notary office of Ufa in 2003 The study of the wills made in 2007 showed that in 10 out of 100 wills in that year, it was made not in favor of relatives, ie blood relatives.
  In similar cases, the institution of compulsory inheritance is the opportunity that gives the right to apply to the notary (court) և to receive the inheritance decision.
A similar analysis was made in the Stepanakert notary office (See Chart 1), which shows that in our society it is possible to make a will in favor of other (third) persons.
Number of wills drawn up
Number of wills drawn up in favor of non-relatives
Graph 1. A study conducted in the Stepanakert notary office, which shows the percentage of the number of wills drawn up in favor of non-relatives in 2010-2015. Based on the above circumstances, it can be stated that the right of compulsory inheritance is aimed at ensuring the property rights of the testator's family members, the stability of their material living standards in inheritance relations, especially that in some countries the study of this issue shows that .
 Such a position of the legislator on enshrining the right to compulsory inheritance and restricting the freedom of will will be more proportionate in the conditions of narrowing the circle of those persons, as the right to compulsory inheritance ensures the material condition of a certain category of persons, taking into account their peculiarities. with.
LITERATURE [4] Жаботинский М. В., Обязательная доля при наследовании имущества.
 российский Khachatryan CERTAIN ISSUES OF INHERITANCE WITH THE MANDATORY DEPARTMENT OF GENERATION OF GENERATION ARTSAKH CIVIL LEGISLATION
