COMPARATIVE EXAMINATION OF MATHEMATICAL TERMINOLOGICAL SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD FIRST PRINTED BOOKS The 17th century is an important milestone in the development of the Armenian language, it is considered the beginning of the world.
 In the period of the division of the Armenian literary language, this period is called the period of the formation of the early world language, the formation of the world language, the formation of the modern Armenian language.
  Among the many manuscripts written in Norwegian, the first world books began to be published.
  Two of them, "The Perfect Perfection of Craft Consideration" (1675), "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the Whole World" (1699), to which the present publication is dedicated, present the exact sciences with an interesting coincidence.
"All's Perfect for Counting Crafts" is a math textbook designed for Armenian merchants.
 The book uses a number of mathematical terms - term words, size - units of weight.
  It consists of a preface (Preface), five chapters (conventionally we can call it the 1st section), followed by a "three chapters (conventionally we can call it the 2nd section)" and an ending (End).
The other book under review, "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the Whole World", was reprinted especially for Armenian merchants.
 The preface ("Towards my Armenian merchant-loving brother") states the purpose of the book, the memoir reaffirms it. "In favor of our beloved Banaser merchant Brother Ts." 1.
 "Treasure of size, weight, number of money all over the world" both use mathematical terms, term words, the larger group consists of different units of measurement, which derives from the content.
  The book consists of an introduction, three chapters, and a memoir.
We believe that the similarity of the content of these two books, the fact that they are in the form of a geographer, the existence of a large number of mathematical terms give the best opportunity to make a comparative examination to find out the degree of development of the Armenian mathematical terminological system (terms, terms, size և weight).
  It is also possible to find out what expression the mathematical term system of units is used in the world-first books, which are characterized by mathematical content, and whether the units are used today, whether there are common "different edges between the mathematical terminological systems used in the above-mentioned books of the same era".
 It should be emphasized that this century, in addition to being a circular language, is a new beginning for the history of Armenian scientific thought, and that, in particular, the ancient books of the 17th century, as scholars note, "still need a thorough scientific study."
Mathematical terms ային term words in the books "The whole" perfection of craftsmanship "," Treasure of size, weight, number of money all over the world ".
 From the point of view of terminology, non-terminal words are distinguished in the vocabulary (they do not have a term նշանակ use), term words (a word with a general meaning,, a term with a specific usage և meaning), terms (have only a terminological meaning) 3.
 Mathematical terms բառերը In the book "The whole և perfection of craftsmanship" the terms շարունակ are constantly used in the book 1 Vanandetsi եցի, Treasure of size, weight, number և from the whole world, Amsterdam, 1699, p. 80.
 From now on, we will mention only the page with the examples brought from this book.
  The examples are mainly presented in the spelling համապատասխան corresponding to the original.
2 Mirzoyan H., An Examination of the 17th Century Armenian Philosophical Thought, Yerevan, 1983, p. 126.
3 Aghayan E. B., Fundamentals of Linguistics, Yerevan, 1987, p. 430.
in all chapters and parts, and in the book "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the Whole World" in the section "Short History at the Doors of Ragham", which is a part of the third chapter of the book, "Yaghags mileage".
 Let us look at the mathematical terms used in the "perfect" craft's "perfect craft" in parallel with how the terms were expressed in the book "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers, and All the World", what are the similarities and differences between the two books? .
The word perseverance, which is also a component of the title of the book "Craft Arithmetic", means 1. arithmetic art, 2. ethnic number 2.
  It is widely used in the book.
  In the sense of the term tolerance, the compound terms (numerical craft (AH1) 3 և (f) numerical craft (AH2) are close, which are in a synonymous relation.
 In "Gandz" the phrase "numerical craft" is found. "The basic alphabet is all four rags ամին 4 doors to the Computational Craft…." (C 63).
 In the book "Craft Consideration" the word "slaughterers" (preface of the Azerbaijani alphabet) was used instead of the term "slaughter".
 Fragment or fraction is interpreted as a fraction, which means a piece obtained by dividing, tearing, cutting an item4.
 As a mathematical term, it is evidenced in modern Armenian explanatory dictionaries ("Dictionary of the Modern Armenian Language", "Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian"), but, as we note, it has already been used as a term in the 17th century - "J. թուոց և կոտորեցելոց…. " (Preface of the Republic of Azerbaijan).
  In "Gandz" the compound term piece number is used in this sense. "…. Եւ if the door of the piece is a number" (C 64).
The first chapter of the "Craft of Counting" is called "Yaghags, what is counting and how many letters does it have?"
  In the book, the digit is called a letter, as a result of which the word letter acquires the value of the mathematical term here: "And it has ten letters, that is. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.9. 0 »(ԱՀ 1).
 However, the term "number" is used throughout the song, which is found in the book with a double writing - number։ number.
 A number of dates were used in both.
 Among the examples given on page 4, the numbers are explained in the order of one, tens, hundreds, thousands, thousands of digits (PC 4). , j biuravor -800 000 000, j biuravor -900 000 000, j billionaire -1 000 000000, j billionaire -20 000 000 000, j billionaire -300 000 000 000, billionaire -4 000 000 000000 (AH 4).
  Billions և billion terms, according to G. According to Petrosyan, they are used for the first time5.
 They are not found in "Gandz".
In the two books we examined, four types of computational crafts are distinguished.
  In the two terms of "craft" they are called as follows: to complicate, subtract, multiply, divide, in "Treasure" the names are the same, except for the subtraction of the type of craft, which is represented by subtraction by a horse (C63).
 The second chapter of the book "Craftsmanship" is called "Yaghags, what is the problem of complex numbers".
 This type of computer craft is interpreted as follows: "It is difficult to teach the numbers written in groups to be collected together" (AH 5).
 The explanation for the "treasure" bombardment is as follows. "It will be difficult to say that it will be complicated when you gather a lot of numbers in it" (G 64).
 Thus, the term bardel was used as a borrowed form (C66, 75, 76) (jam - Arabic: ğam - money, jam - to - add).
  In the book "Craft Consideration" the word jam is found (AH 117, 118), which is the phonetic version of the word jam borrowed from Arabic, with the m> j of the beginning of the word.
 In case of a correct result of the complication, the straightforward expression is used, and in case of a wrong result, the description is distorted.
Instead of the term sum, the phrase compound numbers is used, and instead of the sum term, a compound number is used.
  When adding a few numbers are used in such a work.
  For easy reading, next to the pages marked next to the original copies, we will present the titles of the books in the following conditional versions: "Complete and perfect craft" - PC, "Treasure size, weight, number of money from all over the world" - C.
2 New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language, Venice, 1837, vol. 2, page 24.
3 Perfect's perfection of craft, Marseilles, 1675, page 1.
  From now on, next to the examples brought from this book, we will mention the page from the given source.
  The examples are mainly presented in the orthography corresponding to the original.
4 New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language, Venice, 1837, vol. 1, p. 1117.
5 Petrosyan GB, Armenian Mathematical Literature in the XVII-XVIII centuries, Historical-Philological Journal, Yerevan, 1959, N 1, p. 191.
Terms: complicate one row (s), compound second row (s), content compound (s), extract row (n), and the total sum is expressed as follows: from the rest of the content compound (s) (PC 15) used with the rest of the content (n 16).
 The terms integer are intertwined, in contrast to "Treasure", where only the integer term is used. "If the number is wide, և if the door is a piece" (G 64).
  In "Treasure" the term compound number can be considered as an antithesis of the semi-complex compound term. "Whether it is full or half" (C 66).
 The word content in the book "Craft Consideration" has acquired a term value. "The content was twenty-three thousand seven hundred fifty-two" (AH 9).
 This word is also found in "Treasure". "How to write Armenian content J." (C64), but has no terminal value here.
 During the calculation, the points that are not needed anymore are subtracted, in this case, in the book "Craft Counting", the meaning of subtraction is used to exclude the adjacent verb. "We will throw out the seven because there is so much." (AH 11).
 This adverbial verb is found in "Gandz" to pull out (C 64) և to pull out (C 66).
 Both books do not use a plus sign.
The third chapter of "Craft Counting" "Yaghags, what is subtraction of a whole number" is presented as follows: "The subtraction is to teach a small number to be subtracted from a large number or an equal number from an equal number" (AH 17).
  This is interpreted in "Gandz". "It is expulsion when you subtract a small number from a large number" (C 64).
  As we notice, in the first the explanation is given by using the term number, and in the second - a number.
  In the book "Craftsmanship" in the definition of subtraction, the term words of small number are used instead of the terms of subtraction, subtractible (AH 17), and in "Treasure" the definition of the term small number, large number (C 64) is used.
  To take out the adjacent verb, which is found in "Gandz", to take it out, to take it out with the hands, in the book "Craft of Counting" it has acquired a term value, to take out the adjacent verb, which was used in the sense of the term "take out".
  (F) the term borrow (n) (PC 20) is used in the borrowed sense when a unit is borrowed from the other component of a number during subtraction.
 It meets with the inscription: (f) borrow (n) (AH 21).
 The terms equality և inequality are used in conjunction with the terms size և smallness.
 The rest in the book "Craft Consideration" is called the rest (AH 18), it remains (AH 20), in "Treasure" the rest (C 67).
In both books there is no sign of removal.
The fourth chapter of "Craft Counting" "Yaghags, what is the multiplication of a whole number" is interpreted. "Multiplication is what teaches one number to increase by another" (AH 32).
 Multiply The term multiplication is used instead of the term. "… .Then we will multiply the three of the above 4 by 12" (PC 35), "… .then we will multiply by the third letter». " (AH 39).
As a result of such an application, the term synonyms are multiplied.
 Multiplication in "Treasure" is interpreted as follows. "Multiplication, so that it can be done vulgarly, is when we multiply another large number by one small number." (C 65).
 Here, too, as term synonyms, one can see the multiplication of և ragham (the verb is composed of foreign ragham անել to do in Armenian).
 If the craft book uses multiplication letter (PC 34) instead of multiplicative term, multiplication letter (PC 34) instead of multiplier, multiplication number (PC 34) instead of product, there are correspondingly multiplicative, multiplier letters in "Treasure". և Multiplied terms (C65).
 No multiplication sign is used in any of the books.
The fifth chapter of "Craft Counting" "Yaghags what is the division of a whole number" explains the division operation: "J. to teach one number to cut to the size of another ”(AH 51).
 Both here and in "Gandz" divide the verb instead of the term used as a term. "Division, which means to cut vulgarly, is when we divide a certain number into a certain number" (G 65).
  Instead of divisible և divisive terms, the term “divisive number” is used in both “Craft Counting”. "When we want to divide a number by a number, we have to put the divisor number under the number to the left…." (AH 53), and in "Treasure" the terms divisible, divisive, divided are used (C66).
 There is no division sign in the two books.
The second part of the book "Craft Consideration" consists of three chapters.
  The chapter "Yaghags what the numbered number" is dedicated to the explanation of the numbered number: "the numbered number is the whole number" (AH 80).
 We consider the fragment number to be a compound term.
  The second and third chapters explain arithmetic problems.
  The second chapter is devoted to the rule of three, the explanation of the company: "Yaghags, what is the rule of three, what is the company", and the third chapter is dedicated to the merchants' trade, "Yaghags from merchants to merchants".
 "Treasure" refers to the rules of the three companies.
 The two books on the explanation of the Trinity have much in common.
 Hmmt: "J. is a road with three known numbers. Someone else does not know how to find a number. (AH 106), "By these three rules, in every race, one can find an unknown number with 3 known numbers, or find an unknown number with 3 known numbers" (C68).
 And the basis of the company's explanation can be considered identical in both books.
  Hmmt: "I wish no one could be friends with me. "Every man puts money into his daily fortune." (AH 116), "Let's say that a few people make friends in one place, each of them puts in the best of his ability." (C 76).
 Considering the generality of these interpretations, it is possible to think that the book "Treasure" was influenced by the book "Craft Consideration" from a mathematical point of view.
 Most of the above words և term words are not used today.
Classification of terms և term words.
 Quantitative numbers will be used in the books we study, which, of course, are part of the mathematical terminological system of those books, but in the classification presented below, we will include only those numbers that have a special use in the books we study.
  thousands (AH 3), numerical (AH 3), billions (AH 4), billions (AH 4), more (AH 17, C 64), left (AH 18), divided (C 66), compounded (C66), tried (C72), mixed (C66), -li- divisible (C66), -elik-compounded (C66), loose-divisible (C66), 3. simultaneously prefix և suffix points: inequality (AH 17), 4. Intermediate units: -acc-: multiply (PC 32, C 64), multiply (C 65), -indication: -increase (PC 32), -at- - cut (PC 51, C 65), -dice: multiply ( AH 35), 5. at the same time interstitial և suffix units: -otsn- և -eli: multiplicative (C 65), -atsn- և -ogh: multiplier (C 65), -atsn- ած -s multiplied (C 65), c) complex are formed by word formation. compounded (C66), tried (C72), mixed (C66), -li- divisible (C66), -elik-compounded (C66), loose-divisible (C66), 3. simultaneously prefix և suffix points: inequality (AH 17), 4. Intermediate units: -acc-: multiply (PC 32, C 64), multiply (C 65), -indication: -increase (PC 32), -at- - cut (PC 51, C 65), -dice: multiply ( AH 35), 5. at the same time interstitial և suffix units: -otsn- և -eli-multiplicative (C65), -atsn- և -ogh-multiplier (C65), -atsn- ած -s multiplied (C65), c) complex և complex derivatives are formed by word formation. compounded (C66), tried (C72), mixed (C66), -li- divisible (C66), -elik-compounded (C66), loose-divisible (C66), 3. simultaneously prefix և suffix points: inequality (AH 17), 4. Intermediate units: -at- to multiply (PC 32, C 64), to multiply (C 65), -indication -to increase (PC 32), -at- to cut (PC 51, C 65), -fold to multiply ( AH 35), 5. at the same time interstitial և suffix units: -otsn- և -eli-multiplicative (C65), -atsn- և -ogh-multiplier (C65), -atsn- ած -s multiplied (C65), c) complex և complex derivatives are formed by word formation. multiply (C 65), -indicate -increase (AH 32), -at- cut (AH 51, C 65), -dice multiply (AH 35), 5. at the same time interstitial և suffix units: -otsn- և -eli-multiplicative (C65), -atsn- և -ogh-multiplier (C65), -atsn- ած -s multiplied (C65), c) complex և complex derivatives are formed by word formation. multiply (C 65), -indicate -increase (AH 32), -at- cut (AH 51, C 65), -dice multiply (AH 35), 5. at the same time interstitial և suffix units: -otsn- և -eli: multiplicative (C 65), -atsn- և -ogh: multiplier (C 65), -atsn- ած -s multiplied (C 65), c) complex are formed by word formation.
  The suffix participates in the creation of the complex suffix type.
 Mathematical terms belonging to these groups were not separated during our classification և term words were not separated; d) in the group of compound terms, two-component, energetic, multi-member subgroups are distinguished according to the number of components of the compound term.
  Below we present the compound mathematical terms բառերը term words: 1. Composite Bid Mathematical Terms բառ Terms: Integer (Preface), Computational Craft (PC1, C63), Numerical Craft (PC2), Integer (PC5, C64), Piece Number (PC64), Partial Number (C66), compound number (PC 10), compound number (PC 10), exclude (PC 11.1) Terms mentioned in the examples բառերը The term words were used in different pages of the relevant books, we have mainly mentioned one.
C66) // pull out (C64), take out (C63), jam (C66, also used in the compound version: jam (C64)), make ragham (C65), inverted rule (C71) , small number (PC 17), small number (PC 64), large number (PC 64), large number (PC 17), small number (C 65), content compound (PC 15), equal number (PC 17), pull out (AH 17), (f) exchange (n) (AH 21), Pythagorean table (AH 32), multiplication letter (AH 34), multiplication letter (AH 34), multiplication number (AH 34), division (AH 53) ), dividing number (PC 53), fragmented number (PC 80), rule of three (PC 106, C 68), company rule (PC 115, C 76), 2. Compound Mathematical Terms և Terms: number (n) (AD 5), compound one row (n) (PC 15), compound second row (n) (PC 15), divide by section (C 65), outside Tightening line (s) (PC 15), the compound content of the remainder (s) (PC 15), the remainder of the content compound (s) (PC 16), 3. compound polynomial terms are complex numbers to be used in both (we mentioned above that we will not include quantitative numbers in mathematical terminology: besides those which have a special use in the above-mentioned books (special application): seven hundred seventy-seven thousand two hundred thirty (AH 7), four million. eight hundred and three thousand. one hundred fifty-two (AH 37), two billion. five hundred eighty-two billion. one hundred և one million. two hundred sixty-seven thousand. one hundred and thirty-two (AH 42). that we will not include quantitative numbers in the system of mathematical terminology, except for those which have a special use (special application) in the above-mentioned books: seven hundred and seventy-seven thousand two hundred and thirty (PC 7), four million. eight hundred and three thousand. one hundred fifty-two (AH 37), two billion. five hundred eighty-two billion. one hundred և one million. two hundred sixty-seven thousand. one hundred and thirty-two (AH 42). that we will not include quantitative numbers in the mathematical terminology system, except for those which have a special use (special application) in the above-mentioned books: seven hundred seventy-seven thousand two hundred thirty (PC 7), four million. eight hundred and three thousand. one hundred fifty-two (AH 37), two billion. five hundred eighty-two billion. one hundred և one million. two hundred sixty-seven thousand. one hundred and thirty-two (AH 42).
Size և Weight points.
  Different units of size and weight were used in the books of "Craft Consideration" և "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the World".
 Below, we first present the borrowed units of weight ված of the size evidenced in the Armenian explanatory dictionaries used in those books, grouping them according to the borrowed languages ​​1: 1. Persian borrowed words: drachma (G 7, 8) -Prs. derhām - weight size, monetary unit of measurement, expensive (C16) in Middle Armenian tang - unit of gold ոսկ silver weight, gas (G 28, AH 93) -Persian. gaz - a unit of measurement of length, paper (C 30) - in the middle Armenian tukhtprsk. tuxt - weight (15. 449 g), tuman (G 35, AH 80) - Persian. t ՝mān ՝ պրսկ. AMD, unit: 10 000 silver or gold dinar, interest (G18) // interest (G21) -Prs. šāhi (name of the royal coin) - Persian small coin, money (C 33) - Persian. nūl - a very small metal coin of small value, abasi (G 70) -1.Persian silver coin, 2. Old Georgian silver coin, 3. In the Transcaucasia, 20 kopecks of silver or copper, from Sarma (AH 126), Sarmia-Persian. sār-maye - money capital, 2. Arabic borrowed words: ղանթարն (Գ 9, 10, ԱՀ 143 ևն) -Arabic, Turkish qantar, Persian ğentar: weight size: 100 kg, մսխալ (Գ 9) // մսղալ (Գ 12, ԱՀ 135) - արաբ. mitğāl, Persian mesğal, Turkish miskal - weight: about 1.5 և 4.8 grams, tult (C 14) -Arab. tult - one third, third part, ushur (C 30) -arab. us¯r, tirk. öšür (tithe duty) from the land of tithe duty, 3. Turkish borrowed words: according to (C 22) // stak (AH 80) - the smallest tadjak dram, ghrushet (C 42) - ghrush, ghurush - tachk. guruš - Tachkan dram, Okhay (AH 135) -Turk. Weight: 1 kg 225 g, mango (AH 123) -Turk. mangir, unit of length measurement, 4. words borrowed from European languages: dukat (C 22) - daukat-ital in Middle Armenian. dukato - Italian gold coin, unit, flor (C32) - flor in Middle Armenian, florin - Middle Latin florenus - European silver coin, marshmallow (C40, AH 80), the narchil version was used - in Middle Armenian marnchil - (Italian. marsili) - European silver dram, fli (C 56) - see flor, fiorin (C 71) - flor - Italian. florino - coin, French. florin - silver coin with different value, depending on the country, ounce (C7, 8) // oz (C27) // ounce (C10, 12) - ounce is the same as ounce: 1. Name of old coins in Europe, ounce, 2. unit of weight, card (AH 80) -fr. cart card, 1 card is 50 stacks, ghitr (AH 93) - Greek. liter - weight of 12 ounces, weight unit, lira (AH 97) - old fr. livr, Ital. lira - initially some weight, later that weight, 5 lira is 1 ounce, Dinar (AH 97) - Denar-Latin denarius - tens, weight of one dram, 5. Words borrowed from Russian: Arshin (C 30) - Russian. аршин - the length of the Russian length, connect (C 36) - Russian. kopeck - Russian copper coin.
In addition to the above-mentioned groups, for example, in the books we examined, there are a number of units of size and weight that are not evidenced in the Armenian explanatory dictionaries, but from the originals 1 The units of size and weight found in the Armenian explanatory dictionaries found in both books were grouped together.
 It should be noted that in the book "Craft Consideration" they are incomparably less.
 Their source is given next to the examples so that you can get an idea of ​​this ratio.
It is clear that they are units of weight, sometimes in the case of units it is mentioned that they are used in theoretical countries, for example, Libra (C9) // Libra (C9, 10) // Libra (C14): "All in Italy One pound has 12 ounces "(C9)," Baghdad has 50 meatballs from tomorrow, which is 75 drachmas "(C20).
 Conclusion.
  Examining the mathematical terminology systems of the above-mentioned books, we can mention that there are terms և words, word combinations, which can be considered as mathematical term words in the originals with the given uses.
 Examination shows that there are commonalities between the mathematical terminology systems of the two books, for example, in both cases no arithmetic signs are used, in the Craft Book the small number words are used instead of the lower, removable terms. 17), and in "Treasure" the given words use the term small number, big number (C 64), if in the book "Craft Counting" instead of the multiplicative term a multiplication letter is used (PC 34), instead of a multiplier - a multiplicative letter ( PC 34), instead of the product, multiplied number (PC 34), then in "Treasure" there are correspondingly multiplicative, multiplicative-multiplied terms (C 65).
 Most of the terms used in the poems, the term words are not used today, or G. Petrosyan mentions that most of the terms used in the mathematical works that have come down to us from the 17th to the 18th centuries have entered the scientific dictionary of the Armenian language, "it is successfully used today" 1.
 In modern Armenian, the following units used in the above-mentioned books are mainly used: weight (C3), size (PC 51, C3), number (PC 2), number (C3), subtract (PC 17), divide (PC 51, C) 64), rule (AH 106), less (C66), problem (C73), weight (80), equality (AH17), magnitude (AH17), width (C72), divisible (C66), inequality (AH 17), multiply (AH 35), whole number (AH preface), large number (AH 17), small number (C 65), equal number (AH 17), Pythagorean table (AH 32).
Numbers are, of course, usable except for billions, billions (AD 42), and adjectives with the suffix "avor" are used from the years - units, tens, except for billions, billions (AD 4).
The lexical examination of the terms և term words shows that it is possible to distinguish simple, derivative (prefix, suffix, at the same time prefix և suffix, interfacial, at the same time interfacial և suffix units) և compound groups (compound binomial, unit), polynomial
  The borrowed units of size և weight used in the books, about which the explanatory dictionaries of Armenian provide information, originate from Persian, Arabic, Turkish, European languages, Russian.
  Relatively large groups are the units borrowed from Persian and European languages, the number of units borrowed from Russian երեն is the smallest in size and weight.
Tamara Poghosyan COMPARATIVE EXAMINATION OF MATHEMATICAL TERMINOLOGICAL SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD FIRST PRINTED BOOKS Keywords: 17th century, world-wide, "All crafts համար
"Perfect", "Treasure of size, weight, number of drams of the whole world"
.
