FOUNDATIONS AND PROSPECTS OF GEORGIAN ENERGY-TRANSIT POLICY Problems and imperatives in the field of energy have been in the focus of genetic research for many years, emphasizing the growing importance of energy resources in modern international relations.
 The imperatives of energy security directly affect the foreign policy agenda of states.
Large-scale supply of energy to countries with high energy demand plays a key role in strengthening the political weight of the source countries of energy resources, as well as their international interest in them, strengthening their position in the energy geopolitics system.
  Moreover, the transit role of states in energy supplies usually has not only political but also economic significance in the sense that transit fees, international investments, as well as imports of energy on preferential terms contribute to economic development.
 In addition, as a result of the activities of transnational companies in the market of a particular state, business-specific features are transferred to that country, including capital (foreign direct investment), experience, technologies.
 These companies are very important for the development of the economy in both developed and developing countries.
  For this reason, it is not accidental that today the UN considers them a "driving force" of economic growth1.
A factor contributing to Georgia's involvement in East-West energy supplies is the country's geographical location, which enables the export of Caspian and Central Asian energy resources.
 As a "sanitary cordon" between Russia and Turkey, Georgia plays a key role in meeting the geopolitical interests of the West, which seeks to prevent the formation of a Russian-Turkish energy union.
  The development of the East-West energy corridor is the driving force behind Georgia's growing geopolitical weight and economic growth.
 Within the framework of Western-supported political projects, Georgia is provided with transit fees, affordable energy, international investments in the country, acquires business-specific characteristics, experience, and, on the other hand, its involvement in them emphasizes the country's economic and political potential. contributes to the development of the state's foreign policy in the Euro-Atlantic direction.
The first investment of British Petroleum, one of the Western "energy giants", large transnational companies, in Georgia was connected with the Baku-Supsa pipeline.
 The 830 km long pipeline transports oil from the Shirag field (Caspian Sea) via Sangachal station (Azerbaijan) to Supsa station (Western Georgia).
 Becoming fully operational in 1999, the pipeline is capable of transporting up to 100,000 barrels of oil per day2.
  The official data of British Petroleum on the transit of oil presented in Table 1 3.1 Interview with economist G. With Hayrapetyan, 07.10.2015.
2 The largest shareholders are BP (35.8%), followed by SOKAR - 11.6%, Chevron - 11.3%, INPEX - 11%, Statoil - 8.6%, ExxonMobil - 8%, TPAO - 6.8%, ITOCHU - 4.3% (see Western Route Export Pipeline (WREP), available at http: // www.
//www.bp.com/en_ge/bp-georgia/aboutbp/bp-in-georgia/western-route-export-pipeline--wrep-.html).
Table 1. Total volume of oil transit (barrels) Tariff for oil transit (dollars / barrel) Total charges for oil transit (dollars) It is true that the volume of oil transported through the pipeline is not large, but the project had political significance in terms of creating Caspian energy exports from Russia to Iran. A pipeline road bypassing the area.
The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline, which became a reality with the participation of Georgia, became fully operational in 2006, transporting oil from the Caspian Sea to the Mediterranean.
The total length of the pipeline is 1768 km.
  The section passing through Georgia is 245 km1.
 Initially, it was possible to transport 1 million barrels per day through the pipeline, and in 2009. 1.2 million barrels per day since March 2.
Georgian-European Political-Legal Advisory Center 2007 According to the January report, 2000-2006. Expenditures related to Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan accounted for about 70% of foreign direct investment in Georgia3.
  The pipeline transit fee is estimated at $ 62.5 million a year4.
  Saakashvili's government in 2008 transit fees were estimated at about $ 45 million5.
 2004 According to a survey conducted by the International Monetary Fund, the transit fee in 2012 would be 51.1 million dollars 6.
  Table 2 presents the official data of British Petroleum on the transit of 8 oil via the 7 Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. Table 2. Total volume of oil transit (barrels) Tariff of oil transit (dollars / barrels) Total charges from oil transit (dollars) Regional natural gas supply In these projects, Georgia's transit capacity is underlined by the South Caucasus Pipeline, also known as the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum (BTE) pipeline.
  Starting from Sangachal station, the pipeline transports gas via Georgia to Turkey, connecting to the Turkish gas distribution system.
 The pipeline capacity is 8.8 billion m3 of gas per year, which can be expanded up to 20 billion cubic meters9.
  2006 The gas has been transported through the pipeline to Azerbaijan and Georgia since 2007. July 10, Turkey.
Georgia, as a transit country, has the right to receive 5% of the annual gas flow from the pipeline instead of paying the tariff և to buy 0.5 billion m3 of gas per year at a discounted price11.
Georgia's natural gas import in 2012 The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Caspian Pipeline is available at http: 1.77 billion cubic meters12 and natural gas imports1.
//www.hydrocarbons-technology.com/projects/bp/.
2 The largest shareholders are BP - 30.1%, followed by AzBTC - 25%, Chevron - 8.90%, Statoil - 8.71%, TP - 6.53%, Eni - 5%, Total - 5%, ITOCHU - 3.40%, INPEX - 2.50%, ConocoPhillips - 2.50%, ONGC Videsh - 2.36% (see Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline, available at http.
//www.bp.com/en_az/caspian/operationsprojects/pipelines/BTC.html).
3 See “BTC.
  Who Benefits ”, Transitions Online, April 23, 2007, available at http.
//www.tol.org/client/article/18681-btc-whobenefits.html.
4 See Sanders D., Maritime Power in the Black Sea, Corbett Center for Maritime Policy Studies Series, 2014, p. 118.
5 See "Turkey and the Problems with the BTC", Eurasia Daily Monitor Volume 5, Issue 155, August 13, 2008.
6 See Billmeier A., ​​Dunn J., Selm B., “In the Pipeline.
  Georgia's Oil and Gas Transit Revenues ”, International Monetary Fund, November 1, 2004, page 8.
8 For economic and social benefits of the BTC pipeline for Georgia, see The Baku-Tbilisi-CeyhanPipeline.
 Oil Window to the West ”. Central Asia-Caucasus Institute and Silk Road Studies Program, 2005, pp. 85-90.
9 See Global Strategic Assessment 2009.
  America's Security Role in a Changing World ”, edited by Cronin M., INSS Publication2009, p. 82.
10 The largest shareholders are BP - 28.8%, followed by TPAO - 19%, Petronas - 15.5%, AzSCP, Lukoil, NICO - 10% each, http.
//www.bp.com/content/bpcountry/en_az/caspian/operationsprojects/pipelines/SCP.html).
11 See Bagaturia G., Dumbadze T., “Managerial Strategies for Georgian-Turkish Economic Relation”, Journal of Business, page 27.
12 See CIA.
 Georgia, available at https.
//www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/gg.html.
available (see 84% of these are carried out at the expense of Azerbaijani gas 1.
 Therefore, Georgia buys 1/3 of the 1.5 billion m3 of Azerbaijani gas it imports at a discounted price.
Of course, the involvement of Georgia in the political projects supported by the West makes it possible to increase the international interest in its stability, security, to ensure uninterrupted supplies, but the attacks on the BTC and BTE pipelines make the issue of their physical security urgent.
 On the one hand, still in 2008 At the NATO summit in Bucharest, there was no consensus among NATO member states on the expansion of the structure to the east by Ukraine և Georgia ակցության, which could contribute to the security of energy infrastructure passing through Georgia, on the other hand, BTC and BTE projects. The attacks on these pipelines in Turkey, which is a member of the EU, suggest that NATO membership is not an effective mechanism for ensuring the physical security of pipelines passing through the country.
 Georgia 's cooperation with NATO has not ensured the physical security of the energy infrastructure passing through the country.
Georgia's involvement in the above-mentioned projects contributes to the increase of the country's political weight, makes this South Caucasian state a key partner of the West, as these projects receive political support from the West, due to some motives. • The planned energy supplies would bypass Russia and Iran, which could be politically significant for the United States, as it would reduce Russia's geopolitical weight by reducing its influence in the Caspian-Sea region by excluding Iran from these politically significant projects. In the context of the Iran-West dispute, it was in the political interests of the United States.
The role of Caspian energy resources in bypassing Russia և Iran was still emphasized by the Clinton administration, whose statements 4 stated that the oil pipeline connecting the Caspian Sea basin with the international oil market should bypass Russia և Iran.
  At the same time, the administration expressed its support for the construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline as the main Caspian oil export pipeline.
  American interest in Caspian oil did not diminish during the next administration of George W. Bush.
 Moreover, the role of Azerbaijan was especially emphasized in the planned oil exports from the Caspian basin.
 In this regard, the statement of Cheney, CEO of Halliburton, an American oil company involved in the Caspian Basin, was interesting at the US-Azerbaijan conference, 5 in which he stressed Azerbaijan's role in diversifying not only the future of the region but also the global oil market.
 According to Cheney, the realization of Azerbaijan's potential depends not only on trade considerations, but also on politics, as the struggle to bring these resources to market involves different countries with competing interests.
   Cheney's statement proves once again that the pipeline envisaging the export of Azerbaijani oil will be a political project, the implementation of which will contribute to the strengthening of the position of the state that supports it in the energy geopolitics system and delivers those resources to the market.
 We think that we were talking about the "competition" between the two states with naval and land power, the US-Russian Federation, in general, in the Caspian-Black Sea region.
  And the involvement of the two South Caucasus states, Azerbaijan and Georgia, in the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan project, backed by the Bush-Jr. administration, which seeks to export Azerbaijani oil, underscored the importance of using the energy of the South Caucasus to ensure US success in that "big game."
is 1 Europe & Eurasia Energy News Articles.
  Georgia, United States Energy Association, January 3, 2014, available at http: // www.
//www.usea.org/article/europe-eurasia-energy-news-articles-january-3-2014 2 See http.
//www.euractiv.com/enlargement/old-new-europe-divided-nato-summit/article-171288.
3 See Information Center on NATO and EU, available at http: // www.
//natoinfo.ge/en/whatisnato.
4 See A. Manvelyan, The Caspian Component of US Energy Policy և Relations with Regional Countries, Noravank Foundation, 21st Century 1 (23), Yerevan, 2009, pp. 10-11.
5 See Allison G., Van Emily B., US Policy on Caspian Energy Development and Exports, Caspian Studies Program, Harvard University John F. Kennedy School of Government, May 2001, p.
Therefore, Georgia's involvement in the BTC project has led to an increase in the country's geopolitical weight, as Georgia has thus played a key role in strengthening the US geopolitical position in the Caspian-Black Sea region.
• The energy supplies carried out in this way would contribute to the independence of the participating states from Russia and thus to the weakening of Russia's influence.
In this regard, the statement of Stephen Mann, a US official and senior adviser on energy diplomacy in the Caspian Basin1, in which he spoke about the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan project, emphasized its role in achieving a higher level of autonomy of the member states.
  The supply of gas through the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum pipeline was crucial for Georgia's energy interests in that it allowed it to import Azeri gas at a reduced price, reducing its dependence on Russia. In December, the price of gas supplied to Georgia doubled, as a result of which Georgia had to import Russian gas at a price of $ 235 / trillion cubic meters2.
 The "geopolitical troika" of these countries, formed by the significant influence of energy cooperation between Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, has contributed to the weakening of Russia's influence in the Caspian-Sea region by involving Russia in political projects bypassing Iran.
• The political support of the West would contribute to the implementation of these projects, as a result of which strategic partnerships would gradually be established between Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, which would later be a serious basis for the implementation of other projects aimed at satisfying the geopolitical interests of the West.
The project contributed to the formation of the Georgian-Azerbaijani, Georgian-Turkish strategic partnership3, as a result of which these countries cooperate at various levels, organizing meetings between political and business circles, which contribute to the discussion of various issues between these Euro-Atlantic partners.
Currently, the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline, which can be connected to the Trans-Anatolian Pipeline to supply 6 billion m3 of Azerbaijani gas to Turkey, and 10 billion m3 to the European market via the Adriatic Pipeline, can contribute to the EU energy security within the framework of the Southern Gas Corridor project. .
In other words, the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum pipeline project, which has become a reality with the involvement of Georgia, can play a key role in ensuring the EU's energy security by diversifying its energy supply sources.
 In this regard, we can present the following perspectives on Georgia's energy transit policy: • Georgia will contribute to the EU's energy security by exporting Iranian energy through its territory • Georgia will play a key role in ensuring EU energy security through diversification of energy supplies and diversification routes. The resolution of the nuclear issue makes it urgent to consider ways to export Iranian energy resources to Europe.
  The geographical location of the South Caucasus makes it possible to deliver Iran-Armenia-Georgia-Sea sea gas to the European market.
 Referring to the possibilities of Georgia's membership in the possible project, it should be noted that the gas supply through this route will lead to an increase in Armenia's geopolitical weight, which is a serious disagreement. 1 Begoyan A., United States Policy in the South Caucasus.
 Securitisation of the Baku-Ceyhan Project ”, Iran & the Caucasus, Vol. 8, No. 1 (2004), p 151.
2 De Souza V., A different Country.
 Russia Economic Resurgence, Center for European Policy Studies, September 2007, p. 76. 3 2015 "Azerbaijan and Turkey are Georgia 's key strategic partners, and Georgia is ready to strengthen trade, economic partnership and friendly relations," he said at a Georgia-Turkey-Azerbaijan business forum in March.
  Turkey and Azerbaijan are our key strategic partners ”, EurAsia Daily, March 6, 2015, https.
//en.eadaily.com/news/2015/03/06/prime-minister-of4 Declaration.
 Prague Summit - Southern Corridor (http:
//eu-un.europa.eu/articles/en/article_8715_en.htm) will create relations between Georgia on the one hand and Azerbaijan և Turkey on the other.
 We think that in the conditions of the existing economic, energy, military-political cooperation with those Euro-Atlantic partners, Georgia's accession to that project is unlikely.
As a result of Georgia's decision to join the possible project, it is very likely that Azerbaijan will use its dominant position in the Georgian gas market to put pressure on the country.
 This pressure can be manifested by the increase in the price of gas supplied to Georgia, which will force Georgia to find a source of gas imports at an affordable price.
 Iran can be considered as an additional source of gas, but about the Iranian gas export to Georgia in 2004. The lack of a concrete agreement in the ongoing Saakashvili-Ahmadinejad talks was conditioned by the high price of Iranian gas1.
  Therefore, the weakening of Azerbaijan's position in the Georgian natural gas market by diversifying its gas supply sources is not economically expedient, despite its political importance in reducing its dependence on Azerbaijan.
  In terms of possible import of Russian gas, we can mention that in 2006 The example of doubling the gas supply to Georgia will have a negative impact on Georgia's possible decision on large-scale Russian gas imports.
 Therefore, in case of joining the possible project, Georgia may have problems in terms of importing affordable gas, and natural gas implies mass consumption, so the higher price compared to the previously supplied gas will cause economic problems in the country, which contributes to instability.
Natural gas price, Azerbaijan's close energy cooperation with Turkey, Georgia's satisfaction with Azeri gas price2, Azerbaijan-Turkey-Turkey geopolitical troika to ensure energy security.
  Moreover, the Shah Deniz 2 pipeline means an investment of 2 billion dollars, which will be the largest foreign investment in the history of Georgia3.
  If the project becomes a reality in the future, Georgia, as a transit country, will be involved not only in providing economic benefits, but also in diversifying the sources of energy sources and routes, which are considered a priority of the European Union's energy security policy, thus increasing the country's geopolitical weight.
 Besides, in this way Georgia will strengthen the relations with Azerbaijan and Turkey. First, as a result of gas supply to the EU via the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum pipeline, Armenia's next isolation from regional political projects stems from the political interests of Turkey and Azerbaijan.
  In addition, Iran, with proven natural gas reserves of 34 trillion cubic meters, can produce large volumes of gas due to international investment as a result of resolving the nuclear issue, as a result of which it can be an alternative to Azerbaijani gas.
 Therefore, in case of refusing to participate in a possible gas supply project via Iran-Armenia-Georgia-Sea-Europe route, Georgia will make uncertain the prospect of exporting Iranian gas to the European market through a possible route.
Thus, by providing access to the Caspian energy resources, being a "communication corridor" between the East and the West, the South Caucasus region occupies an important place in the system of modern energy geopolitics.
Georgia receives payments from the countries of the region due to its transit position in the export of Caspian energy resources, there is an influx of capital from developed countries to this South Caucasus country.
  Moreover, the head of that capital 1 See Sarukhanyan S., Perspectives of Iranian gas in Armenia, Noravank Foundation, 06.02.2014.
2 Georgia was satisfied with the price of Azerbaijani gas, for example, in 2013. Minister of Energy of Georgia K. By Kaladze (see "Georgia satisfied with Azerbaijani gas prices", Vestnik Kavkaza, May 28, 2013, available at http: // www.
//vestnikkavkaza.net/news/economy/40777.html).
3 See http.
//www.naturalgaseurope.com/interview-neil-dunn-bp-georgia-shah-deniz-2 4 Comparison of BP, EIA, CIA և OPEC data (see BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2015, available at http: // www.
//www.bp.com/content/bp/en/global/corporate/about-bp/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html; as well as EIA, available at http: // www.
//www.eia.gov/beta/international/analysis.cfm?iso=IRN; CentralIntelligence Agency, available at https.
//www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ir.html#; OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin 2015, available at http: // www.
//www.opec.org/opec_web/en/publications/202.htm).
Interview with Neil Dunn ”, Natural Gas Europe, April 18, 2013, available in Georgia.
The source is a number of large Western transnational companies, which by their involvement in the Georgian market make the country an object of interest of developed countries, as a result of which contribute to the development of Georgia's foreign policy towards the West.
 The discounted natural gas supply to Georgia via the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum pipeline underscores the key importance of energy cooperation with Azerbaijan in the continuous import of affordable energy.
  Strategic partnerships between Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, which have become a reality under the influence of projects with the political support of the West, are a serious basis for the implementation of various political projects with the participation of these countries.
Sergey Hovhannisyan BASICS AND PROSPECTS OF GEORGIAN ENERGY-TRANSIT POLICY Keywords: energy geopolitics, West, East, energy.
