STRUCTURE OF VOLUNTARYLY BUILT BUILDINGS, LEGAL STATUS OF CONSTRUCTIONSAccording to Article 188 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, a voluntary structure is considered the structure.
  The problem of voluntary structures arose during the years of the collapse of the Soviet Union, when improper regulation, control, and the population, without proper permission, in order to improve their housing conditions, built buildings that were not allowed by law, with construction violations.
  To solve the problem, the government in 2006 On May 18, 1945, it adopted Resolution No. 912 "On approving the procedure for the legalization of voluntary structures."
 Despite the positive impact of this decision, the problem has not been fully resolved, as the self-government has not stopped in parallel with the legalization process.
 We strongly believe that the huge number of voluntary structures in the Republic of Armenia largely depends on the problematic regulation in our legislation.
 The official, the head of the community, who is authorized by the legislation to exercise control over the voluntary structures, in case of bad fulfillment of the duty assigned to him, the legislator gives him the authority to legalize those structures.
  When we compare the legislative regulations in force in Armenia with other countries, we have almost the same picture.
  For example, Article 222 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides the following regulation: "A building, structure or other structure constructed without an approved project or plot of land in which there is no permit for that building or in violation of construction norms" is considered self-constructed. "
  The Nagorno-Karabakh Republic envisages the same legislative regulation for voluntary structures.
As in practice the number of voluntary structures is huge, the legislator at the same time gave the regulations on the privatization and demolition of the voluntary structure.
According to Part 2 of Article 1 188 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, "the property of a community or the state, regardless of who built it, is recognized in respect of an unauthorized structure located on state or community property."
  Point 2 states "The property of the person to whom the structure is located on the land plot owned by the voluntary structure is recognized."
 Clause 3: "Recognition of the ownership right of the land owner to an unauthorized structure is not a ground for recognizing it as illegal, as it is not an obstacle for satisfying the claim mentioned in paragraph 2 of Clause 3 of this Article."
2 According to point 3, “The owner of the land plot has the right to demolish the building located on his land plot.
  The illegal legalized structure is subject to demolition at the request of the state, community or other interested person, whose rights and interests protected by law have been violated, and the land plot is at the expense of the landowner at the expense of restoring the previous condition. ”
 The person who carried out an unauthorized construction on someone else's land is obliged to compensate the damage caused to the land owner, including the costs of unauthorized demolition and restoration of the previous condition of the land.
 According to Article 4, voluntary structures can be recognized as legal community leaders, and outside the administrative territory of the community, by regional governors in accordance with the procedure established by the government.
 An unauthorized structure can be recognized as legal only upon the application of the person to whom the structure is located on the land owned by it.
  Article 5 states: "An unauthorized structure cannot be recognized as legal if maintaining the structure violates the rights of other persons, the interests protected by law, or endangers the life and health of citizens."
Unauthorized structures can not be recognized as legal, they are subject to the lands defined by Article 60 of the Code, as in the alienation or security zones of engineering facilities, or are built according to the rules of urban development norms. Adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999 See ASUE 1998.08.10 / 17 (50), Article 188.
2 See Barseghyan T, Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia, Yer ․, "Tigran Mets" Publishing House, 2014, Part One, 310 pages.
There are violations, և causes the right to demand compulsory servitude.
 According to Article 6, “The peculiarities of the registration of the right to real estate in the presence of voluntary structures are regulated by the Law on State Registration of Rights to Property and other legal acts adopted on its basis.
In order to analyze the problem of voluntary structures by a legal-comparative method, in order to identify the existing problems, let us try to settle the voluntary structures according to Article 3 222 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation. "The person who carried out the voluntary structure has no right of ownership over it.
 He has no right to sell, donate, lease or make other transactions. ”
 The voluntary structure is subject to demolition by the means of the person constructing it, except for the cases envisaged by parts 3 and 4 of this article. ”
  According to Part 3, “Ownership of an unauthorized structure may be recognized by a court, and in cases provided by law, in accordance with the law, by mutual consent, a person acquires ownership of an unauthorized structure built on a land plot for permanent use, if 1) The person had a permit to carry out construction on the given land ... 2) on the day of appeal in court the structure complies with the territorial planning approved by the documents, land use rules, other requirements mentioned in the documents նախագծ the project of the structure, 3) the structure does not violate other people's rights և interests protected by law և does not threaten to the life and health of the citizens. "
 In this case, the person whose property has been recognized in relation to the structure must reimburse the costs in the amount determined by the court.
 According to Part 4, “Local self-government bodies shall make a decision on demolition if it is built on land not intended for that purpose, if the land is located in a special use zone (Russian historical and cultural monuments) or in a common use area, or in engineering-transport zones of territorial or local significance of the federation. "
  Local Self-Government Mar 3 See Barinov N. A․, Бевзюк Е. А., Беляев М. А., Бирюкова Т. А., Барышев С. А., ВахрюФедерации, Часть первая, статья 222.
Within 7 days after the demolition decision is made, the miners send a copy of that decision to the person who carried out the voluntary construction.
 This determination is kept in the register of voluntary structures.
It contains information on the period of demolition of the unauthorized structure.
The voluntary structure cannot stay for more than 12 months.
 In case the person who carried out the unauthorized structure is not found, the local self-government bodies make a decision on the demolition of the unauthorized structure within 7 days from the day when such a decision was to be made.
 If the person who carried out the voluntary structure is not found, the demolition of the voluntary structure is organized by the local self-government bodies.
 The decision of demolition shall be made not earlier than 2 months from the day when the decision is posted on the official website of the authorized bodies.
 The regulation in the Civil Code of the Russian Federation is in line with the legal position of Russian scientists Sergey Sukhanov.
  Article 188 of the Civil Code of Nagorno Karabakh envisages the same regulations as the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia.
When we compare the regulation of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation with the most developed country in the world, we see that, in our opinion, the biggest shortcoming of our legislation is that the head of the community, having the responsibility to control unauthorized structures, has the legal authority to do so. voluntary structures implemented in the administrative territory.
  This regulation is not included in the Code of the Russian Federation, where the law gives such authority to the courts.
  This is a serious problem in our republic, և even in the case when the citizens apply to the court, the person who has almost always implemented an unauthorized structure, the person whose interests have been harmed, և the appeal reaches the Court of Cassation.
  Proof of this are the more than 2 dozen decisions of the Court of Cassation in the republic on voluntary structures.
  During the study of the decisions of the Court of Cassation we notice that the voluntary structures 4 See Sergeev A. P. et al., Civil Law, T. 1, M., 2002, 776 p.
5 See Culeylanov M. K., Almaty, Civil Law, volume 2, Textbook for students / Editor, 2014, p. 75-107.
Disputes over this issue are more frequent among "citizens" of state bodies.
  The Court of Cassation, by administrative decision No. 3681/05/08, examining the appeal of the Mayor of Yerevan against the decision of the RA Administrative Court of 27 October 2009 in 6 open court hearings, according to the claim of the Municipality of Yerevan against Levon Shatiryan's demand to extort AMD 400,000 .
 By the decision of the Administrative Court, the lawsuit regarding the demolition of the unauthorized building was rejected, and the administrative case of confiscation of 400․000 AMD was terminated on the grounds of rejecting the plaintiff's claim.
 The mayor of Yerevan filed a cassation appeal in this case as a basis for the cassation appeal. It is built on the will or safety zones of alienation of engineering transport facilities, with significant violations of the rules of urban development, և creates the right to demand compulsory servitude.
 The person who implemented a voluntary structure carried out voluntary construction without urban planning documents.
According to VD, the conclusion of the Court of Appeal is groundless.
 Our legal assessment in this case is identical with the position of VD.
 Protocol No. V8/3 was drawn up by the Commission for Investigation, Preparation and Registration of Cases within the framework of the administrative proceedings, it was decided to make proposals on subjecting the Mayor of Yerevan Leon Shatiryan to administrative responsibility, imposing an administrative fine in the amount of 400,000 AMD.
  The municipality refused to demand the confiscation of 400,000 AMD on the condition of payment by Leon Shatiryan.
  The Court of Cassation found that the complaint was well-founded on the partial reason that Leon Shatiryan had carried out construction work without proper permission, such as that Levon Shatiryan had paid a fine of 400,000 AMD for an administrative offense.
 In other words, by paying the fine, he accepted the fact that he carried out construction works without a corresponding permit.
  And the substantiation that the municipality did not present any evidence that Levon Shatiryan fulfilled the 6 See Collection of decisions of the RA Court of Cassation in 2010 ․ Administrative case number VD / 368/05/08.
The unauthorized structure is built on the land plots defined by Article 60 of the RA Land Code, states that the unauthorized structure is subject to demolition only "in the presence of circumstances specified by the government", then the Court of Cassation finds that the above circumstances are irrelevant to the settlement of this case. The Court of Cassation considers it sufficient to overturn the judgment of the lower court.
  The Court of Cassation partially satisfied the appeal. to overturn the part of rejecting the claim of the decision of the RA Administrative Court փոփոխ to change it, satisfying the claim.
  To oblige Leon Shatiryan to demolish the 15-meter-long fence.
 To confiscate 4,000 AMD as a claim in favor of Levon Shatiryan in Yerevan Municipality, 20,000 AMD as a state fee paid for the cassation appeal.
 The decision enters into legal force from the moment of its publication, it is final, it is not subject to appeal.
The problem of voluntary structures is so complicated that sometimes the verdicts made by different instances of the RA judicial system on the same situation are very different երբեմն, sometimes they even lead to the disciplinary responsibility of the judges who made the relevant verdicts.
  The main reason is that there are difficulties in the uniform application of the laws regulating this field.
  Worth mentioning is the Council of Justice (now the Supreme Judicial Council) 2009 ․ Decision A-X-Y-O-13 on terminating the case on subjecting the judges of the RA Civil Court of Appeal to disciplinary responsibility.
 The Minister of Justice submitted a petition to the Council of Justice to impose disciplinary liability on judges for committing obvious "violations" of the norms of the "procedural law" while administering justice.
 The applicant Misha Hrant Hambardzumyan's father, Hrant Ghazari Hambardzumyan, the defendant in the case, built a house for his parish on the land allotted to him in 1960, of which the applicant was a member.
 In 1970, Misha Hambardzumyan built 90 square meters for his family next to the mentioned house. area a separate residential house.
 The applicant's mother died in 1996.
 Misha Hambardzumyan filed a civil lawsuit against Hrant Hambardzumyan with a claim for inherited property, in total 7 See Justice Council A-X-Y-O-13 2009 ․ the decision.
The court of new jurisdiction rejected the claim, the verdict was appealed in the order of superiority.
  The cassation appeal was left without satisfaction.
Not receiving the right of inheritance, Misha Hambardzumyan filed a civil lawsuit with the Court of First Instance of Kotayk Marz against Hrant Hambardzumyan with a demand to separate a share from the common property, to recognize his property right to it.
  The respondent also applied to the court with a counter-claim against Misha Hambardzumyan, demanding to stop the cost of the unauthorized construction on the land allotted to him by paying monetary compensation and evicting him from the area.
 This is where the contradiction arises, when the court of first instance of general jurisdiction fully satisfied the claim. և´ 90 sq.m. ․ Hrant Hambardzumyan and his family were evicted from the mentioned area, he recognized Misha Hambardzumyan's ownership right over the three-story house built on it.
  The Civil Court of Appeal rejected Misha Hambardzumyan's lawsuit against Hrant Ghazaryan, and Hrant Hambardzumyan's lawsuit was partially upheld.
 Misha Hambardzumyan was expelled from the territory belonging to Hrant Hambardzumyan.
Two different links of the same system have made absolutely contradictory decisions on the same dispute.
  And, in fact, the Minister of Justice, studying the available evidence in the case, came to the conclusion that the judges of the Court of Appeal did not apply the laws they should have applied, և at the same time allowed violations of a number of articles of the RA Civil Judgment, which are obvious in this case rough.
 The Minister considers that the mentioned violations can be committed only through the fault of the judge.
 Therefore, in this case, we must proceed from the presumption of guilt of the judge, the existence of guilt in his actions, which can be revealed only intentionally.
  Thus, the judges allowed actions containing obvious gross violations of the substantive, procedural law, which were grounds for disciplinary action.
  Later, after examining the reasons and justifications of the judges, the Council of Justice rejected the mentioned motion with the following reasoning: "According to Article 188, a building, structure or other structure constructed in a land plot not allocated for that purpose or in violation of the conditions defined by the permit or new urban development rules or rules in accordance with the procedure defined by law or other legal acts, is a voluntary structure."
  Voluntary structures can be legalized by community leaders, and outside community administrations by mayors.
  An voluntary structure can be recognized as legal only upon the application of the person to whom the structure belongs to the land plot. ”
  The Court of Cassation, by the decision of the "Mkrtich ուլ Gyulnakhum Gasparyans v. City Hall", the third person on the demand to recognize the property right of the Erebuni territorial subdivision of the State Committee of the Real Estate Cadastre under the Government of the Republic of Armenia, noted that the voluntary structures are subject to revocation.
  Therefore, the property right of a person towards an voluntary structure cannot be recognized until it is recognized as legal.
  Comparing the facts of the case, the Council of Justice found that Hrant Hambardzumyan had the right of ownership over the land allotted to him as a result of the reforms, and the disputed area was located on the land belonging to Hrant Hambardzumyan and not on the land allotted to Misha Hambardzumyan.
  After considering this motion, examining the attached documents և the explanations of the judges, the Board decided to terminate the issue of subjecting the judge to disciplinary liability.
 In fact, in this case we tried to show what difficulties the implementation of a voluntary structure by a citizen can cause in practice.
In order to reduce the cases of unauthorized construction, to increase its efficiency, in order to exclude them in the future, a number of issues still need to be solved, which are contained in the concept "Solving the problem of combating unauthorized construction in the territory of the Republic of Armenia" developed by the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
 The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, defining the notion of "voluntary structure", at the same time stipulates that a certain procedure is envisaged for legal recognition.
  This procedure also stipulates that by the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia N912 of 2006, in order to legalize an unauthorized structure, the owner of the land must make applications to the head of the community within which the structure is located.
 According to RA 8 See RA Government "Resolution of the problem of struggle against unauthorized construction in the territory of RA" 2010 ․ concept.
The government decision must be accompanied by an application for registration of a property right issued by the state body in accordance with the procedure established by the state body, which must provide information on the self-structures in advance, and if they do not exist or the land is jointly or jointly owned, it must be submitted to the RA. Written consent of the eggs approved by the order of the State Committee of the Real Estate Cadastre under the Government.
  Moreover, the legalization of voluntary structures is subject to rejection if the written consent given by all the owners is not submitted.
  Within 30 days after receiving the application, the community leader makes a decision on the legalization or rejection of a self-built residential building of up to 200 square meters of public or industrial significance.
 And if the building is a public or industrial building occupying an area of ​​more than 200 square meters, the decision is made within 60 days.
The procedure for legalizing unauthorized structures in an apartment building has certain peculiarities, in particular, if the building owners or their authorized persons want to legalize changes in the attics of the building, doors, windows, and other dimensions of the building.
  If as a result, the share ownership of the owners changes, they must submit an application to the mayor, attaching to it the consent of the owners of all apartments in the building, non-residential areas.
 The above procedure does not work when legalizing buildings built on state or community property.
  In that case, the head of the community makes a decision on his / her own initiative to legalize or demolish the voluntary structures located on state or community owned lands.
  When legalizing, the persons who have already built the given structures are offered to acquire them with the right of preference.
 If this offer is not accepted in due time, a new offer is made to rent the building.
  If the builder does not accept the offer, the building is sold or used for public auction or tender.
 According to the decision of the government, in case of legalization or rejection of voluntary structures, the applicant must be informed in writing about the reasons for rejection within 5 days by hand-delivery by mail.
It should be noted that the Law on Administrative Offenses 9 provides for different amounts of fines in special cases for persons who have implemented an unauthorized structure.
 According to that law, - voluntary construction of buildings or structures on the land by persons with the right of ownership or land use, as well as the construction of voluntary structures in apartment buildings or adjacent to buildings, except for a private house built on a land plot in rural communities, incurs a minimum penalty. in the amount of two hundred times the salary.
- Voluntary construction of a residential house on a land plot in rural communities. incurs a fine of one hundred times the minimum wage.
- Voluntary construction of state-owned buildings and structures on land owned by the state and communities by persons who do not have the right to use the land shall result in a fine of four hundred times the minimum wage.
Continuation of the mentioned actions after imposing a fine in the manner prescribed by law shall result in imposition of a fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred times the minimum wage.
Tat Panosyan LEGAL STATUS OF SPLITLY BUILT BUILDINGS, BUILDINGS Keywords: voluntary structure, legalization, legislative regulation on voluntary structure, demolition of a voluntary structure, privatization.
