ANCIENT ARMENIAN LOCATIONS N. ADONTS 'BOOK "ARMENIA IN THE TIME OF HOUSTINIANOS". The value of Adonts' monograph "Armenia in the Age of Justinian" is conditioned not only by the author's choice and application of unprecedented methods of historical analysis, but also by the solid, comprehensive nature of the conclusions.
 Today, in the 21st century, Armenian and foreign historians and topographers build their research based on N. From the principles of this work by Adonts.
  As the author mentions in the introductory section, the work is based on materials of different quality and origin, extracted from national and foreign sources.
  In controversial cases, the scientist is critical of existing materials, regardless of their origin.
  "We are imbued with the consciousness of our work, which can be expressed in the words of one of the scholars of European feudalism:" For a time, in which the Fragments of the Fragments are best, we will not be able to swallow riches "1 (for a period when the beginning they are partial, no one should believe in revealing the truth alone).
  We are especially interested in this work from a philological point of view. N. Adonts' remarkable etymologies and deep knowledge of toponymy can undoubtedly become a large-scale study material, however, in this article we will focus on the toponymic side of his research, exploring the ancient Armenian toponyms in the mentioned era.
While N. Passing to the toponymic analysis of Adonts, let us mention that by saying "The Age of Justinian", N. Adonts means not only the years of the reign of Justinian, but also the period of transition from ancient statehood to medieval statehood in general.
  Studying this period, the scholar first of all had the importance of the latter for Armenian history.
Ն. Adonts divided his work into three main parts: Western Armenia, Eastern Armenia, and the origin of the Ministry.
 The material of our study relates, of course, to the first two, the examination of which led us to construct the following diagram, within the easy-to-understand analysis of the following: WESTERN ARMENIA-EAST ARMENIA 1. Autonomous authoritiesAshtianeneBalaviteneSopeneենop1. Ayrarat 2. Nerkin HaykKhorjianenePaghnatunMundzurDaranaghiEkeleseneAghyunMaghiDerjanKarinShagagomSper2. Touruberan 1 Adonts N., Armenia in the Age of Justinian, Yerevan, 1987, p. 10.
BasenGabegheankAbegheankHawunikArsharunikBagrevandTsaghkotnVanandKhoytAspakunikTarawnArshamunikMardaghiDasnaworkTuaratsatapDalarShirakAragatsotnNigKogovit (Kogihovit) Realm HayotsUrtsadzor (Urtsidzor) AratsSharurHarkVarazhnunikBznunikErevarkAghiovitApahunikKogiKhorkhorunik 3. Small HaykOrbaliseneHaytulaneHayretikeOrseneSinervaAzirisVarsapaOrsa etc. 3. Vaspurakan II series I series III seriesRshtunikTospBogunikMedicineArnoyotAndsatikTrpatunikAkeMets AghbakAndzakh valleyArtsikhakovitAperiranGarni to We will post Adonts' testimonies on the principle of choice.
The Empire in Western Armenia was divided into three regions of lands, depending on the degree of their subordination to the imperial power: autonomous authorities, Inner Armenia և Lesser Armenia.
  The first ones were located in the south of Armenia, across the Euphrates of the Tigris.
 To distinguish it from Greater or Inner Armenia, Justinian gave them the name Other Armenians.
  Thus, Ashtianene և Balavitene are the Armenian Hashtyank and Balahovit.
Balahovit in Armenian means cherry valley from the words cherry valley.
  It follows that the place name is indeed Balu, which is preceded by Palu's sexual և.
  Terև Ashti-ane will connect with Ashti-shat.
Next is the area called Sopene, Anzitene և Sopane, as it is called Angelene, which in ancient times, according to the scientist, was known by the common name Sopene.
Armenian Tsopk is now called Goljek in Turkish, as N. Adonts proves it.
  It is a small alpine lake, not far from Harput.
 According to N. Adonts' Hore berd can probably be compared to Khar-berd.
  Harput was located in Anzitene, in the Hallelujah field. This is where Shamushat is located.
 Hallelujah field, according to N. Adonts, corresponds to the field that the ancient authors called Geghetsik, where the city of Arsamosat was located.
 Ն. Adonts mentions that the Kharberd valley deserves that short name, which even his, N. In Adonts's time it was also distinguished by its fertility and population density.
 In Turkish it is called Oluova, meaning Great Plain, but it is obvious that Olu comes from the name of the old Hallelujah, which was simply interpreted by the Turkish language.
Shahunyats Tsopk, according to Pavstos, was located between Anzitene "Muzur".
  In the world map, Tsopk is the province that lies "west of Paghnatun և Balahovit, that is, it corresponds to Shahunyats Tsopk.
  It is interesting that Ptolemy, when he says Sophia, understands only Little Sophia ”1.
According to N. Adonts: Tsopk was known as Supani long before our era.
 The pre-Armenian place name Supani was passed to the Armenian language by Tsopk dz, in which the last q is the simple equivalent of ani, which was the plural sign in the language of the natives living in that country before the Armenians.
 Supani name, N. According to Adonts, it is closely preserved in the Assyrian Sofan-aje egg.
Part of Sophanene was called Angelene.
 Ն. Adonts thinks that its origin dates back to the period after the split of Sopene, it originated from the Great Tsopk, just like Anzitene, which did not split from Sopene.
Ն. According to Adonts, part of the former Arshakuni estates, which bypassed the upper Euphrates and later became the heritage of the Roman Empire, formed the Greater or Inner Armenia.
 Paghnatun got its name from Paghin or Paghanglkhavor city from its provinces.
 Next to Paghin, N. According to Adonts, there was the province of Muzur, to the north of which, on the Euphrates, lay side by side Daranagh և the province of the Church.
 Daranagh occupied the valley of the Kyomur River, and the province of Ekeghyats occupied the neighboring plain.
The name of Derjan has been preserved in the name of Tadjik Terjan kaza, the capital of which is Mamakhatun.
Aghiun is known in Armenian literature only from the World Map, and in several readings Leo is read.
According to N. Apart from Adonts, Shatgom, the other names are of pre-Armenian origin.
Strabo, as N. Adonts mentions that Achilles placed it on the left bank of the Euphrates.
 In its composition ak-ilis-ene is related to daran-ali, man-ali, mard-ali, that is, it consists of Ake և 1 Adonts N., page 50.
from ali: * ake-salt.
 In Greek ilis dz, the last s corresponds to either the Armenian ts, resp. to the pre-literal sex scene, or to the claimant sex scene.
  According to Adonts, a number of geographical toponyms have the suffix ali.
 Among them is Aghun, like ib Analibna, Analiba or Analibla.
 Ն. Adonts thinks that in the last part of An-alibna's one should not miss the Armenian aghin, where v is the softening of the initial b.
 And what does ali-s mean?
 According to Hovhannes Yerznkatsi, Daran-aghi came from the salt caves in that province, but N. Adonts, thinking that it is a folk etymology, considers it unlikely that alis originated from the Armenian word for salt. According to him, it is more correct that the adjective * ali suffix has a pre-literary origin և is equivalent to the Grabarian -gh.
 According to that, Mardagh simply means Mardyan, Man-aghi means Manyan, Ak-ilisene means Akiya.
 It is more accurate that the adjective * ali suffix has a pre-literary origin և is equivalent to the Georgian eli and the ograbar gh. According to that, Mard-aghi simply means Mard-yan (province), Man-aghi means Manyan, Ak-ilisene means Akiyan.
Derjan has been preserved by the present-day Terjan իմDersim։.
 A small district of Dersim is called Koghlijan.
 Ն. According to Adonts, Dersim and Koghlijan are the Arab-Persian parts of the Armenian Derjan Church, as well as of the medieval Keltsen (* from Eke-les-akan, followed by Yerzinjan * Yerizakan).
The Armenian lands on the west bank of the Euphrates have been called Little Armenia since ancient times.
  Ն. According to Adonts, the mines in the town of Orsa in Little Armenia were mistakenly brought closer to Orsdara.
  The scholar considers it possible that one of the Byzantine dioceses, Kharsian-on, owed his name to Orsene, which was named after the fortress of Kharsian in the same diocese.
 Ն. Adonts adds that the exact position of the latter is not known, և an attempt was made to bring it closer to Karissa, Garsi, which is not far from Amasia.
 According to N. Adonts: there is no need to take Khorsia to Ptolemy's Orsa.
  Erna-Varsapa was one of the provinces of Little Armenia.
 Some of the Arab geographers suggest reading Varpasa to identify it with Arabison, others suggest Sarsapa.
 According to N. According to Adonts, if it is possible to read Saraspa instead of Varsapa, then it is more reasonable to identify it with a village on the Kuru-Chay River, also called Sarsap.
  As for Orsa, there is no doubt that it was located in Orsa, regardless of whether we accept its identity with the current village of Khorsana or not.
 From a topographical point of view, according to him, Khorsana is more suitable for the city of Orsa in Little Armenia than Osdara, which is located outside its borders.
Let's move on to the examination of the toponyms of Eastern Armenia.
 The Eastern or Persian part of Armenia differs significantly from Western Armenia in its position and significance in Armenian history.
  In Byzantine sources, Eastern Armenia is usually called Persian Armenians.
The suburbs of Eastern or Marzpan Armenia, Syunik, Mokk and Tayk, were in the hands of the Syunyats, Mokats and Mamikonyan ruling houses.
 The other tribes were located in the area between the mentioned states.
 According to the World Map, that territory was divided into three big countries: Ayrarat, Taruberan, Vaspurakan.
  In Ayrarat the World Map counts 16 subdivisions or provinces, which are given in the table.
  Of these, Shirak occupied the valley of the Akhuryan River, between Vanand and Ayrarat. During the time of Adonts, it was already called Shoragyal, in Armenian, after Shirak-gavar or Shirak-avan.
Basian, later called Basen, spread near the origins of Araks, up to the village of Salkora, that is, as N. Adonts notices, almost to the Russian-Turkish border.
The second central state, Taruberan, according to the World Map, also consists of 16 provinces, of which the most important due to its antiquity and significance, according to N. Adontsi, Tarone, which was adjacent to Arshamunik և Aspakunik provinces.
  The name of the first originated from Arsham, which, in all probability, is connected with the founder of the city of Arshamashat.
  Like Arshamunik, Aspakunik also has only a geographical significance և In the world map it is also called Aspakuneats gorge.
 Aspakunik is one of the mountain valleys adjacent to Khoyt, which lies on the left side of the Karasu River (ancient Meghraget) in the Khandosh Mountains, in front of Sasun.
 Apahunik is located at the foot of Masik big mountain.
 The settlement of Aghyorsk was located here.
 According to N. The city of Adonts, Aghiorsk, is used in the old sense, a fenced place for hunting.
  In Pavstos it is called Aghoy-valley, and in Ashkharhatsuyts it is called Aghitovit.
 From Aghiorsk to the west, N. According to Adonts, Bznunik was spreading in the direction of the lake layer.
The curved province is a part of Bznunik, just like Aghiovit is a part of Apahunik.
 Below Manazkert, on the left, the Korsu river flows into Aratsani, which starts from Bulamapokrik lake. Ն. Adonts supposes that the old Core was right there.
 Of the other provinces, Erqark was located on the southern shore of the lake, near Aghdznik.
  Mardagh occupied the origins of Araks on the northern slopes of Bingյl.
 To the east of it, above Varajnunik և Hark,, came Dasnavor, Tavaratatsatap և Dalar, which extended to the Aratsan River.
The third central state, the Vaspurakan world, according to the World Map, consisted of 35 provinces, or there, according to N. Adonts, only the names of 32 are given, and only 18 are described.
 In describing these provinces, the World Map follows a certain principle: the enumeration begins from south to north in three rows.
 The place of these provinces is mostly known to the scientist. Rshtunik, with Vostan in the center, is the southeastern shores of Lake Van, Tosp is in the Vanishurkaq district, and Archishakovit is located north of Van, in the Marmetget region of Lake Artchak, which flows next to it.
 Archishakovit - N. The name of the Adonts period is Archak, which is the old Archishak - in short, the minimum egg of Archesh.
 Archesh is a city located in the northern corner of Lake Van.
 In ancient times, that part of the lake was called Archesh Bay, and then the whole lake.
 Ն. Adonts considers it probable that Archesh, in the language of the population that existed before the Armenians, generally meant a lake.
The provinces at the beginning of the second row, Buzhunik և Andzatsik, lay on the upper reaches of the Bohtan or Ar-Alyan Tigris River.
 To the south of Andzatsik were Buzhunik և Arnoyotn, and to the north, on the upper course of the Khoshab River, the valley of which was called Hayots Dzor, Trpatuniq և Yervandunik, and from Lake Artchak to Artaz Mardastan extended.
The third row of provinces extends from the sources of Zav river to Araks. These are Aghbak, which is the present-day Aghbak Kazan with the town of Bashkala, Ake to the south, Andzakhidzor to the north, Kotur with the town of the same name on the old Kotor river, and Kotur-to-west, Tonravan, next to it. `Nkan, N. Naga castle of Adonts time.
 Here is another historic fortress, Sean, which stood in the Limbi gorge.
Summing up N. We rightly mention Adonts' testimonies about the ancient Armenian toponyms. A. The song "Armenia in the Age of Justinian" is an irreplaceable toponymic database.
  All surnames simply became toponyms, first of all, large natural - the name of the world or province, which was the cradle of the given dynasty, then from the natural were born և small natural surnames of the same name - fortresses, dogs, settlements, monasteries there, in parallel - large physical-geographical The names of units - mountains, which are a symbol of high power - inviolability, lakes - rivers, which were the guarantor of the economic power - protection of the given dynasty, and at the end, directly or with the addition of suffixes - the names of valleys, plains, mountain passes - tributaries, ie the eponymous toponym It was a root for the formation of new toponyms with suffixes and words in ancient times.
  B. When we look at the special historical documents, which are called throne lists և military letters, they are ministerial lists, which indicate the pillow of the given dynasty, the position, in the state-government hierarchy, the number of its troops, the cavalry և in general, we see that they are all are the names of indiscriminate geographical units fixed on maps of different times.
 The author of the detailed research of those throne և military letters N. In this work, Adonts shows the mirror connection of the ministerial names, the names of the lands belonging to them, on the basis of which he restores the traces of the ministerial dynasties that disappeared during the time he examined, according to the preserved toponyms1.
 The human offspring can disappear, be assimilated by larger, more efficient, warlike nations, but the toponyms derived from their names are more durable, so it is possible to outline the local ethnography of the area, for example, in ancient Armenian literature - the name of the province, the territory of which in the 5th century belonged to the Mandakunyats ministerial dynasty, but N. Adonts supposes that this place name derives from the surname Arsham, which is most probably connected with the founder of the city of Arshamashat near Kharberd.
  An inscription mentions King Arsham near Mount Nemrut, west of Taron.
 According to some sources, he 1 Adonts N., pp. 266- 432.
He was the brother of Tigran II.
 Connecting these facts, N. Adonts concludes. "According to ancient times, the Arshamunyats ruling dynasty existed in the Euphrates valley. their successors at the foot of Bingյl, that is, in the place which bears their name, have continued their existence for a relatively long time. ”1
 He was of the same opinion. Ghapantsyan, who went further, restoring not only the abolished ministerial surname, but also their national roots on the basis of the preserved toponym.
 Based on the time of their establishment in Armenia, the sources of reference, the sound structure, he considers the Mandakunis, Slkunis, and Arshamunis to be Armenianized Hittite settlers who settled in the areas northwest of Taron2.
  Գ. If the beggars after the surname or surname are not convincing, one should look for combinations with the names of the gods of the mythology of the time, because at that stage a serious factor for naming was the heavenly protection, the role of supernatural forces.
  It should be noted that in the case of large natural beings, such as country names, province names, etc., the name of the founding race is more decisive than that of the gods.
  D. The etymological system of the ancient Armenian toponyms by N. Adonts is very solid and clear, nevertheless we find disputable the author's observation regarding the Achilles tendon that the adjective suffix * ali (ali) has a prepositional origin, is equivalent to the Grabarian suffix.
 At first glance, this approach is correct, as long as the author does not bring examples. According to him, Mard-ali with the above-mentioned regularity, that is, having an adjective -ali suffix, is equivalent to Mard-yan, Man-ali is equivalent to Man-yan.
In our opinion, the Grabarian -gh, showing that there are many features, cannot be equivalent to the adjective -yan.
 Then N. The * ali (ali) mentioned by Adonts is either not equivalent to the Grabarian -gh, or being equivalent, the equivalents of the above-mentioned Mard-ali տեղ Man-ali toponyms should be not Mard-yan-Man-y, but Man-egh և Man-egh.
  E. Ն. Adonts calls the same place name in both cases Munzur in one case and Muzur in the other.
 Considering the infrequent transition to Armenian, which also appeared in these two, we think that the plaintiff of the Old Armenian's personal pronoun, zis, arose not from the direct, as mentioned in the Old Armenian textbooks, but from the tragic me, whose became a petitioner for me.
 With the addition of the past participle f to the latter, with the progressive adaptation, the last f became s: ziz> me.
Vanuhi Baghmanyan ANCIENT ARMENIAN LOCATIONS N. ADONTS 'BOOK "ARMENIA IN THE TIME OF HOUSTINIANOS" Keywords: N. Adonts, place name, etymology, geographical location.
