"YEREVAN" MAGAZINE. CONTENTS AND FORMAT FEATURES 2000 More than 100 youth, political and cultural magazines have been published in Armenia since.
 Taking a general look, we can say that in the beginning most of them were published at a low level, as there were no funds, and the readers were not ready to provide money to buy Armenian-language magazines.
  There was also no confidence in reading Armenian magazines.
Armenian magazines were published mainly on the basis of translations of materials in foreign magazines on fashion, show business and health.
The first decade of the 21st year cannot be considered historic in terms of quality.
It is true that magazines were created, however, even after they were published for months, they did not imagine their target audience.
 Meanwhile, I think that the ideas about the interests of the audience should always accompany the specialist throughout the work, when writing a preface, designing, choosing a hero, asking questions, choosing a point of view for presenting the material, etc.
The advancement of electronic media in general has significantly weakened the role of newspapers and magazines.
 The number of newspapers in the world has decreased, and in the case of magazines the situation is more complicated.
  Even The Guardian recently announced the cessation of printing.
  One of the objective reasons for the decline is that the public today has more means to receive information, to read, to see, than years ago.
Referring to the history of magazines in Armenia, it should be noted that magazines were created, which, however, not being able to withstand the challenges of the time, later ceased to be published.
  However, no matter how much there has been a decline in the field of magazines lately (և not only in Armenia), nevertheless, the magazine remains one of the most interesting media outlets for both professionals and the public.
 Although such an approach has been observed in recent years, however, I think the magazine sector has more than serious prospects for development.
In the framework of the article, let us refer in more detail to "Yerjan" magazine2, which had its unique place and role in the "content" format of the magazine, becoming the first free Armenian magazine 12 years after its foundation.
  Initially, "Yerevan Productions" was best known for its Russian-language magazine "Yerevan" for Diaspora Armenians.
 The non-Armenian-language "Yerevan" performed exactly the same functions as the current "Yerevan" magazine.
 In both cases there were և clear goals, which are used to achieve many modern journalistic methods.
 The Armenian language version of the magazine has been distributed since 2012.
The publication of the last five issues of the magazine brought a change in the format.
  The format of the new "Yerjan" differs from other magazines in the field.
  Initially having 3000, then 6000 copies is not a small number in Armenia.
 Taking into account the interest of the residents of the capital and a study of the city 1 For more details see http.
//www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/16/guardian-observer-digital-first-strategy link.
2 The editor-in-chief of "Yerjan" magazine is Artavazd Yeghiazaryan.
  It is released every month, except for the January-July-July-August joint issues.
 The city magazine has a volume of 56 pages, all the pages of which are in color, and it is printed on offset printing paper.
  The print format differs from other magazines: smaller than A3, և larger than A4.
  The publication of the last five issues of the magazine բեր brought a change in the format.
Each new issue of the magazine finds its place in the city's cafes, mainly those whose regular visitors are young people with an interest in cultural values.
Note that the magazine is distributed free of charge.
  This is the basis of the advantages over many other magazines. If other magazines are often unable to implement new programs and ideas due to financial problems, to have quality photos, artistic editor, then "Yerjan" does not need all that.
According to the editor-in-chief of "Yerjan" magazine Artavazd Yeghiazaryan, the traditional media will not be destroyed, but will be introduced to the field of modern media; the opportunities provided by the new media can be used to develop the traditional mass media.
  The appearance of tablets on the market gave a new opportunity to print periodicals. Electronic versions of newspapers and magazines can now be read in print.
 This opportunity is widely used by international periodicals.
One of the Armenian periodicals also uses this opportunity - "Yerjan" magazine.
 It is registered on the website www.issuu.com, which includes more than 11.7 million publications.
 It is a digital publishing platform that allows you to read the printed issues of magazines and newspapers.
 Through this, "Yerjan" becomes very popular, as it has Russian-English versions of the orphan Armenian version.
In addition to creating an electronic version, Armenian magazines use the platform provided by virtual social networks.
  They serve to distribute the materials to as many people as possible.
  The ability to leave comments on the Internet and write e-mails makes it easier for journalists to understand what the reader wants to see.
  The issues discussed in them can become the material of an article, even a whole series.
"Yerjan" also raises issues and problems that concern young people, through which the young but experienced journalists of the magazine offer their solutions and options to overcome them.
  There are also entertaining materials in the magazine, which are the best way for search readers to make boring everyday fun.
Under the heading "In the middle of the city" the schedule of events for young people is regularly presented.
  They are a great opportunity to raise awareness of new events as well as exciting programs.
  In the September 2014 issue, the magazine hastens to inform its readers that a new application has been created.
The mobile application of the Armenian Navigator project of imyerevan.com website is already available in the App store.
 The idea is simple. Create a free, interactive, constantly updated online encyclopedia of Armenian places in the world1.
  These other similar publications, which contain news, appear in the "mixed" subheading of "Qaghakamej".
"Yer!" Magazine touches upon the problems taking place in the city.
 In order to find out what are the content and dimensional features of the Armenian magazine, we took as a core of research all 31 issues published by the magazine.
  Or that during the previous four years the magazine had some breaks (there was a period when the magazine was about to close), but it continued its activity.
The content of "Yerevan" is entirely dedicated to the past and present of the city of Yerevan.
  All issues are thematic.
  Among the 31 issues published as of March 2015 are issues dedicated to literature, transport, museums, Kond, the suburbs, the Closed Market, rock, statues, and repatriates.
  Special attention is paid to urban-architectural problems, as well as to the stories of urban dwellers.
Celebrities are not presented as such in the magazine, except for one headline - "Imerjan", where famous people (Roland Gasparyan, Gor Sujyan, Vardan Petrosyan, Krist Manaryan, Arsen Grigoryan, etc.) tell about their favorite places, thoughts, memories of Yerevan.
It should be noted that the publishing staff of the magazine maintains close ties with the representatives of modern Armenian literature.
  In particular, the literary editor of the magazine is literary critic Arkmenik Nikoghosyan, and he regularly writes essays and short stories. 1 See "Yerevan" magazine, No. 9 (27), 2014, Yerevan.
Among the authors are prose writers Armen Ohanyan, Aram Pachyan, poet Karen Antashyan, whose materials are usually devoted to the central theme of the issue (for example, ArmenOhanyan's "Yerևanyan Garbage Song" was published in a magazine dedicated to the problem of garbage).
 Besides, within the framework of the permanent title "Let the Writer Take It", modern writers write essays about Yerjan (the title includes the texts of Hovhannes Ishkhanyan, Hovhannes Tekgyozyan, Nara Vardanyan, Areg Azatyan and others).
The illustrations of the magazine were created by the designers of "Yerjan Production" design studio of different years (Gegham Vardanyan, Sargis Antonyan, William Karapetyan), as well as invited designers (Vahram Muradyan, Sergey "Magic" Navasardyan).
In the pages of "Yerevan" readers can read stories about famous people from Yerevan, as well as citizens living in the city - shoemakers, taxi drivers, young people engaged in graffiti.
 At the same time, it should be noted that the stories presented in each issue are born as a result of new ideas and creative solutions.
If "Yerevan" magazines published in foreign languages ​​represent Armenia and our capital abroad, then the Armenian version is for the people of Yerevan, so the content of "Yerevan" tells interesting details about the history, situation, recent developments and problems of our capital1.
In the thematic issue entitled "Urban transport and its residents who have been sitting and running many times" 2, the magazine comprehensively presents the transport issue of public importance.
 At all times, the issue of public transport has received a lot of attention from the society.
  The editor-in-chief writes in this regard. "You leave home in the morning to go to work or class.
 You reach the bus stop.
 You see dozens of fellow citizens who left home on the same occasion as you.
 And you understand that part of the gatherings is your opponent. ”3
  Humorous, at the same time purposeful lines prove the shortcomings and omissions of the city authorities, and their emphasis in the pages of the magazine helps to reach a solution to the problem as soon as possible.
"In the City", "Event", "Event", "Internet", "Fun", "Citizens", "Opinion", "Study", "Faces", "Stories", "Version", "Symbol" և "Personnel" The section entitled "Department" at different times reflected the transportation problems in the capital.
  Their studies are spiced with photo stories, which help to present it more vividly.
For example, the article entitled "Route Trafficking" says that the Yerevan Transport Network is a huge industrial system with all its avenues and alleys, through which flows the minibus minibus, which becomes a huge thrombocytopenic carrier ready for any moment.
  The author of the article, Karen Antashyan, is convinced: "Marshutka is a complex social system, where intra-class roles operate, intertwined with psycho-physical relations."
  According to him, the minibus going on the last flight late at night is filled mainly with criminally-looking men of middle-aged youth, whose tense and gloomy faces actually testify to the reasoning behind the T-shirts of women or women.
In general, let's record the negative next to the positive one.
 There is no opinion or analysis of the interlocutors or the specialists themselves in the "Route Trafficking" material.
 I think it is not very effective to completely season the material with the creative thoughts of a journalist.
  But the "Good Luck" publication entitled "Study" is not about minibuses, but about taxis operating in Armenia.
  An interesting comparison was made: journalist Victoria Aleksanyan and photojournalist Arthur Lumen Gorgyan focused on the facial expressions of taxi drivers and the names of taxis embossed on the car.
 The unique photo series helps the reader to read it to the last line.
 In "Yerjan" magazine, in general, a lot of attention is paid to photos.
 Next to the photo stories we can see interesting comments.
 They are not only purposeful in their content, but also help to read long materials easily.
1 From the interview with Yeghiazaryan A., Yerevan, March 2, 2015.
2 See "Yerevan" magazine, No. 5 (6), Yerevan, 2012.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P.
No less impressive in the mentioned issue of the magazine is the Armenian woman who appeared in the headline "Faces", with her hair styled, with lipstick and make-up, runs a slow trolleybus.
 Here is what the magazine writes. "Dear drunken four-wheeled husband", Emma is at the helm of the giant trolleybus.
  Presenting Mrs. Emma's story, "Yerևan" magazine emphasizes the image of an Armenian woman in its pages.
  You can regularly meet such citizens in the pages of the magazine with the slogan "Nothing is impossible".
Let's also record the fact that in "Yerjan" magazine the main problems are presented through a person.
  In other words, the heroes are people with their stories.
  In my opinion, it is the best method to make the problems more public.
 This method is also used in authoritative international newspapers and magazines, such as the French daily "Le Monde" and the German "Bravo" magazine.
  As in "Yerjan", in these magazines the primary use is to convey information through people.
 It is not absolutely necessary that the heroes are people of public importance.
  On the contrary, in order to make their image expressive, it is preferable for them to be ordinary inhabitants of the city or village, who are living and walking like us.
 Yerjan uses this effective method in the Armenian magazine field.
The first issue of the Armenian-language "Yerjan" magazine published an interview with Arthur Meschyan about the architectural face of the city, an extensive article on Yerjan, once the second most active center, the station and its prospects, an interview with the mayor of Yerevan, as well as many other interesting articles.
Most often, the quality of content is discussed by various experts when talking about the characteristics of print քննարկ online media.
 In case of studying "Yerjan" magazine, it becomes clear that the issue is seriously asked in the editorial office.
 The fact is that not only the content but also the very structure of the magazine deserves special attention.
 As a result of the combination of the two, the magazine maintains international standards.
Referring to several factors that shape the content and at the same time limit the content diversity, let's group the latter. • Thematic variety և Features of coverage, • Photo stories - the best way to attract an audience.
Each media outlet, for one reason or another, adopts certain unwritten rules about what topics can "be" or "should not" be covered.
 Content formation is closely linked to the audience.
 In many cases, the low quality of the content is justified by the media leaders as "enhanced demand" (providing relevant content to the needs of the audience, interests), ignoring the feedback.
 The impact of the audience factor on content design is also exacerbated by increasing competition between media outlets.
Considering the market, resources and opportunities, it is necessary to understand to what extent the conditions and resources are sufficient to achieve the set goals.
We often hear admiring opinions from "outside" foreign partners about how one person works like a superman for you, combining the work of several (give an idea, organize a meeting of people with several different professions: photographer, hero, go to the shooting, participate in the screenplay , edit և etc), in case the subtitle may have an editor, several assistants և etc.
  Here we are dealing with market volumes.
Indeed, creative work requires several people to work on one detail to refine the end result. Unfortunately, it is not possible for us.
  But even in that case, the creative team must try to fill this gap to the best of its ability.
  For example, as a result of regular discussions and meetings, discussing the work in a team and listening to each other's opinions can become an effective working tool.
 After all, especially when doing creative work, it is possible to make a mistake that you might have been the first to see in someone else's work.
  With self-discussion-meetings the work becomes more mature.
Hovhannes Vardanyan "YEREVAN" MAGAZINE. CONTENTS AND FORMATIC FEATURES Keywords: electronic media, target audience, free magazine, team work, digital publishing platform, entertainment materials, famous people, thematic issues, resources և opportunities.
