IDEAS RELATED TO SOCIO-LINGUISTICS IN ARMENIAN SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION Sociolinguistics as a field of study of an independent interdisciplinary direction is in the domain of intersection of sociology and linguistics. This idea in itself necessitates consideration of various research questions within the two sciences.
 Broadly defined, the discipline aims to understand language-society interactions and interactions, despite the fact that linguists and sociologists give scientifically unique interpretations of these two ideas and consider the issue of mutual interaction differently.
Although in the framework of both sciences, studying different issues of sociolinguistics, it is necessary to address both language and society, nevertheless, linguists emphasize the issues of language use and internal structure, conditioned by society.
 Sociologists are interested in this question from the point of view of the study of society, for example, the observation of linguistic and communicative peculiarities of different members of the social class, the speech typical of subcultures, dialectal features, etc.
  The research opportunities provided by the discipline also help to focus on the linguistic side in the study of other social topics, creating a unique approach, enriching the interpretability of the results.
When conducting a study on the discipline in the Armenian reality, it is necessary to understand the general situation in the field, which the article aims to reveal.
 The latter aims to understand the general description of sociolinguistics in the Armenian scientific discourse: the views of the authors who referred to the discipline, the perspectives of the approaches put forward, the emphasized aspects, in other words, to reveal the essence of ideas and interrelations in the broader general context of the discipline.
  In this sense, theoretical research is relevant not only in terms of the general understanding of the discipline, but also in terms of its practical applicability, becoming a methodological basis for further research.
Understanding the scientific discourse as a set of processes և methods of information քննարկ discussion in writing or orally, we see that the general observation of the conducted studies, theoretical analyzes allows to understand the main thematic issues under discussion.
  The references made in sociolinguistics vary from the use of the term in a particular context to the description of the role of discipline in the classification of sciences.
 In order to understand the way in which the discipline was discussed, in order to identify the existing materials of the new authors dealing with the topic, the references made in the studied literature were considered, making a chain transition, we tried to find out the general situation in the field.
Linguist L. Ghazanchyan mentions sociolinguistics when talking about the unification of sciences in the context of interdisciplinary mutual penetration of terms. "In the history of linguistics of the XX century there is a characteristic feature for the development of all sciences of the century, with the narrow specialization (differentiation) of sciences, it is observed, on the contrary, outside their process of mutual penetration and unification, due to which the number of intermediate disciplines gradually increases.
  These include, for example, linguistics (psycholinguistics), social linguistics (sociolinguistics), a number of other new disciplines of linguistics ”23.
 Speaking mostly about loan terms, examining terminological issues, L. Ghazanchyan, however, notes that currently the ties and relations between the disciplines have acquired a new quality.
Carries out a comprehensive analysis of the scientific system. Zakaryan in his article "Sociolinguistics, its current state և problems", where he presents the essence of the discipline, emphasizing the preconditions of development հիմնական the main directions of study.
Referring to sociolinguistics as a history of the emergence of a discipline, the author presents it from a chronological point of view, speaking of changes in the field of linguistics study, as a result of the expansion of the latter, ie "cooperation with other sciences, their methods, perspectives. , "Language style questions", vol. 4, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1977, pp. 248-249.
"about exploitation" 24.
 Examining sociolinguistics in this context, the author notes that the emergence of the discipline was conditioned by the internal logic of the development of linguistics, as well as by the new practical, applied requirements of public and scientific life. In this respect, the article describes sociolinguistics in comparison with structural linguistics.
Although sociolinguistics as an independent discipline was just being formed at that time, the field of study of the latter was not clear yet, nevertheless, H. Zakaryan brings out the main issues that are in the center of the discipline's attention.
 Among them, he pays special attention to the issues of "social dialectology", arguing that the coverage of the causes and interactions between the social causes of language changes, in general, language and social phenomena, has begun in connection with the first studies on social dialects.
 Moreover, by saying "dialect" he not only quotes E. Aghayan's definition of "the language of different social classes or groups, which to some extent distinguishes their language from the common language" 25, but also refers to jargons, cover languages, professional languages, differences in gender, age, speakers' education, socio-economic status. , options depending on social status, national origin այլ other similar factors.
 Within the framework of this issue, linguistic-verbal differences are studied both due to the social structure (among the bearers of different age, gender, profession, other characteristics) and manifested in different social situations.
  Social dialectology not only describes the variants of language conditioned by social stratification, but also reveals the causal connections that exist between linguistic "social structures".
Among the interests of sociolinguistics, the author singles out the issues of linguistic communication, the social, situational, thematic distribution of the relationship and use of those languages ​​in case of contact between two or more languages.
  In terms of language communication, sociolinguistics is interested in the direction of language interaction, what are its causes, such as language 24 Zakaryan H., Sociolinguistics, its current state և problems, "Journal of Social Sciences", № 2, 1975, p. 70.
25 Aghayan E., Differential forms of language existence, "Banber Yerjan University", 1973, N 2, page 62.
the situation within the given society, what are the socio-political, cultural conditions of the given linguistic status, etc.
H. Zakaryan also briefly describes the issues of linguistic policy and linguistics related to applied sociolinguistics, within the framework of which the task of the discipline is to determine the socio-political preconditions which, during the development of language, require linguistic works of this or that nature. creation of systems and elaboration of literary language in accordance with modern requirements, implementation of orthographic reforms, creation of scientific terminology systems, etc.
  In addition, sociolinguistics is interested in the "relationship between verbal situation and language choice", taking into account that the interlocutors choose between different linguistic variants in different verbal situations.
 The article also presents the issues of typology of sociolinguistics and language ecology as issues of concern to the discipline. "The ecology of a language can be defined as the study of the interactions between a given language and its environment."
 By the environment of a given language is meant the society in which it operates ությունը the totality of the languages ​​with which it enters into harmony ”26.
In his article "The Problem of Linguistic and Communicative Ability in Foreign Enlightenment" E. Movsesyan talks about the establishment of an egitic system in the West, emphasizing its empirical nature in the 1960s and its theoretical nature in the 1970s.
 He refers to linguist Noam Chomsky's concept of the use of language ադրության the contrast of "pure" language27, through which they tried to distinguish language used in different contexts of speech, which changes according to conditions, is not descriptive of "pure" language used in linguistic theories28.
E. Movsesyan criticizes this approach by sociolinguists (it is impossible for those who use the language to "spoil" the language to such an extent that it interferes with the scientific description or that the language 26 Zakaryan H., Sociolinguistics, its current state և problems, "Journal of Social Sciences", № 2, 1975 , page 77; for details, see Haugen E., The Ecology of Language, Stanford, California, 1972, page 325.
Linguistics, Journal of Social Sciences, № 10, 1982, pp. 58-64; See Chomsky N., Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1965.
Linguistics, Journal of Social Sciences, № 10, 1982, pp. 58-64.
cognition depends on the knowledge of the use of language), referring to the linguist G. Jahukyan's comment: "Having no clear philosophical concept at the beginning of his activity, N. Chomsky later came under the influence of the ideas of Descartes, Humboldt ոց others, developed a concept that was an eclectic mix of idealist-rationalist nature.
 Its reflection is Chomsky's idea of ​​the nature of the origin of linguistic structures ”29.
Sociolinguists see the main problem of linguistics in the study of communicative competence, which, as a complete cognition of language, includes not only grammatical rules but also the social aspect.
  In this regard, the author criticizes the separation of the language of sociolinguistics from the sociology of language, stating that the first is the theory of the use of language, the second - the theory of communicative competence.
 He thought that in this way only N. is strengthened. Chomsky's use of language և dichotomy of language competence.
  From the point of view of sociolinguistics, the author's idea that linguistic competence presupposes knowledge of linguistic codes is also important.
  The speaker of a given language usually possesses many language codes, from which he constantly chooses a code appropriate to his role in the given situation.
  Thus, linguistic behavior is, in essence, a "passage of codes."
The empirical side of sociolinguistics from the point of view of language-society linking has been observed by H. Galstyan's article, which is a study of ethnolinguistic processes in general in the multinational USSR, based on empirical data from the Department of Ethnosociology of the Institute of Archeology and Ethnography of the Armenian SSR30.
 As the most typical form of such ethnolinguistic processes, the author speaks of bilingualism, when the mother tongue of the given ethnic unit, Russian, serves as a means of communication.
From the point of view of sociolinguistics, he presents an important commentary on language behavior. "Linguistic behavior, being one of the obligatory preconditions of human social behavior, is revealed by studying the social-functional distribution of languages ​​or their manifestations in a given society.
 The choice of language of communication is conditioned by the influence of a number of factors of linguistic and non-linguistic nature: relative to language proficiency 30 Galstyan H., Some issues of language behavior (according to the ethnosociological study materials of Yerevan population), "Newsletter of Social Sciences", № 2, 1983, pp. 31-37.
degree, literary and cultural traditions of languages, emotional attitude towards language, ethnic environment, gender, age, social-professional position, etc. ”31.
According to the presented research, if depending on gender and age characteristics, certain patterns of language use (Armenian / Russian; at home / at work) are not noticeable, then the socio-professional affiliation տարած the spread of the Russian language are directly comparable.
  Russian is increasingly used in the manufacturing sector, which is explained by the intensification of integration processes between Soviet countries.
 The linguistic behavior of an individual is correlated with his socio-professional status, which testifies to the high role of the second language in the socio-cultural processes.
 As he speaks, Russian is becoming more popular among a separate group, the intelligentsia.
  This is explained by their Russian-language education, the presence of business contacts with colleagues in other republics, etc.
The article summarizes the results of the study of linguistic peculiarities among individual groups, the discovery of correlations between different factors, in a broader context allows us to talk about the existence of elements of empirical sociolinguistics in the period under consideration.
D. In his analytical article, Gyulzadyan refers to Saussure's contribution to the development of general linguistics, which he presents as a scholarly starting point for the theories put forward by some scientific schools (some of which were formed with the aim of eliminating apparent, sometimes real, contradictions).
  Among Armenian linguists, he quotes G. Jahukyan, who considers the stage of the history of linguistics, initiated by Saussure, a period of systemic-analytical linguistics.
 This period is analytical, because for the first time language և word հստակ is clearly separated, է it is systemic, as the mentioned division is derived from the linguistic whole, linguistics.
  According to G. According to Jahukyan, "the normative template, which shows the order of succession of points according to the rules established in the given language, is attributed to the language, and the word refers to the private verbal sales of the template" 32.
The author also refers to Saussure's role in the formation of general semiotics. “According to Saussure,... One can imagine a science that studies the function of signs.
32 Jahukyan G., The development and structure of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1969, p. 101.
as part of general or social psychology.
33 Saussure, unlike his predecessors, calls this science not semiotics, but semiology, of which only linguistics is a part.
The fact that the sign, according to Saussure, is a psychological science, comes from his definition of the sign.
 According to Saussure, the sign combines concept and auditory image.
  Although by the modern classification of sciences, these sciences are separate fields, and in terms of comprehensiveness, semiotics is much more comprehensive than psychology.
As the first Armenian author to reveal the essence of the sign և the peculiarities of sign-loving in the USSR, D. Gyulzadyan mentions Leon H. Abrahamyan.
 In his recently published "Sigma" notebook, L. Abrahamyan makes the observation according to which "the relation of the name to the subject of appointment is never direct, but is always mediated by the concept" 35.
From this point of view, the references of Armenian theorists to signs, semiotics, language, speech, the interrelationships of the listed terms are a step forward in the development of sociolinguistics, which allows to speak about the discipline not only from the linguistic point of view as before, but also to add semiotic, linguistic and philosophical points.
  This established system in the West sums up the theoretical, methodological, applied possibilities of both sociology and linguistics, the lack of proportion of which, as it becomes clear from this study, is noticeable in the Armenian reality.
Thus, when observing the place of sociolinguistics in the Armenian scientific discourse, it is noticeable that it has been widely studied by linguists (linguists H. Zakaryan, L. Ghazanchyan, G. Jahukyan, D. Gyulzadyan, E. Aghayan, etc. referred to the discipline in their studies).
 The sociological point of view is somewhat marginalized by the studies of philosophers (L. H. Abrahamyan - Concept of Semantics, E. Atayan - Concept of Linguistics and Philosophy 33 is http.
//www.arteria.am/en/1311521321, as of 9.11.16 /, for details, see Ferdinand de Saussure, General Linguistics Course, Yerevan, 2008, p. 32.
34 Ibid., Pp. 104 - 105.
35 Gyulzadyan D., The significance of the Armenian translation of Ferdinand de Saussure's "Course of General Linguistics" for our mental reality, part II / available at http: // www.
//www.arteria.am/en/yev1312663973 with reference to 9.11.16 /, for details see Abrahamyan L., Sigma notebook (in Russian), Yerevan, 2008, page 43.
However, it is clear that it can not fully reflect the applicability of the theoretical basis of sociology, the conceptual apparatus and the possibilities of interpretation.
  Observing the general situation in the field in this regard helps not only to describe the situation, but also to understand the existing gaps, to create a basis for further studies.
Ofelia Grigoryan IDEAS RELATED TO SOCIO-LINGUISTICS ARMENIAN SCIENTIFIC Keywords: sociolinguistics, Armenian discourse, theory, dialect, bilingualism, language-society communication, SPEECH.
