FORMAL DEFINITION OF LAW Legal certainty is manifested when the content of the norms of law clearly states under what conditions the given norm operates, what rights և obligations arise based on that norm, ինչWhat legal consequences may arise in the non-fulfillment of the given norm?
 It is the basis for the development of methods by which legal acts are to be adopted and applied. [1]
One of the important criteria of the principle of legal certainty is the requirement that every legal act providing for legal restrictions must be published.
 This interpretation means that the state should be obliged to publish all legal acts providing for restrictions.
 The European Court of Human Rights expressed its position on the mentioned comment, in one of its rulings the following definition was given: "The law must be reasonably accessible, that is, citizens must be able to predict the behavior that is most justified in the current situation within the framework of the legislation governing the relevant legal relations." [2]
  The structural requirements of the principle of legal certainty refer to the features of the internal quality of certainty.
  The European Court of Human Rights has expressed the following opinion on one of them. "A rule of law cannot be accepted as a law unless it is drafted with such clarity that, when given to its addressee, in some cases with the help of professional assistance, it can predict the consequences that may arise if the legal act delegates its behavior." [3]
  It is worth mentioning that one of the most important criteria of legal certainty is the requirement of clarity and predictability of legal acts, which, if not observed in the legal act, can lead to the process of recognizing the given act as unconstitutional.
 The legal system of the state, apparently, should exclude such phenomena of legal regulation as the adoption of inconsistent and incomplete, contradictory legal acts.
  Nowadays, however, the legal system of no country is fully protected from these shortcomings, and in the case of modern legal developments, when it is necessary to radically expand the scope of legal regulation, to make legislative changes more often, the situation becomes more complicated.
  The principle of legal certainty is key to all democratic societies.
 Many specialists have expressed their positions on this principle.
  Anthony Arnoul, a professor at the Birmingham School of Law in the United Kingdom, singles out the following criteria for legal certainty: Laws must be clear և clear.2. Laws must be publicly available, 3. Laws must be made without ambiguous expressions, they must be predictable, 4. Laws must be stable, և they must be amended only when public relations arise or develop that cannot be regulated by existing laws; 5. Judicial decisions must be interrelated և mandatory; 6. Restrictions on the rights of individuals ը Giving retroactive effect to legal acts should be applied in cases where there is no other way to regulate those relations; 7. The legitimate expectations of individuals must be protected.
We believe that the definitions of such requirements should go beyond the level of theoretical literature, be clearly enshrined in the legislation of each democratic state, and have a practical application, in addition to being fixed on paper.
From the point of view of modern ideas, the quality of a legal act by public standards is crucial, but it should be noted that the non-re-recognition of legal acts on that basis is ignored, leading to delays in the legitimate protection of human rights.
  The modern legal culture is such that in case of violation of human rights as a result of the application of a specific legal act related to the principle of legal certainty, the aggrieved party simply tends to challenge the given legal act.
  In this case, preference is often given to the complicated procedure of challenging the legal act, while it would be more reasonable to simply apply a legal analogy in the presence of a defective act.
 In this case, it will be possible to overcome the shortcomings in the legal system within certain limits, to guarantee the normal process of realization of the law.
The principle of legal certainty presupposes the observance of the principle of j j dicata, that is, the principle of the finality of judicial acts.
  This principle requires that neither party has the right to request a review of the final "mandatory judicial act" for the purpose of making a new act in the case of a direct retrial.
 That is, the possibility of having two opinions on the issue should not be a basis for a double examination.
 Retreat from this principle is justified only when it is necessary in circumstances of a substantial and undeniable nature.
The content of the above-mentioned principle includes the following provisions: • Final, ie legal decisions made by the courts are not subject to review, • Double review of a case once resolved by the court is inadmissible, • Neither party can demand a final, ie legal force. Review of incoming judicial acts only for the purpose of conducting a double review կայ for the enactment of a new act; The existence of opposing views alone cannot serve as a basis for reviewing a final judicial act.
The Armenian legal system has also not been spared from issues related to legal status.
 As mentioned, the existence of stages of the trial that do not fully comply with the provisions of legal certainty leads to an increase in the timeframe for the examination of the case, which is obviously accompanied by an increase in the number of cases. Here, the European Court of Human Rights sees a violation of the principle of judicial review within a reasonable time.
In any case, in the Armenian reality, it is necessary to wait for a long time when filing a lawsuit, as the courts are overloaded, it is simply not possible to hear cases quickly, within reasonable limits.
 This violates the right to hear cases within a reasonable time.
  Added to this is the fact that the vast majority of the appealed cases, in our opinion, refer to the voice determination of the right.
 The current situation causes citizens' distrust of the legal system of property.
By conducting research, studying international experience, we offer two possible solutions to the problem. 1. Develop methodological instructions that will allow to exclude similar situations, 2. Write legal acts so clearly that it is easy for specialists to understand, to exclude such problems.
The proposed solutions will be reasonable so that the person will be able to defend his rights knowing and understanding them. He must first imagine what the norm that creates a right for him implies, be able, if not personally, then at least with the help of a specialist, to imagine the consequences of that legal norm, and for that it is necessary that the legal The norm corresponds to the principle of sound certainty of the right.
 By compiling methodological guidelines, there will be guiding and guiding manuals in the legal system, which, containing all possible methods, will anticipate the emerging problems, offer possible solutions, and clearly state the legal acts. They will avoid encountering the problem.
  We think that the proposed methods will be reasonable if possible conditions are initiated.
LITERATURE [5] The decision of the RA Court of Cassation civil case No.ARD / 0062/02/09, URL.
 https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=50544 (Link made on 16.05.2018).
Layli Tadjosyan THE FORMAL DEFINITION OF LAW Keywords: legal certainty, principle, democratic society, ECHR decisions.
