BORDERS OF PRE-TRIAL PROCEEDINGS IN REM AND IN PERSONAM.
 SOME PROBLEMS Criminal proceedings can be described as a process that begins, continues, ends with certain facts, and involves specific individuals.
  The pre-trial proceedings, as a key և extensive stage of this process, are distinguished by their content, like any other legal proceedings, they are carried out within certain limits.
 The observance of these boundaries predetermines the effective solution of criminal procedural problems ապահով the provision of criminal procedural guarantees of the right to personal protection.
The issues of the boundaries of pre-trial proceedings as an independent institution of criminal procedure have been covered in the works of prominent forensic experts of the inter-revolutionary period.
However, this institution seems to have been forgotten since the Soviet period of criminal proceedings.
  Despite the fact that certain aspects of the subject matter have been examined in the scientific works of some theorists, there is still a lack of comprehensive research on the issue being studied in the domestic forensic science today.
As the current problems of criminal proceedings show, insufficient attention to the boundaries of pre-trial criminal proceedings raises both theoretical and practical problems.
Depending on the specifics of each stage of the pre-trial proceedings, these issues have their own manifestations.
In this work, we have set ourselves the task of raising some issues within the pre-trial proceedings in the prosecutorial investigation practice, of presenting the necessary proposals for their solution.
The boundaries of pre-trial proceedings are legally a combination of procedural norms that govern the subject matter of the entire pre-trial proceedings.
In forensic science, it is customary to distinguish two criteria: in rem և in personam1, within the framework of which the criminal case originates and proceeds.
 In criminal proceedings, in rem means a certain fact or episode of a crime, in connection with which a criminal case is initiated, criminal proceedings are conducted, and in personam, a circle of certain individuals, against whom criminal prosecution is carried out.
  These two criteria define the boundaries of the pre-trial proceedings and predetermine the further course of the criminal case.
 In the domestic criminal trial, which traditionally belongs to the continental legal system, in contrast to the Anglo-Saxon, the delimitation of the proceedings begins at the initial stage of the trial.
 The first procedural act outlining the boundary of the pre-trial proceedings is the decision to initiate a criminal case, which is of key importance from the point of view of the content of the further proceedings and its further movement.
Related to the boundaries of pre-trial proceedings is the question of whether it is always necessary to initiate a new criminal case when another criminal case, episode (in rem) or other person who committed an offense (in personam) arises during the criminal case.
According to Article 27 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), "The body of investigation, the investigator, the prosecutor are obliged to initiate a criminal case within their competence in each case of finding features of a crime."
According to Article 175 of the Code, if there are grounds and grounds for initiating a criminal case, the prosecutor, the investigator, the investigative body, within their jurisdiction, are obliged to initiate a criminal case.
  And Article 181 of the Code defines the decisions, the making of any of which is obligatory for the public participant in the proceedings in each case of receiving information about the crime.
1 See The powers of Courts of Equity. I. “In Rem” and “In Personam”. Walter Wheeler Cook. The RA Court of Cassation G. In the decision on Ghondyan, he formed a legal position that: "(…) The stage of initiating a criminal case is an independent stage of the criminal procedure, which has its beginning and end, problems, subjects, etc.
 At the stage of initiating a criminal case, the body conducting the proceedings shall find out the fact of the existence և grounds or grounds for initiating a criminal case.
  (J) A lawful, reasoned, timely decision to initiate a criminal case is a necessary precondition for the rapid, complete detection of crimes, as well as for their prevention.
 At the same time, the unjustified initiation of a criminal case restricts the rights and freedoms of individuals, harms them. ”
  In other words, both the groundless initiation of a criminal case and the groundless refusal of the initiation are gross violations of law, causing significant damage to the person, the society and the state2.
 The RA Court of Cassation, L. Referring to the role and significance of the decision to initiate a criminal case against Poghosyan, he set out in his case law that in the direction.
  Only after initiating a criminal case is the body conducting the proceedings endowed with wide powers of investigative-judicial actions envisaged by the RA Criminal Procedure Code, gets the right to interfere in the rights of individuals և legal interests, if necessary apply procedural coercive measures against them, etc. ”
In forensic science, the initiation of a criminal case is understood as a process by which the beginning of the preliminary investigation is officially announced.
 The decision to initiate a criminal case creates conditions for conducting investigative-judicial actions envisaged by the Criminal Procedure Code, for protecting the rights and legal interests of individuals, as well as for restricting them.
2 See RA Court of Cassation, October 18, 2013, G. Decision EKD / ​​0044/11/13 on Ghondyan.
Due to the above, the criminal procedure legislation establishes a common, mandatory procedure necessary to resolve the issue of initiating a criminal case.
 … "At this stage, if the body conducting the proceedings obtains sufficient factual information indicating the characteristics of a crime through a preliminary verification of the report, as well as in the absence of procedural barriers excluding criminal proceedings, it is obliged to initiate a comprehensive and comprehensive investigation."
  Conversely, if, in the course of preparing the materials, evidence has been obtained that denies the existence of a crime, indicates the existence of actions arising from civil, administrative or other legal relations, such as procedural barriers excluding proceedings, the prosecuting authority must make a criminal decision. to reject the lawsuit ”3.
  However, the second paragraph of Article 27 of the Code, not excluding the possibility of the body conducting the criminal proceedings in case of discovery of facts of committing other crimes by the same person, stipulates: if it is possible to carry out the preliminary investigation of the case in full within the framework of the already initiated criminal case. ”
The legislator has set a mandatory precondition for the application of the above-mentioned article, that is, if it is possible to carry out the preliminary investigation of the case in full within the framework of the already initiated criminal case.
  That is, the legislator ruled out the possibility of not initiating a new criminal case in case of discovery of facts of committing other crimes by the same person during the preliminary investigation of the same criminal case, while within the framework of the already initiated criminal case it is not possible to carry out the case in full.
The provisions of the above article will, of course, apply only if the in personam limit of the proceedings is emphasized.
 Therefore, when the person who allegedly committed the crime is not known, the boundaries of the proceedings 3 See RA Court of Cassation, December 22, 2011, L. Decision EKD / ​​0136/11/11 on Poghosyan.
have not been determined by the in personam criterion, in case any new crime is discovered during the investigation of the case, the initiation of a criminal case is obligatory.
We believe that the starting point for initiating a new criminal case if the same person discovers the fact of committing another crime during the investigation of a criminal case should be whether the discovered fact has anything to do with the crime in connection with which a criminal case has already been initiated.
 In relation to that, we need to understand whether there is a connection between the detected crime case, the factual features of the initiated case, the legal significance, the objects or not.
  It is this logic that underlies the content of paragraph 2 of Article 27 of the Code, which, however, is not unequivocally perceived in law practice, giving rise to different interpretations.
The question arises how to find out whether the detected crime case is an independent crime or an integral part of the already initiated case.
 The mentioned problem, in our opinion, is directly related to certain complex crimes, the criminal law institute of crime multiplicity, in particular to the substitution of a combination of crimes.
  In the case of a real combination, when each act of a person is an independent crime, there is no connection between them, a separate decision on initiating a criminal case must be made on each fact, thus emphasizing the in rem limit of the proceedings.
  For example, when the investigation of a criminal case initiated on the fact of theft reveals the fact that the accused committed murder, a new decision should be made on the fact of initiating a criminal case, only if it is expedient to join the main case.
Our investigations are conditioned by the fact that the decision to initiate a criminal case limits the limits of the preliminary investigation within the framework of the fact on which it was initiated, ie the alleged investigation will be carried out within the framework of the alleged crime, and the prosecuting authority is obliged to conduct the investigation within those limits. .
 In case of discovery of another fact or episode of crime, which is not related to the main case, does not fit within its borders, therefore the logic of the second paragraph of Article 27 of the Code does not apply here, one of the final decisions provided for in Article 181 of the Code must be made, ie either to initiate a criminal case or to reject it.
 In other words, if the investigation of the case is carried out within the framework of the facts of theft, and the newly discovered crime case is beyond those facts, in order to conduct an investigation in that case it is necessary to initiate a new criminal case, which will be a judicial act emphasizing the limits of new investigations.
 The whole logic is that each case should be subject to a separate investigation, which starts with initiating a criminal case, ends with terminating the criminal case or passing a verdict, thus guaranteeing the observance of the principles of non bis in idem և res judicata.
 From this point of view, the decision of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation dated 18.07.2006 can be considered acceptable. N 343-O և 21.12.2006 Decisions 4 made by the decisions made N 533-O that it is inadmissible to involve a person as an accused in the framework of a criminal case for committing another crime without initiating a new criminal case and joining the "mother" case.
Our research, personal conversations with prosecutors և investigators show that the current practice in the prosecutor's office is very problematic, in our opinion, illegal.
The legal practice has been conducted in the direction that in case of revealing facts of committing other crimes by the same person during the preliminary investigation of the criminal case, a new criminal figure is initiated, և all cases are examined within the framework of one case.
 A contentious situation arises when the subject of the proceedings, discovering the circumstances excluding the proceedings of the original case, the case in connection with which the criminal case was initiated, the proceedings on other crimes are carried out within the borders of Jori, only decides to terminate the criminal prosecution without predetermining the outcome. to make a decision, that is, without terminating the criminal case.
  A situation arises when the factual and legal grounds for terminating the criminal case are fully available, but the body conducting the proceedings does not complete the proceedings, using it to investigate other crimes.
4 See Determination of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation from 18 July 2006, N 343-O and from 21 December 2006, N 533-O // SPS Consultant Plus, 2008.
Therefore, in the case of a de facto non-existent case, an investigation is carried out into other crimes.
 The question arises, to what extent are the actions of the body conducting the legal proceedings, to what extent is the evidence obtained in these conditions admissible?
 In addition, terminating the criminal prosecution against a person does not end the proceedings within the limits of the specific facts.
  The grounds for terminating the criminal proceedings are provided by Article 32 of the Code.
 Decisions on termination of criminal proceedings դ termination of criminal prosecution are decisions with different legal nature, content, purpose և, in particular, the decision to terminate the criminal case is a decision excluding further proceedings, while the decision to terminate criminal prosecution is made against a specific person, excluding that person. Prosecution of a particular case, not the proceedings in that case.
  It is appropriate to mention M. here. Ս. Strogovich մի's idea, according to the distinction between "initiate a criminal case" and "initiate a criminal prosecution", criminal prosecution is initiated against a specific person (in personam), and a criminal case is initiated in connection with a fact, a crime (in rem).
  Subsequently, the criminal case is terminated due to the fact (in rem), and the criminal prosecution is terminated against the person (in personam) 5.
 In fact, in this situation, the "fate" of the case (main case) initiated on a specific fact remains unknown, as it does not make a final judicial act, it does not directly guarantee the observance of the res judicata principle.
Otherwise, if after the termination of the criminal prosecution a decision is made to terminate the proceedings in the main case, an unjust situation will arise when a person is prosecuted in the absence of a criminal case, which contradicts the requirement of Article 33, Part 4 of the Code.
If we accept that in case of discovering a new crime during the preliminary investigation, there is no need to initiate a new criminal case, then the investigation of the newly discovered crime will be carried out within the framework of the previous case.
5 See Strogovich M. S., Rolling overview in the Soviet rolling process, Otv. OK. М. A significant "gross violation of criminal procedure norms" can be considered the cases when a person is prosecuted without the existence of a criminal case initiated with a relevant criminal law qualification.
According to Article 33 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, "/… / 4. Criminal prosecution can be carried out only in a criminal case."
According to Article 6 of the Code: “/… / 17) criminal prosecution - all the judicial actions carried out by the criminal prosecution bodies, and in the cases provided by this Code, the victim, with the aim of revealing the person who committed the act not allowed by the Criminal Code, his guilt in committing a crime; how to ensure the application of other means of punishment or coercion against such a person. "
The analysis of the above-mentioned norms shows that the evidentiary actions constituting the content of a criminal prosecution can be carried out only in a criminal case initiated with a relevant qualification, and if the criminal case has not been initiated or initiated on a completely different fact, the person cannot be prosecuted in connection with a newly discovered crime. as a consequence, it leads to the illegality of the actions taken.
 Due to that, one of the criteria for the admissibility of evidence is whether it was obtained within the framework of a criminal case, except for the evidence obtained as a result of investigative-judicial actions provided for in Part 2 of Article 180 of the Code.
The decision to initiate a criminal case with the appropriate qualification not only initiates the preliminary investigation of the case, but also delineates the boundaries of the proceedings, establishes the legal basis that allows restricting the rights and legal interests of individuals, and imposes coercion on them.
 In this regard, the RA Court of Cassation, referring to the conditions of detention as a measure of restraint in its decisions, noted, among well-founded suspicions, that the necessary condition for detention is the existence of a criminal case initiated with a corresponding criminal qualification6.
  We know from the case law cases when detention as a precautionary measure is 6 See RA Court of Cassation, February 24, 2011 No. EKD / ​​0678/06/10, April 18, 2013 No. EAKD / 0218/06/12 decisions.
The motion of the preliminary investigation body to dismiss the case was rejected by the court on the same grounds that there is no separation on initiating a criminal case with a corresponding qualification.
 In addition, we believe that it is unjustified in practice that the body conducting a criminal case initiated on a completely different fact, in case of finding another crime, begins to prosecute the person without deciding to initiate a criminal case, and later to exclude criminal prosecution. In case of appearing, it decides on the termination of the criminal prosecution.
 This practice directly contradicts the whole logic of the Criminal Procedure Code ում violates the boundaries of the proceedings.
 We consider that as long as there is no such court document, certain facts have not been given even a preliminary, but official assessment, no preliminary investigation can be carried out on that fact, moreover, decisions have been made that can be made only within the framework of the initiated criminal case.
  Here we would like to emphasize that the decision to terminate the criminal prosecution is a decision to be made exclusively on the initiated criminal case, and in case a criminal case is initiated on a specific fact, the in rem limit of the proceedings is not emphasized, it can not be investigated within personam. The criminal case initiated with the appropriate qualification, according to that fact, no criminal prosecution can be carried out against the person, therefore, it was terminated.
Unlike the real one, the ideal combination of crimes is not essential from the point of view of the pre-trial limits, the further change of the number of legal assessments given to the act does not change the in rem limit of the proceedings.
 Therefore, it is permissible to involve a person as a defendant in another article of the Criminal Code, in addition to the legal assessment of the fact, when initiating a case under the relevant article of the criminal law, without making a decision on initiating a criminal case with additional qualifications.
In forensic science it is rightly mentioned that the in rem judicial category is absolute in nature. it covers exclusively the external, incidental side of the crime; it is not related to the criminal assessment of the act.
In connection with the mentioned issue E. Ն. Jidkova considers that a remarkable correlation is taking place here between the "institutions of accusation" within the boundaries of pre-trial proceedings.
  The criminal characterization of an act, which is an inseparable element of the institution of prosecution, does not matter from the point of view of pre-trial proceedings. change (complete) the charge 7.
 The science of criminal law distinguishes the duplication of crimes as a type of multiplicity of crimes, which until 23.05.11 was enshrined in the RA Criminal Code.
 Under this institution, when a previous act lost its legal significance and was assessed as a whole with the new perpetrator, there was no need to initiate a new criminal case if a new crime was discovered, as there was a absorption of duplicate acts and a common quality.
In case of discovery of facts of committing other crimes by the same person during the preliminary investigation of the same criminal case, a new criminal case may not be initiated, if the crime committed is an ongoing crime, and the discovered case or episode is an integral part of it8.
  Each episode of an ongoing crime is an independent offense, but together they are considered a single crime, so if an official response has been given to one or more of these facts, in other words, if a criminal case has been filed against one or more of them, then In case of revealing other episodes, a new criminal case may be initiated, as the logic of paragraph 2 of Article 27 of the Code will apply, that it is possible to carry out the preliminary investigation of the case in full within the framework of the already initiated criminal case.
However, it should be noted that in practice there are many situations when it is difficult to distinguish between what is found and what is found in the crime. 7 For more details see Жидкова Е. I., Formation of the production process according to the part of the decision-making stages.
  Dissertations on the associate degree of the candidate юридических наук, М., 2007.
8 Ongoing crime - a set of more than one identical illegal act against the same object.
It raises the question of how to determine whether a new criminal case is an integral part of the crime in respect of which the "main" case has been instituted or whether a completely independent case should be instituted in connection with which a new case should be instituted.
In the professional literature in such cases, theorists suggest to be guided by the chronological-spatial description of the factual side of the decision to initiate a criminal case (which started the preliminary investigation of the main case), taking into account the generality of sex objects, the scope of victims, their demand for a separate trial. .
If these rules are not observed, then the boundaries of criminal proceedings are violated. Եւ The question arises as to what is the need to enshrine in the law the grounds for instituting criminal proceedings (Article 176), to stipulate that every piece of information must be instituted or rejected one of the decisions (Article 181), if the grounds for initiating an illegal case are not sufficient պետք the criminal case should be rejected (Article 185), the person has the right to appeal the decision to reject the criminal case (Article 185), may be joined քրեական separate criminal cases (Article 28), a new criminal case may be initiated on the materials of one criminal case (Article 184), etc.as it is possible to conduct an investigation into a criminal case initiated in another unrelated case, rather than instituting a criminal case in each individual case to identify features of the crime.
  The whole logic is that each case should be the subject of a separate investigation, which begins with the initiation of a criminal case and ends with the termination of the criminal proceedings or the verdict, thus guaranteeing the observance of the principles of non bis in idem և res judicata.
Let us now turn to the discussion of the issue of whether it is necessary to initiate a new criminal case when a new person who has committed a crime appears during the pre-trial investigation of the case.
We think that from the point of view of resolving this issue, the discovery of the essence բացահայտ content ույթի of the boundaries of the proceedings in personam անումը clarification of the issue whether the criminal case is initiated on the fact or against the person is of cornerstone importance.
Unlike the in rem boundaries of the proceedings, the in-person boundaries of the proceedings are relative, so any change in the course of the criminal case is assumed.
  Expansion of the inpersonam of the proceedings և narrowing occurs by initiating or terminating criminal prosecution against the "other" accomplice or relative.
 However, it should be noted that the extension of the in personam border of the proceedings without initiating a criminal case is possible only if the in rem border remains unchanged, the change is related to the first crime, and in the case when crimes appear during the preliminary investigation. , which by in rem և in personam criteria are beyond the scope of the main proceedings, then the investigator on newly emerged circumstances may be carried out within the limits of the initial preliminary investigation.
  In this case, a decision is made on the materials of the "mother" case to initiate a new case and separate it in a separate proceeding.
The RA Court of Cassation, by making the issue of whether a criminal case is initiated on the fact or by self-immolation, a subject of discussion, has established a stable legal practice that in the RA criminal trial a criminal case is initiated on the fact, institute of initiating a criminal case The Code of Procedure does not provide for the grounds that there is no mention of a person in the requirements for the decision to initiate a criminal case9.
From the above it can be concluded that the existence of a subject who has allegedly committed a crime is obligatory in order to initiate a criminal case, as the fact that the case contains features of the objective side of the object of the crime is of primary importance here.
 Therefore, the appearance of a person who has committed a new offense during the pre-trial proceedings is not a ground for initiating a new criminal case if he is involved in the proceedings as an accomplice or accomplice.
 However, in practice, there are many cases when the decision to initiate a criminal case mentions the name of a specific person who has committed an alleged crime, sometimes these statements have such an absolute content that there is no doubt that the person committed the crime and the question arises whether it is violated. 9 See the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia, G. Regarding Mikaelyan No. EADD / 0085/06/09, V. Decisions No. EKD / ​​0031/11/08 on Grigoryan, No. EKD / ​​0136/11/11 on L. Poghosyan.
The principle of the presumption of sin does not take the discussion of this issue beyond the scope of our study.
  The subject of our research here is the significance and impact of such a decision in terms of drawing the boundaries of pre-trial proceedings.
The Court of Cassation L. In the case of Poghosyan, he stated that in the case when the decision to initiate a criminal case contains such statements, after which it follows that the specific person has committed a criminal act, the decision under discussion is equal to the decision to charge the person in terms of legal consequences.
It is rightly mentioned in the professional literature that the initial delimitation of the boundaries of the pre-trial proceedings according to the criteria of "in rem" and "in personam" leads to a deadlock in the further proceedings if a new accomplice appears, moreover, each time a new criminal case is not initiated can be justified from the point of view of legal technique. It is illogical to have several proceedings in the case, as well as to guarantee the observance of the principles of non bis in idem և res judicata10.
It is difficult to agree with the opinion expressed in the theoretical literature that the emergence of a new suspect or accused in a criminal case against a particular person puts those persons in an unequal position, because the person against whom the case is initiated receives a prior knowledge of what The newcomer does not have such an opportunity to defend himself against suspicion or accusation, which jeopardizes the equality of all, the constitutional principle of the law "before the court" 11.
 It is proposed to make a decision on initiating a new criminal case against him in case of involving a new person in the proceedings in order to eliminate such inequality.
Some theorists believe that if the criminal proceedings are initially personified, և it turns out that the suspect in the crime has nothing to do with the case, then a joint decision should be made to terminate the criminal prosecution կարճ to terminate the criminal proceedings.
 He also expressed a similar position. Ghambaryan, who is 10 See Course of the lead process. In order. Л. В. Golovko, M., "Status", 2016, p. 96.
11 See Kalinovsky K. B., Do you always feel the excitement of a deceptive act during the reorganization or new persons // Российский насдовател№, 2009, № 6.
If the materials were prepared within the limits of one act committed by one person, it turned out that the suspect mentioned in the crime report was not relevant to the case, in this case a joint decision should be made to reject the initiation of a criminal case and not to prosecute12.
We can disagree with the theorists on the grounds that the decision to initiate a criminal case restricts the actions of the prosecuting authority in the rem և in personam proceedings by substantiating or refuting the commission of the crime by a specific person mentioned in that decision. If the circumstance is committed by that person, the joint decision on terminating the criminal prosecution and terminating the criminal case should be made.
 In the future, in case a new person is found, to whom the commission of that crime will be attributed, a new criminal case must be initiated, the investigation of the case must be carried out within new limits.
 It should be noted that the restrictions envisaged by the principle of inadmissibility of retrial are not applicable here, as its subject is to protect a specific person from criminal prosecution.
We believe that in order to avoid such problematic situations, the practice should, if possible, refuse to make decisions on initiating such a case, in which the name of a specific person will be indicated as a presumed crime.
We would also like to note that if there is a change of border in in rem, in case the border is narrowed by the in personam criterion, the subject having the right to initiate proceedings acquires the right to discuss initiating a criminal case or refusing to initiate a criminal case13.
Thus, concluding this work, we would like to emphasize that the existence of the boundaries of pre-trial criminal proceedings as an independent institution of criminal procedure is based on the ideology that any proceedings must be conducted in a certain manner. 12 See Ghambaryan A., Prosecution (accusation) in pre-trial proceedings. Yerevan, 2016, page 90.
13 For more details on this, see S. Marabyan, The Problems of Initiating a Criminal Case on the Cases of False Betrayal in the RA Criminal Proceedings, Proceedings of the Conference of the Faculty of YSU Faculty of Law, YSU; ch. Editor: G. Ս. Ghazinyan, Yerevan, YSU, 2017, pp. 464-504.
There can be no unlimited, initiating or carrying out proceedings, subjects can not have absolute authority, which will allow the latter, often abusing their powers, to violate the constitutional rights and freedoms of individuals.
  The observance of the boundaries of the pre-trial proceedings is a guarantee of action from the point of view of ensuring the basic principle of criminal procedural legality enshrined in Article 7 of the Code (which derives from the principle of constitutional legality enshrined in the RA Constitution).
Petik Mkrtchyan BORDERS OF PRE-TRIAL IN REM AND IN PERSONAM.
 SOME PROBLEMS Keywords: limits of pre-trial proceedings, in rem, in personam, decision on initiating a criminal case, initiate criminal prosecution
.
