THE RIGHT TO CLAIM AGAINST THE DEFENDANT: DRAFT NEW CODE OF DETERMINATION PROCEEDINGS The right of cross-examination of a defendant
  The RA Criminal Procedure Code is not a right of definition, at the same time it is enshrined in international legal acts ratified by the RA, such as the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the European Convention) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. (Article 14, point 3, sub-point e).
  The main content of this institute is as follows: "Everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right to be questioned by witnesses against him or to have the right to be questioned by witnesses, to have the right to call and interrogate witnesses who have testified in his favor under the same conditions as witnesses against him" (Article 6, 3). point-point, sub-point d).
The exercise of the right of the accused to cross-examination is called to ensure the effective implementation of such principles of criminal proceedings as the right to a fair trial, competition between the parties, and the right of the accused to defense.
  The connection of this institute with the principle of competition is especially obvious.
 As H. rightly states. H. According to Ghukasyan, according to the logic of the draft, the cornerstones of the competition model are set in several starting points, one of which is the inadmissibility of conviction only on the basis of the testimony of a person whose defendant or his defense counsel or representative did not have the opportunity to counteract.
  It is obvious that depriving the accused of the right to interrogate the person who gave his objection և trial stage 1 See H. Ghukasyan, The Ideology of Competition in the Draft of the New RA Criminal Procedure Code // Problems of the Draft RA Criminal Procedure Code, "RA Bar Association", Yerevan, 2014, pp. 69-70.
Only by publishing the testimony of an unannounced witness will the court perform the function of proving guilt, thus violating the principles of equality and competition between the parties.
In such a case, the court will be deprived of the opportunity to give an objective assessment of the circumstances of the case, to confirm their substantiation and proof, to eliminate the contradictions arising during the trial of the case, by not allowing the accused to present his / her position through a counter-inquiry.
And as a consequence, the realization of the principles of a fair trial and the impartiality of the court cannot be ensured in its entirety.
For the first time in the national legislation, this institution received its fixation at the level of the Constitution (6.12.2015) under the article entitled "The right to be protected from accusation". "Everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right to be interrogated, to have his interrogated, or to have his interrogated, to be interrogated under the same conditions as those who testified against him."
Making such an innovation in the Constitution already creates the need to make appropriate changes in the sectoral legislation.
  Accordingly, the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code contains several provisions related to the right of the accused to cross-examine.
 Thus Article 43 stipulates: "The accused has the right to cross-examine the persons who testified against him in accordance with the procedure established by this Code, or those persons to be cross-cross-examined, as if he were summoned and interrogated under the same conditions as the persons he opposed."
As we can see, the proposed regulation of the Code is presented by the institute in the form of a law, the draft does not directly oblige the investigative body to give the accused the opportunity to ask questions to the witness, unless the party mediates for it.
  At the same time, according to Article 22 7 7 of the Draft, the conviction of the accused may not be based solely or on the basis of such conduct on the basis of which the accused or his defense counsel or representative have not had the opportunity to cross-examine.
  It turns out that in the case when a significant sum of money was obtained for the solution of the case, but the right of the accused to counter-claim was not secured, a case situation arises. there is permissible և relevant evidence that cannot be used sufficiently to reach a judgment in the case.
 From this it can be concluded that this institution, being a right for the accused, is a duty of the investigative body, because, as we see, the realization of the right of counterclaim arises from the demand for a complete, comprehensive solution of the case.
The European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court) has repeatedly emphasized in its precedent decisions that the accused should be given the opportunity to ask questions of witnesses.
2 If the defendant's motion to cross-examine a witness is not binding, but at the same time well-founded, directly related to the charge, may strengthen the defense or even acquit the accused, the domestic authorities must present compelling arguments to reject the motion.
Another case established that the possibility of the accused confronting a potential witness in court is one of the basic elements of a fair trial4; if the accusation is based on the testimony of evacuees, it is necessary in any case to provide the accused with the opportunity to ask questions.
  If there are discrepancies between the testimony of the accused և the prosecution witness,, the investigator should then consider the possibility of a confrontation as a duty5.
Within the framework of this article, we consider it necessary to discuss the subject matter of the persons against whom the accused should be given the opportunity to make a counter-inquiry.
  Thus, in the text of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the terms "person who testifies" are used, in the Draft - the person "testified", and in the European Convention, the terms "one who testifies".
  The European Court in the case of Damir Sibgatulin v. Russia has stated that the term "witness" used in the text of the European Convention should be interpreted as an autonomous (autonomous) law.
In the case, the Ivanovo Regional Court considered, among other evidence, the allegations made by 10 witnesses, including Mr A., ​​an alleged accomplice to the crime, when the latter did not have the status of a witness.
  Neither the witnesses nor Mr. A. 2 See Melnikov v. Russian Federation, 14.01.2010, complaint N 23610/03, paragraphs 77-82.
3 See Topic v. Croatia 10.10.2013, complaint N 51355/10, point 42.
4 See Tarau v. Romania 24.05.2009, complaint N 3584/02, point 74.
5 See Andandonsky v. Russian Federation, 28 September 2006, application no. 24015/02, կետ 52.
They did not stand before a jury or a court.
 The European Court notes that their contribution to the pre-trial stage, being of significant importance, was formulated in writing, read in court and used as evidence against the accused6.
  In essence, the idea expressed in the case law of the European Court of Human Rights is that the term "witness" should be interpreted in the light of national law, based on the fact that one has testified against the accused.
 The European Court of Human Rights has ruled in a number of precedents that the notion of "witness in the sense" of the European Convention includes co-perpetrators7, specialists 8 and victims9.
  Trofimov v. Russia's domestic court found the perpetrators guilty of drug trafficking and relied on the testimony of one of the perpetrators, S., during the trial.
 In the case, in particular, it is mentioned that S was the only direct witness to the possession and sale of drugs, and the testimonies given by the other witnesses in the case were of an indirect nature.
  The regional court emphasized that the interrogation of the latter was crucial for the confirmation of guilt.
  In such circumstances, it is obvious that the testimonies given at the pre-trial stage have a special significance for finding the person guilty, despite the fact that the authorities did not confront him.
 As a result, the European Court has concluded that in such a case the co-executor, having regard to the objectives of the Convention, is considered a witness, and in that case exists between Article 6 3 3 (d) of the Convention.
The so-called confrontation right of the accused's counter-inquiry was also enshrined in the text of Article 6 of the US Constitution.
 In particular, it stipulates that in each criminal proceeding the accused must exercise the right to confront witnesses who testified against him10.
  However, in the case of Crawford v. Washington, this institute received a rather interesting commentary, և two key factors were singled out 11.6 See Damir Sibgatullin v. Russia, 28.05.2014, complaint N 1413/05, point 45.
7 See Case of Trofimov v. Russia, 02.03.2009, complaint N 1111/02, point 37.
8 See Case Of Doorson v. The Netherlands, 26.03.1996, complaint N 20524/92, point 72.
9 See Case of Vladimir Romanov v. Russia, 24.07.2008, complaint N 41461/02, point 97.
10 See Sixth Amendment to The United States Constitution, https.
//www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/sixth_amendment (as of 8.05.2016).
11 See Crawford v. Washington, 2004https.
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crawford_v._Washington (as of May 8, 2016).
A witness is a person who bears testimony aimed at establishing facts relevant to the case.
At the same time, there was a requirement for the testimony to be "testimonial" by presenting a private copy.
  Thus, the testimony is considered non-"testimonial" if it was made by the police during the interrogation in conditions that objectively prove that its main purpose is to provide as much assistance as possible to the police in resolving an urgent matter.
 It will be considered "testimony" in the absence of urgent, extraordinary circumstances; the main goal is to confirm the facts and events that are important for the investigation.
From this it can be concluded that, in fact, autonomous interpretation is also used in the United States, և the main criterion is the possession of information on the circumstances relevant to the case, regardless of the judicial status.
 However, if the institution is presented as a right by the convention, it is defined as an obligation by the American Constitution.
 Due to that, the classification of evidences is indicative և non-indicative.
  An example of a demonstrative is the situation when a testimony is taken to clarify what was previously given, in which case there is no obligation to conduct a counterclaim.
 That is, the similar classification is aimed at emphasizing the need to realize the institute in relation to the testimonies that are essential for the case.
 By fixing the institution as a right, certain risks may arise in the event that the relevant mediation is not satisfied.
 It is true that in such a case there is also the possibility of an appeal, but we believe that the demand for maximum protection of the rights of the accused stems from the obligation to consider the right of cross-examination as an obligation.
In the context of a fair trial, in particular in the context of the right to a fair trial, the European Court of Human Rights has nevertheless established certain conditions for the lawful restriction of that right.
  In general, the European Court's position is that, in accordance with Article 6 3 3 (d) of the European Convention, all evidence against him must be considered in open court before convicting the accused in order to ensure that the principle of competition is exercised.
 At the same time, according to the case law of the European Court, exceptions to this principle are possible if it does not infringe the right of defense, which requires the accused to be given a sufficient "sufficient opportunity to object to the testimony of a witness;
  The following requirements have been separated to ensure the above-mentioned principle: firstly, a good reason for not appearing necessary; secondly, if the accusation is based solely or mainly on the testimony of a person whom the accused has not been able to interrogate in any way during the pre-trial investigation or trial, the rights of the defense are more restricted than permitted by Article 6.
The question of whether there is a good reason for a witness not to appear should be considered before finding out whether such evidence is the only or decisive one.
 If the witness himself does not appear to testify, it is obligatory to find out the grounds for his absence13.
The above-mentioned positions expressed in the case law were reaffirmed by the European Court in the framework of the "Gabrielyan v. Armenia" case, noting that the absence of a witness from the country is still not a valid reason and a sufficient reason to justify not questioning that witness.
  In the absence of a witness from the country where the proceedings are taking place, this in itself is not sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Article 6 3 3 (d), which requires Contracting States to take positive steps by allowing the accused to be questioned by witnesses against him.
 Such measures shall form part of the obligations to be fulfilled by the Contracting States which shall guarantee the effective exercise of the rights set forth in article 614.
The Court of Cassation has repeatedly stressed within the framework of the above-mentioned judgment of the European Court in the case of Artak Gabrielyan v. Armenia, initiated as a new circumstance, that: "(,,,) if at any stage of the trial the accused is not given the opportunity to ask questions to the witness who testified against him, 12 See Hummer v. Germany, 19.07.2012, complaint N 26171/07, point 38.
13 See Al-Khawaja and Tahery v. the United Kingdom, 15.12.2011, complaint N 26766/05 and22228 / 06, point 120.
14 See "Gabrielyan v. Armenia", 10.07.2012, complaint N 8088/05, points 78, 8184.
then he is deprived of the right to a fair trial.
  (J) In order to use such evidence, two requirements must be met, namely: (a) there must be a good reason for not appearing as a witness; (b) the conviction of the person must not be based in whole or in part on such evidence.
In other words, making the testimony of a witness who is not entitled to a cross-examination as a basis for a guilty verdict will not lead to a violation of the right to a fair trial if the absence of the witness was justified և if that evidence did not have a decisive weight in the evidence.
 Moreover, in order to use such evidence, the court is obliged to present appropriate reasons.
 The European Court has emphasized that even when the testimony of an absent witness is not the only or conclusive evidence, failure to provide a good reason for not questioning a witness leads to a violation of the right to a fair trial. ”15
From this we can conclude that the question of whether the non-appearance of a witness is respectable or not is a positive obligation on the state, moreover, simply recording, as in the previous judgment, that the witness is currently absent from the country is not uniform. can be interpreted as a valid excuse not to question a witness.
Situations may arise where the exercise of the right of cross-examination is not possible with the involvement of a witness; օգտագործման there is a need to use evidence obtained during the investigation, such as the death of a witness, or if he or she exercises the right to remain silent; to bring the person, they did not bring results.
 The European Court has held that, given the fact that the absence of a witness may adversely affect the right to a defense, if not examined at any of the previous stages of the trial, the use of witness testimony should be used as an extreme measure instead of direct testimony16.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the Draft directly envisages testimonies as well as appendices attached to it (pictures, drawings, schemes, photos, recordings, videos, pictures. 15 See RA Court of Cassation, Criminal Case No. VB-04/13, 13.09.2013 year
16 See Al-Khawaja and Tahery v. the United Kingdom, 15.12.2011, complaint N 26766/05 and22228 / 06, item 125.
Possibility of publishing videos during the trial in the following cases: • The testimony of a person in pre-trial proceedings has been deposited in accordance with the requirements of this Code: • There is a significant discrepancy between the person's "previous testimony" in court. • Exercising his constitutional right, the accused legally refused to testify in court. • the person has died և the need to deposit the testimony of the person on the grounds of serious illness in the pre-trial proceedings was reasonably absent.
Of particular interest is the institution of judicial deposition of testimonies. According to Article 312 of the draft, “judicial deposition of testimonies is carried out: 1) in order to ensure the credibility of the accused's confession, through the mediation of the investigator; 2) in case of a reasonable presumption of not being able to appear at the trial, in order to obtain credible testimony from any person, through the mediation of a private participant of the investigator's will. "
  We can deduce from this that the introduction of such an institution greatly contributes to the realization of the right of counter-inquiry.
Thus, we can conclude that the introduction of the right of counterclaim of the accused in the national legislation is quite a progressive step, which will contribute to the effective implementation of the right to a fair trial.
Luiza Meliksetyan THE RIGHT TO CLAIM AGAINST THE ACCUSED ACCORDING TO THE DRAFT NEW CRIMINAL CODE Keywords: right of cross-examination, competition, prosecution, testimony, conviction
