THE IMPACT OF THE DIASPORA ON THE TOURISM DEVELOPMENT OF RA Tourism is a dynamically developing sphere, which is constantly changing, enriched with new elements.
 Tourism is constantly evolving, և the tourism sector of each country must develop in time.
 It is also a developing sector for Armenia, where tourism has been declared a priority sector of the economy.
 The goals of the state policy aimed at the development of the sphere of tourism in the Republic of Armenia are defined in the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Tourism". In the Concept of Tourism Development approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia on February 13.
  According to the document, the aim of the state policy in the field of tourism is to increase the contribution of tourism in the process of increasing national income, balanced territorial development, raising the living standards of the population, reducing poverty due to increasing tourist visits, increasing tourism income and creating jobs.
  In recent years, the Republic of Armenia has announced a policy of sustainable economic development with significant improvements in a number of economic indicators [2, p. 25].
At present, tourism և hospitality industry is one of the investment sectors in many countries of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
  Tourism accounts for 8% of world GDP.
  Although the tourism and hospitality industry in Armenia is still one of the non-leading sectors of the country's economy in terms of GDP, it should be noted that they are one of the developing, promising, dynamic sectors of the Armenian economy.
According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, the direct investment of tourism in the GDP of the Armenian economy in 2012 amounted to 87.4 billion drams or 2.1% of the total GDP, այս it is predicted that this index in 2013-2023. will grow to 110.2 billion drams in 2023.
 Total contribution of tourism to GDP, including economic impact, 2012 amounted to 336.9 billion drams or 8.2% of GDP, այս it is predicted that this index in 2023 will make 444.8 billion drams.
  Travel և Tourism directly provided 22,000 jobs in 2012, or 1.9% of total jobs, but this figure is projected to decline in 2023. accounting for 19,000 jobs or 1.5% of total jobs.
  2012 year. The total investment of tourism in the labor market, including the jobs indirectly provided by the industry, has made 7.3% of the total jobs or 87,000 jobs,, this indicator is predicted to decrease by 2023. making 6.0% or 76,000 jobs.
  Introduction of tourism in 2012 amounted to 29.6 billion drams or 2.7% of total investments, այն it is projected to increase to 43.3 billion drams or 2.1% of total investments in 2023 [6, p. 1].
Tourism is developing in Armenia, there is an increase in inbound tourism flows.
  Inbound tourism in Armenia is characterized by a steady annual increase in the number of tourist visits.
  Over the past decades, the number of incoming tourists in Armenia has grown by a maximum of about 15-20% annually.
  For example, in 2010 The number of tourists was 683,979, which is approximately 20-25% of the country's population, in 2001-2010. The average annual increase in the number of inbound tourism visits was 24.3% [4, p. 95].
2013 The number of incoming tourist visits to Armenia has exceeded one million.
 This proves that the interest in Armenia as a tourist country is increasing year by year. 1,084,188 tourists arrived in Armenia, 12.6% more than in 2012.
  This trend is observed in 2014. In January-June, 495,967 tourists arrived.
 2013 The index increased by 17.3% compared to the same period last year [5].
Incoming tourists arrive from the CIS countries, the United States, Iran.
  According to hotel reports, in 2013 27.8% of tourists visiting Armenia in January-December fell to the CIS countries, 36.3% to the EU countries and 35.9% to other countries (see Table 1) [4, page 97].
Table 1. The structure of geographical distribution of tourists visiting Armenia and growth rates in 2012-2013. January-December [4, p. 97] Specific weight (%) of tourists 2012 January 2013 January - December - December growth rate (%) Total, including CIS countries - Ukraine - Russia - Other CIS countries - EU countries - France - France - Germany - United Kingdom - Other countries - United States - It coincides with the regions where there are a large number of Armenian communities.
The Armenian Diaspora is one of the factors contributing to the development of Armenia's tourism sector.
  The visits of Diaspora Armenian tourists to Armenia make up 62% of the total tourist visits, and the average length of the visit is 25 days [2, page 42, point 4.1].
 This is a rather high index in the share of total visits, which supposes the peculiarity of the routes, the choice of the place of residence, the indicators of the length of stay in Armenia.
 The general picture of tourist visits, in this respect, makes the tourist offer diverse, choosing on the one hand a target group of Diaspora Armenian tourists, on the other hand, tourists of different foreign preferences.
 Diaspora Armenian tourists should be provided with a more vivid presentation of Armenia, the Armenian environment, every hour spent in the homeland, every day should contain a whole chain of memories, at the same time high quality of service, respectful attitude without deception.
The main goals of the visit to Armenia are to visit relatives `65.6%, for business purposes - about 7.4%, for leisure - 6.8%.
  Moreover, the visits are quite frequent.
  66.2% of Diaspora Armenian tourists made four or more visits, և only 8.3% visited for the first time [2, page 13, points 5.3, 5.4].
 From this we can assume that this index will remain high for many years to come.
 This is the factual indicator. 98.8% of Diaspora Armenian tourists want to visit again և suggest their friends և relatives to visit Armenia [2, page 13, point 8].
67.3% of tourists prefer to receive information about Armenia from friends and relatives, 31.4% from previous visits.
 Only 2.8% use the Internet as a source of travel packages and services [2, p. 13, paragraphs 5, 6].
As a place of residence, Diaspora Armenian tourists choose friends և relatives - 79.9%, և only 9.8% choose hotel facilities as a place of residence [2, page 13, point 7].
 This is due to the fact that the prices of services provided in hotel facilities are not affordable, especially for long-term tourists.
Each Diaspora Armenian tourist in Armenia spends an average of $ 27.9 per day or $ 678.7 per visit [2, page 13, item 5.9].
A special part of the Diaspora Armenian tourists visiting Armenia is made up of American-Armenians who, despite the great distance, visit Armenia, moreover, this presupposes a long visit.
  52% of American-Armenians say they are very interested in Wanting to visit or revisit Armenia, and 48% of American-Armenians who have never been to Armenia are eager to visit in the coming years [2, p. 13, point 11] .
 Thus, it can be concluded that the share of Diaspora Armenians in their visits to Armenia acquires a stable nature, as there are tourists who visit, are going to visit again, there are tourists who have not yet visited, want to visit.
  Maybe they will also become visitors again, if the quality of the services corresponds to the prices, they will not be the target of scams, they will not be disappointed.
82% of American-Armenians visited Armenia in April-September, ժամանակ during further visits they want to visit famous places of interest - 86%, monuments and churches - 83%, և get acquainted with music, literature and dance - 79% [2, p. 13, paragraphs 13, 15].
 Thus, after all this, American-Armenians mainly prefer cognitive-ethnic tourism.
  The development of ethnic tourism is connected with visiting the birthplace, relatives and friends.
  This can be characterized by the nostalgic subtype of ethnic tourism.
Only 28% of American-Armenians believe that Armenia is properly represented in the international tourism market as a tourist destination [2, p. 13, point 16]. This indicator once again shows the need for a competent marketing policy in Armenia.
 89% of Diaspora Armenian tourists visiting Armenia have a high opinion of Armenia as a tourist destination [2, p. 14, points 17, 18].
 45% of American-Armenians stated that they would probably use the services of a US or Armenian tour operator, and the remaining 55% would arrange their own trip or turn to their relatives and friends in Armenia [2, p. 14, point 19] This indicator reflects the peculiarity of Diaspora Armenian tourists. from the point of view of organizing visits [1].
In this respect, the following event is significant. USAID's Competitive Private Sector Program Հայաստանի The Competitiveness Foundation of Armenia has launched the first event in the "Promoting Tourism among US Diaspora Armenians" pilot program, the visit of Diaspora Armenian journalists from the United States to Armenia to increase interest in Armenia among Diaspora Armenians, especially those who have not yet visited Armenia.
 This promotion project is based on the methodology developed by Armenia's Competitive Tourism Private Sector Program, which is based on cost-effective methods to ensure the flow of targeted visitors to Armenia in the target markets.
 One of the main tools of this method is an active advertising-propaganda, media campaign through the media enjoying the prestige of the target country.
 Therefore, the program started with the visit of the media representatives of the Armenian-populated states of the United States, giving them the opportunity to personally see Armenia, get acquainted with the country's tourism opportunities and share their impressions with objective journalistic experience.
  Thus, in 2010 In December 2007, 7 journalists from The Armenian Reporter, Asbarez, Armenian Weekly, IanYan Magazine, and a film crew from KSEE Channel-24 NBC visited Armenia. Upon their return to the United States, they immediately began covering the Armenian tour and regularly presented the information to their audience. [3] .
Based on the above-mentioned indicators, the description of the peculiarities of Diaspora Armenian tourists, the studies of the "Tourism Development Concept", we will have the following perspective picture in terms of Diaspora Armenian tourists.
  Until 2030 The number of Diaspora Armenian tourists will increase year by year, reaching 1.5 million a year, and their share in the total number of tourists will decrease to 50%, which will happen through the strengthening of advertising in non-Diaspora Armenian markets, due to the increase in the number of visitors to Armenia.
 Due to targeted advertising in Diaspora Armenian communities, the share of Diaspora Armenians visiting Armenia for the first time in the total number of Diaspora Armenian tourists will increase by 20% by 2020.
  (p. 42, point 4.2) It is predicted that in the future, first-time visitors to Armenia will be more likely to stay in hotels than regular visitors to Armenia, and consequently will spend more money during their visit.
 In order to work with this unique market, it is necessary to apply a special advertising policy [2, page 42].
Thus, it can be concluded from all this that: • Many changes are still expected in the future; it is necessary to keep in the center of the study the tourists who have a high rate of such visits to the Republic of Armenia.
• It is possible that the total number of Diaspora Armenian tourists visiting Armenia will decrease slightly, but it will remain high and stable for many years to come, especially with the continuous development of the nostalgic subspecies of business and ethnic tourism.
• It is necessary to use the money spent by them in a targeted way, as well as to develop tourism by attracting investments and the corresponding auxiliary infrastructure network.
• High quality of organizational and service should be ensured in 2015. In connection with the events dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide, as more than one and a half million visits are expected.
Literature 1. USAID Competitive Private Sector Program in Armenia, US-Armenia Study.
2. Tourism Development Concept, Yerevan, 2008.
3. "Competitive private sector in Armenia" program, available at http.
//www.caps.am/page.php?page_id=218.
4. NSS RA, socio-economic situation of RA in 2013 January-April, Yerevan, 2013.
5. Official website of the RA Ministry of Economy, available at http: // www.
//mineconomy.am/arm/39/gortsaruyt.html.
Hayarpi Shahinyan DIASPORA'S IMPACT ON TOURISM DEVELOPMENT Keywords: tourism, Tourism Development Concept
.
