SHUSHI LIBERATION REACTIONS IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS 1985 In April 1945, Mikhail Gorbachev, Secretary General of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, announced a policy of reconstruction that allowed the small peoples of the Soviet Empire, including Armenians, to speak on national issues.
  Karabakh became the "Reconstruction Exam" or "Reconstruction touchstone", paving the way for the new and decisive stage of the Karabakh struggle.
 Many forbidden issues became the subject of public discussion և public activism1.
 This was, first of all, the problem of Nagorno Karabakh for Armenia.
1988 The latest period in the history of the Armenian press began in February. It was in those days that the popular movement was born, which was marked in 1988. By the historic decision adopted by the special session of the NKAO Regional Council on February 20.
 It opened a new and powerful cycle for the Armenian press, journalists and publicists.
The struggle going on in the constitutional way was to turn into a military operation after a while, and then it would become the Artsakh War.
  Armed attacks, massacre and forced deportation of the Armenian population, curfew, small victories and irreversible losses.
  Other rallies, demonstrations, strikes were powerless to change anything.
 Instead, the Azerbaijani side responded to all this with the Sumgait genocide, with large-scale attacks from different directions in Askeran, Shahumyan, Martakert, Martuni, and Hadrut regions2.
More detailed information about the armed struggle is provided by historical sources. The Armenian press of that period was mostly in the role of a recorder.
 The liberation or retreat of another village by volunteer detachments was covered in the press mainly in the form of messages.
1991 The rockets fired by the Azeris from Shushi (since November 8, 1992, about 15,000 projectiles and rockets) were destroying the NKR capital Stepanakert since November 2010.
  The liberation of Shushi became an issue.
  The preparations were completed, everything was planned to be done in April, but it was postponed several times due to weather conditions and a number of other factors.
  The engineering service of the Azerbaijani military group in Shushi was rather weak.
  The enemy was convinced that he should capture Stepanakert, he did not pay serious attention to the mining3.
1 Mkrtichyan A., The Birth of the Karabakh Movement և Press, "Akunq", 2011 3, page 79.
2 See http.
//www.nkr.am/en/decision--of the-special-of the-nkao-council-of-peoples-secret-of-xx-session / 41 /.
3 "Our victories", vol. D, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 294-295.
1992 on the night of May 8 at 8 p.m.
On the 23rd, the order to attack was given, about 2000 fighters started the attack on the fortress city from four directions.
  The operation to liberate Shushi was called "Wedding in the mountains".
  On the morning of May 9, Shushi was liberated.
 The news was first reported by the ARF official newspaper "Yerkir" in its May 9 issue, writing: "Luys 9 at 2 o'clock.
According to 30 data, the city has been liberated. "
  The correspondent of the newspaper got in touch with the acting chairman of the NKR Supreme Council Georgi Petrosyan and Vazgen Manukyan of the RA Ministry of Defense at midnight to find out the details, to write down the words of several fighters who liberated the city.
  In the following issues, the newspaper touched upon the details of the liberation, presented a schematic map of the liberation operation in Shushi, and published photos from the heights of the fortress city (with the caption "It was impossible to photograph the NKR capital from here for several years").
  The official newspaper of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia, "Republic of Armenia", published the news of the victory in an insignificant, unattractive place.
In those days, the message of "Armenpress" appeared next to the visit details of the official delegation of Armenia to Tehran, according to which "Self-defense forces entered Shushi".
 Only a few days later, information appeared on the 3rd page of the newspaper that "after the complete capture of Shushi, the city is controlled." The readers of the newspaper did not have the opportunity to get acquainted with the details of the liberation.
The article titled "Victory Bells" published in "Azdarar" newspaper was a completely patriotic call, an exhortation to the generations. "Shushi, Shusha, Shosh, Shushva Berd… .. All the newspapers and magazines of the world, all the indiscriminate stations of radio and television talk about Shushi these days.
For some it is a betrayal (Azerbaijanis), for some J. Shushi is liberated, Shushi is Armenian, Shushi is finally breathing Armenian, it can no longer be a fratricide, this is the truth.
  Shushi is liberated, Shushi is ours.
  This is the biggest "reason".
  The other nineteen should just laugh… »1.
In another issue of "Azdarar" daily, the heroes of our nation and their heroism were praised. "Finally, Shushi became the property of the Armenians again; it should have been like that, because what belongs to us could not be someone else's."
"Hayk" daily announced a few days later. "Both the losses of Armenians and Azeris were less than expected. Apparently, Azerbaijan was psychologically ready for the fall of Shushi."
Azerbaijan could not tolerate the idea of ​​handing over Shushi և continued persecution of Armenians.
 For several days, the enemy launched strong attacks on Artsakh և the vulnerable points of the Republic of Armenia էր they had to resist again.
  Under the strong attacks of the Armenian freedom fighters, the Azerbaijani military units left the nearby military bases in Shushi, which were overflowing with various types of ammunition.
 They mined the arsenals and the nearby roads.
  This intrigue of the enemy became the cause of new innocent victims3.
  "Hayk" in the following issues referred to the events taking place in those days, presenting their course in detail.
1 "Azdarar", 1992, N 1-26, 15.V-30.XII, Closed: May 23, 22-28, No. 2, "Rings of Victory".
2 "Azdarar", 1992, N 1-26, 15.V-30.XII, Closed: May 23, 6-12, page 1, "Shushi has been liberated".
3 "Hayk", 1992, N 1-25, 15.I- 24.VI, May 13-19, "Situation in Artsakh ներում in the border regions of Armenia".
The Azerbaijani side was accusing the NKR authorities of allegedly using chemical weapons during the shelling of Shushi.
  This was followed by the "reliable" footage from Shushi shown by the Russian television program "Vesti".
 Some of the remnants of the exploded shells were emitting particles that were supposedly highly toxic chemicals.
  The NKR leadership categorically denied that accusation and expressed regret over the distortion of facts on Russian television.
 At the same time, the NKR leadership demanded the invitation of independent experts from neutral states to Shushi to deny the propaganda provocation.
 As expected, there was no answer 1.
The liberation of Shushi had a turning point in military-political and psychological terms.
  Due to this victory, Berdzor was liberated, which allowed to restore the land connection with Armenia, thus uniting the two Armenian states.
  The threats against Stepanakert, Karintak and Shosh villages were eliminated2.
"Azdarar" and "Yerkir" periodicals published articles not only about the victory and the current situation, but also about the freedom fighters' words after the victory. "We entered Shushi when the enemy had already destroyed the main firing points.
  All we have to do is neutralize and persecute the last Turk.
  As soon as we entered the city at 4 o'clock, we lit fires. Ում They learned in Stepanakert that Shushi is in our hands.
  The atrocities of the enemy that live in my memory awaken in my soul the feeling of revenge.
  With this conviction, today my brother, my nephew, dozens of friends from Artsakh and Armenia have joined me ”(Ruben Ohanyan, commander of the 1st detachment of the patrol platoon).
"Like everyone, I participated in the capture of Shushi with inner fear.
  See how our Artsakh boys fought, who have never killed an ant in their whole life.
 A boy named Vrezh was with us, with a small body, several times smaller than me.
 But he was better than me in fighting.
 I was simply amazed at his boundless courage and physical strength.
 It was as if he was a soldier by birth. ”3
The first foreign reactions to the events in Shushi were not particularly noisy.
  On May 9, Sergei Dorenko, a commentator on Moscow's Novosti program, first expressed some disappointment with the Armenians, who claimed that the 366th Regiment would be massacred as soon as it was removed from Artsakh.
  Then he said with hesitation that either the so-called Azerbaijani army are weak and unorganized detachments that handed over "inaccessible Shushi", or the Armenian armed groups are a well-organized Strong Army.
After the liberation of Shushi, the hostilities turned into a border war between NKR and Azerbaijan, and the de facto independence of NKR became irreversible.
 The first stage of the struggle for NKR independence ended with the victory of Shushi and the opening of the Lachin corridor.
 From the point of view of covering the Karabakh issue, a new stage was outlined for the Armenian press as well.
1 "Hayk", 1992, N 1-25, 15.I- 24.VI, May 6-12, "The Armenian side denies".
2 "Our Victories", Volume D, pp. 299-300.
3 "Azdarar", 1992, N 1-26, 15.V-30.XII, Closed: 23, May 22, "Freedom fighters tell".
Meline Hovhannisyan RESPONSIBILITIES OF SHUSHI LIBERATION IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS Keywords: Shushi liberation, Armenian press, "Hayk", "Azg", "Azdarar", "Yerkir", "Hayastani Hanrapetutyun" periodicals, coverage of events. May 9, defense operations, national movement, rallies, volunteer detachments, foreign press.
