THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ARMENIAN PATRIARCHATE IN KOSTANDNOPOLS AND THE LEGISLATIVE AND POLITICAL PRECONDITIONS The Armenians have lived in Constantinople since the first days of the formation of the Byzantine Empire.
 They were quite active in all spheres of public life, especially science, art, culture, economy, etc.
 Armenian-Byzantine scientific-cultural ties developed especially in the 5th century, after the creation of Armenian letters by Mesrop Mashtots.
 They were equally used both in Armenia and among the Armenian population living in Byzantium.
 According to Koryun, after opening schools in Armenia, Mashtots left for Constantinople and established Armenian schools.
 During that period, Armenians got acquainted with and made translations of the works of ancient Armenian intellectuals, which were found in the Byzantine Empire.
The first Armenians who settled in Constantinople were mainly military men, architects, merchants, and young people who came to study.
 It is known that even in 572 A separate Armenian-religious community was established in Constantinople, and already in the 9-11th centuries. Armenian emperors (Macedonian or Armenian dynasty) ruled the Byzantine throne.
 Thanks to these Armenian emperors, this period is considered one of the most brilliant pages in the history of the Byzantine Empire.
 We can say that Byzantium survived thanks to the Armenians.
Over time, Constantinople developed considerably, դ the role of the great Armenians in this matter.
 On this occasion, it was appropriate to quote N. In the words of Adonts: "Armenians are a river, the waters of which irrigate not only their native land and desert, but also send strong waves to the ocean of general civilization." [1]
Of course, the Byzantines could not like all this և they often put pressure on the Armenians.
 They were mainly of a religious nature, everything possible was done to make the local Armenians Greek.
 Although Catholicos Grigor Apirat sent Nerses Lambronatsi to Constantinople to rectify the situation, nevertheless, a large number of Armenians had already become Greeks, and some of them had left Constantinople.
The pressures continued in the following years as well, however, this circumstance was not an obstacle for the Armenians who developed Constantinople [2].
  They continued to take an active part in all spheres of city life, even in 1453. After the conquest of Constantinople by Sultan Mehmet Fatih.
 It is noteworthy that right here in 1567. Through the efforts of Abgar Tokhatetsi, the first Armenian printing house was established.
 A large number of Armenians also lived on the other side of Constantinople, Galatia (Galata), which was under Genoese rule until the conquest of Constantinople by Mehmet Fatih.
 There was a large Armenian population in the Crimean town of Kefa (Kafa).
 Over time, especially from the above-mentioned regions, many Armenians migrated to Constantinople.
 They united around the Armenian churches, created places of worship.
  History has shown that the Armenian Church always plays a unifying role in all the places of the world where there is an Armenian population.
 This circumstance proves that even before the establishment of the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Armenians had a special center in Constantinople - the Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Church [2].
Before Emperor Alexis I (1081-1118), the Armenians and Assyrians had only one church in Constantinople.
 The oldest local Armenian church is St. Galatia. It is St. Gregory the Illuminator Church.
 It was built in 1391. The Catholic Armenians of Cafe even before the conquest of Constantinople, when Galatia was in the hands of the Genoese.
 Thus, we can investigate that Catholic Armenians lived in these regions, but they did not make up a large number.
 It is known that back in the 10th century, Catholicos Khachik Arsharun tried to establish a bishopric in the Byzantine Empire to free the local Armenians from the oppression of the Greek Orthodox Church.
 Only after long efforts is it possible to establish an episcopal see.
 It actually fulfilled its duty and was able to unite the Armenian people under its auspices.
Before the establishment of the patriarchate, many bishops were mentioned in Constantinople, whose activities undoubtedly played a great role not only in the life of Constantinople, but also in the life of the entire Armenian population of the Byzantine Empire.
Gradually, the Armenian bishops began to participate in various church meetings.
 For example, in 1307 26 Armenian bishops participated in the church meeting in Ssi on March 19. They represented the interests of the local Armenian population at those meetings.
 1403 Archbishop Zakaria is mentioned as the leader of the Episcopate of Constantinople.
 He, according to his merits, fulfills the obligations imposed on him.
 1433 Catholicos Constantine V Vahkatsi (1430-1439) appointed Bishop Hovhannes leader of the Armenians of Constantinople.
  However, according to some sources, during this period, Bishop Hovhannes, who was under the patronage of the Armenians who settled in Thrace, Greece and Constantinople, is mentioned as Bishop Isa, who was given only the leadership of the Armenians of Constantinople.
 It is known that both of them carried out pro-Armenian activities.
About 15 years before the conquest of Constantinople, no other bishop is mentioned.
 Instead, two Armenian monks are known to history: Abraham Ankyuratsi and Arakel Baghishetsi.
 In his poem "Lament for the Reconstruction of Constantinople", Abraham Ankyuratsi presented the catastrophic days of the capture of Constantinople through the eyes of an eyewitness, described the sufferings of all Christians, including Armenians, and how cruelly the Turks treated them.
 The same topic was addressed by the contemporary Arakel Baghishetsi in his two poems "Lament for the Capital of Istanbul".
Only long after the conquest of Constantinople, in 1459-1461. Bishop Martiros is mentioned, and in another source, in 1458. Bishop Grigor is mentioned as the leader of the Armenian community in Sulu-Manastir.
Before the establishment of the Armenian Patriarchate in Constantinople, the Catholicosates of Akhtamar, Ss and the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem were established next to the Catholicosate of Etchmiadzin.
As these Armenian religious centers were outside the Ottoman Empire at the time of Mehmet Fatih's conquest of Istanbul, Mehmet decided to establish an Armenian religious center in Constantinople, the Patriarchate.
  And it was only after the conquests of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent that all the above-mentioned centers, including the newly established Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople, came under the yoke of the Ottoman Empire.
1453 Mehmet Fatih Sultan conquers Constantinople.
 Many Armenians also took part in the defense of the latter.
 After the conquest, the Turks massacred most of the local Christian population, and the city was subjected to cruelty and looting.
  However, Fatih soon began rebuilding the city and relocating the inhabitants of different parts of the empire.
  The sultan had a special attitude towards the rich Christians և, using their means, he wanted to give a new breath to the city.
After the conquest of Istanbul, Sultan Fatih Sultan was interested in settling the Armenians in Constantinople, as this would create a new Armenian Christian community that would oppress the Greeks.
 15th-century Turkish historian Ashikpazazade notes that the viziers of the Fethiye period, especially Mustafa Pasha, established schools and other institutions for Armenians.
 Thus, the Armenians began to develop Constantinople, and gradually the Armenian colony of Constantinople was started.
 The first Armenians to emigrate to Constantinople were mainly from Prussia (Bursa) and Edirne, and some from Ankara.
  According to 17th century Turkish traveler Evliya Çelebi, Armenians who migrated from Evdokia to Sebastia settled in Sulu Monastery.
 The latter began to unite around the Armenian churches.
Shortly afterwards, six Armenian districts (altıcemaat) were formed in Constantinople.
 Later, the Armenians were scattered all over Constantinople, but the core continued to be the "alt's community".
 Soon that name began to symbolize all Armenians in general.
 In addition to "alt jamaat", the term "Okht odallar" was also used, which originally meant seven apartments where Armenians lived.
 However, over time, their number gradually increased.
 Along with the new flows of emigration to Constantinople, the number of emigrants gradually increased, where Muslims, Jews, Greeks, Serbs and Albanians lived.
  It is not possible to accurately present their borders, as they are not always Armenian districts.
 In time, Turks began to settle in these Armenian airfields.
Later, when the number of Armenians gradually increased in Constantinople, and for a long time the Armenians living there began to move to other regions, the above-mentioned term began to symbolize the native Armenians of Constantinople, they were called "Odalartsi" [3].
Mehmet Fatih Sultan accepted the Armenians as friends, was kind to them, and the vivid proof of that was the fact that a short time later an Armenian patriarchate was established in Constantinople.
  However, the question was whether this was in fact a kindness or a step taken for mercenary reasons.
 However, even if it was not an exceptional kindness, we can still note that Fatih had taken a tolerant position towards his Christian subjects.
Thus, after conquering Istanbul, Fatih first decided to create a patriarchate for the Greeks living in the city, which was to be based on their religious traditions.
 George Curtes Scolarius was elected patriarch and was given the title "Gennadios".
 After the Greeks, it was the turn of the Armenians.
 However, the establishment and later development of the Armenian Patriarchate was quite different from the Greek one.
 In fact, Fatih established the Armenian Religious Center in Istanbul as a bishopric, and only in the following centuries did this structure acquire the status of a patriarchate.
Prior to the establishment of the patriarchate, Armenians living within the borders of the Ottoman Empire were included in three dioceses: Sebastia, and the center was St. Nshan Monastery, Enkuri (Ankara), center: St. Astvatsatsin or Karmir Vank, Bursa (Prussia) - Kyotahya (Kutina) - Garaman, center - Bursa.
 Its leader was Bishop Hovakim.
According to some sources, when Sultan Mehmet Fatih was in Bursa shortly before the conquest of Istanbul, he established close relations with the local Armenian population, their caretaker leader Hovakim.
 One day, when Sultan Fatih was talking to Hovakim, he started praying, saying: "May God magnify your kingdom above all other kingdoms."
 This is followed by the sultan's answer, which in fact promised: "If I succeed in conquering Istanbul, I will take you, the other prominent Armenians of the place, to Istanbul, and I will make you their leader."
 And a few years after the capture of Constantinople, Fatih left for Bursa, remembering the promise he had made: և Together with Bishop Hovakim, he transferred many Armenian families from Bursa to Constantinople.
 According to some sources, there were six such families.
During this period, the Armenian population was brought to the capital in groups from different places and settled here.
 And only when everyone was settled in different districts of Istanbul, in 1461. Fatih Sultan issued a decree declaring Bishop Hovakim the leader of the Armenian community, that is, the patriarch.
  Hovakim was given the authority to rule all the Armenians living in Anatolia և Rumelia.
  From that day until today, the Armenian Patriarchate continues its activities. [6]
The beginning of the formation of the Armenian millet is also considered to be 1461, that is, it is identified with the year of the establishment of the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
The Armenian millet was called "Millet-i Sadıka".
  Initially, the seat of the Armenian Patriarch was in St. Samatia. It was a carpet church, but in 1641 It was moved to Gumgapu St. Astvatsatsin Church մնալ still remains there [8].
However, according to Turkish sources, the Armenian people did not receive the status of a nation, but in addition to the Armenian-Apostolic community, the Armenian Evangelical, Catholic, and in the 19th century, the Armenian Protestant community were formed.
The patriarchs who ruled the Millet were considered the protectors of their people before the Ottoman authorities. "
 They performed secular functions in accordance with Ottoman order.
During Fatih's time, Armenians had only four places of worship in Constantinople.
 The oldest of them is St. Galatia. It is Gregory the Illuminator.
 Some philologists claim that this church belonged to the Armenian Catholics, as it had been under the rule of the Genoese for a long time, in a Genoese district, it was built by the Kafai Catholic Armenians.
The second is St. Samatia. It is the carpet church.
 It was originally a Greek church, but later the Turkish sultans were given to the Armenians.
 This issue was first addressed by Jeremiah Celebi Keomurjyan in his "History of Stampolo".
  And according to Ghukas Inchichyan, the current St. The "Ghasdria" monastery, built by the mother of Constantine the Great, St. Heghine, at the beginning of the 4th century.
 And it was Mehmet Fatih Sultan who granted the Armenians St. The carpet church, which became a caring center for the Armenians.
 It is noteworthy that this church became the Armenian Patriarchate until 1641 [2].
  In 1643-1644 the seat of the Armenian Patriarchate was moved from Sulu Monastery to Gumgapu, and to St. The carpet was made in 1660. is on fire.
The third is St. St. Nicholas Church, which became most famous during the reign of Sultan Fatih, when Armenians began to visit there.
 And the last, the fourth church, which is mentioned during the Fatih period, St. It is the Mother of God.
Thus, as we have already mentioned, the first Armenian patriarch of Constantinople became Joachim I of Prussia, holding office from 1461-1478.
 Gradually, the entire Armenian population of the Ottoman Empire came together.
 By uniting under the patriarchate, they were able to preserve their national identity.
Thus, we can mention that in reality Constantinople could not play the role it assumed for the Armenian people, if Mehmet Fatih Sultan did not establish the Armenian Patriarchate here.
 This event had a significant significance not only in the life of Constantinople, but also in the life of the Armenians of the Ottoman Empire.
Speaking about the history of the latter, we can not separate it from the history of the Armenian community of Constantinople, as it was the patriarchate that united around it the Armenian population of the surrounding areas of Constantinople under one complete nation.
It has been for the Armenian community of Constantinople և to this day it remains the stronghold that protects the interests of the Armenians, facing many challenges.
LITERATURE [1] Abrahamyan A., A Brief Outline of the History of the Armenian Colonies, Volume A, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 90, 76 [2] Asatur H., The Armenians of Constantinople և Their Patriarchs, Watertown, 1973, pp. 3,96, 6.
[3] Siruni Y., Constantinople դ its role, first volume, Beirut, 1965, pp. 90-92, 96-97, 115-117, 150-180, 195-200, 235-236.
[6] Güllü RE, Establishment and Status of the Armenian Patriarchate of Istanbul, URL.
http:
//turksandarmenians.marmara.edu.tr/tr/istanbul-ermeni-patrikhanesinin-kurulusuve-statusu/ (Accessed.
 23.09.2017). [8] Makaryan V., The formation of the Armenian millet իրավ The powers of the Armenian patriarchs of Constantinople (17th-19th centuries), St. Etchmiadzin, 2016, pp. 114-115.
[9] Kharatyan A., The Armenian Colony of Constantinople, Yerevan, 2007, p. 156.
Kekhyan Anush ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ARMENIAN PATRIARCHATE IN KOSTANDNOPOLS AND THE LEGISLATIVE POLITICAL PRECONDITIONS
