EFFECTIVENESS OF PRIVATE CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS PURPOSE OF THEIR PRESCRIBATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
  For that purpose, we will refer to the historical reasons for their emergence, the experience of different countries, the current situation in the RA penitentiaries, the conditions.
A private correctional facility is a place of imprisonment based on a contract with the Ministry of Justice or the penitentiary service of a given state.
  Private institutions, dating back to 16th-century England, became widespread in the United States in the 1980s.
 Privatization was a promising idea in a number of respects, especially when the state was facing major problems in this area էր with great difficulty securing penitentiaries2.
 Despite much criticism, the United States has expanded its private correctional system, and a number of other countries have followed suit, privatizing their corporations to a greater or lesser extent (mainly countries that, like the United States, have problems with prison overcrowding. ).
Private correctional facilities are now operating in at least 11 countries around the world.
 These include Australia, the United States, South Africa, New Zealand, Scotland, France, Japan, Chile, Peru, the United Kingdom and Wales.
  Although the United States ranks first in the number of people serving sentences in correctional facilities, countries such as Australia, Scotland, New Zealand, and 1 See Sellers MP (1993). The history and politics of private prisons.
 A comparative analysis, page 47.
2 See "Jail Breaks.
 Economic Development Subsidies Given to Private Prisons ", October, 2001, page 2.
3 See Cody Mason International Growth Trends in Prison Privatization August 2013, page 2.
a higher degree of privatization of correctional facilities.
  According to statistics, as of 2012, the number of convicts in Australian correctional facilities was 19% of the total, in Scotland - 17%, in England և Wales - 14%, in New Zealand - 11%, in the US - 8% in South Africa - 4% 4.
The US private correctional system deserves special attention.
 About 2.3 million people are currently imprisoned in the United States.
 This figure is a record in all modern countries56.
 The US penitentiary system is divided into two major branches: 1) public institutions և 2) private institutions.
The two branches operate և develop in parallel7.
 The spread of private correctional facilities in the United States began in the 1980s.
  The idea has been around for decades և actively preaching to presidents Ջ Ջ Bush և R ․ By the Reagan governments.
Initially, it was considered unbelievable.
  However, the current situation forced the country's authorities and society to change their minds.
  The state, in the conditions of a significant increase in crime, had to keep more and more people deprived of their liberty in prisons.
Overcrowded prisons և rising costs became heavy cargo։ for federal budgets.
 The state did not manage to build new prisons, and the old ones were so overcrowded that the authorities were afraid of the threat of disobedience of the convicts8.
 Under the influence of the mentioned factors, the idea came to life and spread widely.
  He was also of great importance. Clinton's plan to reduce the number of federal employees9.
  This state policy led to the Department of Justice concluding agreements to transfer control of convicts under special supervision to private companies.
  Private Companies Soon 4 See ibid., P.
5 See https.
//www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/pie2016.html.
6 See Trends in US Corrections p. 1. http:
//www.sentencingproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Trends-in-US-Corrections.pdf.
7 See Rachel O'Connor The United States Prison System.
 A Comparative Analysis May, 2014 page 24.
8 See Cody Mason Too Good to be True Private Prisons in America January, 2012, page 1, http.
//www.sentencingproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Too-Good-to-be-True-Private-Prisonsin-America.pdf, pp. 2-3.
9 See Sellers MP (1993). The history and politics of private prisons.
 A comparative analysis, page 48.
They started to make changes in the contract.
They wanted to replace the usual contract for the provision of prison services with a contract for the full management and privatization of penitentiaries, which was also soon implemented.
 At the end of 2011, there were 264 corporations owned by private companies in the United States10.
  But a little question arose ․ Did the government, and more specifically the Federal Bureau of Prisons, have the right to enter into such an agreement and transfer its functions directly to private companies?
 The report of the Privatization Commission set up by the President to clarify these and a number of other issues asserted the existence of such a right.
 It was noted that the Bureau's approach to contracts was "still acceptable", and that such decisions were within its competence11, and that this was not the first attempt by the US Government to contract with a private party.
By 1991, nine states had passed laws that allowed private correctional facilities to be opened on a contractual basis.
 Today, they are legal throughout the United States, and some states that do not have private correctional facilities have enacted legislation to establish them12.
 Nevertheless, many continue to argue that if Congress approves privatization, the state will pass a corresponding law.
It should be noted that in August 2016, the Department of Justice issued a statement stating its intention to terminate contracts with private correctional institutions13.
  Meanwhile, private correctional facilities in the United States continue to operate.
Australia's first private correctional facility was established in 199010 See Mattera P., Khan, M., & Nathan, S. (2003). Corrections Corporation of America.
 A critical lookat its first twenty years.
http:
//grassrootsleadership.org/sites/default/files/uploads/CCAAnniversaryReport.pdf.
11 See Report of the President's commission on Privatization, Privatization toward more effectivegovernment, March 1988. http:
//pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNABB472.pdf.
12 See https.
//www.muckrock.com/news/archives/2016/jan/26/how-are-private-prisons-even-legalpart-i/.
13 See http: // www.
//time.com/4457597/private-prisons-justice-department/.
in the year 14.
  As of 2012, 5 out of 8 Australian states had private correctional facilities.
 Currently, the state of Victoria has the highest level of privatization, at 35 percent (approximately 1,500 convicts).
  However, it may give way to the state of Queensland, where the authorities plan to soon completely privatize the correctional system.
 Despite this, privatization is completely absent in three states.
 Twenty-four per cent of Australia's 29,500 convicts serve their sentences in private correctional facilities15.
In modern times, Great Britain was the first in Europe to establish a private correctional facility.
  Scotland's first private correctional facility has been operating since 1999.
  It is run by a private company based on a 25-year contract with the Scottish Penitentiary Service16.
  The second private correctional facility was established in 2008.
 Together, 1,400 of Scotland's 8,200 convicts are serving sentences17.
The first private correctional facility in England was established in 199218.
 In 2000, the country already had 8%, and in 2013, 15% privatization.
 It should be noted that all countries select a company on the basis of a competition with which to sign a contract for the establishment of a private correctional facility.
The first private correctional facility in New Zealand was established in 2000 and operated until 2005, when the New Zealand Parliament passed a law banning private prisons.
 However, in 2009 a new parliament amended the law to allow privatization again, after which the first private correctional facility was opened in May 2011 and the second in 2015.
 In both, 1,920 people were sentenced in 1920.
Privatization planning began in South Africa in 1997, and was already implemented in 1999. 14 See Harding, RW (1992). Private prisons in Australia. Canberra, Australia.
 Australian Institute of Criminology, page 1.
15 See Australian Productivity Commission. (2012). Report on government services 2012. Chapter 8.http.
//www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2012/2012.
16 See http: // www.
//posa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/Prison-Privatisation-in-Scotland.pdf, pp. 2-4.
17 See Cody Mason International Growth Trends in Prison Privatization August 2013, page 5.
20profits.pdf, page 3.
19 See http: // www.
//www.mashpedia.com/List_of_correctional_facilities_in_New_Zealand.
20 See http: // www.
//www.mashpedia.com/Department_of_Corrections_(New_Zealand).
http:
//www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/portals/0/documents/private%20punishment%20who% See by two companies21.
 By 2004, there were 5,950 convicts in these two institutions, which was only 3% of the South African convicts22.
 In the following years, the crime rate in South Africa decreased significantly, but these two institutions are still full today.
The privatization attempt in Israel deserves special attention.
  In 2004, Israel passed a law allowing the establishment of private correctional facilities in the country.
 In 2005, the Department of Human Rights of the Academic Law University filed a lawsuit against the law in the Supreme Court.
 In November 2009, the 9-judge Supreme Court ruled that private correctional facilities were unconstitutional, stating that providing state management of correctional facilities to a private company on a contract basis, the main purpose of which is profit, would violate the rights of convicts23.
 The President of the Supreme Court clarified that the basic principles of Israeli law stipulate that the right to use coercion, to deprive persons who have violated the law of their liberty on the basis of criminal law, is one of the most fundamental rights of the state.
  Consequently, when the right to enforce is transferred to a private company, the process of restricting human freedoms and rights loses its basic legitimacy.
  Violation of the essence of legality restricts the right of convicts to freedom and violates their right to freedom.
Although a number of countries have relied heavily on private correctional facilities, giving them more powers than the United States, the latter remains the world leader in the number of people incarcerated in private correctional facilities.
  This, of course, is mostly due to the large population of the United States and the high level of crime.
Summarizing the example of the quoted countries, it is necessary to complete the advantages and disadvantages of private correctional facilities.
 Part 21 See http.
//www.dcs.gov.za/Publications/Annual%20Reports/DCS%20Annual%20Report%201999.pdf.
22 See South Africa Department of Correctional Services. (2004). Annual report for the 2003 / 2004financial year. http:
//www.dcs.gov.za/Publications/Annual%20Reports/DCS%20Annual%20Report%202004.pdf.
23 See http.
//digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1194&context=scujil.
In particular, the controversy between supporters and opponents of private correctional institutions does not stop, starting with the initial proposals for the establishment of such institutions.
The arguments of the supporters mainly end with the practical side of the issue. to calculate costs և to determine the profitability of private and public correctional institutions is quite difficult, especially taking into account the specifics of different countries տարբեր different results of experience.
  However, if we study the experience of the United States, we will see that private correctional institutions are more profitable for the state.
 And the state, mainly spending large sums of money, in fact, do not provide the results and conditions provided by the private ones.
  They are comfortable, they provide good conditions for convicts, when the state penitentiaries of some countries (including the USA, Australia) are known for unfavorable living conditions.
  The buildings are modern, spacious and more durable.
The existence of competition, in fact, contributes to the significant improvement of the living conditions of convicts, the reduction of costs for the execution of sentences.
The arguments of the opponents are based on the principles of legality and morality.
  It is mentioned that handing over the administration of justice to private companies is unacceptable.
  In addition, in a democratic country, the right of the state to enforce complies with the principle of justice, and when the state transfers that function to for-profit companies, its basic content is disrupted.
  Opponents argue that in practice, too, private correctional facilities are not always a good option for convicts, as for-profit companies seek to save as much money as they can.
In our opinion, this is only a fear, which has no real grounds, as the state concludes a contract with private companies, which clearly defines the scope of "services" provided, conditions, the amount of money spent on each convict, the possibility of state control, as well as the involvement of independent experts. inspections և control process.
Finally, there is a danger that privatization could have a negative impact on public opinion.
  Thus, a significant part of the economy is at the expense of private correctional facilities, for example, the city or state, which relies on the resources of a private prison to do everything possible to ensure that it does not remain empty.
 The companies, in turn, also aim to ensure the uninterrupted flow of people to their prisons, and for that it is necessary to convince the public of the need to tighten the legislation and send more people out of jail.
 And the state, in its turn, will sooner or later adapt the legislative activity և judicial practice to the public opinion.
 This, of course, is a great danger, which rather concerns the USA.
  The problem is that the United States has very strict criminal law, due to which a record number of convicts, which is a feature of the American justice system, where even repeating the same administrative violation several times can be punished with imprisonment.
 In fact, the state has a task to reduce the level of crime, the number of convicts, which can be threatened by this phenomenon.
  But even in this case, the existence of private correctional facilities in the United States can be considered more justified than in any other country, because in their absence, the problems faced by penitentiaries "in general" are wider.
Companies running private correctional facilities are often accused of distributing drugs, violence, and aggression among those incarcerated in their facilities.
  For example, Scotland's Addiewel Private Prison was named the country's worst correctional facility in 201124.
  However, it should be noted that the existence of such similarities is a fact for almost all types of correctional institutions, in this respect the private ones do not occupy the first place.
Moreover, these indicators are higher in state correctional institutions in almost all countries.
  As evidence, the fact that US federal prisons are considered the worst correctional facilities in the world, they have the highest number of cases of violence.
  According to official statistics, in 2013, the number of natural deaths in US correctional facilities was 89%.
  Dash 2008. See http.
//www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/scotlands-flasgship-private-prison-the-most1097103.
There were 399 deaths out of every 100,000 convicts serving sentences in prisons, of which 21 were suicides and 33 were homicides and 2526 deaths as a result of injuries received.
Therefore, this problem is wrongly attributed to private correctional institutions.
Now let's refer to the RA penitentiaries.
 The annual report of the Human Rights Defender provides information on unequal placement in overcrowded cells in RA penitentiaries.
 The report states that in 2016 steps were taken to solve the problem of overpopulation.
Despite that, overcrowding remains a big problem.
  Cases of not providing accessible living space for one person were registered in "Nubarashen" penitentiary institution, where 10-15 people deprived of liberty were living in an area of ​​30-35 square meters.
 The latter also had a problem with the bed and bedding, which sometimes caused them to sleep in shifts.
 The same problems exist in other penitentiaries.
  Cases of unequal placement have been found in institutions without overcrowding problems27.
 The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, in its Second General Report, stated that the need to keep more people in a place of detention than is provided for has an adverse effect on all services միջոցառ measures taken այնտեղ there այնտեղ significantly reduces the overall standard of living.
  Moreover, the degree of overcrowding in the place of imprisonment or part of it can be inhuman or degrading.
  It should be noted that according to Article 73 of the RA Penitentiary Code, the size of the living space allocated to one convict in a correctional facility cannot be less than four square meters.
A number of issues related to the right to health care of persons deprived of their liberty were raised.
 In accordance with international requirements, the state is obliged to provide permanent care for convicts with special needs by specialists with special training, but the data proves it.
//www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=194.
26 See https.
//www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5341.
27 See Annual Report of the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia on the Activities of the National Preventive Mechanism in 2016, p. 12.
The volume of care provided to sick persons deprived of their liberty is not always sufficient28.
 Cases of insufficient sanitary-hygienic conditions were registered: high humidity, malfunction of bathrooms, presence of insects in cells, etc.29.
Of course, a number of renovations were carried out in 2016, but most of them were carried out at the expense of the detainees' personal funds, which is unacceptable, as it creates corruption risks and inequality in the conditions of detention of convicts.
  A number of practical issues related to the provided food have been raised30.
  It is also necessary to improve the working conditions of penitentiary staff.
They should be provided with well-equipped offices, internal communication facilities, a separate canteen, bathrooms with sanitary-hygienic conditions, etc.31.
  The state is responsible for the deaths of persons under the jurisdiction of the state, and in this regard it should be noted that the measures taken by the competent authorities to prevent suicide, self-harm and self-mutilation are insufficient among persons deprived of their liberty.
 This is evidenced by the statistical data of the RA Ministry of Justice, according to which, from 2011 to the end of 2016, 26 cases of suicide were registered in penitentiaries, 7 of which were in 2016.
  In 2016, 879 cases of self-harm were registered in penitentiaries.
 The study of complaints against the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia, as well as during the monitoring visits to the places of conviction, revealed cases of violence and threats against persons deprived of their liberty32.
 These շարք a number of other problems and shortcomings testify to the existence of conditions in RA penitentiaries that do not comply with the legislation և international norms, which is unacceptable, as the purpose of criminal punishment is to restore social justice, to correct the convicted person և to prevent 28 See ibid., P. 16 .
29 See ibid., P.
30 See ibid., P. 31.
31 See ibid., P. 51.
32 See Annual Report of the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia on the Activities of the National Preventive Mechanism in 2016, pp. 52, 55.
In any case, criminal punishment should not be accompanied by violations of the rights of persons deprived of their liberty, which inevitably occurs when the state does not fulfill its obligations in this area.
We believe that the main reason for the need for private correctional facilities is the overcrowding of penitentiaries, as well as the lack of sufficient conditions in them.
  In fact, if the state for some reason fails to meet the requirements set by its own legislation, then allowing the creation of private correctional facilities by the state can be considered justified (of course, if they are established, they will operate within the law).
  The selection should take place through a competitive procedure, as a result of which the relevant state body will sign a contract with the company that offered the best conditions, in which all the conditions will be defined in detail.
  As for the dissatisfaction with the fact that private correctional institutions are given too much power և independence, which creates a risk of abuse, we believe that if the agreement clearly defines the forms and guarantees of state control, և the state will show the necessary consistency, such abuses և Violations will be ruled out.
 At the same time, we believe that it is more appropriate for the US-based system of private correctional facilities, ie not to provide full privatization in any penitentiary institution, but to provide private companies with the opportunity to provide only penitentiary services.
  This type of privatization will be limited, it will operate partially on the basis of the Penitentiary Services Agreement.
 In this case, the penitentiary institution will not belong to any private company (as it currently does in countries with private correctional facilities), but will continue to be under the jurisdiction of the state, and the private company will provide the programming of the services provided in it.
  In such a case, the persons deprived of their liberty will be provided with sufficient conditions (food, sanitation, repair, security, etc.), the service company will perform its functions, in return will receive daily payments for each detained convict, and the state will be deprived of its ability to function in penitentiary services. to oversee the activities of private correctional facilities.
Restricting privatization in this way will resolve the dispute over their legitimacy.
  As mentioned, many believe that by allowing private correctional facilities, the state illegally transfers its exclusive right to enforce to the private sector.
  While in this case the penitentiary institution remains under the jurisdiction of the state, the person applying the coercion is in fact the state again, therefore the violation of the rule of law is excluded.
Thus, such private correctional institutions will be expedient in our republic, as there are many problems in the sphere of penitentiaries, and the state finds it difficult to solve them.
  We think that the proposed approach can be the most effective and most beneficial way to overcome these problems.
Gohar Begoyan EFFECTIVENESS OF PRIVATE CORRECTION INSTITUTIONS AND THE PURPOSE OF THEIR PRESCRIPTION IN RA Keywords: private correctional facility, privatization, overcrowding of prisons.
