NEW YEAR'S EVE CHARACTERISTICS IN DOVETS VILLAGE In the last few decades, conflicts, including ethnic conflicts, have been in the focus of attention of researchers of different disciplines.
 Ethnography is quite actively interested in the ethnographic aspects of wars and ethnic conflicts, trying to find out how society responds to new realities, how it organizes and self-organizes, how it reconsiders perceptions and relationships about neighbors, and so on.
The above-mentioned main questions have also appeared in the center of attention of Armenian researchers.
 Monographs of separate articles have been published (A. Dabaghyan, M. Gabrielyan և others), in which the authors consider war and contradictions as realities that build on everyday life and at the same time are built on that daily life.
In this article, we will consider all these realities with the example of the border village of Dovegh in the RA Tavush region, based on the ethnographic materials we have written during the last one or two years.
  The main emphasis will be on how the holiday life in the village is organized in general, in particular, New Year as a family holiday on the one hand, and community holiday on the other, how the main symbols of the New Year are preserved and reproduced (such as mowing and accompanying activities). և how new ones appear (for example, writing a number).
 We will observe how the phenomenon of border warfare affects all the main components and actions of the holiday.
 In other words, the New Year will be considered not only as a holiday in itself, but also as a holiday whose content and actions around it are significantly influenced by many realities conditioned by the border.
The aim of the article is to present the Christmas customs in Dovegh village, to make the village known to the public in general.
  Dovegh village is located at the northern border of Tavush region of the Republic of Armenia.
 It is 15 km east of the border and directly borders Azerbaijan.
 The distance from the border is 1.5 km.
1 The village is quite old ունի has a centuries-old history.
  As a historical and cultural monument, St. Sarkis Church.
 As in all border villages, so in Dovegh, first of all, the issues of existence and security of residence are addressed.
 Here, "even light" tension pushes the population to active movements.
 By pushing the danger to the forefront, the population of border villages also seeks protection, which leads not only to the implementation of programs of international organizations, but also, first of all, to state intervention and support.
 State intervention is used in the protection of border villages and their development issues2.
The fact that it is so close to the border does not even prevent the people of Dovegh from celebrating one of the most awaited holidays - New Year.
  As they say, the border is a border, and the holiday is a holiday.
 The presence of the enemy in the village of Dovegh is common, as the people of Dovegh say, the village has seen the worst.
  1990s In the days before the holiday, there was not a theatrical but a military "firework" here.
Let us now turn to some of the most interesting Christmas preparations in the village of Dovegh.
Pork is the most important ingredient in Dovegh Christmas dishes.
  Pork dishes are very diverse, in which pork, by-products (legs, heart, lungs, spleen, liver, intestines), skin are used.
 One of the preparations for the New Year is the process of slaughtering pigs.
 The villagers mainly slaughter the pig a few days before the New Year or a maximum of a week.
  Especially in connection with the New Year holidays, the process of slaughtering pigs is organized in a different way in the village.
 After slaughtering the pig, the skin, as the villagers say, is "scorched", then peeled (after scalding the skin often does not need to be scraped, because after heating it is easily torn off), then it tastes and entertains those present.
 There are many lovers of this delicacy (auxiliary food).
  This Leather Processing Horse 1 Article was written in 2015-2016. Based on field ethnographic materials in Dovegh village (hereinafter referred to as MPI).
2 See Dabaghyan A., "The Border" և "The Border" in Tavush Region (History և Present), Tavush Material և Careful Heritage, Yerevan, 2009, p. 72.
3 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2015.
It is very specific to Tavush region.
 There is hardly a Tavush resident who will be unfamiliar with this version of leather processing.
 They inform their relatives about that process so that they can come to eat skins and barbecues.
  It is accepted in the village that the relatives who were not present at the mentioned process definitely send "a piece" of leather for them.
 As a rule, after slaughtering the pig, the barbecue fire is lit and a feast is organized for the guests4.
  Pig slaughter և By-products are processed and prepared exclusively by men5.
  The resulting meat solves the whole New Year meat issue.
 Many of the villagers often sell some of the meat and use the money for other Christmas purchases.
  And, as they say, "that way a part of the cost comes out" 6.
There are quite interesting New Year customs in the village, from which we would especially like to single out, as the villagers say, the custom of "writing the number".
  It has become an annual custom on the slope of the high mountain of the village, "Ktuts Karin", at 24 o'clock.
Writing the year of the coming year at 00 7.
 66-year-old Vanik Gorginyan remembers that day very well. "1965 We decided to light a fire in Ktuts stone with some young people.
 I was one of the initiators of the custom. "
 But over the years, the habit of lighting fires has improved.
 As Vanik remembers. "10-11 years after that, in 1976, they started writing that date."
 In other words, the custom of writing numbers has been uninterrupted for about 40 years on New Year's night.
 That decision to write a number, of course, was the idea of ​​the young people, which became a significant ceremony for the village.
 Many of the villagers remember who the first "number writers" were.
  The people of Dovegh speak about it with special pride, as it is the only village in the region that has such a beautiful custom connected with the New Year.
 That is why young people are supported as much as possible to maintain it at all costs8.
The ceremony itself is very simple.
 It seems to contain inspiring advice and at the same time herald the beginning of the coming year.
They have been preparing to write the number since the beginning of December.
 As a rule, the graduating boys of that year are enrolled, of course, they are not missing 4 In the same place.
5 See Tsaturyan R., Pork in the food system of the Armenians of Tavush region, Tavush Intangible և Caring Heritage, Yerevan, 2009, p. 122.
6 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2015.
7 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2015.
8 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2016.
the help of senior and experienced friends.
 They collect worn-out, unusable tires from their fellow villagers, as well as collect tin cans from their homes and from the border guards, all of which together with the diesel fuel, they climb a mountain with the help of appropriate equipment provided by the village administration.
  About a week ago, the boys climbed Ktuts stone, cleaned the area, leveled it, and got rid of various weeds.
 In the next stage, ash and diesel fuel are poured into the tin cans, and then it is sorted according to the pre-measured numbers.
 These works will be completed on December 30.
 Already on December 31, minutes before 24-00, they start burning the contents of the tin jars in sequence, so that the year burning at exactly 24-00 is ready for the people of Dovegh.
 The whole process takes 10-15 minutes 9.
The villagers spend those few minutes on their balconies, and if the location of the house does not allow them to see the burning number, they go down to the village to see it.
 And that bright number that seems to be burning in the distance cuts everyone away from their worries for a few minutes and leads them far and wide to the realization of their bright desires and freedom.
 Well, of course, fireworks of fellow villagers are an integral part of all this.
  After all this, the boys, smoking from a tire, go down the mountain to the village hall, where the New Year table is waiting for them (under the auspices of the village administration), and with the same vigor continue their joy until late at night 10.
  They do not forget to enter their home for a few minutes, raise a glass with family members, and rejoin their friends.
  Thus, number writing, as a relatively new reality, has acquired an additional function, as it can be considered not only as an indicator of community viability, but also as a symbolic sign addressed to Azerbaijani communities, which shows that there is a community, regardless of borders. from disputes and conflict.
After midnight, the visits to the houses of the closest relatives begin, which continue on January 1.
 From early morning, abundant tables are waiting for their guests in everyone's homes.
  Visits end on January 3 or 4.
  They visit the houses of relatives, friends, classmates (everyone dances 9 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2016.
10 Gorginyan O., MPI, Dovegh, 2016.
tadir) և etc.
  The guests come, raise a glass, congratulate everyone on the New Year and wish a successful year.
 The first toast, as a rule, "Happy New Year to everyone".
 As Samvel Gorginyan mentioned in his toast, "Good luck to everyone, peace to the borders, good service to the soldiers."
  We are a border village whose status differs from other villages.
 "Even if there are shootings, they do not affect our mood, our pain is always there."
11 For several years now, the head of the community has been wearing a military uniform on New Year's Eve, going up to the front line to be with the soldiers who ensure the security of the village, to congratulate them on their holiday.
The villagers living and creating under the enemy's fire are hoping that one day the long-awaited peace will be established, which will be the humane dream of living on the border for years. it can be summed up with a glass of wine. "We want peace" ...
Oksanna Gorginyan FEATURES OF THE NEW YEAR HOLIDAY IN THE VILLAGE OF DOVECH VILLAGE Keywords: Dovegh, village, Ethnic conflict, New Year, borderline phenomenon, pig slaughter, slaughter, stone, border
Summary Thus, as mentioned above, ethnic conflict in the last few decades.
