ISSUES OF GENOCIDE REJECTION POLICY AGAINST ARMENIANS AGAINST THE LIGHT OF LEGAL ANALYSIS he accepted. The 11th clause of the Declaration of Independence of Armenia, adopted by the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia on August 23, 1915, stipulates that the Republic of Armenia supports the 1915 Armenian Genocide. International recognition of the Armenian Genocide in the Ottoman Empire and Western Armenia.
Numerous well-known lawyers have repeatedly presented the issue of genocide as an international crime around the international legal context of the issue, which has been recognized and publicly recognized by more than two dozen impartial observer states.
 Turkey has been denying the fact of the Armenian Genocide for almost a century, in order to ensure its "academic" basis, the principle of justice, scientific impartiality and impartiality is deliberately bypassed.
 There has been no shortage of monographs and articles denying the fact of the Armenian Genocide in recent decades.
  They generally develop several theses that were put into circulation during the massacres, trying to impose their version of history on the conscious public with various "arguments".
The origins of these theses can be found in a number of publications published in the years following the Armenian Genocide, in which attempts are made to divert the attention of the international community from the course of events, to distort the facts or to simply deny any accusation of Turkish role in the Armenian genocide.
In this paper, we will try to present the issues of the Armenian Genocide denial policy adopted by Turkey through the prism of international law, including their legal aspects in the light of the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter ECHR), taking into account the recently widespread EU The case of the famous Perincek v. Switzerland in the Grand Chamber (CASE OF PERİNÇEK v. SWITZERLAND (Application no. 27510/08) 1.
One thing remains obvious. As stressed in the Pan-Armenian Declaration on the 100th Anniversary of the Armenian Genocide, impunity for acts contained in the crime of genocide is inadmissible and this crime has no statute of limitations2.
 The denial of the Armenian Genocide provides new opportunities for future crimes against humanity, so the responsibility of the Armenians, the "progressive humanity", to prevent and prevent the denial of the Armenian Genocide.
 Argentina, Switzerland and Uruguay have passed laws establishing responsibility for the denial of the Armenian Genocide.
It should be noted that despite the denial of genocide as an international crime, the UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (December 9, 1948) does not provide for the denial of genocide as a crime. 1 See European Court of Human Rights, CASE OF PERİNÇEK v . SWITZERLAND, available at http: // www.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001139724#{"itemid ".
["001-139724"]}.
2 See PAN-ARMENIAN DECLARATION ON THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE, January 29, 2015, c. Yes, it is available at http.
//armeniangenocide100.org/files/uploads/2015/02/declaration-arm.pdf.
on the objective side, but it is reprehensible under other international legal instruments; it can be qualified as propaganda of hatred, violence, manifestation of ethnic discrimination, etc. 1.
 After all, it is not in vain that many states, including Armenia, have implemented international legal documents in their criminal codes. They have envisaged a criminal offense to deny the crime of genocide.
It should be noted that when we talk about the policy of denying the Armenian Genocide, we should mean not only Turkey, but also individuals and organizations whose activities are aimed at the baseless policy of denying the Armenian Genocide2.
  The main struggle of such policy makers is the right to freedom of speech, within the limits of legal standards.
  In other words, the denial of the Genocide is presented as a discussion in the field of law, politics or history.
The case of Perincek v. Switzerland, which is being investigated by the ECHR, has recently become a subject of heated discussion among lawyers.
  The ECHR in that case in 2013 The decision of December 17, 2006 by the Swiss Confederation did not consider the verdict of the Swiss Confederation to hold Perincekchinary accountable for the comparisons between the statement "Armenian Genocide is an international lie" between him and Talaat Pasha, considering them in the field of freedom of speech.
 A number of well-known lawyers considered this decision of the ECHR to be ridiculous.
 By the way, the verdict was appealed by the Swiss side to the Grand Chamber of the ECHR, where the court hearing took place in 2015. The decision will be published by the ECHR by the end of the year3.
Let us clarify that the ECHR 2013 The December 17 decision stated that the statements of Doուu Perincek, Doctor of Law, Chairman of the Turkish Workers' Party, who considers himself a historian and writer, were made in the context of controversial and heated discussions.
  The court found that the essence of his statements and arguments should be considered in the historical context, at the same time taking into account the fact that Perincek was speaking as a politician.
 The court found that the applicant's comments were of a historical, legal or political nature, noting that the fact that the question of whether 1915 was a crime of public interest was not disputed in court. հաջորդ The subsequent events can be described as "genocide".
  In other words, it turns out that in the decision made by the European Court, Perincek's statements և presented the presented arguments in the field of freedom of speech, recognizing them as lawful.
Discrimination against the memory of the victims of what happened to the Jews and later of the Jews in Germany and the historical memory and identity of their descendants prompted Rafael Lemkin to introduce the term "genocide" to describe this heinous crime against humanity. calling it an international lie.
In this connection, let us mention that in 2015 Amal Clooney, a member of the Armenian delegation involved in the "Perincek v. Switzerland" trial on January 28 in the Grand Chamber of the ECHR, stressed in her speech that "the court, of course, is aware of the deplorable state of freedom of speech in Turkey. This court registered violations of the right to free speech in 224 separate cases concerning Turkey.
  Thus, although this case concerns a Turkish citizen, Armenia is also interested in ensuring that its own citizens do not fall into the trap of over-criminalization of free speech. ”4
1 See Vardanyan V., Kirakosyan E., Gorgyan L., Grounds for International Legal Responsibility for the Armenian Genocide (Legal Guide), Yerevan, 2014, p. 25.
2 See Gzoyan E., Denial of the Genocide as an Expression of Racism. Approaches to International Law (Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute), Journal of Genocide Studies, 2 (1), Yerevan, 2014, available at http: // www.
//www.genocide-museum.am/arm/articles-Edita-Gzoyan.php.
3 See CASE OF PERİNÇEK v. SWITZERLAND.
4 See “Conclusions in the Lower House Judgment Disrespect the Memory of Genocide Victims. "Amal Clooney announced at the ECHR", 28.01.2015, available at http.
//bit.ly/1VhMZQd.
It is obvious that in the field of human rights, freedom of speech is especially used in a real, political, practical format; it is not only a separate category of opportunities given to a person, but also as a guarantee for the realization of other rights.
At the same time, freedom of speech also needs special protection and guarantee.
  In all major documents of international importance, special attention is paid to the need to guarantee freedom of speech in countries, to create opportunities that can be implemented in practice.
The issue of guaranteeing freedom of speech was also reflected in the 1950 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Freedoms. Article 10 of the European Convention of November 4, 2006 provides: "Everyone has the right to freedom of speech.
 This right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.
 This right is protected by the Convention equally with other human rights.
  However, we would like to draw the reader's attention to the fact that as a result of the possible interference with other rights of a person as a result of the exercise of freedom of speech, there is a need to balance other rights that are affected by this right.
  This is evidenced by the fact that Article 10 of the Convention, while guaranteeing the principle of freedom of expression, also provides for the possibility of restricting the exercise of that right.
  That is, in terms of the Convention, that right cannot be perceived և exercised in an absolute sense.
 The Convention, in particular, stipulates: "The exercise of these freedoms, as it relates to obligations and responsibilities, may be subject to such conditions, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law necessary in a democratic society for the prevention of riots or crimes of public security, territorial integrity or public security." to protect health or morals, as well as to protect the reputation or rights of others, to prevent the disclosure of information obtained on confidential terms, or to preserve the authority and impartiality of justice ”2.
The right to freedom of expression is one of the essential foundations of a democratic society - one of the basic conditions for its progress and self-expression.
For the purposes of Article 10։ 2, it applies not only to "information" or "ideas" which are either regarded as harmless or indifferent, but also to those which are offensive, shocking or disturbing.
 Such are the demands of pluralism, tolerance and open-mindedness, without which there is no "democratic society".
  As set out in Article 10, this freedom may be restricted, which, however, must be narrowly interpreted; the need for any restriction must be convincing.
The adjective "necessary" within the meaning of Article 10 2 2 includes the presence of "public necessity pressure".
 The Contracting States have a certain discretion to assess whether such a need exists, but that discretion is exercised "hand in hand" with European oversight, including bilateral legislation and decisions resulting from its application, even if the latter were made by an independent tribunal.
  The Court therefore has the power to make a final decision as to whether the "restriction" corresponds to the legitimate aims of the restriction of freedom of expression protected by Article 10.
In exercising its powers of oversight, the Court must look into the violation in the light of all the circumstances of the case, including the impugned Statements.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=20870.
2 In the same place.
content և the circumstances in which they were made.
 In particular, it must determine whether the problems were "in accordance with the legitimate aims pursued" or whether the justifications presented by the national authorities were "appropriate and sufficient".
 In doing so, the Court itself must ensure that the national authorities have applied criteria which comply with the principles set out in Article 10 that they are based on an acceptable assessment of the relevant facts.
In a democratic society, a person has the right to comment on the administration of justice, on the officials involved in it, on criticizing the process and on individuals1.
Returning to the ECHR "Perincek v. Switzerland" 2013 It should be noted that in general, the qualification of a speech as historical, legal or political is not an end in itself;
  As mentioned above, in order to view speech in the light of freedom of speech, it is first necessary to study the content of the impugned statements.
We should not ignore the purpose of the person making the relevant statements, that is, to find out whether the person wants to spread hatred or simply to inform the public about issues of common interest, for which it is necessary to study the context in which they were made.
The analysis of the content of the decisions made by the European Court shows that the court, under the "veil of protection" of the right to freedom of speech, makes a wide variety of speeches and statements, in connection with which it is unlikely that there is a certainty "about which debates are still going on."
  In other words, in order to make a legal conclusion on Perincek's case through the prism of ECHR decisions, it is necessary to find out whether there is a certainty in connection with the fact of the Armenian Genocide, whether it is still in the debate of multidisciplinary specialists.
Let us now raise the question: can a phenomenon be considered uncertain, which is considered genocide, the realization of which has been recognized by more than 20 states, the fact of which the existence of books, scientific works, material evidence and even witnesses directly makes irrefutable? reports the event.
  And the court, resolving the issue of whether the statement falls within the scope of freedom of speech, illogically stated in its decision that "it was not necessary to decide" whether the Armenian massacres were "genocide or not". Even Armenia was not involved in the case as a third party (as it did). A hearing on appeal in the Grand Chamber).
  Meanwhile, the above-mentioned issue required the court to consider it within the limits of certainty, to make it a subject of proper discussion in order to resolve the issue of the presence or absence of debates in that regard.
  The latter demands the content of Perincek's speech, in particular, the denial of the Armenian Genocide, calling it an "international lie", along with threats to expel him as a descendant of Talaat Pasha or threats of deportation of Armenians (especially if we take into account the fact that such a statement explicitly states that being Armenian can be used as an insult) should not have left the court indifferent; they could not have been qualified as statements that contribute to a legal, historical or political debate.
  Therefore, being a personal historian, lawyer or politician should not in any case be considered a sufficient basis for expanding the scope of a person's freedom of speech, considering the manifestations of offensive speech in the light of professional debate, or giving them historical, legal or political value.
1 See ECHR.
  Handyside v. the United Kingdom, 07.12.1976, Series A no. 24, Lingens v. Austria, 08.07.1986, Series A, no. 103, Jersild v. Denmark, 23.09.1994, Series A, no. 298, Sfrek v. Turkey (No. 1) [GC], No. 26682/95, ECHR 1999, Janowski v. Poland [GC], No. 25716/94, ECHR 1999-I, Nikula v. Finland, No. 31611/96, 22.03.2002, Lenvk v. Slovakia, No. 35640/97, 11.03.2003.
2 Vardanyan V., Kirakosyan E., Gorgyan L., page 25.
3 Vardanyan V., Kirakosyan E., Gorgyan L., page 25.
Thus, in the case of the ECHR "Perincek v. Switzerland" in 2013 The December 17 ruling shocked the legal community, as well as the non-legal community, which has studied the facts of the Armenian Genocide, believes that such a decision can not be legal, it should be reconsidered by the decision of the Grand Chamber, because Perincek's statements do not fit Within the framework of freedom of expression provided for in Article 10 of the Convention, there is also a violation of Article 17 of the same Convention, which prohibits the abuse of the law, namely: "Nothing in this Convention shall be construed to mean any State, group of persons or rights have such an activity or action to perform
This litigation effectively replaces the state with the individual as a traditional subject of international law.
  However, it is obvious that holding the individual accountable does not solve the problem; it remains open, in particular, it remains unresolved. Turkey's policy of denying the Armenian Genocide, recognizing the Genocide as an international crime, apologizing to the people (being held accountable under modern international law) All forms and types of international legal responsibility (restitution, compensation, satisfaction).
 Romanian lawyer, international expert Vespasian Pella in his 1925 In the book "Collective Liability of States - Criminal Law of the Future" written in 2006, he calls the state a "subject of law" that can not escape the requirements of the law, which are presented to individuals, can not commit the crimes in which it accuses the latter.
 He especially emphasizes that the state implements the will of the people; if the latter is a criminal, then the responsibility falls on the whole state, respectively on the people.
  In addition, individuals behind the state can not hide from responsibility, and the state should not turn a scapegoat into a state's scapegoat only for statesmen, handing him over to justice, to avoid responsibility2.
However, in the case of the Armenian Genocide, in the absence of legal remedies to accuse individuals other than Perincek of pursuing a policy of denial of the Armenian Genocide, the question of the responsibility of present-day Turkey, which is considered the "successor country" of the Ottoman Empire, remains.
In this regard, it is very important to substantiate that the Armenian Genocide, regardless of the use of the term "genocide", was considered a crime at the time of its commission;
 It is obvious that modern international law must express this questioning attitude based on the previously established international legal norms and the principles proclaimed by them.
No matter how much Turkey tries to avoid responsibility, regularly referring to 1948. The UN Convention on the Prevention of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 2009 has no retroactive effect and does not apply until 1948. It is the same, it is not acceptable, because the UN in 1968. Article 1 of the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statute of Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity explicitly states that no statute of limitations applies to war crimes or crimes against humanity, regardless of the date of their commission (emphasis added). ».
  And according to the second article of the same Convention, a crime against humanity is also considered a crime of genocide, which was defined in 1948. by convention.
1 CONVENTION ON THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS.
2 Marukyan A., The Problems of Overcoming the Aftermath of the Armenian Genocide and the Historical and Legal Justifications, Yerevan, 2014, p. 180.
The UN General Assembly in its 1946 Resolution 96 (1) of 11 December 2006 states that under international law, genocide is a crime, contrary to the goals of the UN spirit, that the civilized world condemns it, recognizing that genocide has caused great loss to humanity throughout history; As international cooperation is needed to free humanity from this abominable catastrophe1, and Turkey, with its policy of denial, further inflames the existing relations between the two countries and deepens the insurmountability of the obstacles to mutual cooperation.
It should be noted that the Republic of Armenia, as if in 1948. A member state of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide has considerable powers, despite the gaps and shortcomings of the same convention, which Turkish "international jurists" try to exploit today in order to distort the provisions of the Convention and use them to deny the Armenian Genocide.
 For example, Gunduz Aktan, a former member of the Armenian-Turkish Reconciliation Commission, used to be more "skilled" in this matter.
  Discussing the applicability of the Convention to the Armenian Genocide, the Turkish "expert" was not inclined to view the Armenian people as "victims of crime" because he believed that Armenians in the Ottoman Empire were fighting for independence, because the "political group" according to the Convention , genocide is not considered an object of crime, therefore, it is possible for them to do everything that is qualified as genocide without bearing responsibility for it.
The above-mentioned legal interpretation is inadmissible չի can not have a place in legal thought.
 Based on the analysis of the essence and content of the provisions of the Genocide Convention, let us present the competencies of the Republic of Armenia in the disobedient struggle against the denial policy pursued by the Republic of Turkey, as follows: • The denial of the Armenian Genocide by the Republic of Turkey as a crime in the Armenian Genocide, which is in accordance with Article 3 e e of the UN Convention, as well as for the actions mentioned in Article 3 of the Convention (genocide, conspiracy to commit genocide, direct and public incitement to genocide). , attempt to commit genocide, complicity in genocide) to apply to the UN International Court of Justice2.
• In view of the fact that Turkey denies the fact of the Armenian Genocide, relying on Article 9 of the Convention, which states that "disputes between the Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation, application and enforcement of this Convention, including genocide" or those listed in Article 3; Disputes over the responsibility of this or that state are submitted to the International Court of Justice at the request of each of the parties to the dispute, to present the issue of the Armenian Genocide as a dispute within the framework of the UN Convention between Armenia and Turkey, without the latter's consent. to pass the examination of the International Court.
Pursuant to Article 8 of the Convention, any Contracting Party may apply to the competent authorities of the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to take such action as it deems necessary to suppress genocide և to prevent any other act referred to in Article 3; may apply to the relevant UN body (for example, the Security Council) to take all necessary measures to prevent the denial of the Armenian Genocide.
1 See CONVENTION ON PREVENTING AND PUNISHING GENOCIDE CRIME, available at http: // www.
//www.un.am/res/UN%20Treaties/III_1.pdf.
2 Marukyan A., page 200.
Arnold Vardanyan ISSUES OF REJECTIVE POLICY OF GENOCIDE AGAINST ARMENIANS: INTERNAL OF LEGAL ANALYSIS Keywords: genocide, 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide, Perincek
1948 Genocide Convention, Turkey's policy of denial,
Right to freedom of speech, UN International Court of Justice
.
