THE PROBLEMS OF ABSURD AND ALIENATION IN EXISTENTIAL LITERATURE There is no greater meaning than to confirm the meaninglessness of life Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus: We have been thrown into a world where no one is responsible.
 We are expelled from our non-existence.
 We live to give meaning to existence, and existence is meaningless.
 If human existence is absurd, it ends in death, can anything valuable be taken out of it?
 If we are thrown into a desperate and abandoned existence, is it worth doing something?
 Shouldn't we commit suicide instead of waiting for the inevitable death? ”[1]
Even love does not overcome nonsense.
 We are looking for our corner, to prove that it exists.
  If we accept that there is a Theology, then absurdism, as a philosophical direction, contradicts all religious tenets, but the purpose of this article is not to reject or affirm the idea of ​​God's existence.
 We are alienated from society, from the things and objects we have created, and finally we are alienated from ourselves. In this case, we are not tormented by the question of the existence of God, but by the absurd nature.
  As an existential question, even Hamlet's monologue "To be or not to be?" Does not give a final answer.
  It remains an eternal mystery to which no one has yet answered.
 Kundera says that filth is a more complex theological problem than evil.
 God has given man freedom, so it can be assumed that he is not responsible for the crimes he committed recently.
 Whereas the responsibility for the dirt falls entirely on the creator of man.
  Carl Jaspers in his "Sinful Problem" expresses the following idea: "There can be no collective sin of one group of people of one nation, apart from political responsibility. neither as a moral nor as a metaphysical sin.
From a moral point of view, only the individual can always be condemned, the collective can never be. ”[3]
  And critic R. Leroy says. "In the absurd world, the idea of ​​sin loses virtually any meaning."
Now let's try to understand what the concept of absurd implies.
Absurdity is a philosophical concept, which means a conflict between the search for the meaning of life, the search for the meaning of life, the ability to find that meaning.
 The absurdity arises from the fundamental disharmony of the search for the meaning of life բաց the absence of the meaning of life.
  The absurdity arises from the contradiction of the simultaneous existence of the etheric և human mind.
Absurd does not mean impotence, impossibility, as it is often commented. it is the absence of meaninglessness և existence.
  Absurdism, as a philosophy, reveals the fundamental nature of the absurd, how a person who realizes the absurd should try to answer the questions of the existence of human life և values.
 The absurdist philosopher Albert Kamyung believes that individuals must accept the absurd nature of human existence while continuing to search for and discover the meaning of life.
 Absurdistic theoretical stereotypes and concepts are similar to existentialism and Jnihilism.
  It originates in the works of the 19th century Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard, where he chooses to face the crisis of man-absurdity, developing his own existentialist philosophy.
Absurdism as a system of beliefs arose in the direction of European existentialism now, especially when Camus rejected some aspects of existentialism and published his essay The Myth of Sisyphus.
  If we try to leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain, we will see that each person has his own rock.
 Sisyphus teaches us supreme fidelity, which denies the gods է raises rocks.
 The effort to reach lofty peaks is enough to fill the human heart.
 Sisyphus must be imagined happy.
 We all have the cross like Sisyphus, we raise it every day, but we do it of our own free will, with the desire to reach the top.
  Of course, there is suicide or the evasion of existence, when an individual ends his life without finding the meaning of life, but "Kierkegaard" and "Camus" exclude the viability of this solution, because suicide is not opposed to the absurd.
 Moreover, the cessation of someone's existence makes everything more absurd.
Religious, spiritual or abstract belief in the existence of another idea, place, essence is the solution when a person believes in the existence of otherness beyond the absurd, which has meaning.
 Kierkegaard believes that in order to believe in anything beyond the absurd, it is necessary to accept the existence of something unprovable in an unconscious ևreligious way.
  Kamyun և others called this solution "philosophical suicide" 1.
There is also the notion of "acceptance of the absurd" when a person accepts the absurdity of life and continues to live the opposite.
 Kamyun values ​​this solution, considering that by accepting the absurd one can reach the peak of his freedom.
 Rejection of religion's other moral compulsion Rebellion against the absurd gives man satisfaction.
 Kierkegaard, however, called this solution "madness."
 If we try to understand the notions of existentialism և nihilism within the framework of absurdism, we will see that existentialism focuses on the free will of the individual, the construction of meaning.
 Nihilism, on the other hand, finds it "meaningless to seek meaning where it is impossible to find it."
 Absurdism, according to Camus, allows a certain existence of meaning, but does not value the constructed meaning as much as existentialism.
 Camus's absurdism devalues ​​և denies the existence of free will.
  In his essay "The Rebellious Man", Camus opposes nihilism, as opposed to the label "existentialist", although for many to this day, Camus is an existential philosopher-writer.
 Both existentialism and absurdism have to do with the practical application of existential nihilism, the acceptance of truth.
The philosophical basis of existentialism can be compared to the Renaissance, who is like a child whose parent is alive, healthy, fulfilling all parental responsibilities. All that is left for the child to do is to enter into life on his own, feeling the constant care of the parent.
 Existentialism and modernism, on the other hand, are like the fate of a child whose parent has died.
  The fact of the existence (absence) of the cosmos (parent) God is under the observation of existentialism, because in the absence of that man is defenseless and alone, because he has been thrown into the world without knowledge or consent.
  Existentialism itself already had its prehistory, because people understood that with the development of humanity humanity goes into despair and alienation.
  And in that situation no one gives instructions to the person, no one imposes moral standards.
At the same time, a free and independent person is absolutely defenseless.
 The basic human problem is with its existence, as Sartre says. I am responsible for everything except my existence, because I am not the root cause of my existence.
 Meeting one's self can end in despair, complete disappointment, and even the outcome of death ceases to be a major human tragedy.
 Schopenhauer 1 Lat sui - himself և caedare - to kill from words, as a phenomenon, self-expression, behavioral manifestation, pathological condition.
 The issue of suicide is studied by the science of suicide.
According to him, in the focus of the nightmare, a person wakes up to interrupt a bad dream, and in the same way, in the presence of bad circumstances, he can interrupt his life like a nightmare.
  "In times of tragic misfortune, we realize that even life can be a bad dream and a need to wake up."
Eventually, Existentialism put forward the thesis that ultimately mortality is only the end of existence, when in fact both death and life are domains within the action of man.
  It is necessary to differentiate existentialism from general existential philosophy, because we can distinguish episodes of existential philosophy everywhere.
  The philosophical foundations of existentialism were laid down in the works of Marseilles, Jaspers, and Heidegger.
  There is often no clarity in the terminology.
  Many refused to use the term "existentialist."
  Sartre said that he was not an existentialist.
  Simona Beauvoir refused to be an existentialist.
 And Camus insisted that he was neither an existentialist nor an absurdist.
  Sartre describes in one episode. "A woman approached me and said: "I have become so bad lately, I have become so bad that it seems to me that I am gradually becoming an existentialist."
  Sartre was deeply offended by such an interpretation of the term, but by "existentialist" he meant the denial, the certain despair, the depression that prevailed in Europe.
  To counteract the perverted perception of existentialism, Sartre made a unique existentialist manifesto, the foundations of which he crystallized in the lecture "Existentialism is humanism."
What is the initial mission of a person, the essence or the existence?
 Existentialism gave a very clear answer to this question: man first exists, that is, first comes existence, then essence.
 In one of his works, Taylor formulates the following idea: "Man is an animal that interprets itself," և this is indeed the most capacious formulation that could ever be imagined in existential philosophy.
If we try to redefine the condition of an existential person, let us disregard that the term "Abraham's alarm" proposes a very variant of persecuting man. 1. Was he really an angel?
  2. Is there a God who sends an angel?
  And finally, the most important question from the point of view of existentialism. 3. "Am I Abraham?"
 It was written in Dante's Hell. "Let everyone who enters here lose hope." [7] և Sartre repeats Dante's words word for word. "And we must finally learn to live with full appreciation of our existence, we must learn to live without hope."
From the field of existence man enters hell, where he must learn to live without hope.
 The concept of general hell rises here.
 A great regularity is broken in cosmogony. Man goes to hell, և that hellish existence, the inner world, where man lives without hope.
 Man was entering the hell of existence; he has to stay there until the end of that existence, although he is also free to decide whether it is the end or not.
 Hell is where there is no passage to higher realms, - that is the greatness of hell, because - man sharply understands that he has no hope of paradise.
 Camus's "Sisyphus myth" comes to symbolize hell.
 Man is thrown into existence, he is meaningless from everything an orphan, first of all, because he will end in death.
  Birth, existence, existential choices are uncertain because man is free to choose, but he is unaware of what to choose without having a perspective and an instruction.
When making a free choice, a person is in a lost state.
  Even in fairy tales there are instructions, while there is no guide in human existence, a person knows one thing in his life: he will die, everything will end for him.
 Sisyphus lives without the meaning of the existence given above, without the hope of having that meaning.
 He knows that he cannot finish his work, but that arrogant burden is the meaning of his life.
 According to the appropriate interpretation of the symbols, the stone is very similar to what the existentialists called the absurdism of our existence.
 Man is first of all the victim of the repetitive և monolithic reality. People live by repeating the same actions that make up the universe of existence, because man lives in order to give meaning to existence, and this repetitive cycle is the most obvious proof of the meaninglessness of existence.
  But if we look at Sisyphus from another angle, we will see that he is not punished or suffering, but happy, because by choice, struggle and decision he raises the stone, standing on the top of the mountain, conquering the victorious and happy moment. he had already lifted the load.
  That fragment of existence begins again և ends in the same way with daily torment and victory.
 This is the highest concentration of freedom of existential struggle. the person accepts և assumes responsibility.
All European culture is a process of self-interpretation, during which man has tried to understand the objective-subjective reasons for his existence.
Without ceasing to be in the hell of his existence, learning to live without hope, in the boredom of the absurd, he understands that freedom is not only a grace but also a condemnation.
 "Hell is for others," says Sartre.
 One can not see oneself in any other place than in the eyes of another, no one else can understand who he is.
 Sartre discovers that even in hell there is a door, և even after the actual end of existence man has the right to free choice.
 Even after the end of existence, man is left with only one thing, his freedom, be it freedom of existence or non-existence.
During World War II, the idea that human existence ends in a second matured և that instant death bears the symbol of the meaninglessness of life.
  These objective preconditions contributed to the development of the genre of the absurd.
  Camus' "Sisyphus myth" showed that human existence is absurd, "survives" motivated only by protest and passion. Man lives without context, being thrown to earth for unknown reasons.
  Man is born, dies voluntarily and unknowingly. it is the simultaneous trap of the inevitability and meaninglessness of human existence.
 The genre of the absurd և The concepts of the drama of the theater of the absurd put us in a deadlock.
 In the realm of the worldview of modernism, Nietzsche's philosophy sets in motion the principles of modern thinking. "No matter what I have created, no matter how much I love what I have created, I will soon have to give it up."
The peculiarity of the theater of the absurd is that in the genre of drama the idea of ​​the absurd is expressed not so much by the horror of despair, imminent death, but by the repetition of existence.
 People do not understand each other when communicating. The communication between man and the world is broken.
The principle of building a theater of the absurd always presupposes a minimal number of actors, as their abundance is incompatible with the monotonous boredom of the absurd of life.
  They are not related to each other by action or logic of words.
 The real meaning must be sought in nonsense.
Alienation in the theater of the absurd is two-stage. The first stage is the alienation of the image from its own person, that is, not having an image, and the second stage, that is, double, in two dimensions, is the alienation of the spectator-actor.
  The traditional theater was built on the basis of empathy, the Greek theater knew that the audience had to live catharsis.
 The theater of the absurd destroyed this union.
 It is impossible to live in compassion for a monotonous person who does not realize his surroundings and himself.
 The audience is not able to follow the psychological development of the image, as there is no psychological development of the image.
 All the heroes of the theater of the absurd forget the past or have no past.
 Man is in slavery eternally dependent on the meaninglessness of his person and existence, it is impossible to eliminate that meaninglessness and alienation even by love.
 That is why the theme of suicide, which is mentioned in almost all plays of the theater of absurdity, the problem of murder is not perceived as a crime, because the theater of absurdity not only removes the moral-cognitive boundary, but also defines the illusory nature of existence and action.
 The term "theater of the absurd" was first used by theatrical critic Martin Eslin, making the phrase his book title.
  The term "Theater of Absurdity" suggested by the latter describes the 1950s. to French playwrights.
 Thus, the Absurd Theater or the Drama of the Absurd is considered an absurdist direction in the dramaturgy of the Western European theater of the 1950s.
  The notion of "absurdity", which originated from the philosophy of existentialism (Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre), makes the drama of the absurd the main feature of reality, which due to the public crisis is deprived of the inner meaning of "cause and effect".
 In the plays of this direction, the world is represented full of meaningless, illogical facts, actions and destinies.
 The term's most striking expression came after the Parisian premiere of the play "The Bald Singer" by Romanian-French playwright Eugene Ionesco's "Waiting for Godot" by the French writer Samuel Beckett.
 The main lines of the drama of the absurd are revealed in them - the depiction of the falsity and meaninglessness of external (linguistic) external forms through grotesque, comic means, in which the daily life of the "average man" takes place, with which he tries to isolate himself which arise from the realization of the meaninglessness of the values ​​of life in relation to death and cruelty.
  The absurd is also one of the main motives of existentialist literature, so we have tried to interpret the concept here in the context of other motives of existentialism: the alienation of man from society, self-alienation, individual freedom, life as death. In the context of these motives, the existentialist perception of the absurdity of being seems legitimate.
 In existentialist literature, these motives are expressed together, revealing each other.
 Existentialism is perceived by the absurd as an experience of the meaninglessness and absurdity of human existence, which is expressed in the anxieties of the human soul, in the sense of horror.
 The key issue of the philosophy of existentialism և literature ն is the issue of existence։.
Man is abandoned, he has no support either inside himself or in the outside world.
 That abandonment gives him freedom.
  Man is free or, to be more precise, he is doomed to be free.
  It is this abandonment that guides the human being.
 The Surrealists not only minimized the genre restrictions in the mindset of having no borders, but also began to develop the problem of the comprehensiveness of the "poetic act".
 Life as an existential unit becomes a poetic formulation.
 This in turn connects surrealism and mythology.
 It is not for nothing that the post-surrealists developed the mythical theme of the initial chaos.
 The world, which began with the egg of divine creation from an unknown point, coincides with poetry, being born from the chaos of the subconscious through the poet-creator.
In his diaries, Kafka writes: "The clock is moving off. The interior moves forward at a satanic, inhuman pace, the exterior at a normal pace.
 Is it possible to assert that these two different worlds are not divided, they are really tearing each other to pieces in the most horrible way? ”
 The absurd world of Kafka's heroes is from the beginning alien, incomprehensible and inexplicable.
 The grotesque is cold, often terrifying.
The external objective world exists as long as it reflects the inner self of the hero.
Existentialism became a fact of intellectual life in France in the 1910s, when Gabriel Marseilles' philosophical works and plays were being created.
  But the official rise of existentialism in French philosophical institutes is linked to the mid-1930s.
  Before the war, existentialism could not attract much attention.
 The ideas of existentialism were spread in France through the works of leading writers, such as Sartre and Camus.
 Soon Sartre և Camus announced that man is involved in the historical movement է is responsible not only to himself but also to other people.
 Sartre's works - the novel "Nausea", the philosophical work "Life's Nothing", the dramas "Flies", "Behind Closed Doors", partly the novel "Roads to Freedom", etc., are the highest expressions of existentialism.
 Existentialist man Sartrin presents himself as something concrete, with his life, with his existence, with his actions in this arbitrary life situation.
  The most important thing is his "choices" of the given individual, his existence as a whole, with feelings and desires.
  Sartre mentions in his existentialist articles that the writer is obliged to endow the hero with complete freedom of action. That is why he prefers Dostoevsky to Moriac.
 According to Sartre, Dostoevsky's hero is "free". "I do not know what he will do next, he himself does not imagine that," and Moriak's hero is a "slave." he is oppressed by the absolute truth, the representative of which considers himself a scribe.
  Sartre is not an individual, but an idea, a bearer of ideas given once and for all.
 Sartre creates the illusion of heroic freedom, but Rocanten is absolutely devoid of freedom because it is inextricably linked to the existentialist dogma that deprives him of individuality.
 Sartre is the god of the existentialist universe he created.
  Rocanten can not go beyond the narrow confines of that universe.
 He is doomed to reveal only what Sartre will allow him.
 Rocanten reveals the basic ideas of existentialism - "existence", existence.
  Intentional consciousness directed to the outside world finds և affirms itself by discovering "being" և "nothing", the world itself։.
 It is what it is, the petrified, underdeveloped world of matter.
 "For himself" is consciousness, it is nothing, existence without essence, freedom և choice, project, eternal movement, which never reaches the goal, turning into essence.
 And existence is the concentration of consciousness with the outside world, that emptiness, the frightening absolute freedom, which the hero wants to avoid, but to which he is anchored, as the only sign of his existence.
 Philosophy is experienced in Sartre's novel, և experience is philosophical.
 The world itself is revealed in a sensual way. The feeling of existence is physical, erotic, hidden.
In the novel, the feeling of sticky material penetrating everywhere, one's own body, the hero is surrounded on all sides, things that are realized as emptiness, meaninglessness, coincidence.
  Realizing the meaning and absurdity of being, the consciousness understands what it is, understands its freedom.
Death robs a person of his freedom and free choice, his only gift.
 In the novel "The Wall", Sartre shows the transformation of a person "into" an object, a body, which, feeling the inevitability of death, decays and suffers.
  The living corpses of Sartre's novel are indifferent in every way.
The existential hero makes his "choice" within the limits of "natural" existence towards people, towards all others, which are determined by the nature of the desires arising in the hero.
 Sartre's works are extremely naturalistic.
  He depicts highly personal, intimate relationships, which show the alienation of a person, the desire to obey another, the sadistic rage.
  Existentialism reveals its individualistic, anti-social core in all the cases when it approaches the life and social life of others.
What hatred there is for people, for everyone else in the novel "Herostratus".
 The self of this novel is obsessed with the example of Herostratus, with the passion of destruction and devastation.
 It is self-evident that there is no specific reason for hatred.
 The whole point is that "hell is for others."
 This idea is expressed in Sartre's play "Behind Closed Doors" [8], which is completely based on the same conclusion.
  The play takes place in that world, the so-called hell.
  All three heroes have gone to hell for real crimes committed in this world.
They all know what happened, they were given a wonderful, fairytale opportunity to evaluate their actions.
 They remain faithful to themselves, they remain ordinary people who cause each other unbelievable suffering, they turn life into hell for the simple reason that hell is "others" for each person.
  In the existentialist hell, there is no other way to get rid of outside harassment than to establish oneself by trampling on the will of others.
  In the story, Herostratus, obsessed with the desire to find himself, to show him, to make free choices, even raises his hand against his relatives.
He bought a gun և is obsessed with murder mania.
 Three bullets were fired at random people.
 As in Merson Camus's novel, Herostratus's is discharged by a purely physiological, bodily action.
 In Sartre's work, the most extreme forms of naturalism are reunited with the abstract forms of modernized myth.
  The precondition for this reunification is in existentialism, as if in a metaphysical "philosophy of life".
 The naturally copied being merges with the absolute categories of consciousness outside the power of development, creating petrified patterns of philosophical allegory from empirical material.
 The highest expressions of Sartre's mythical tendency are his two fists: "Flies" and "Beyond Closed Doors".
 What worries people the most is that they understand that they are free.
 Gaining freedom, the hero of "Flies" becomes a completely lonely person, acquires the ability to "go to himself", that is, the ability to close his existence, as if in one truth.
 He acquires freedom, which allows him to feel like an existentialist hero, to realize the existence "for himself".
  Relationships are torturous because everyone affirms themselves, freely expresses their will at the expense of another.
 People strive uncontrollably for each other. All these aspirations are sexual in nature, but existential heroes value their freedom the most, trying in every way not to fall under the influence of others.
 They live under the power of everyday life, in the clutches of intimate-physiological relations of life.
 Everyone is unhappy, everyone is tormented by unbearable sadness.
 In the novel "Deferment" Sartre develops the idea that people depend on external circumstances.
 Man chooses himself, but the choice is determined by the circumstances. Man is absolutely free within certain limits of necessity.
 People depend on the period, on their situation.
 A person can be born into a poor or rich family, he can not choose his origin և social status.
 Man is responsible not only for what he is, but for all other people.
 By choosing you, you choose others, all of humanity, that is, choice is always a social action.
 The summary of the inner humanism of existentialism is completed with a quote from Camus's "letters to a German friend". "No one is able to lead a meaningful existence where he is crucified for the sake of existence."
 Sartre defined the existentialist notion of choice from Andre Gide's notion of "aimless, meaningless action."
 Freedom was another abstract banner.
 Sartre began to write about conquering it in specific historical circumstances.
 Sartre announced his position loudly during the dispute that erupted between him and Camus after the publication of the essay entitled "The Rebellious Man".
 "Our freedom today is nothing but a free choice in the struggle for liberation," he wrote in 1952. in the article "Response to Albert Camus" in August.
 Only participation in the struggle really strengthens a person. He who turns his back on history is under his control, but he does not influence it.
 Sartre contrasted Camus' "ideal riot" with the struggle for specific goals, the change of social conditions, as opposed to political backwardness, exploitation and poverty.
 The general is given in concrete.
 "Only in historical action is the understanding of history given," Sartre writes.
 1947 In the articles entitled "What is literature?" published in 2006, Sartre speaks about the responsibility of the writer, the social activity of literature դրա its involvement in people's lives.
 "Literature is a work, it moves," says Sartre, combining thoughts into several works of art ("The Undead Dead", "Dear Prostitute", "Dirty Hands", "Satan the Lord God", "Necros", "Alton's Loners" ).
To understand the disappearance of man as existence, it is necessary to look at the picture of human psychological decay given in Dostoevsky's work.
 The second half of the 19th century is connected with the realities in European literature and art, which show the descent of man, his expulsion from the information system of creation, making him either a symbol or a biological unit.
This situation of man was first formulated by Nietzsche in the phrase "God is dead" [11], where instead of God one should read "man", everything will become clear and understandable, especially if we remember another of his words: "Man is one thing, that must be overcome. "
  According to Nietzsche, Kafka does not criticize man. It is absurd to criticize the one who exists, from whom his life has been taken out, leaving in place a human monotony that can disappear at any moment.
 Sartre added that everything is possible.
  The enormous foolishness of the outside world, the meaningless nature of life, the lack of purpose, the absence of purpose, the presence of foreign enemies, the perfect absurdity of existence create a mythical atmosphere, where man is present as a convict, an outsider. a more defenseless helper because he is doomed to destruction from the beginning.
  Dante sees the sinners in hell, Kafka in existence, where there are no sinners, there is no punishment. Existence itself is a punishment, and there is no punishment in punishment.
 He is punished with a crime, and Kafka's heroes are punished without a crime. None of his characters are sinners, but everyone is punished. Punishment when the crime is absent.
 There is no crime, but there is a punishment. There is a crime in Dostoevsk, but there is no punishment.
 Kafka's task is to show the destructive influence of these forces on human life.
 It is not a matter of moral psychology or ethics, but of existence. Man is alienated from existence, and his efforts to enter into existence further alienate him.
 Acceptance of an absurd thought or consciousness.
 The world is a place of folly, a domination of chaotic forces, where consciousness can not be present, it is expelled from that world, its place is the inner world of man, who either tries to resist foreign forces, but is doomed to defeat from the beginning.
 How many people is their consciousness, therefore, doomed to deportation, disappearance. it exists only in its consciousness, it relies only on its consciousness, its closed essence, but "the essence does not exist yet!"
Sin, as a general line of consciousness and involuntary merit, is present in the thinking of both Kafka and many of his heroes.
 "Orj" says the animal in the story. "I throw myself into the thorny bushes to punish me for a sin I do not understand."
LITERATURE Chapter 15, URL.
 https:
//s3.amazonaws.com/aws-website-jamesleonardpark---freelibrary3puxk/AU60.html (Accessed.
 25.07.2017). [2] Kundera M., The Unbearable Lightness of Being, Antares, 2015, 384 pages.
URL.
 http:
//www.dhspriory.org/kenny/PhilTexts/Camus/Myth%20of%20Sisyphus-.pdf. [6] Sartre JP, Being and Nothingness.
 An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology, 1956. [7] Dante A., Divine Comedy, 3rd edition, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 1983, 600 pages.
[8] Sartre JP No Exit and Three Other Plays, URL.
 http:
//www.vanderbilt.edu/olli/classmaterials/Jean-Paul_Sartre.pdf (Accessed.
 23.06.2017). [9] Foreign Dramaturgy of the 20th Century, Volume 2, YSU, Yerevan, 1986.
[10] Камю А., Пиcьма к немецкому другу (translation.
  Волевич И. ).), Альбер Камю (translator.
 Mairet P.). Amalia Soghomonyan THE PROBLEMS OF ABSURD AND ALIENATION IN EXISTENCE LIST Keywords: absurdity, alienation, existentialism, Albert Camus,
non-existence, biblical sin, freedom, Sartre, death
.
