THE ROLE OF "RESSENTIMENT" 1 IN THE FORMATION OF NATIONAL IDENTITY The recognition of the Armenian Genocide by the international community is of great importance for Armenians.
  In order to achieve that, it is essential what kind of mentality, what national features the Armenians and Turks are.
Undoubtedly, the Armenian Genocide is the bloodiest and most painful page in Armenian history.
 Within a few years, millions of Armenians in Western Armenia were brutally annihilated. This is a terrible catastrophe, which has a great impact on the thinking, perception and perception of the Armenian identity.
 Every Armenian today knows about the genocide, and one can often hear such an expression as "the Turks massacred us."
 This testifies to the fact that in our minds we are perceived as a nation subjected to great massacres.
 At the same time, so far we have witnessed the constant denial policy of the Turkish state, which, it seems, forces both sides to always talk about the genocide, and to talk about it means to think about it forever.
  But how can one constantly think about such cruelty, slaughter and violence?
 Turkey's behavior, in this respect, remains incomprehensible, it raises many questions. Is their denial conditioned only by some political or economic reasons, or is there a certain fear of feeling the successor of the perpetrator of the genocide, because it may be traumatic for them, it may cause great obstacles to the formation of national identity?
The present article discusses the consequences of the genocidal worldview for Armenians, the changes that this fact causes in the Armenian mentality, the consequences of the genocide in the formation of the Turkish national self.
In this respect, several features become visible in the Armenian temperament.
 The first of them is connected with national pride: we are of Aryan origin, we have lived for millennia, while many of us more powerful have disappeared from the stage of history, we have created due to the creative potential of diligence and so on.
  But at the same time, there is the realization that he has been unjustly slaughtered by the Turks, as a result of which we perceive the Turkish image as an eternal enemy, to whom we must punish and restore historical justice.
Such a description is reminiscent of the well-known term "resentment" in philosophy.
The concept of "resentment" was applied by the German philosopher F. Nietzsche, և Developed by M. The shell.
  Ressentiment is mental self-poisoning, which has very specific causes and consequences.
 It is a state of mind that arises from a certain tendency to systematically inhibit the discharge of the emotions եկտ the emotions belonging to the basic layer of human nature, to create illusory values, to make corresponding value judgments2.
Ressentiment is built on a feeling of powerlessness.
  The starting point of its formation is revenge.
 Revenge is a reactive signal, which should be preceded by some attack or damage, but the desire to react immediately arises, because there is a feeling of inability, powerlessness.
 The feeling of revenge becomes easier to turn into ressentiment, when it turns into a tempting, constantly "deprived" perception և the power to deprive our 1 "Ressentiment" is a French word that literally translates to self-poisoning.
  However, this does not fully express the meaning of the concept.
  In Armenian literature, the versions "resentiment" or "resentiman" are found.
 To avoid disagreements, it is more expedient to use the ressentiment option.
2 See Identity, Yearbook, Yerevan, 1995, p. 236.
jelly mental state 1.
  In the case of an individual, it is more obvious when a person has physical defects.
  Nietzsche believed that women, children, the elderly, and the elderly had the most prominent ressentiment because they were weak.
  The problem is more complicated when societies, nations and peoples live carrying it within themselves.
It is quite difficult to speak about the Armenian resentment, because as Armenians we can not completely get rid of the personal attitude that contains certain emotions about the history of the genocide in general for the last two hundred years.
  But it is also wrong to be silent about the drama, because in that way we will avoid confronting ourselves, we will be afraid to speak out, as a result it starts to raise its head and express itself in other places.
It is known that ressentiment is expressed in two ways: inward և outward 2.
  The Armenian resentment is not unequivocally expressed in one of them.
  At times, we are likened to “morally rebellious slaves” who fail to overcome their weaknesses and begin to disintegrate it into values ​​such as equality, freedom, and humanity.
 Of course, the mentioned are the highest values ​​from the point of view of ethics, it is virtuous to be guided by them, but in the international political sphere they become only abstract, meaningless concepts that can be manipulated at any moment.
 This is dangerous, because over time there may be an overvaluation of values, which will lead to the formation of false notions about one's own identity.
  It will be approximately the situation described by the Turkish Captain Hakob Oshakanheros. "... first, after adopting the flaw of underestimating us, you added to the bulge of overestimating you."
In parallel, we find the second model of resentment directed inwards.
The obvious examples of this horse of expression are the folk rituals, songs, literary works, which A. In Voskanyan's words, "they are an aestheticization of existence" 4 .... Do not sing, beautiful swallow, the wound under the ground of my heart, And order the children, let them not forget the memory ... It's about turning you on.
For example, the Jews, whom Nietzsche considered to be a people with infinite ressentiment, went to extremes in order to surpass themselves and gain recognition in line with national self-esteem.
 For us Armenians, it is more expressed at the level of theoretical ideas, which have not yet reached practical application.
  In practice, we must undertake to forgive the Turk, but not because he committed genocide, but to be strong enough to stop self-poisoning.
 From this point of view, the concept of resentment is no longer presented exclusively in this color, but becomes a potential to overcome one's own weakness, as A. notes. Voskanyan, to show that Armenians were present in the world not only as scattered fragments, as an eternal diaspora, eternal victims fleeing another massacre, but that Armenians had a certain collective presence in history, are, will continue to have their place among nations. as an unmistakable collective presence in the society that lived that fate5.
  It is very important to know the Turk on that way.
We know the Turk only by "backstage", by everything he has done to the Armenian.
  However, they are only a recognition of empirically unique facts.
 He must be recognized in his "causality".
  Was committing the Armenian Genocide just a political rudeness for the Turks, as some experts claim, or was it an expression of a Turkish resentment?
 But here comes a key question. Is it possible to talk about the Turkish ressentiment at all?
Some Armenian and Turkish thinkers think that a Turk has a clear image of a barbarian;
 This approach is, of course, legal 1 See Identity, Yearbook.
2 See K. Svasyan notes.
 F. Nietzsche, Beyond Good և Evil, The Twilight of the Ungodly, Yerevan, 1992, p. 270.
3 Յ. Oshakan.
 Balances.
 Volume C, Antelias, 1988, page 246.
4 See A. Voskanyan, Congregation of the Covenant, Yerevan, 2008, p. 31.
5 Ibid., P.
However, there are some interesting facts that allow us to advance the idea of ​​Turkish resentment.
Turkish historian Taner Akcam in his work "Turkish National Self և The Armenian Question" discusses the Turkish complexes that are directly related to the Armenian Genocide.
 One of them emphasizes that the Turkish term was considered insulting in the Ottoman Empire until the 20th century.
  This was used to describe rude, ignorant people.
 The Ottomans did not like being called that.
 Even when asked by the British Wamber what they think of themselves as a Turkish ethnos, as an Asian ethnos, they considered the issue offensive.
 According to them, the Turk is the lowest peculiar type of villager.
  Even Evliya Chamberlain, a well-known figure in the Pan-Turkic movement, was despised for trying to purge the language of Ottoman elements and make it more Turkish.
  Hakob Oshakan describes the Turk in the same way in his work "Mnatsordats". "At that time, the Turkish word did not have the credit of today, on the contrary, it was insulting in the barbaric sense it symbolized in European languages."
The Ottoman schools were mainly taught by Arab authors; the Turkish authors were presented in a humiliated way.
  In the Muslim world, especially in the Qur'anic commentaries, the Turk is presented as an enemy of humanity, a predatory race, which is a disaster for humanity.
 A few poems, which are the words of Muhammad, say: "Unless we fight against the narrow-minded, red-skinned Turks, the day of just judgment will not come."
The image of a Turk formed in the Middle Ages is preserved in modern times.
  Europe perceived the Turk as a barbarian.
  Even Danilsky describes them as the most negative factor in history.
The 19th century is known in Turkish history as a period full of wars, in which many defeats were suffered.
  According to the Turkish historian, in the 19th and 20th centuries, the Turks not only suffered defeats, but also their national dignity was degraded. Therefore, this Turkish stereotype became more acute in the 19th century, and attempts were made to get rid of the Kurdish self, as the Turkish self emerged. Problem 3.
 In this context, a number of thinkers set themselves the task of overcoming the destructive image of a Turk-barbarian, formed near Europe, to show that he is not at all what he was before he was presented.
  The newspapers of that time often wrote that the West did not want to understand the Turks at all, they always wanted evil, despite the fact that the Turks with their culture and science left a big mark in the history of civilization, all these services are forgotten, they try them to present illegitimate children of historical development.
  This is how they perceive themselves as "deprived" and Europe as "deprived".
In order to get rid of such stereotypes, the nation begins to create values, with which it must educate the generations, which must show its superiority.
 Such a value is that the Turks were a high race, had a heroic past, that they were born to rule over others.
 They change their barbarity by being predestined to rule the rest.
 This is somewhat similar to the Jewish resentment, so much so that being a humiliated nation, they overcame it by thinking of themselves as their chosen nation.
Peoples with a glorious past are constantly oppressed by that past, especially when they are weak, they are constantly subjected to humiliation, they are afraid of the imminent end.
Turkey was on the verge of collapse as a result of constant losing wars.
In addition to losing vast territories, European nations also interfered in the internal affairs of the empire, using Christians as a pillar.
The deepening contradiction of the glorious past և the filthy present leads to a nationwide desire to revive that past.
As Turkey was powerless against the West, for its revenge they sought the weakest of them, the Christian peoples living in its territory.
 This is reminiscent of the outward model of ressentiment, when, looking for other local solutions out of the inability to resist the oppressor, they rebel against the oppressor's power, but he cannot strike.
 Here is 1 Hagop Oshakan, the Remnant.
 Volume C, Antelias, 1988, page 204.
2 Quoted by Taner Akcam: Akcam T., Turkish national and Armenian question. Moscow, 1995, page 18.
why the Turks decided to take revenge for their national failures on the national minorities, who were accused of treason and wanting to overthrow the Ottoman wealth.
 Turkey at that time was likened to a sick person, but. “A sick man?...
 And many return from the grave. ”1
Apart from considering the Armenian Genocide as an expression of Turkish ressentiment, a much more important issue is today's Turkish ressentiment, which is expressed in different ways.
 For example, the assimilation of cultures and territories of other nations, Anatolia is Turkish land, culture is Turkish, etc.
  It expresses so much resentment that, constantly offended by Europe, but inwardly considering themselves a glorious people born to dominate, it tries to overcome the fact that its bad, barbaric, savage history is illegal.
  It is sometimes manifested in the form of self-justification.
  There is a widespread belief that during the First World War the Armenians carried out a massacre of the Turks, but when they started to counterattack, a big noise arose, as it always happens: "when a Turk is killed, no one responds."
 However, the Turkish resentment was not overcome by committing genocide, today's Turks carry it more.
The Germans, unlike the Turks, were able to overcome their resentment by apologizing to the Jews, կա they have a collective responsibility, they avoid individual responsibility more. Hitler is not the only one responsible for the Holocaust.
 This is not the case with the Turks. Why?
 Maybe because the Turks have a problem of national identity.
We are witnessing that this problem is clearly set in Turkey in the 20th century.
  It seems that Ataturk started a completely new page in Turkish history.
  A model was created for the nation, in which at the same time one must be a Turk, a Muslim and a European.
 For that, certain levers were needed, in particular, language and history.
  First of all, a language reform was carried out, the language was Turkified, which is done by a number of political mechanisms, making a large number of Arabic words in the language Turkish.
  And to become European, the alphabet was changed from Arabic to Latin, as a result of which the current generation can not even read the documents of its predecessors.
  Communication between generations is almost impossible.
At the same time, they take from history what they consider valuable for the establishment of the nation, as a result of which many realities are left out of that history, which really existed.
 In addition, there is a constant desire to integrate into Europe, for which they take European values.
In the modern world, the acceptance of these values, of course, plays a big role in joining the countries that are considered civilized in the conditions of globalization, but for Asian countries, in addition to many advantages, they have their disadvantages, which are related to national bases.
 It is not a secret that the Turks are conquerors by nature, նվ constantly conquering territories is considered a virtue for them.
  There are a number of similar "virtues" that contradict European values.
  And at the point of conflict between these values, the Turks are divided, they consider themselves Europeans, but on the other hand, the feature called national virtues exacerbates (the idea of ​​a nation called to rule all of the above), which does not allow to be European.
 In other words, the European is on the surface, the Asian is deep.
 In today's Turk, no matter how much the European tries to keep the Asian under control, a weak signal from outside is enough - he is Asian again.
 He has brought him so close to the one who deprives him that he seems to be trying to get into his skin, to wear the clothes of that one who deprives him, but at the same time to look for national grounds to remain the "deprived".
 In this dichotomy, the nuances of ressentiment are expressed, which instead of overcoming, intensify.
Thus, it turns out that the Turks, trying to follow in the footsteps of their own selves, in order to realize the desire to find the Turkish in everything, as a result, shrouded their history, taking from that story only what today's Turks need as a nation.
  That story "Beyond the Curtain" is full of majesty and power, but sometimes the curtain goes aside and the cruel Asian becomes visible to the eye.
 On the one hand, they aspire to be included in Europe, for that they have accepted European values, they have left themselves, 1 Hagop Oshakan, p. 253.
The superficial image was created, but inside it is the Asian.
 On the other hand, they glorify their past, but they do not want to face the fact of genocide in that past.
One of the reasons for not recognizing the genocide is that there is a mentality that it is "their" handiwork, so only "they" are responsible and again a contradiction. Who are they, if not your ancestors?
 The question arises: do they not feel responsible for the sin committed, but do they consider the past of the great and powerful homeland as their own, their heirs, the past during which territorial and cultural appropriations took place?
Thus, speaking of the national ressentiment, we notice that in the case of Armenians, Turks, Jews, its sources (on the one hand, elected (Jews), the idea of ​​ruling everyone (Turks), creative և intellectual (Armenians), on the other hand, humiliated, neglected insulted selfishness. idea) are similar, but it may be how it is expressed.
If it only receives manifestations of revenge, it becomes destructive in nature անում is one of the main reasons for stagnation.
 However, if the potential is used, which makes it possible to overcome deep issues, then the process of building a national identity can go in a completely different way for both Armenians and Turks.
Mariam Asatryan THE ROLE OF "RESSENTIMENT" IN THE PRACTICE OF FORMATION OF NATIONAL IDENTITY Keywords: Armenian Genocide, national identity, Armenian ressentiment և Turkish ressentiment.
