JUDICIAL PENALTY SOME PROBLEMS OF THE LEGAL SANCTION One of the main guarantees of the effectiveness of the criminal proceedings is the provision of the normal course of the proceedings, from the point of view of the full realization of which the proper conduct of the proceedings by the participants is possible.
  Therefore, in order to ensure the normal course of the proceedings, the procedural responsibility provided by law in case of violation of the procedural procedure is aimed at ensuring the normal course of the court session by settling the relations related to the application of the appropriate coercive measure.
Criminal coercion is an integral part of state coercion.
 The use of this coercion in criminal proceedings is permissible in cases provided by the Criminal Procedure Code.
  The basis for the application of coercion is, first of all, the non-fulfillment or improper performance of their duties by the participants in the criminal proceedings, as well as the abuse of their rights, which are aimed at violating the procedure established by law during the court session.
  There are many cases when the participants of the criminal proceedings do not fulfill their procedural responsibilities, hindering the examination of the case.
  To prevent this, the court has the right to apply appropriate coercive measures against the participant in the trial.
 The envisage of those coercive measures ևapplication is subject to judicial liability.
Ն. A. Gromov և S. Polunin believes that litigation is the effect of legal sanctions on a person who has violated the rules of criminal procedure, expressing the condemnation of illegal behavior by the state [1].
  V. Մ. Kovalev views judicial liability as the effect of statutory sanctions on a person guilty of violating criminal procedure law.
  P. Ս. Elkind argues that criminal liability is the imposition of an additional criminal liability on the offender, the deprivation of his or her procedural rights, in other words, the imposition of additional responsibilities on them, the deprivation of proper procedural rights.
  F. F. Kovriga analyzes litigation in two ways: the need to act in accordance with the rules established by the court, exercising rights, performing duties, as well as the obligation to bear the consequences of dishonest behavior.
Summing up the above, we believe that the criminal procedure is the application of procedural sanctions in response to the illegal behavior of the participants in the proceedings.
 Like other types of legal liability, litigation has regulatory, preventive, punitive, rehabilitative and educational functions.
In the legal literature, punitive (fine) sanctions include first of all those sanctions that have a great impact on the offender։ are expressed by applying corporal or material punishment to him.
  These sanctions are mainly aimed at preventing procedural violations, punishing the offender, restricting his rights, obliging him to perform his duties.
The court fine subject to the study of the work is classified as a disciplinary sanction, և has a monetary nature.
Thus, Article 314.1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code stipulates the following: "Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, on the grounds provided by the Constitutional Law, the court has the right to apply the following sanctions to the persons participating in the criminal proceedings, to others present at the court session. 1) reprimand. 2) removal from the courtroom. 3) court fine ”.
Article 47 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia (purpose and grounds for applying a judicial sanction) stipulates that a judicial sanction is applied to protect the authority of the judiciary, as well as to ensure the normal course of the trial.
  A court may impose a court sanction when a person abuses his / her procedural rights or maliciously fails to perform his / her judicial duties, disobeys court orders or otherwise violates the court procedure, disrespectful treatment of the court outside in the courtroom.
Some theorists classify the court fine as an intermediate sanction, stating that it has both a punitive and a restorative nature.
 Ս. Ս. According to Chernova, a court fine is a sum of money imposed by a court on a type of criminal coercion imposed for non-performance of its duties by participating in a trial, including breach of court order.
  The systematic analysis of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation shows that the fine imposed by the participants in the criminal proceedings, especially the most prominent participants in the performance of their judicial duties, who serve the interests of justice, ensures the normal course of the trial.
Further generalizing the above, we can define the court fine as a type of judicial sanction, the appointment of which aims to influence the person violating the procedure of the court session or to force him to perform his duties in good faith.
Along with the general features typical of any court coercion, the court fine has its own peculiarities.
 In particular, in criminal proceedings it has a special purpose, acting as a sanction ensuring criminal liability.
 As we have mentioned, it has a punitive nature; it serves as a punitive measure against those who have committed criminal offenses, because it causes unfavorable consequences for them in the form of a financial burden.
 The peculiarity of legal relations protected by court fines is in their direct or special nature.
 It should be noted that these legal relations arise ամանակ during the involvement of the parties in the performance of legal actions, և as a result of non-performance of duties, և between the persons present at the court և court session և.
Judicial fines, as a form of criminal coercion, are envisaged in a number of countries, and the study of the experience of those countries can certainly be used for the development of domestic legislation.
  Thus, the Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine provides for the imposition of a fine on all persons who violate their legal obligations.
  In Belarus, for failure to perform duties without good reason and for disobeying the orders of the body conducting the criminal proceedings, city 1 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation provides for a "fine" - a fine, while the same sanction is provided for in the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation. .
The plaintiff, the defendant, the representative, the witness, the expert, the translator, as well as other persons may be fined.
  Under the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Lithuania, a fine is again imposed for non-fulfillment of procedural obligations.
  Thus, according to the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Lithuania, a witness, like any person who fails to appear before the investigator, prosecutor, judge during the pre-trial proceedings without good reason, may be fined, and in some cases provided by law may be detained for up to one month.
  The accused և the suspect և may be fined for no good reason for failing to appear in due process.
  The prosecutor appoints the fine at his / her own discretion or through the mediation of the relevant competent body of the pre-trial proceedings, and the court through the mediation of the prosecutor or at his / her own discretion.
  In Moldova, for violating the specific obligations provided by law, a court fine is envisaged.
 For example, a person who has been assigned custody of a minor ել has violated or failed to perform that duty may, depending on the circumstances, be subject to either criminal liability or a fine. [9]
  Under German criminal law, not only can all participants in the proceedings be fined for non-performance of their duties, but they can also be arrested for violating the court order.
 In the event of another offense, legal sanctions may again be imposed.
  Under the Austrian Code of Criminal Procedure, the court has the power to impose a fine on the accused, the victim, the witness, the expert, all persons who are not representatives of the authorities.
The Czech Criminal Procedure Code provides that a fine may be imposed on a person who violates court order or insults a court, state representative, investigator or police officer or fails to comply with an order without sufficient apology.
 The French Code of Criminal Procedure lists not only the full range of offenses punishable by a fine, but also all those who can apply it, which is rare in foreign law.
 Under the laws of England and Wales, the courts have great authority to regulate the conduct of persons who show disrespect to the court.
 A fine can be applied.
  The procedure for applying the sanction in the case of England and Wales is peculiar.
  In particular, the person against whom the coercion is applied, in writing is informed about the actions that serve as a basis for the application of the sanction, the possible punishments are presented, they are allowed to apologize, to explain the actions.
  In addition, if there is a danger that the judge who has been treated disrespectfully may not be impartial, the case will be handed over to another judge.
  But in any case, this procedure should be applied only when it is necessary to protect the interests of justice.
  Similar regulations are envisaged in the legislation of Scotland, Ireland, Slovenia and Cyprus.
It is clear that the practice of imposing court fines is widespread in foreign countries, where the issues related to this institution have long been regulated in detail by law.
Let's move from the study of international experience to the issues of regulation of domestic legislation.
 The Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia defines the purpose of applying judicial sanctions, that is, to protect the authority of the judiciary և to ensure the normal course of the court session (Article 47).
 It follows from the analysis of the current provisions of the RA Criminal Procedure Code համապատասխան the relevant provisions of the RA Judicial Codes, the legislator considers the application of the adoption fine possible only at the stage of the judicial examination.
  The draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the "Draft"), in contrast to some sanctions, which provided for the possibility of their application in pre-trial proceedings, did not establish that possibility for a court fine.
 Disagreeing with the above regulation, it should be noted that in practice there are possible cases, for example, when the expert refuses to give an opinion or appears at the relevant interrogation to clarify questions related to the conclusion, or the lawyer intentionally prolongs the pre-trial examination.
  In such cases, taking into account both the experience of foreign countries [12] (for example, the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation provides for the imposition of a fine in case of absence of a witness or other participant or non-compliance with the orders of the body conducting the proceedings) and monetary nature , we consider it expedient to extend the application of the court fine by pre-trial proceedings.
According to the current Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, the grounds for imposing a fine are provided by the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia (Article 314.1). showing disrespect to the court in the courtroom.
It should be noted that this legal regulation is problematic.
 In fact, the current Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia envisages the application of a court fine in case of abuse of rights, but the question arises as to which actions should be considered as abuse of rights.
There is an opinion in the legal literature that in case of abuse of law, a court penalty can be applied, characterizing the abuse as a violation of the principles of criminal proceedings, an exercise of procedural rights that seeks to harm other participants [13].
 The Louisiana Supreme Court has stated in one of its cases that the law is abused even when the law is exercised without the pursuit of any serious purpose, even if the exercise of that right does not cause harm.
 A definite solution to this problem is contained in the Draft, stating that in case of abuse of rights, only the restriction of the exercise of the right to a judicial sanction can be applied (Article 141).
 However, we think this is only a partial solution to the problem, because although it is clear that a fine will be applied in the above-mentioned case, there is no answer to the question in which cases the fine will be imposed.
  In case of disrespect to the court, disobedience to the court orders, the regulations are clear, but the situation is different in case of non-performance of duties, as the legislator does not specify which duties will lead to the application of the sanction, leaving it to the court.
  And failure to clearly state the relevant responsibilities can lead to certain abuses and pressures.
Thus, taking into account the above-mentioned unfavorable monetary consequences for a person in case of imposing a court fine, as well as the need to ensure the independence of the participants in the trial, we believe that all the obligations in case of non-fulfillment of which a court fine may be imposed should be directly envisaged in the Criminal Procedure Code.
  We consider that in order to clarify the judicial practice of applying procedural sanctions, it is necessary to improve the existing legislative provisions, to envisage the possibility of applying sanctions in specific articles.
  The legal literature rightly states that offenses for which fines should be imposed should be explicitly provided for by law.
 Clarity is never superfluous, especially in legislation, such as in France.
The next issue is the procedure for applying and imposing a court fine.
 The ability of a court to impose a judicial sanction is certainly intended to ensure the normal functioning of the courts, which is also a guarantee of a fair trial.
  However, the law should provide adequate guarantees to ensure the rights of trial participants.
 The current Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia stipulates that reprimands and removal from the courtroom are applied by a court decision made at the same court session, which enters into force upon publication (Article 341.2).
 The legislator, who does not have a clear regulation on the court fine, only states that the court decision on the application of a court fine enters into force from the moment it is made.
  However, it is not clear in what order that decision should be made.
  Meanwhile, in order to ensure the protection of the rights of the participants in the trial, we consider that the court should issue a separate court decision, which will clearly describe the permitted violation, substantiate the proportionality of the sanction applied, which will ensure the legality and justification of the court decision.
  This approach is based on the experience of foreign countries and the positions of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR).
Of some interest is the question of how the court fine should be paid.
 There is no relevant legal regulation in the current legislation.
  Taking into account the grounds for imposing a court fine, we can claim that it is not aimed at compensating for any damage, but has a punitive, preventive nature, so in this case it would not be fair to impose the fine in favor of the court or any other participant.
 Therefore, the offense for which the court fine will be imposed should be considered as directed against the state, as provided by the Draft, with the previous regulations, to pay it to the state budget.
 We consider that the regulation envisaged by the law on non-application of a sanction by the court in case of a person admitting the illegality of his action, apologizing to the court, is of a formal nature, և in practice it will be difficult to ensure the implementation of this provision.
 It is true that it is envisaged in a number of countries, but the experience of those countries shows that the relevant regulations are given in the form of rating categories, և there is no criterion on the basis of which the court will accept an apology in one case and not in another.
 The issue of ensuring impartiality by the court is very important in relation to the issue under discussion. Can a judge who has been treated disrespectfully by imposing a court sanction, whether apologizing or not, continue to be impartial? [16]
  It is theoretically and practically impossible to transfer the case to another judge after the imposition of each sanction.
  At least it is not reasonable.
  However, in order to ensure the impartiality of the court ապահով In order to ensure the independence of the participants in the criminal proceedings, the law should provide for additional safeguards, including the reasoned decision to apply the sanction ությունը the possibility to appeal it, which has already been discussed.
More than the recent changes in the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the circle of persons against whom a court fine can be applied is more controversial.
  The subjects of criminal procedural offenses are the participants in the criminal proceedings, respectively, who, in accordance with their status, perform different functions.
  Such may be the citizens who do not participate in the procedure, but after that are obliged to observe the order of the court session.
 According to the recent amendments to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the court fine can now be applied to the prosecutor and the lawyer.
Given the importance of the issue, we consider it necessary to refer to the international experience in this regard.
 The criminal procedure laws of almost all countries presented in this paper consider the application of court fines to all participants in criminal proceedings.
  The Maltese government has stated in the case of Kyprianou v. Cyprus that Maltese law provides for a special provision for judicial violations committed by lawyers.
 In specific cases, the judge may suspend the activities of a lawyer for a period not exceeding one month.
 Still in 2003 The Federal Court of Western Siberia ruled that the lawyer had been fined, arguing that he had acted to prolong the proceedings.
 The countries of the Anglo-American legal system allow the court not only to fine, but also to arrest both the prosecutor and the lawyer for showing disrespect to the court.
25.10.2000 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the freedom of professional activity of a lawyer Paragraph 1 of Principle 1 of Recommendation No. 2000 (2000) requires that all necessary measures be taken to respect, protect, promote and promote the freedom of professional practice of lawyers without discrimination, and in the light of unlawful interference by the authorities or the public, in particular the relevant provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights. .
According to paragraph 4 of the same principle, lawyers should not suffer the consequences or be subjected to any sanctions or pressure when acting in accordance with their professional standards.
  At the same time, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe states in its same recommendation that lawyers must respect the judicial system, perform their duties towards the court in accordance with the professional standards of domestic law.
Paragraph 49 of the Clarification of the same instruction states that courts must use any statutory sanction, including the imposition of a fine, to ensure compliance.
With the above in mind, the question arises as to whether a lawyer can be fined for a lawyer if they do not perform their duties or deliberately show disrespect to the court.
  We believe that the special status of a lawyer և a prosecutor gives them a central role in the administration of justice, as a mediator in society և courts.
 Lawyers are entitled to comment on issues related to justice, but their criticism should not go beyond certain limits.
 In this regard, the European Court of Human Rights' approach is that Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms should not be taken in an absolute sense.
Moreover, the lawyer's freedom of speech in the courtroom is not restricted; certain interests, such as the authority of the judiciary, are sufficient to justify the restrictions of the right provided for in Article 10 [19].
We find that by abusing the right, showing disrespect to the court, the lawyer և the prosecutor obstructs the proceedings like any third party, thereby harming justice.
  The court sanction in this case aims to ensure the right to a fair trial.
 Its application is not the wish of the court.
It becomes the duty of the court when it demands the interest of justice.
 In the event of misconduct in court for their own purposes, the relevant entities violate their professional duties by their actions; therefore, they must bear the same legal consequences as all those who show disrespect to the court or do not perform their duties maliciously.
 The principle of equality assumes equal responsibility.
 One is meaningless without the other.
 A lawyer ազ is prosecuted for a wide range of rights, but without legal liability for the abuse of those rights, the proper exercise of those rights is endangered.
In practice, for example, there are no serious mechanisms to counteract the unnecessary prolongation of the court session by a lawyer or a prosecutor.
 It is no secret that lawyers often choose "special protection" measures to prolong the proceedings, for example, the lawyer of the victim deliberately delays the court session so that the defendant's bank accounts or property are detained for a longer period of time.
 In the same way, prosecutors can prolong court hearings when the accused is in custody, allow the accusation, and the person does not plead guilty; by prolonging the proceedings, the prosecutors sometimes expect the person to testify and the accusation will be confirmed.
In this situation, the actions of the lawyer-prosecutor may not have any effect on the outcome of the case, but a conflict of interest is inevitable, as there is a requirement to complete the trial within a reasonable time, which must be maintained regardless of the subjective aspirations of individual participants.
It is not expedient to apply the sanction of dismissal of a prosecutor or a lawyer from the courtroom, as it causes other procedural problems.
 The court may apply to the Prosecutor General or the Chamber of Advocates, but that application may be left without due consideration.
Therefore, taking into account the above, as well as the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, "On the freedom of professional activity of lawyers" of 25.10.2000. The provisions of Recommendation No. (2000) 21, the positions of the ECHR are justified; we consider it necessary to impose a court fine on a lawyer or a prosecutor.
 However, we suggest that in each case the imposition of a court fine be carried out with the following interests in mind: 1. the need to ensure the reputation of the prosecutor, the lawyer and the effectiveness of their professional work, 2. the other rights of the lawyer's client, including the defendant; Prevention of violations, provision of court proceedings, protection of the rights of other persons.
LITERATURE Constitution of the USSR, Ryazan.
 RVSH MVD USSR, 1979, ss. 138–9.
 Published in LGU, 1976, c. 96.successful realization of key responsibilities; Уголовная ответственность.
 prob [6] Chernova S. С., Меры уголовно -просесуаляого принуждения.
 textbook Посо [7] Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine.
[8] Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Lithuania.
[9] Moldovan Criminal Procedure Code.
[10] Criminal Procedure Code of the Federal Republic of Germany.
[12] Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Lithuania.
2007, ss. 253-4, URL.
 https:
//cyberleninka.ru/article/v/karatelnye-protsessualnye-sanktsii(tay
 26.03.2018) .URL.
 http:
//law.justia.com/cases/louisiana/supreme-court/1977/344-so-2d-1353-1.html(Accessed.
 22.03.2018) .URL.
 https:
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng#{"itemid ".
["001-71671"] Access (Accessed.
 22.03.2018). [18] URL.
  https:
//rm.coe.int/16804d0fc8 (Accessed.
 21.03.2018) .Gasparyan CLERATORY PENALTY SOME ISSUES OF JUDICIAL SANCTION Keywords: criminal proceedings, criminal coercion, judicial sanction, court fine, prosecutor, lawyer.
