FEATURES OF AZERBAIJAN'S INFORMATION POLICY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE "APRIL WAR"
  Information policy is an integral part of the information war.
  The term "information policy" came into being with the notion of "information war", registering a conceptual evolution over time.
 1990-1991 Not only the "information war" started after the Iraq-Kuwait war, but also the period of studying the term "information policy".
  In the professional literature, the latter's comprehensive interpretations and definitions emerged as a term that emerged in the context of globalization, outside of the fourth generation war.
Effective information policy is one of the guarantees of success in the information field.
 In this regard, the Azerbaijani propaganda machine is active on all possible platforms, trying to create, spread anti-Armenian myths, pro-Azerbaijani statements, but rather tries to create the impression that it is achieving definite success.
The aim of this work is to present the information policy of Azerbaijan with its manipulation tricks based on the peculiarities of the information struggle, the coverage of the April four-day war by a number of reputable Azerbaijani media, as well as the positive and negative sides in the field of information security.
1 "Information war" is a scientific, political, military term, a set of information activities aimed at defending the enemy's state "military management system" and its leaders, as well as its own information and information systems.
  Information warfare, in addition to carrying out information attacks, also has information protection and security.
The source of the article was the media publications.
It is no secret that in the 21st century, the mass media has become one of the most powerful tools of conflict management, one of the most powerful means of resistance to the implementation of the modern information war.
 On the one hand, they can provoke a conflict, on the other hand, they can contribute to the settlement process.
 In this context, the current Azerbaijani authorities play a major role in the media in the Artsakh conflict, actively using it in their anti-Armenian activities.
  In the current situation, the right information policy is one of the preconditions for success in the information field, which both sides strive for.
  Thus, in the unstable conditions of the Karabakh conflict, the Armenian-Azerbaijani sides, being in a constant information war, try to do their best to achieve tangible success.
The Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict ended after the establishment of the ceasefire. it entered a new phase of the information sphere.
  Here, Azerbaijan conducts propaganda in three main directions, each of which has its own strategy and tactical goals.
 These are: • propaganda for the internal audience, one of the strategic priorities of which is to deepen the hostility towards the image of the "enemy" Armenian, to build the conviction of the economically weak Armenian-Azerbaijani army, to psychologically prepare the Azerbaijani society for a victorious war, • propaganda for the Armenian audience, whose strategic One of the priorities is to mature the idea of ​​handing over the "occupied" territories to Azerbaijan through continuous information and psychological pressures in the Armenian society, and in case of a possible war, to psychologically prepare for the defeat of the Armenian side.Anti-Artsakh positions aimed at spreading the provision of "occupied territories" and presenting Armenia as a "genocide perpetrator" and "invader".
In this context, 2016 The April four-day war became the platform on which the Azerbaijani propaganda machine took its information policy to a new level.
Before the April war, the internal political situation in the country was quite tense, as a result of which the wave of disobedience in the country could get out of control, so it was necessary to divert public attention.
 In this respect, the Artsakh issue and the Artsakh frontline have always been the best platform for Azerbaijan.
  In such a situation, of course, the Azerbaijani side did not refrain from spreading misinformation.
Let us remember that in 2015 On December 5, the Azeri Oxu news agency reported that the Deputy Commander of one of the Defense Army units, Colonel Jalal Harutyunyan, had been killed in an artillery shelling on Armenian positions.
 Minutes after "being killed", Colonel J. Harutyunyan personally commented on the false rumors about his "death" [2], revealing the working style of the Azerbaijani propaganda machine based on a blatant, blatant lie.
Realizing the significant influence of the media sphere on the consciousness of the societies, Azerbaijan tried to influence the formation of perceptions of both its society and the international community by all possible means of its information policy.
 During the April war, the Azerbaijani anti-Armenian propaganda was dominated by lies, fabrications, intolerances, and hatred, aimed at reinforcing the image of the "enemy Armenian" that had been formed before, as well as increasing the role of Azerbaijan in its own society.
In this regard, the intention of the Azerbaijani leadership was clear in the internal audience2 - to divert the public's attention to other targets from offshore issues related to the name of the Ali family, and this was possible through a blitzkrieg against Artsakh3.
 In this context, in addition to hostilities, Azerbaijan launched an information war, diverting the attention of the domestic audience through misinformation.
2 The decision to launch a massive attack on Artsakh was made by Ilham Ali after the Azerbaijani security services reported on the publication of the results of the joint draft of the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists in early April.
  Baku has known about Panama Magate since February, which is an international journalistic investigation into financial machinations registered in offshore zones.
  As a result, the names of Ilham Ali and his associates are circulating in billions of dollars in offshore activities, which could have the effect of a nuclear bomb in Azerbaijan, which suffered from oil prices.
  It was impossible to divert public attention simply by keeping silent, a larger military order had to be unleashed, so Ali was trying to divert the attention of the Azerbaijanis from the Panama Magate.
See https!
//www.panorama.am/en/news/2016/04/04/corruption-scandal-Aliև/ 1556787.
3 Lightning war, which means defeating the enemy in the shortest time (days or months).
 Such a war was intended to be waged by Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union within 1.5 months.
However, before the April war, after the signing of the decree of the President of Azerbaijan on September 24, 2014 "On a number of security rules on the line of contact between the Republic of Armenia and the troops of the Republic of Azerbaijan", the Azerbaijani military leadership set a new, higher benchmark in information policy .
 At the same time, along with completely distorting the facts presented to Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh about the situation on the line of contact, both domestic and international, and spreading obvious misinformation, the Ministry of Defense of that country completely stopped any negatives related to the Azerbaijani Armed Forces. publication of information related to failures.
 This working style was fully in line with the information policy pursued at the national level.
From the very first days of the four-day war in April, it was clear that the Azerbaijani media were acting in a pre-instructed way in which the information should be taken.
 In addition, Armenia was presented as a state "provocative, violating international legal norms, violating the ceasefire, and claiming Azerbaijani lands."
 With such a policy, Azerbaijan aims to hide the failures and large-scale losses of its own army.
The real picture in the Azerbaijani media was exactly the opposite. From the very beginning, false information was presented about the victims of the Armenian side և the incompetence of the army.
 The trick was to instill confidence in one's own army on the one hand, and to discredit the reputation of the Armenian army on the other.
During the war, Azerbaijan's information policy adopted a number of manipulative tactics aimed at making the information provided more convincing.
  Remarkable misinformation published by News.az on Azerbaijani social networks, according to which the Azeri soldiers "reached" the administrative borders of Jrakan (Jabrail) and Varanda (Fizuli) regions after the occupation of Laletepe hill on April 2-5.
  The signs on the Azerbaijani side were used as a tool to falsify the facts, next to which the Azerbaijani soldiers were "photographed".
  Such information could only serve to strengthen the Azerbaijani society, to increase the seeming role of the Azerbaijani army in the eyes of the latter.
Another false example of the Azeri propaganda machine is the "acquisition" of a secret document in the Armenian defense sphere.
 The photos of the "document" of the Artsakh Defense Minister addressed to the RA Minister of Defense circulated on the Internet very quickly.
  According to the content of the "document" published by the Azerbaijani media, due to the intensity of the Azerbaijani fire, the residents of several regions of Artsakh are leaving their settlements, moving to Armenia, and cases of desertion are registered in the Armenian Armed Forces.
  The Armenian text of the "document" կայ the presence of the coat of arms could have created the impression of an official source for the Azerbaijani audience, but the spelling, punctuation and grammatical errors in the "document" testified to the obvious falsification of the enemy.
 The publication of a "document" with such content could have had a psychological impact on the Armenian audience if it had not been quickly refuted.
The falsifications of the Azerbaijani propaganda machine are replacing each other at a rapid pace.
  Another disgraceful misinformation can be considered ridiculous. The Azerbaijani "Baku.ws" website introduced the host Nazeni Hovhannisyan as an Armenian sniper after the correspondent of the Italian "RAI News24" news channel Annamaria Esposito prepared a report on the border situation from the Artsakh position, during which she talked to the host [7].
 Taking the footage from the report, "Baku.ws" website described the presence of the "hired sniper" on the front line as follows: "Armenians who are unable to fight face to face with the Azerbaijani army are defending themselves by sending women, children and the elderly to the front."
Even after the ceasefire, the Azerbaijani media continued its anti-propaganda, this time presenting reports from the allegedly occupied Talish, where an Azerbaijani sign would be placed somewhere.
  The Azerbaijani anti-Armenian ANSpress TV channel, in its article "ANS on the liberated Talish plateau", stated that the Armenian Armed Forces were very weak and that the Azerbaijani armed forces could control the village of Talish in the Agder region because the location was so important.
 Azerbaijan went to the creation and dissemination of untrue information at all costs to increase confidence in its own army in the domestic audience, spreading false rumors about the panic on the Armenian side and the flight of the Armenian population from border settlements.
 It should be noted that the misinformation about the "occupation of Talish" was preceded by another article entitled "Armenians are completely fleeing from the occupied territories of Azerbaijan."
The information policy pursued by Azerbaijan during the four-day war showed that the Azerbaijani society was easily subjected to the manipulations of the leadership, often turning a blind eye to blatant fraud.
  However, on the second day of the war, the world was shocked by the Panamanian documents, which also published documents about the multibillion-dollar offshore property of Ali's family.
 It was known that the leaders involved in the offshore scandal had been informed in advance about their publication.
 Conscious Azeris began to suspect that Ali had provoked the war in order to divert the people's attention from the documents disgracing him and to neutralize the wave of discontent through war.
  In such conditions, Ali's policy was left with the real picture of the victims.
  However, Azerbaijani activists and online media outlets, which received information from the relatives of the victims during the four-day war, constantly published photos, names, birthplaces and places of destruction of the Azerbaijani servicemen.
  An exception to the list of Azeri media outlets was one of the Berlin-based opposition websites, the independent Internet television station Meydan.tv, which argued that the Azeri side was attacking [11] in an attempt to find information about the actual number of Azeri casualties on social media.
  It should be noted that a criminal case was initiated against the Azerbaijani "Meydan.tv" [12], as according to the information published by the latter, the number of victims on the Azerbaijani side reached 93, while the official information spoke of only 31 victims [13].
  Looking at the list of Azerbaijani victims published on the website, one can get a clear picture of the geography of the losses suffered by the Azerbaijanis.
2016 In April, the Azeri aggression brought Artsakh to the center of everyone's attention.
  For almost four days, news from almost all media outlets started in Artsakh and Artsakh.
 The four-day war was covered by authoritative international media such as Italian RaiNews24, Euronews, Reuters, New York Times, The Guardian, BBC, AlJazeera, CNN, which had their correspondents in Artsakh. .
  There were not so many foreign journalists in Stepanakert at the same time.
They presented the situation from the front line, most often referring to Armenian sources.
 In fact, foreign journalists saw and pointed out the reality that distorted Baku's propaganda.
The main theses, against which Baku can do nothing else, were the following: • Azerbaijan unleashed the war, • Turkey has a special interest and role in all this, • Ali's blitzkrieg failed.
In this sense, during the four-day war, the Armenian side was as open as possible to all journalists, ready to receive Azerbaijani journalists as well.
  The information headquarters was operative in Stepanakert, due to which the Armenian side was maximally represented in the international media field.
  The authoritative media presented the point of view of official Stepanakert next to the official point of view of Azerbaijan.
The officials of Artsakh were on the international media platform for a whole week.
This was a precedent, perhaps a hint to Baku that Stepanakert can fully speak on its behalf.
 Due to the Azerbaijani-Armenian information war, the world, in fact, rediscovered Artsakh, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
"EurasiaNet" news website, which provides information on Central Asia, the Caucasus region, Russia and the "Southwest Asia" countries, referring to the media policy pursued by Azerbaijan during the four-day war, notes that some journalists entering Azerbaijan were arrested or deported.
 If the coverage of the hostilities on the Azerbaijani side was extremely limited, it was possible to organize media outlets in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Referring to the coverage of the four-day war by the international media, we should mention that some media present Artsakh as "Armenian enclave 4 in Azerbaijan", and in the information published by some media we can see the traces of the information policy adopted by Azerbaijan. On the one hand, when Armenia is presented as an "occupier country", on the other hand, the Armenian forces as "separatists" who "aggravate the situation" attack the Azerbaijani positions.
  On this occasion, the British newspaper "The Guardian" writes that "Nagorno Karabakh, which is officially part of Azerbaijan, has been under the control of the Armenian armed forces since 1994, when the Armenian forces occupied the territory of 4 foreign states outside the territory of Nagorno Karabakh. territory not belonging to the state.
some areas. "[15]
  The emergence of such anti-Armenian information on the media platform, we think, speaks on the one hand of significant progress in Azerbaijan's information policy, on the other hand, the lack of influence of the Armenian media field on the external audience,
Summing up the above, it should be noted that even after the four-day war in April, Azerbaijan, losing the opportunity to put pressure on the Armenian side over the talks, had to resort to the policy of distorting the facts again, convincing the public that the Armenian side had taken offensive actions.
  In an interview with Russian "RiaNovosti", Azerbaijani Defense Minister Z. Hasanov notes that only 15-20% of the Azerbaijani armed forces were withdrawn from the battlefield during the April war, while the Armenian side withdrew all its weapons, attacking Azerbaijani positions for three days.
Of course, such "reliable" information could be obtained only from the representatives of the Azerbaijani defense sector - media sources, while the facts prove the complete opposite.
  In this regard, we consider it necessary to refer to 2016. The documents found in the Azeri MI-24G helicopter shot down by Narek Malkhasyan, an Armenian position holder, on the morning of April 1, 2012, prove that Azerbaijan had planned to carry out large-scale military operations in advance.
  Contrary to the Azeri propaganda machine, both Armenian and international media outlets reported from the front line that in addition to the permitted weapons, the Azerbaijani side even used weapons of mass destruction prohibited by international conventions, such as Smerch (Azerbaijan denies use). "Hurricane", long-range volley fire systems (GDRS), known as "Gradlar", TOS-1A "Solntsepyok" heavy artillery systems, "Spike LR" type anti-tank missile systems, "Harop" type manufactured by the Israeli company "Aerospace Industries" reconnaissance-strike "suicide" ATS, which were first used in the April war.
Even after all this, Baku's propaganda continues.
  After the April war, Azerbaijan continues to be presented as a victorious party, which will never reconcile with the "occupation of its lands."
 The Azerbaijani CBC TV channel, which carries out anti-Armenian propaganda function 4, published an article about this in an interview with President Ilham Ali. "Let the April battles be our glorious historical victory, the victory of the Azerbaijani soldiers, the state of Azerbaijan.
  We once proved to the whole world that the Azerbaijani army is one of the strongest armies in the world.
 It is also mentioned by the international ratings.
  We have proved once and for all that Azerbaijan will never accept the current situation and will definitely restore its territorial integrity. "[17]
According to our observations, in the days following the four-day war in April, a) the goal of Azerbaijan's domestic and foreign information policy was as follows: To present Armenia in the classroom as an "aggressor" that provoked the April war, • To present Azerbaijan as an occupied country, a victim of Armenian "aggression" • to deepen the previously hated attitude towards Armenians by presenting the "enemy" Armenian as a "monster", • to present some tactical successes as strategically important achievements, • to present the strength of the Azerbaijani army through distorted realities, to divert attention from offshore topics related to the Alien family; the real picture of the losses of the armed forces; • to increase the prestige of the armed forces in the eyes of our own people;• to spread anti-Armenian, anti-Artsakh positions at all costs, • not to allow the international community to come to terms with the fact that Artsakh is an integral part of Armenia.
b) The peculiarities of the RA information policy were as follows.4 The channel belongs to the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan (SOCAR).
 It reflects the anti-Armenian policy of the Azerbaijani authorities.
  Performs campaigning in five languages: Azerbaijani, Russian, English, Persian and Armenian.
Every day news is reported in Armenian, which mainly refers to the Artsakh conflict, the financial and economic situation in Armenia, the spread of Azerbaijani views on Armenian-Turkish, Armenian-Azerbaijani relations.
 The official website of the channel is campaigning in Armenian.
• The Armenian side was maximally open to all journalists, ready to receive even Azeri journalists, • The information headquarters was operative, due to which the Armenian side was maximally represented in the international media field, • there was effective cooperation between media "specialists", • Strict secrecy of actions was maintained;
Despite the presence of professional skills and the ability to counter the opponent, there were some gaps on the Armenian side.
 First, there were almost no translators in the general information field, while in addition to Armenian sources, it was necessary to present the interpretation of the events in foreign languages, in addition to the fact that correspondents of a number of international media outlets were active in the project.
Armenian websites were conducting anti-Azerbaijani non-mass propaganda.
After the April war, Azerbaijan still continues to move in the military sphere with the already developed information tactics.
Azerbaijan is well aware that in case of opening fire in the direction of the Armenian positions from its border settlements, the Armenian forces will definitely retaliate.
 The resulting victims, in fact, become a propaganda tool for Azerbaijan. It is as if Armenian forces are bombing Azerbaijani settlements.
 In addition, the Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan publishes "war reports" every day, which are spread by all media outlets under its control.
 The content of those statements is the same, that is, the Armenian armed forces "violated" the ceasefire regime, firing not only at the military, but also at the civilian population.
The Ministries of Defense of Armenia and Artsakh are forced to deny the misinformation of Azerbaijan every time.
 But it is not a solution to the problem.
 Moreover, Azerbaijan presents the border situation every day with appropriate accents, for example, using the phrase "Armenian Armed Forces", Baku tries to present the tension as an Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict, but such a position is in the interests of Armenia and Artsakh, and the Armenian side does not address it very often. to the problem of border tension. The Ministry of Defense rarely covers it, and the Ministry of Defense of Artsakh only covers it on a weekly basis, which is not enough;
  It is not ruled out that some "professional" journalists and analysts will start using Azerbaijan's information, inadvertently damaging our official position.
 In fact, today in the military sphere, Azerbaijan is developing an "information opportunity" about the course of the Artsakh conflict.
Winning the battlefield is not enough, it is necessary to gain an advantage in the information war.
  In this regard, the Armenian side should be more attentive to the information propaganda of Azerbaijan, respond to its semi-professional policy in a literate and adequate manner, be able to neutralize the information-psychological influence of the enemy on the Armenian society.
It is necessary to continuously train specialists in the field, replenish the base.
 Finally, by mastering the tactics and tactics of information warfare, we can achieve the strategic and political goals of war by psychologically crushing the enemy's armed forces and overthrowing the political order.
LITERATURE [1] Demoyan H., "On the ways of propaganda, organization and implementation of propaganda, counter-propaganda on the Nagorno Karabakh issue", Yerevan, 2005, p. 52.
URL.
 http:
//voskanapat.info/?p=13071&l=ru (date of application.
 11.11.2017). [3] Galstyan D., Peculiarities of Coverage of the Four-Day War in the Azerbaijani Media, "Globus" Analytical Journal 4, Yerevan, 2017, p. 25.
URL.
 https:
//news.az/articles/karabakh/106502 (Accessed.
 12.11.2017) .URL.
 https:
//haqqin.az/news/67332 (date of address.
 11.11.2017). [6] Another stupidity of Azerbaijani preachers, URL.
 http:
//nkrmil.am/news/view/178 (The link was made on 11.11.2017).
URL.
 http:
//www.rainews.it/dl/rainews/media/Resta-tesa-la-situazione-in-Nagornoa95ab5be76f5.html (Accessed.
 13.11.2017). [8] Sniper of the Armenian army in Karabakh, URL:
  http:
//az.baku.ws/hot_news/9822qarabada-doyun-ermni-qadn-snayper-vdeo.html (Accessed.
 11.11.2017) .URL.
 http:
//www.anspress.com/siyaset/08-04-2016/ans-azad-edilen-talis-yuksekliyinde(Accessed.
 11.11.2017) .URL.
 http:
//www.anspress.com/siyaset/07-04-2016/ermeniler-isgal-altinda-olanazerbaycan-erazilerinden-birdefelik-qacir (Accessed.
 12.11.2017) .URL.
 https:
//www.meydan.tv/ru/site/politics/13225 (date of publication).
 12.11.2017) .URL.
https:
//tvrain.ru/teleshow/here_and_now/azerbajdzhanskih_zhurnalistov_nazvali_nats
predateljami-408142 / (date of address.
 12.11.2017). [13] Black.
 93 hərbçi şəhid olub, 6 mülki şəxs dünyasını dəyişib, URL.
 https:
//www.meydan.tv/az/site/opinion/13405/ (Accessed.
 12.11.2017). [14] Nagorno-Karabakh.
 Who Won the Media War ?, URL.
 http:
//www.eurasianet.org/node/78346 (Accessed.
 17.11.2017) .URL.
 https:
//www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/conflict-erupts-betweenazerbaijani-and-armenian-forces (Accessed.
 17.11.2017). [16] Zakir Gasanov.
 Transfer to Nagorno-Karabakh image URL closed.
 https:
//ria.ru/interview/20170713/1498376245.html (data date.
 17.11.2017). [17] Azerbaijan will never reconcile with the occupation of its lands, URL.
 http:
//cbc.az/arm/arm/news/1511946107 (The link was made on 30.11.2017).
Ghazaryan LiparitITARGETICS OF INFORMATION POLICY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE APRIL WAR Keywords: information war, Azerbaijan, four-day war, information policy, media, propaganda
