TYPES OF DAMAGES CAUSED AS A RESULT OF GOODS, WORKS OR SERVICES According to Article 1088 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia Damage resulting from the provision of incorrect or inaccurate information about a product, work, service is subject to compensation by the seller or manufacturer of the goods, the contractor or the service provider, regardless of their fault or whether the victim is in a contractual relationship with them.
Liability for damage caused by defects in goods, works or services is the basis for the occurrence of damage, in which case the issue of compensation arises.
Defects in goods, services and works can cause damage to the life, health or property of a citizen, as well as the property of a legal entity, so there is a need to compensate for such damage.
The damage can be material or non-material.
Material damage is what can be counted, and non-tangible damage is impossible to count.
 In case of material damage, the victim may lose his / her salary, ability to work, incur additional expenses for treatment, purchase of medicines, sanatorium treatment նպատակ for other purposes, in case of loss of breadwinner, burial expenses arise. The damage caused by the loss of the breadwinner is compensated.
  If the damage was caused to the property, the victim may claim compensation for the damage to the property or the costs of replacing the property գույ 1 See ARPA 1998.08.10 / 17 (50), adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
etc.
 If the damage cannot be assessed in monetary terms, it becomes non-pecuniary or non-pecuniary damage2.
Since the purpose of tort is to compensate the damage actually caused to the victim, the amount of compensation is usually measured in degrees of damage.
  In monetary terms, they include the replacement of destroyed property, compensation for lost wages, reimbursement of medical expenses - the amount that should alleviate the suffering suffered.
 Compensation for these damages is called compensatory 3.
According to Part 2 of Article 17 of the Code, damages are the expenses of the person who has violated the right that he has done or should have done to restore the violated right, the loss of his property or damage (real damage), the unearned income that person would receive in normal civil turnover. , the right to air would not be violated (lost benefit), as well as non-material damage.
  Part 4 of the same article stipulates that non-pecuniary damage is subject to compensation only in cases provided by law.
The notion of "non-pecuniary damage" is given in Article 162.1 of the Code, according to which non-pecuniary damage is physical or mental suffering caused by a person who is born with or violates material or non-material goods belonging to him by law or violates his personal or non-property rights. by decision, action or inaction.
 However, in case of compensation for damage caused by defects in goods, services, works, the legislature does not yet provide for compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
  While the study of the experience of foreign countries shows that in this case it is envisaged to compensate non-material damage, in some cases even punitive damage.
Damage, as a condition of liability in the sphere under consideration, has no special specifics.
 It can be manifested in the destruction or destruction of the victim's property, in the costs of health restoration, in the loss of salary (income) due to the reduction (loss) of the ability to work, etc. 4.
2 See G. Bekmezyan, On a number of issues of compensation for non-pecuniary damage under the RA civil legislation, Proceedings of the conference of the teaching staff of YSU Faculty of Law, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2015, p. 191.
3 See Don Mayer, Daniel Warner, George Siedel, and Jethro K. Lieberman, op. Cit., P. 280.
4 See Civil Law, textbook, vol. 3, 4th edition, revised. and additional, under order. А. P. Сергеева, Ю. K. Tolstogo, M., Ed. Prospectus, 2005, p. 73.
Damage can be caused to property (property damage) or to a person.
In case of harm to a person, including intangible assets such as life and health, property damage is subject to compensation in the form of property damage և property restoration costs, which have decreased as a result of loss of health.
The situation is different when the moral damage, which was caused by moral, physical torment, is compensated and has no material equivalent.
  His compensation can only help to alleviate the suffering, to create a sense of restored justice in the victim5.
The question arises as to what exactly the property damage can be expressed in case of encroachment on the given rights.
It is obvious that a person's life or health is not subject to monetary or other property valuation.
  However, one should not ignore the fact that a person's health condition is conditioned by his ability to work (ability to work), consequently the possibility of material (property) security, the satisfaction of his needs.
  The reduction of capacity usually causes the deterioration of the property status of the citizen due to the fact that he can temporarily or even permanently not work as before with the same workload, in the same position, etc.
  At the same time, the actions that cause harm necessarily find their reflection in the consciousness of the victim, cause a certain psychological reaction.
  Moreover, the unfavorable changes in the goods protected by law are reflected in the human consciousness through the negative feelings that have arisen as a result of the cabaret feelings of physical suffering.
  The content of feelings can be fear, shame, humiliation or other psychologically unfavorable situation.
  Such a reaction may occur in violation of the property rights of the citizen.
 Feelings in such circumstances seem to be "secondary" damage, but one must not deny that negative consequences of this nature are in causation with the illegal action; they must be compensated according to the degree of suffering suffered.
 It expresses the non-property damage, which is subject to compensation through the payment of appropriate compensation6.
5 See Civil Law of the Russian Federation.
 Textbook. Volume II, in order. О. Н. Sadikova, Ed. "CONTRACT".
 "INFRA-M", M., 2006, page 255.
6 See Repjev GA, On the Questions about the Conditions and Composition of Delinquent Obligations, Business in Law. -Кономико-ридический журнал, № 1-2 / 2006, М., էջ 78.
In particular, moral damage may result from the loss of a loved one in moral feelings, inability to continue an active social life, job loss, disclosure of family or medical secrets, dissemination of untrue information defamatory to a citizen, honor or business reputation, or physical or temporary deprivation of rights. is associated with mutilation, other damage to health, or illness suffered as a result of moral suffering, etc.7.
  Such sufferings are manifested in the form of negative physical feelings, mental feelings, which to one degree or another deprive a person of mental well-being and mental balance.
The existence of moral damage is connected with the emergence of negative consequences of the actions of the person causing the damage in the non-property sphere8.
Mental suffering can be reversed if it is the result of physical harm.
 Some countries now only allow the recovery of mental illness (a mother being shocked to see her son injured in an accident while the two were walking down the street) 9.
The RF Law on Consumer Protection provides for 10 moral damages in case of damage to property.
  According to Article 15, citizens-consumers have the right to compensation for moral damage even when it has occurred as a result of a violation of their property rights.
 However, the law stipulates that it is subject to compensation only in the presence of a fault that causes damage.
In our opinion, the mentioned approach is right.
 Naturally, in this case we are talking about property damage that can cause mental suffering to a person.
 In our opinion, in case of insignificant property damage, there can be no question of compensation for moral damage.
  That is, in case of compensation for property damage, the application of the institution of compensation for moral damage should be limited.
7 See Post Plenum of the Plenum of the Russian Federation from December 20, 1994, № 10, "Some questions approached.
//www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_5677/.
8 See Civil Law of the Russian Federation, ed. О.Н. Sadikova, M., Published by "CONTRACT".
 INFRA-M, 2006, page 276.
9 See Don Mayer, Daniel Warner, George Siedel, and Jethro K. Lieberman, op. Cit., P. 279.
10 See Law RF from 07.02.1992 N 2300-1 (ed. From 13.07.2015) "For the right of the needy".
The term "damage" is also given in Article 9 of EU Directive (85/374 / EEC of 25 July 1985), which means "damage": (a) damage caused by death or damage to health; (b) damage to any property; Destruction (other than defective goods themselves) of not less than ECU 500, provided that the property in question (1) relates to a type normally intended for personal use or consumption և (2) was mainly used by the victim for his personal private property for use or consumption.
It should be noted that disagreements have arisen over the provision of a minimum threshold for compensation for property damage and destruction.
The French Government has not provided such a limitation of liability for damage caused by defects in the product, as it considers that such a provision would be contrary to Article 6 (1) of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, would be incompatible with French public policy. will upset the balance of interests of consumers on the one hand and producers on the other.
The Commission argues that a minimum threshold of 500 European currencies in case of damage to property does not lead to a rejection of justice, where there is liability, as the injured party is in any case able to sue under the general rules of non-contractual liability.
Finally, the Commission notes that the case law of the European Court of Human Rights includes the principle of proportionality 12, under which certain restrictions on the right to apply to a court may be imposed on the condition that they are based on legal grounds13.
 The basis of this case is the desire 11 See Council Directive 85/374 / EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning liability for defective products.
12 See Opinion of Mr. Geelhoed, Cases C-52/00 and C-1 83/00, opinion of advocate Generalhttp.
//curia.europa.eu/juris/showPdf.jsf?text=&docid=46583&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=re
q & dir = & occ = first & part = 1 & cid = 659176.
13 See Stubbings and others in United Kingdom, Appl. № 22083/93, judgment of 2 October 1996, http.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng#{"fulltext ".
["Stubbings.
 andothers "]," documentcollectionid2 ".
["GRANDCHAMBER", "CHAMBER"], "itemid".
["001-58079"]} to avoid an increase in court cases14.
In fact, envisaging such a restriction is not without logic, it is an effective way to avoid overload.
  And our studies show that there are not so many such cases in the courts of the Republic of Armenia that the problem of overcrowding arises, therefore, there is no need to envisage such a restriction.
In our opinion, the need to provide for such a restriction may arise in the event that moral damages are provided.
 In that case, it would be in the interests of justice to provide for such a restriction in cases where moral damages are provided for damage to property.
The question of the existence of damage is inextricably linked with the need to determine its size.
The amount of compensation for the damage caused must be real ափ tangible, although it may be difficult to secure the amount firmly, especially in cases involving claims such as pain, suffering or emotional distress.
In foreign practice, the plaintiff can receive compensation for both current and future physical pain and suffering.
 Compensation for future pain is allowed when there is a good chance that the plaintiff will bear it.
 The plaintiff is not allowed to receive future pain և suffering recovery, which is questionable15.
The amount of compensation for moral damage is determined by the court, regardless of the amount of compensation for property damage, in connection with which, as compensation for moral damage, the amount of monetary compensation charged may be dependent on the value of the product (work, service) or as a penalty.
  The amount of compensation for moral damage provided to the consumer in each case must be determined by the court taking into account the nature of the consumer's moral and physical suffering, based on the principle of common sense and justice16.
14 See Opinion of Mr. Geelhoed, Cases C-52/00 and C-1 83/00, opinion of advocate Generalhttp.
//curia.europa.eu/juris/showPdf.jsf?text=&docid=46583&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=re
q & dir = & occ = first & part = 1 & cid = 659176.
15 See The free dictionary by Farlex, 2003, http:
//legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/damages.
16 See Establishment of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation from 28.06.2012 N 17, "On the consideration of the civil part of the dispute over the right of the needy", www.consultant.ru.
In addition, in many countries, in addition to the above types of compensation, which are commonly called compensatory, punitive damages are used.
 It should be noted that compensatory or punitive damages are not a new institution at all.
 Its roots go back to ancient times.
  Thus, in Roman law, an act of lawlessness must provide either compensation or a fine (for example, according to the law of Aquileia (286 BC), if the tort caused damage to civil property, then the delinquent provided only compensation for damages, and if damage was caused to intangible property, the penalty provided by law or court decision was repaid17.
Thus, we can say that the compensation of fine damages was known to the ancient Roman law.
Punitive damages are generally awarded to punish a person for extreme or offensive acts, to deter that person from committing such acts in the future18.
In addition, compensation for losses, which is more than losses, creates additional incentives to reduce risks.
 If the compensation for the damage exceeds the losses, the level of care will tend to be 19.
Punitive damages are compensated in cases when the defendant action is so extraordinary that justice can be done only by compensating the damages, in addition to increasing the fine.
As the term "punitive" implies, the purpose is to punish the actions of the respondent.
  As compensatory damages (sometimes referred to as fines) run counter to the general purpose of the tort law, it is permissible only in the worst of circumstances.
 In most countries, the law allows for punitive damages only if the defendant has intentionally committed an offense, maliciously or otherwise committed something extraordinary.
Compensation for punitive damages is therefore rarely allowed in case of negligence.
 But when someone intentionally և maliciously intends to cause harm to another person, retribution will be appropriate.
  Compensation for punitive damages is aimed not only at 17 See V. D. Avetisyan, Roman Private Law, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2010, p. 97.
18 See Thomas J. Collin, Punitive Damages and Business Torts.
  A Practitioner's Handbook, American Bar Association, USA, 1998, pp. 2-3.
19 See Steven Shavell, Economic Analysis of Accident Law, Haarvard, John M. Olin center for law, economics and business, Discussion Paper No. 396, 2002, p. 56.
to punish the offender by confiscating an additional և sometimes heavy fee (the exact amount is left to the discretion of the court or jurors), but also to deter others from such behavior.
Compensation for damages provided by the court only provides approximate damages for damages or property damage caused by the person causing the damage.
  The tort law goes one step further in terms of prevention, in addition to providing the plaintiff sometimes with compensation against the defendant.
  They are almost always in cases when a deliberate crime was committed20.
The amount of punitive damages to be compensated depends on the discretion of the investigator, who must take into account the nature of the offender's conduct, the degree of loss or injury of the plaintiff, and the extent to which the defendant's conduct contradicts public perception of justice and piety21.
Compensation for punitive damages has been criticized for a variety of reasons, including uncertainty ի the extent of compensation որոշ 22.
There are many cases of punitive damages in foreign practice, especially in the USA, where the compensation of punitive damages is significant.
  Thus, Liebeck v. In the McDonald's case, the plaintiff received a third-degree burn by accidentally spilling hot coffee on himself.
 Liebeck was awarded $ 2.7 million in damages for և $ 160,000 in medical expenses23.
In 2002, Philip Morris was sued by a woman who had lung cancer, claiming that her illness was caused by tobacco, that she was addicted to tobacco because the company did not warn her about the harm of smoking.
  The company was ordered to pay a $ 28 billion fine և $ 850,000 in compensation 24.
20 See Don Mayer, Daniel Warner, George Siedel, and Jethro K. Lieberman, op. work, page 280.
21 See The free dictionary by Farlex, 2003, http:
//legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/damages.
22 See David G. Owen, Products Liability, Thomson West, 2008, USA, p. 42.
23 See Liebeck v. McDonald's Restaurants, PTS, https.
//caselookup.nmcourts.gov/caselookup/app.
24 See Bullock v. Philip Morris, USA, № B222596., 198 Cal.App.4th 543 (2011), Court of Appealshttp.
//blogs.harvard.edu/exemplarydamages/files/2011/08/B222596.pdf.
Գ. Bekmezyan notes that it would be expedient to adopt the institution of damages in the RA legislation, which will be a combination of punitive and compensatory damages, will be aimed at compensating non-material damages.
Taking into account the fact that one of the main goals of the institute of compensation is to prevent the infliction of damage, it is proposed to call the new institute of damage preventive damage.
It is argued that only intentional or gross negligence on the part of the person causing the damage should be the basis for compensatory damages.
  In order to award preventive damages, the nature of the offense, the danger, the public outcry, the negative economic value of the act, the income of the offender, etc. must be taken into account.
One of the main tasks of preventive compensation is to determine the amount of compensation.
  The courts should not be allowed to award any amount at their discretion, but to clearly legislate the monetary limits within which the courts, taking into account the nature of the offense and the above-mentioned other circumstances, will determine the amount of damages25.
In our opinion, it is also more expedient to introduce the institution of preventive damage compensation, which is more in line with the essence of civil law.
 Moreover, it must be compensated in case of intent or gross negligence on the part of the debtor.
In addition, in order to avoid arbitrariness, it is necessary to set monetary limits for its compensation, as well as the criteria to be followed by the courts in providing such compensation.
The doctrine of punitive damages is described as an anomaly.
  Its two purposes, punitive and preventive, are likened to the purposes of American law.
  And since the compensation of punitive damages exists in civil law, but is criminal in nature, that doctrine is characterized as "quasi-criminal".
  It is this feature that has caused long debates about its appropriateness26.
25 See G. Bekmezyan, On a number of issues of compensation for non-pecuniary damage under the RA civil legislation, Proceedings of the conference of the teaching staff of YSU Faculty of Law, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2015, pp. 203-204.
26 See Thomas J. Collin, Punitive Damages and Business Torts.
  A Practitioner's Handbook, American Bar Association, USA, 1998, pp. 2, 3.
Therefore, in our opinion, such a perception of preventive damage, which is, in essence, a combination of punitive and compensatory damages, is more in line with the essence and goals of civil law.
We consider it necessary to refer to the ratio of the concepts of "damage compensation" and "amount".
The literature states that the concepts of "amount" of compensation և "amount" are independent legal categories, the differences between which are expressed in the fact that the amount of compensation is a fixed category, which includes the total amount of damages (real damage, unearned income, moral damage). ).
 The amount of compensation is the part of the volume that is subject to compensation in each specific case.
  Therefore, the amount of compensation may change under the influence of certain legal facts. both reduced and 27.
The mentioned approach is correct.
 This is shown by the study of the relevant articles of the Code.
  The Code enshrines the principle of full compensation for damage caused (Articles 1058, 1064), and then addresses the issue of determining the amount of compensation (Articles 1058, 1066, 1074, 1076, 1079, 1083, 1084, etc.).
 From this point of view, Part 3 of Article 1078 of the Code needs to be corrected.
Part 1 of this article, enumerating everything that is subject to compensation in case of damage to the citizen or other damage to his health, essentially means the real damage և the lost benefit.
 It is obvious that we can only talk about the amount of compensation.
And the third part mentions that the amount of compensation for the damage caused to the victim և the amount can be increased by law or contract.
In our opinion, the use of the word "volume" in the third part is not correct, because the volume is constant, it is not subject to increase or decrease.
 Here only the amount of compensation for damage was meant, which is evidenced by the analysis of other norms of the Code.
As for the amount of damages, it, in our opinion, can be changed, added, reduced, if the parties are legal entities.
 In the case of citizens, such an agreement is directly prohibited by law.
27 See Shabunina I. S., Pony and peculiarities of warnings in the history of value, 2004, Ulyanovsk, http.
//www.dissercat.com/content/ponyatie-i-osobennostivozniknoveniya-obyazatelstva-vsledstvie-prichineniya-vreda#ixzz3yMgZa0yO.
Part 2 of Article 416 of the Code stipulates that an agreement to limit the amount of liability of a debtor under a voluntary contract by which the creditor is a consuming citizen is void if the type of liability or the amount of liability for the breach is established by law or the agreement was made before the obligation. the occurrence of circumstances leading to liability for non-performance or improper performance.
In our opinion, the full amount of damage is subject to compensation in case of causing damage to the life and health of a single citizen.
 In case of providing compensation for moral damage, it would be right to provide the minimum threshold for compensation of property damage, in case of destruction.
 It is in the interests of justice to provide for such compensation in the event of moral damage in the event of property damage.
In case of damage to the property of legal entities or individual businessmen, if there is no fault of the person causing the damage, in our opinion, it would be right to establish only the obligation to compensate the real damage.
Kristine Gabuzyan TYPES OF COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY DEFECTS OF GOODS, WORKS OR SERVICES Keywords: product, work, service, defect, damage, punitive, preventive.
