NERSES LAMBRONATS AND HIS POETIC HERITAGE "St. Paul II of Tarson, the wonderful man, the apostle of the sermon, the enlightened priest of the Armenian Church, St. Nerses of Lambron" 1 1. This is how Mkrtich Avgeryan, one of the Mekhitarist fathers, described the genius from Cilicia.
The ancestor of Lambronatsi, a nobleman named Oshin, from Gandzak in 1073. He moved to Cilicia, where the prince of his acquaintance and friend Aplgarip Artsrun was the governor.
  SaOshin gives the fortress of Lambron, which was located in the Taurus Mountains.
  Oshin, his son Hetum, remained in the imperial service and became the famous princes of those parts.
 Nerses Shnorhali's older brother Vasil marries one of the Hetumids.
 Later, Hetumiord, Oshin, secretly married Shnorhali's daughter, Shahan Shahandukht, Shnorhali's younger brother.
  Smbat is the son of this Oshin ահ Shahandukht, who would later be named Nerses.
Smbat was born in 1153. In the Lambron fortress of Cilicia, from here it was called Lambronatsi.
  They had four brothers: Hetum, Apirat, Shahnshah and Grigor, three sisters, Mariam, Shushan and Talita.
 Lambronatsi biographer Grigor Skratsi A number of other scholars, such as Smbat Saatetyan, Mkrtich Avgeryan, Grigor Hakobyan, etc. The parents think that it is good for such a handsome boy to stay with them և the legacy of the director's ruling house.
 However, the newborn Smbat is very ill, there is no hope of salvation.
 At this time the mother takes the sick child's diaper and goes to Skra Monastery not far from Lambron.
In the arms of a child, Shahandukht enters St. Astvatsatsin Church, crying and regretting that he had broken the covenant.
 The priest of the temple receives Smbat from his mother's arms, who soon recovers2.
 Demographer Nerses Akinyan writes that the reason for Oshin ահ Shahandukht's betrayal was probably the fact that at the time of Smbat's birth their eldest son Hetum was in captivity, his parents had to think about the heir to power3.
In the temple the monks teach him to read, write and sing hymns.
 Smbat forgets children's games and entertainments և reads day and night.
 The more Smbat grows, the more the divine grace grows in him. "For just as it is impossible to block the light of day, so it is impossible to cover the radiant love and grace of God."
 He was like an angel in the flesh, loved by all.
  One day his father took Smbat with him to Constantinople to Emperor Manuel.
The emperor liked the boy so much that he offered to honor him greatly if he stayed with him.
In response to this, Smbat says that if the honors he had given him were eternal, he would have stayed there. but "he has the desire to arm another kingdom" 5.
Although Smbat spent most of his time in the monastery, he often received his mother's upbringing and affection at home.
  Shahandukht was educated by the Catholicos Grigor Pahlavuni և Nerses Shnorhali Catholicos, he knew Greek well, he taught his children Greek from a child տալիս he gave a Christian upbringing.
Smbat was sixteen years old when his father died and left a will in which it is said that he handed over the power of Lambron to Hetum, and Smbat was to be in the church of Skra 1 Augerian M., Complete conduct and testimony of saints, h. E, Venice, 1813, p. 344.
2 Soperk Armenian, Venice, 1854, vol. JE, p. 13, Augerian M., Complete conduct and testimony of saints, vol. E, Venice, 1813, p. 345, Hakobyan G., Nerses Lambronatsi, Yerevan, 1971, p. , page 87.
3 Akinyan N., Nerses Lambronatsi, Vienna, 1956, pp. 13-14.
4 Jond Alishan, Druag i saint Nerses Lambrunatsi, Bazmavep, Venice, 1886, p. 93.
5 Soperk Armenian, h. JE, page 18.
the leader.
 When the young man was sixteen years old, his mother took him to Hromkla to see Father Nerses Shnorhali, and asked him to ordain Smbat a celibate priest. "In 1168, he was immediately ordained a priest in the Catholicos Mother Cathedral of Smbat Hromkla and called him Nerses" 1.
Returning to his native house, the priest Nerses Lambronatsi refuses to stay in Skra զբաղ to deal with administrative matters.
  Contrary to the insistence of his mother և brothers to stay in Skra, he, taking his caring tutor, Father Hovhannes, stands out in St. In the Astvatsatsin monastery.
Several times the Lambronians secretly fled to the mountains to try, և he was forcibly returned to his hometown.
  After his episcopal ordination, he tried to escape to the deserts bought on the way to Egypt, to try there, but he was found and returned.
 After calming down for a few days, he set out for Mount Sepuh, where the Enlightener's hermitage was.
  The road was so rocky that his legs were bleeding, but this time he was forcibly pushed back halfway.
 Another time he escaped disguised and fled to the Greek island of Cyprus, but his relatives did not know his whereabouts.
It is interesting that Smbat receives the church titles both times.
  In the first case, when Smbat was sixteen years old, his mother forcibly took him to his uncle Nerses Shnorhali to be ordained a priest, as he hoped that after that Smbat would have to stay in Skra.
 For the second time, already in 1176, Catholicos Grigor Tgha forcibly summoned him and ordained him Archbishop of Tarson2.
Nerses Akinyan writes about Lambronatsi's premature ordinations. "He was a victim of the evil habit of the time, rising to the episcopate at a young age, while the Ecclesiastical Code had set this level for at least 30 years.
  He was aware of the height of the rank, the demands of the position, the weight of the responsibilities, the responsibility and his unpreparedness, contrary to the title of "cosmic teacher" exalted by his contemporaries.
  He had a mental need to dedicate himself to learning, reading, authority and translation in a quiet, distant atmosphere. ”3
Some time after the episcopal ordination, the Lambronians were forced to return to their homeland to take possession of their inheritance.
 In addition to the Skra Monastery, his father bequeathed 30,000 gold pieces, part of which he uses for the exterior and interior renovation of the church, and part of which he distributes to the poor. "And being so pleased, he distributed what he could, and made a habit of distributing 200 and 300, and sometimes 400, of poor bread and groceries in front of the church of Tarson every Wednesday and Friday."
There is evidence that Nerses built a church in Tarson called St. Sofia.
 As part of his father's money, he also compiled a Matenadaran, which contained a number of Greek-Latin books.
 The biographers write that Lambronatsi had the gift of healing by the Holy Spirit, healed many from various diseases.
Nerses Lambronatsi died in 1198.
  His biographer Grigor Skratsi does not write the cause of death, but writes that Nerses felt his imminent death. A liturgy is served in the church of Skra. That very day Lambronatsi seals his mortal.
 The remains are summed up in St. Skra. In the tomb of the Savior Church.
A special place in Lambronatsi's work is occupied by his poetic heritage, which includes poets, poems and hymns.
 Some of them are verses, and the other part is composed with genre features typical of prose poetry.
He wrote four volumes of hymns, only one of which is a verse.
 The first of these is a biographical work entitled "Praise of a Poetic Historical Thing", dedicated to Nerses Shnorhali, who was his mother's uncle.
 With this verse, Lambronatsi praises his teacher և grandfather, presents in a rich language the description of Shnorhali's fruitful creative work. Nerses, who knows the depths from above, and tells the story of the lord of meditation, 1 Saadetian S., p. 105.
2 Augerian M., p. 348.
3 Akinyan N., page 24.
4 Jond Alishan, pp. 97-98.
Translator of the testament, revealing something secret.
Measuring from the Homeric hymn, finding from the rhyming letter, taking it from my spiritual heart, which crushed my heart hard… 1.
In this hymn, Shnorhali is presented as a skilled pen, a man endowed with many talents, who is equal to Nerses the Great in his patriotic deeds.
The other three wonderful poets of Lambron ("In Change of Cousin", "In the Coming of the Holy Spirit", "In the Ascension of Christ") have long been considered speeches, among his other speeches, but the genres of the poet's speech are clearly different. Grigor Hakobyan writes about this. "If the speeches are the interpretation and retelling of the fables in the Gospel, then the poets are independent works of art with their material and structure.
 It is true that some of the themes of these hymns are taken from the New Testament, but those materials are artistically developed, which have become individual works ”2.
These poets are one of the most beautiful examples of our literature, in which Lambronatsi is presented with all the richness of his language.
  These are prose poems, but some passages can easily be presented as verses.
 Let us bring an excerpt from the miraculous hymn dedicated to the Transfiguration of the Mother of God. Indeed, you are blessed on the lips of the nations of the world, O Mother of God, that you have changed your state of bliss and glory from the curse of the Kurdish plague.
Blessed are you, O Mother of God, the golden ornament of the exalted hell, the bride of the deity, for her mercy was upon her in the event of her true hope.
Blessed are you, O Mother of God, for the innocence of the plank and the ink, for the judge of the just has dispersed my abyss deep, my exalted humble nature above awful.
Blessed are you, O Mother of God, the pitcher of golden toast of manna, the bread of heaven, for what is seen from you on earth, fills the hungry with the goodness of heaven, brought to rest the toast անկ 3.
According to some scholars, this hymn was written in 1171-1173 ․ during the time when Lambronatsi was not even 20 years old4.
 Judging by the title, one can think that it is completely dedicated only to the Feast of the Transfiguration of the Virgin, but it is not so. "On the occasion of that day, the people of Lambron imagine the whole life of the Virgin Mary with the successful lines of a brush, of course, taking the case of her transformation more extensively."
The other two poets have the same structural features.
  In the hymn dedicated to the coming of the Holy Spirit ("Nerboghian's miraculous coming of the Holy Spirit"), the Lambronians describe how the Holy Spirit descends on the apostles fifty days after Christ's resurrection, which is filled with many graces.
  The apostles begin to speak in tongues they did not know before; they then fight to serve God, to preach to the world in the glory of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
 The hymn is interesting in that it tells the story of a Bible passage, yet it reflects the personal thoughts and ideas of Lambronatsi.
The hymn dedicated to the Feast of the Ascension of Christ is a unique work written with great enthusiasm in a beautiful and luxurious language specific to the author.
 Here Lambronatsi describes the joy of all the disciples, the angels, the Mother of God, who mourned the death of our Lord a few days ago, and now all rejoice because He ascended to heaven and sits at the right hand of the Father.
Nerses Lambronatsi wrote poems on specific topics, which are summarized in a number of manuscripts and have not yet been published.
  Among them is the hymn "At the Lord's Great Sabbath", which describes how Christ, a disciple of Christ, demanded that Pilate, who had not been baptized, surrender to him the body of the crucified Lord.
  Pilate does just that.
  Joseph lowers Christ from the cross and puts him in a cave.
  He addresses Jesus, saying: "Blessed are you now in the shadow of the shadow of God. Therefore, grant us the resurrection of immortality."
Let us worship you with all your dead, 1M. Matenadaran, manuscript 2496, page 306b-307a.
2 Hakobyan G., page 197.
3 Voskian H., Nerses Lambronatsi's hymn to the Transfiguration of the Virgin, Handes Amsorea, 1925, p. 363.
4 Hakobyan G., page 197.
5 Voskian H., p. 359.
To whom did the Lord preach freedom?
From the mouth of the living to the dead, Praise be to You always with blessing forever.
The other hymn is dedicated to the Feast of the Annunciation, "Hymn to the Gospel of the Blessed Virgin", when the angel Gabriel announces to the virgin Mary that she will conceive the Savior of the world by the Holy Spirit.
  Here Lambronatsi sometimes simply describes the Bible story beautifully, sometimes gives comments, talks to the Mother of God, praises her with a number of comparisons.
The song "Filled with Unspeakable Joy" dedicated to the 12 apostles of Christ is similar in content to the hymn dedicated to the Holy Spirit.
  Here the apostles are presented, who are endowed with the graces of the Holy Spirit, the poet makes them happy, because they are worthy to see the Savior of all mankind, to be strengthened by the heavenly gifts of the Holy Spirit.
St. He also has a poem dedicated to General Gorg, which is more of a biographical work, "To General Varksboy Kevork."
 Following the example of Nerses Shnorhali, Lambronatsi presented poems to the apostles, Christmas, prophets, famous saints and archangels ("Song of the Holy Archangels").
  It should be noted that the poem "Song of the same day in the evening" has long been attributed to Lambronatsi, but further linguistic studies have shown that it belongs to the pen of Nerses Shnorhali2.
More than two dozen of his hymns, some of which he personally sang3, have a significant place in Lambronatsi's poetic heritage3.
 His hymns are dedicated to the feasts of Christ's resurrection, all three to Gregory the Illuminator and his sons and grandchildren.
 Gabriel Avetikyan in his study "Explanation of hymns" presents in detail which of the hymns in the canon of resurrection և belong to the pen of Lambronatsi4.
  According to this list, in the canon of Holy Easter in Sharaknots, the Lambronians have the following hymns: "Today is the Resurrection" Blessing, "Today is the Great Gospel"
  The canon of remembrance includes the Blessing of the "New Islands", the question "Who humbled you" with his work, "They will magnify the new solar tabernacle", "The one who restored again" Voghormian և "Today new people" Lord from heaven.
  The happy-positive mood is noticeable in all these hymns. Lambronatsi presents the miraculous resurrection of Christ through a series of landscapes and metaphors. The double-married bride is the church of God. Under the ornament I am crowned with a golden crown, For here comes the glorious New Christ 5.
Among the hymns in the canon of Ascension are the following from Lambronatsi: The Blessing of Our Ascension, The Question of the Crown of Blessing of Orhnes, The Question of "Who Ascended Today" Lunch, The Question "Who Were Your Nurser" , "Glorious and inexhaustible" Lord from heaven, "Your timeless God" Merciful և "Your glorious" Lord from heaven.
  In these hymns, "Lambronatsi" is presented as a skilled poet, who uses various stylistic tricks to create the image of Christ's ascension.
Entering heaven a great multitude of angels, crying and saying, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord ("Our Lord ascended") 6.
Grigor Hakobyan writes about the Lambronats hymns in the rules of the Resurrection and Ascension. "These hymns with their lively horses and motives are a novelty at the time. Matenadaran, manuscript 7785, pages 234a-234b.
2 Hakobyan G., page 178.
3 Saadetian S., p. 304.
4 Avetikian G., Explanation of hymns, Venice, 1814, pp. 279-313.
5 Sharakan, Etchmiadzin, 1999, p. 218.
6 Ibid., P. 271.
They were in the soulful Armenian song, a kind of turning point towards the love of life, human worldly feelings and moods ”1.
Nerses Lambronatsi presented the following hymns to Gregory the Illuminator և to his descendants: the question "Which is the divine light", "The work of the supreme ancient law" and the Child of the "Divine Faith".
  In these hymns, too, the author glorifies and praises the descendants of the Enlightener, who were the bearers and disseminators of the light of Christ.
The huge literary heritage of Nerses Lambronatsi is one of the greatest treasures of our people, which must be properly studied and preserved.
 Prominent scientist Nerses Akinyan writes about a multi-talented bishop. "It is impossible to confirm whether he prayed more or wrote more.
 But we can say that his "writing" was equivalent to praying "3.
Arpine AvetisyanNESES LAMBRONATSI AND HIS POETIC HERITAGE Keywords: Nerses Lambronatsi, Smbat, Lambron fortress, prince, Skra, monastic complex, priest, bishop, poetic heritage, poetic heritage.
