COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RECOGNITION AND CONDEMNATION OF ARMENIAN GENOCIDE BETWEEN ARGENTINA AND CANADIAN PARLIAMENTS.
  However, even 100 years later, the Armenian Genocide has not yet received the appropriate official international recognition, and as a result of the Turkish policy of denial, the issue of recognizing the Armenian Genocide has become a subject of political speculation.
The official recognition of the genocide is the recognition and fixation of the fact of genocide by the highest state governing bodies of the state (executive, legislative-judicial), relevant bodies of international organizations or relevant international courts.
The official recognition of the Genocide can be by states, international intergovernmental organizations, international non-governmental organizations, state self-government bodies, relevant bodies of city councils1.
To date, the Armenian Genocide has been recognized by the legislatures of 23 states (recognized by the UN) through a resolution adopted by parliaments2.
Three of the officially recognized states (France in 2001, Uruguay in 2004, Argentina in 2006) enshrined the recognition of the Armenian Genocide by law, and the rest by parliamentary resolutions.
 It should be noted that the laws adopted by the legislative body of the state are obligatory for implementation, and in the Parliamentary Recognition, http.
//www.mfa.am/en/recognition/.
2 Recognition- http.
//www.genocide-museum.am, see also http:
//armeniangenocide100.org/states/.
The persons are of a consultative nature only and have no mandatory application.
In order to determine the completeness of the resolution in terms of its content, the extent to which the wording in the resolution is in the interests of the people who were victims of the genocide, it is necessary to pay special attention to the content of the crime. to the problem.
  If there is such information in the formula that is objective, reflects the historical reality, then the formula has a content value, it is not only of a figurative nature.
Argentina has adopted 5 resolutions on the Armenian Genocide.
 The first resolution was adopted in 1993, which states that the people of Argentina sympathize with the Armenian people for the tragedy that took place in 1915-1917, և exactly 10 years later, in 2003, the Senate of Argentina adopted a resolution, which differs favorably. was from the previous one.
 It is already clearly stated here that the crime is genocide against the Armenian people.
 2004 Argentina recognizes the Armenian Genocide by law 24 April 24 as the Day of Remembrance of the Innocent Victims of the Armenian Genocide.
 2005 և 2006 Resolutions are adopted, and in 2007 Argentina passes a law declaring "April 24 a day of tolerance and mutual respect".
Discussions on the Armenian Genocide in Canada began in the 1980s at the state level.
  However, after long discussions, already in 1996. On April 23, 1915, the House of Commons of the Canadian Parliament passed a resolution stating: "The House shall decide: On the occasion of the 81st anniversary of the tragedy of the Armenians who took the lives of 1.5 million people on April 24, 2012, as well as on other crimes against humanity, April 20-27 of each year was declared to commemorate the week of cruel treatment of their loved ones. 4.
3 See Kocharyan V., The Armenian Genocide in International Legal Documents, Yerevan, 2014, p. 45.
http:
//www.armenian-genocide.org/Affirmation.149/current_category.7/affirmation_detail.html.
As we see, this resolution does not say anything about what happened to the Armenians, but simply states that what happened is a tragedy.
 There is no word on where the crime was committed.
  However, this resolution was not final; a few years later, in 2002. On June 13, 1945, the Canadian Senate passed a resolution on the "recognition of the Armenian Genocide," which is much more complete in its content.
2004 The issue of recognizing the Armenian Genocide was again discussed in the House of Commons of Canada.
 On April 21, a resolution was adopted with 153 votes in favor and 68 against, in which "the Chamber recognizes the 1915 Armenian Genocide and condemns a crime against humanity."
In the resolutions recognizing the Armenian Genocide, we especially emphasize the emphasis on the time of the genocide.
 In this respect, the states have shown contradictory approaches.
  "During the Armenian Genocide, the Canadian resolution adopted 1915-1918, while the Argentine Senate resolution referred to 1915-1923."
 For us, the resolution may reflect the continuity of the crime.
 If the crime is limited to the Young Turk regime, it means that the crimes committed by the Kemalists are not seen as a continuation of the genocide; .
  The lack of a clear time period for the commission of the crime somewhat weakens the force of the resolution, in this respect the resolution adopted by Argentina is more complete than the resolution adopted by Canada.
The second possible circumstance is the emphasis of the victim.
 Both the resolutions adopted by Argentina and Canada emphasize that the Turkish government is the perpetrator of the crime.
5 Kocharyan V., The Armenian Genocide in International Legal Documents, Yerevan, 2014, p. 35.
6 Kocharyan V., note work., page 31.
Quote from the Argentine formula. "April 24 is the commemorative anniversary of the first genocide of the twentieth century, planned by the Turkish government."
The Canadian resolution states: "... The authorities of Ottoman Turkey ordered, carried out the massacres of Armenians, the attempt to completely annihilate the presence of Armenians in those territories."
Both countries consider the Armenian population as a victim of crime, mentioning the number of victims as 1.5 million.
The next possible circumstance is the place of the crime.
In the resolution of the Senate of Argentina we read: "1.5 million Armenians became victims of barbarism, horrific massacres and forced deportations carried out by the Turks.
 They have occupied the lands, violated the right of Armenians to live in their historical homeland ”9.
The resolution of the Senate of Canada states: "Using World War I as a cover for its actions, the Ottoman Turkish authorities ordered the massacre of Armenians living in the six provinces of Southern Anatolia and Cilicia, the attempt to completely annihilate the presence of Armenians in those areas, ... The Ottoman Turkish authorities deported those displaced , ... historical facts clearly prove that in 1915-1918. The events that took place that led to the massacres and deportations of the Armenian population of Eastern Anatolia, Cilicia, constitute genocide, as enshrined in international custom, the punishment for the prevention of the crime of genocide, in the UN Convention of December 11, 1948 ”10.
The mentioned resolutions clearly state that the Armenians were deported from their homeland.
 In fact, the idea of ​​deprivation of the homeland is emphasized.
If the Argentine resolution clearly mentions the historical homeland of the Armenians as the place where the genocide took place, then the Canadian resolution mentions place names, it is said that the Armenian genocide took place in "six states of Anatolia and Cilicia", where Armenians lived.
 This wording is quite unsuccessful.
 A7 In the same place.
8 Kocharyan V., note work., page 29.
9 Kocharyan V., note work., page 31.
10 Kocharyan V., The Armenian Genocide in International Legal Documents, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 29-30.
First of all, the phrase "six states of Cilicia" is incomprehensible, և, besides, the term "Eastern Anatolia" is mentioned in the resolution, which weakens the content of the resolution.
 There is no mention of Western Armenia or at least the Ottoman Empire, while for us it is possible that the genocide took place in the historical homeland of the people, the goal was deprivation of the homeland, and the ultimate goal is the restoration of rights to the homeland.
  "Eastern Anatolia" is not only a mistake of geographical terminology, but also a deliberate step to show that the Armenians are not a native people, it is just a region where Armenians lived, besides them, other peoples lived.
 If it is proved by false terminology that Western Armenia was not the homeland of the Armenians, then the Armenians cannot claim compensation for the homeland.
It is necessary to pay attention to the point where it is said that the massacres and deportations of the Armenian population are qualified as genocide, not only in accordance with the 1948 Penal Code on the Prevention of the Crime of Genocide. UN Convention, but "customary international law".
 In fact, the resolution attempts to state that the atrocities committed in the Ottoman Empire were considered crimes against humanity in accordance with the international legal norms that existed at that time, which corresponds to the modern perception of the crime of genocide.
No less important is the fact that these resolutions condemn Turkey's denialist stance, whether the states see Turkey as guilty in its policy of denial.
The Argentine resolution says about this. "With the policy of annihilation, with the intention of completely annihilating a nation, with the zeal of erasing the memories of the past in the future, the Turkish government went too far in denying the genocide, the 'Armenian question'."
The resolution of the Senate of Canada states: "The Government of the Republic of Turkey distorts the historical facts and denies the fact of the Armenian Genocide" 12.
11 Kocharyan V., note work., page 31.
12 Kocharyan V., note work., page 30.
 It is an interesting fact that the resolution adopted by Canada states that the crime was committed in Eastern Anatolia, but at the same time they emphasize that they condemn Turkey's policy of denial.
 The contradiction is as follows. The wrong geographical term "Eastern Anatolia" is mentioned, denial is condemned, while Eastern Anatolia itself is already one of the attributes of denial.
 It turns out that the resolution is somewhat compromising, it can be assumed that at the time of making this decision there was the influence of both the Armenian and Turkish communities.
It is very important for us whether there is a call to recognize the Armenian Genocide, whether the issue of compensation for Turkey's responsibility is stressed.
  We see such appeals in the resolution adopted by the Argentine Senate. "The international community has a duty to hold the perpetrators accountable for their actions, as it is an international crime, a violation of human rights.
 The European Parliament, the UN Commission on Human Rights, several countries have recognized the need to recognize the Armenian Genocide, considering it an undeniable historical truth.
  Mr. President, justice is the only guarantee of human dignity, therefore I ask for our joint approval of this bill. ”13
The resolution adopted by Canada calls on the Government of Canada to condemn the attempt to recognize, deny or distort the Armenian Genocide. "... The House calls on the Government of Canada to recognize the Armenian Genocide" to condemn any attempt to distort or deny the historical truth when it is presented as less lenient than genocide as a crime against humanity. "
 It is also emphasized here that "the settlement of the issue of the Armenian Genocide can help the peaceful settlement of a number of ancient conflicts in the South Caucasus."
In general, it should be noted that Latin American countries are relatively more free in their formulations, they are much calmer to call things by their names than some European ones.
14 Kocharyan V., note work., 30-31.
15 Kocharyan V., note work., page 30.
րկրներ.
  This is due to the fact that they are geographically far away from Turkey and have significant economic or political dependence on it.
Unfortunately, the recognition of the fact of the Armenian Genocide by the parliaments of the states does not bring with it any legal obligation for the Republic of Turkey, it is only of the nature of the recognition and fixation of the fact.
 And in the states where the fact of recognizing the Armenian Genocide is enshrined in law, or attempts to deny it are criminalized, domestic legal norms have been created, not international ones, that is, the norms defined by those laws apply only in the territory of that state.
Until now, the Armenian Genocide has been recognized through a resolution adopted only by the legislatures of the states.
 The main "disadvantage" of such recognitions is that the recognition is often made with the consent of only one body, and other public administration bodies - executive, judicial, sometimes not only do not accept, but also consider these recognitions wrong, resulting in serious problems and disagreements between those bodies. Recognition becomes incomplete and ineffective.
Tsovinar Yolchyan COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ARMENIAN GENOCIDE RECOGNITION AND CONDEMNATION RESOLUTIONS BY ARGANIAN AND CANADIAN PARLIAMENTS Keywords: genocide, Armenian Genocide
Crime against humanity, denial, recognition
.
