COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THEOCRATIC AND RELIGIOUS STATES In political-legal literature, "theocracy" is understood as a state և etc. 1.
 Usually during the reign of religion, the supreme power belongs to the leader of the ruling religious organization, which is known as the "living God" or "god substitute" in the country, "high priest", etc.
  The clergy are engaged in state activity.
  According to the law, the head of the state (the leader of the church) is the one who performs "God's will".
 Examples of the religion of the ancient or slavery era are Egypt, Babylon, the Jewish kingdom, in the Middle Ages, the Arab caliphate, the power of the Pope.
  It is accepted that the Vatican and the Islamic Republic of Iran are considered the religions of the modern period2.
In religious countries, the worldview of people is usually more limited, because they look at everything from a religious point of view.
  People have lived for centuries in stratified communities, ruled by rulers.
  The poorer the country և closed, the higher the level of concern (we mean religion).
  All this led to the emergence of theocratic states.
 In Egypt, the poor could not even think about the afterlife, because if they were not given the gift և the corresponding ritual items, they could not.
In both cases, the organization of public authority is headed by its leader, the leader.
 However, there is a well-founded view in the literature that when revealing the theocratic tendencies of modern society, it is necessary to take into account the whole complex of the relationship between state power and social institutions, and not only the structure of higher government.
to cross the world of the dead.
  Do not forget that mummification was not a cheap pleasure either.
  There has been a similar class discrimination in other civilizations.
  The picture changes with the advent of world religions.
The theocratic model of the socio-political structure presupposes the recognition of the highest deity, which transfers the powers of state governance to special persons (the sovereign leader).
  As a result, characteristic features of theocracy include the deification of the image of the supreme ruler, the idea of ​​a cosmic, infinite state of believers, which provokes the yoke of interference in the internal affairs of other states, acts of terrorism.
 Among the features of theocracy are the supremacy of religion over the state over society, the supremacy of religion over politics, political rule, and the alienation of power from society and the individual.
In the system of social regulation, the regulation of the main aspects of public life is carried out not by law, but by religious norms secured by the compulsion of a theocratic state, which excludes the ideals of human freedom and rights.
 In fact, the religious norms in this case are the same, "the right".
In a theocratically organized society, there is not a state religion, but a religious state, that is, the state is a religious organization on a community scale, endowed with all the features of state power.
 As a result, management acquires the qualities of one-size-fits-all.
Conventionally, theocracy can be divided into two types: direct և delegated.
 An example of direct theocracy is the ancient Israel of the time of the judges (before the reign of King Saul), the rule of the chief priests, the high priests, in BC. 5-1 cc.
 The direct theocracy was Ancient Egypt (pharaohs embodied heavenly and earthly powers), Ancient China և Japan.
  In China, emperors were called sons of heaven and high priests.
In a delegated theocracy, power is given to a person to solve certain problems.
 For example, an empire established by God through the anointing of a kingdom.
The state of Aratta was a theocratic monarchy as the first state formation in the Armenian highlands.
  It existed in the 28th-27th centuries BC.
 Aratta was a theocratic monarchy, that is, secular power was concentrated in the hands of one person, the king.
  The king of Aratta was also the high priest of the land.
  The king discussed all matters with the elders in the congregation.
  In Aratta the religion was diversity, the main god was Hayk, the son of Haya.
  All officials, including military, were classified as clergy3.
  In the tribal unions and prefectures of the Armenian Highlands, there was a customary legal system, the common denominator of which was the customs of the tribes of the Armenian Highlands.
 Due to the peculiarities of the geopolitical, economic, ethnic structure, the customary legal legal system in the Armenian highlands existed for a long time.
Aratta is the first state organization of the Armenian Highland, the system of socio-normative regulation of which was theocratic custom, and its normative form - sanctified customs4.
In the modern world, there are almost no theocratic states.
  It is accepted to consider the Islamic Republic of Iran as such.
  In Iran in 1979 As a result of the Islamic Revolution, a system of government was established in which the Islamic clergy played a significant role.
 The state religion of Iran is the Shia direction of Islam5.
 In Iran, the de facto leader of the country is considered to be the caretaker leader, who is called "Rahbar Moazzam".
  He is the commander of the ¢ ¢ IRI-Armed Forces · »ñ³ ·։.
Article 19 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran declares that "Iranians, regardless of their nationality, race, ethnicity, are equal before the law; skin color, origin or language, such other characteristics can not be considered a privilege."
And Article 20 of the Constitution declares that all people, regardless of gender, have the right to enjoy equal political, economic, public, humanitarian and cultural rights and powers, of course, within the limits of Islamic principles. "
 Thus, religion is recognized as a unifying feature of a nation, ignoring the diversity of believers according to a national feature.
3 See https.
//sergeyboyakhchyan.wordpress.com/2015/12/05/.
 Sergey Boyakhchyan, Aratta.
4 See Vagharshyan A., Aratta. Country of Sanctified Customs, Ghazinyan G., Vagharshyan A., Issues of the History of Armenian Law.
 From ancient times to the present day.
 Yerevan, 2014, page 20.
Today, Iran is the country with the largest number of Shiite followers in the world.
Shiite Muslims make up about 89% of the population.
  The majority of the population of Azerbaijan and Bahrain are Shiites.
1979 The Islamic Constitution was adopted in 1906, following its predecessor. According to the Constitution, it recognized the country's non-Muslim national minorities as religious minorities.
  Article 13 of the Constitution states: "Zoroastrian, Jewish-Christian Iranians are officially recognized religious minorities who, within the limits of the law, are free to perform their religious rites, as well as to practice the religion of notaries and religious works."
  Article 14 of the Constitution instructs the Muslim population of Iran: At the behest of the Qur'an, the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, "Muslims owe it to Muslims to treat non-Muslims in a kind, fair and just manner, while respecting their human rights."
 The same article clarifies that this "principle applies to people who do not conspire against Islam, the Islamic Republic" 7.
Article 26 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran stipulates that "the activities of parties, unions, political and trade unions, as well as officially recognized Islamic minorities are free, provided that they do not violate the principles of independence, freedom, national unity, Islamic norms and the foundations of the Islamic Republic." .
No one should be barred from participating in them, just as no one should be forced to take part in any of them. ”8
Religious (clerical) states occupy an intermediate position among secular "theocratic states".
  These states do not coincide in structure with religious institutions, but in them there are legal preconditions for the mutual influence of the state և religious organization (organizations) և real practice.
 These countries obviously prefer one religion (rarely several).
  Representatives of the main religion և religious institutions influence the political processes of the state.
 In other words, the institutions of the clerical state have a significant organizational function. 6 See the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran (Basic Law), (Unofficial translation by G. Badalyan, Tehran, 2005, pp. 39-40.
7 See ibid., P. 42.
8 See Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran (Basic Law), Unofficial Translation G. Badalyan, Tehran, 2005, Article 26.
Thai independence from the church.
  Here, as a rule, freedom of conscience is proclaimed, but the state supports this arbitrary religious religion, its spread in its territory.
 Religious organizations are allowed to participate in or influence the exercise of political power, ie religious institutions, without directly participating in the adoption of binding decisions, indirectly influence the political processes of the state and perform a number of public functions entrusted to it by the state9.
The clerical state is the state in which the formation of state and legal institutions, the activities of state bodies, officials, the state education system, and other spheres of state life are under the influence of religion.
 In a clerical state, one of the religions is usually legally recognized as state (official, predominant, national), or the state authority creates a de facto privileged position for such a religion.
  One of the peculiarities of the clergy is that there religious organizations, priests participate in the activities of state bodies, leading positions can be held only by persons of a certain religion.
In the modern world, clerical states can be considered Kuwait, UAE, Jordan, other Muslim countries, such as Israel, some Latin American countries.
 In some lands where there is no official religion (church), many state events are accompanied by religious rites, state authority creates a privileged position for a church, provides moral and material support, and the church participates in political life.
  This means that there are sufficient grounds to insist on the clergy of state and public life in those countries.
 Indeed, many of the modern constitutions, acts of current legislation և or political practice contain elements of state clergy.
  Moreover, even in those states whose constitutions more or less consistently proclaim the principles of the secular state, there are legal norms or practical phenomena which testify to this or that religion and the corresponding religion.
  pois constituition balance (Alebastrova IA) http.
//xn----7sbbaj7auwnffhk.xn--p1ai/article/23326 about the special role of the organization.
 Thus, although the concept of a secular state is considered by the current Italian Constitution to be exemplary by some constitutional scholars, there are provisions that emphasize the status of the Catholic Church.
  "The state, the Catholic Church, are independent and sovereign in their respective spheres.
 "Their relations are regulated by the Lateran Covenants," Article 7 of the Constitution states.
The elements of the clergy are manifested by the state in providing ideological, material, cultural, political, legal, administrative preferences to the religious organization.
 The difference between the volumes and combinations of the listed preferences determines the degree of clericalization of specific states10.
The clerical state is an intermediate version between the secular "theocratic states".
 State power merges with the church.
 In such states, one religion treats the other as state status, receiving tax privileges and subsidies from the state.
  Clergy states can be considered: Great Britain, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Israel, almost thirty Islamic states.
  In Italy in 1984 government և The Vatican signed an agreement abolishing the status of the Catholic religion as the only state religion.
 However, the positions of Catholicism in that state are still very strong.
Manuel Sargsyan COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THEOCRATIC AND RELIGIOUS STATES Keywords: theocracy, religious supremacy, religious state, pact Summary.
