RELIGIOUS BEHAVIOR OF ARMENIAN IMMIGRATION OF ARMENIANS AS A RESULT OF THE SYRIAN CRISIS It has been about four years since the Syrian-Armenians left Syria due to the situation in Syria, a significant number of them came to Armenia 1.
In addition to the many socio-economic problems in the country, they face many cultural, linguistic and religious issues in Armenia, as well as in the Diaspora, but at the same time different, which have no less significant impact on their adaptation to the Armenian reality, especially mutual tolerance, cooperation and national values. on the process of living in the homeland with compatriots united around it.
  In this context, the revelation of the Syrian-Armenian religious behavior, which became possible due to our research conducted in 20142, is especially important2.
Armenians have settled in Syria since ancient times.
During the reign of Tigran II, a large part of Syria (Syria) was included in the Armenian state for a certain period (80-60 BC).
 Armenian sources mention that at that time there was a large migration of Armenians to the northern regions of Syria3.
  The Syrian-Armenian community was greatly replenished in 1915, when a large number of Armenians emigrated to Syria after the Armenian Genocide.
 Initially, the Armenian migrants lived in the most difficult conditions, mainly in tents. As of February, there are about 11,000 Syrian-Armenians living in Armenia, about 2,800 families.
2 Ethnosociological research was conducted using the quantitative-qualitative methodology used in sociology: 184 audio recordings և 36 in-depth interviews among Syrian-Armenian families in Yerevan և regions in 2014. հարց Expert interviews were conducted with NGOs dealing with Syrian-Armenian issues, charitable foundations, religious institutions, as well as representatives of the Migration Agency of the RA Ministry of Territorial Administration, and the RA Ministry of Diaspora's working group on Syrian-Armenians.
 In the case of the quantitative method, one person from the family was randomly selected according to the birthday principle to ensure the representation of the sex and age group.
 In case of in-depth interviews, the selection criteria were gender, age և employment.
3 See Abrahamyan A. G., "Brief outline of the history of Armenian colonies", volume A, Yerevan, 1964, page 428.
in the camps.
 It is natural that at the initial stage the Armenians did not intend to finally settle in Syria, where they found themselves in a completely new, in a sense alien environment, which had a number of differentiating factors - ethnic, religious, linguistic, cultural, etc.
 However, later they came to terms with the reality of settling in Syria, and the mentioned factors simply contributed to the preservation of the ethnic and cultural identity of the Armenian deportees4.
In Syria, according to the country's constitution, an Armenian is considered a Syrian Arab citizen with his community-church affiliation.
 These communities are three: • The community of the Armenian Apostolic Church.
 It has two dioceses: Berio (headed by the Church of the Holy Forty Children of Aleppo), which is subject to Antelias, and Damascus (headed by St. Sargis Church, Damascus), which is subject to Etchmiadzin.
• Armenian Catholic community.
 Only Aleppo has a separate diocese.
• Armenian Evangelical community, which with its churches is connected with the Union of Armenian Evangelical Churches of the Near East.
  The residence of the diocesan leader is the city of Aleppo5.
There is a fourth group in the Syrian-Armenian community, which is part of the Syrian-Latin community, whose church language is Arabic.
One of the indicators of the study of religious behavior is the revelation of religious attitudes.
 When asked about their attitude towards religion, 98% of Syrian-Armenians who moved to Armenia stated that they believed (see Table 1).
  A very small mass, that is, one in a hundred who are indifferent (1%) or do not believe (1%), moreover, they are followers of the Apostolic Church.
  For comparison, the results of ethnosociological research conducted in four cities of the Republic of Armenia during almost the same period are presented.
6 Table 1. Comparative picture of the religious behavior of RA Armenians and Syrian-Armenians, (%) Attitude towards religion Syrian Armenians, RA, 2014 Vanadzor, Tashir, 2012 Hrazdan 2013 Sisian, 2015 RA urban settlements (arithmetic) 4 See Hrinschilds T., Settlement of Armenian refugees in Syria and Lebanon in 1915-1939, Yerevan, 1982, page 10.
5 See Pashayan A., Harutyunyan L., “The Armenian community of Syria. Current Issues ", Yerevan, 2011, pp. 12-13.
6 See Mkrtchyan S., Field ethnographic materials (hereinafter referred to as MPI), urban settlements of Lori region: Vanadzor, Tashir in 2012, Hrazdan in 2013, Sisian in 2015.
Believes Indifferent DOES NOT BELIEVE Just as we can see from the data in Table 1, the Armenians living in Armenia have significant differences compared to the general religious behavior of Syrian-Armenians.
  There is a sharp increase in infidels (or rather, those who do not consider themselves believers), that is, those who have a negative attitude in one case are three (urban settlements of Lori region), in the other case - six (Sisian city) are more than Syrian-Armenians.
 The indifferent mass prevails among the residents of "Hrazdan (eight times)," "Vanadzor", "Tashir" (ten times), in contrast to the population of "Sisian" city of Syrian-Armenians.
 And in general, comparing with the average arithmetic index of these cities, we see that among the Syrian-Armenians the faith in religion is quite strengthened, compared to the mass of Eastern Armenians, among whom there are about six unbelievers and three times those who have a negative attitude.
According to Table 2, the majority of Syrian-Armenians in Armenia are followers of the Armenian Apostolic Church, and in addition to the large Aleppo Armenian community, they represent the settlements of Damascus, Kamishli, Raqqa, and DerZor.
 The believers of the Armenian Catholic Church are only in Aleppo, and the Evangelical Church is the Armenians who moved from Aleppo-Kessab communities.
Aghyusak2.Siriahayeri dogmatic character, by area of ​​residence (%) EndameneDavanabanakan ughghvatsutyunHayHayHayarakelakankatoghikeavetaranakanBnakavayr which moved yensiriahayereDamaskos HalepKesabKamishliRakkaDer analysis of the survey results ZorEndameneOrakakan to say that, despite various doctrinal contributions and Syria to show tolerance towards each other yevhayastantsineri this issue, and it is noteworthy that not openly, but with 7 positive perceptions, that is, recognition of each other's religious values ​​and ideas, acceptance and respect for each other.
 "Our church is Katoghike church.
 The woman is an apostle (of the past), there is no contradiction, because there is nothing private.
 For example, we look at the kernel, not the peel.
 The core says that both of us have the same faith. ”
8 Within the same religion, the common denominator of different religions is in the same religion.
 The best example of this is shown by the Syrian-Armenian community, whose three religious sects - Armenian Apostles, Armenian Catholics, Armenian Evangelicals, closely integrated with each other - form a unified whole.
 The integration and solidarity based on religious tolerance has deepened so much that the Apostolic Armenians visit the Armenian Evangelical Catholic churches in Syria, Armenia.
 "I am a follower of the Armenian Catholic Church!"
 I do not like mechanical things, it works for me.
 I do not necessarily look for a Catholic church to go to.
 I also go to all the churches.
  Faith is in my God. Nobody tells me to think like that and believe like that or not to cross!
9 It is not accidental that the Syrian-Armenians realize that the main thing is the Christian faith, the religion is of secondary importance, because the mutual solidarity between the different sects of the Armenians is provided by two very important worldviews: • high national self-consciousness, • common Christian religion.
The first presupposes raising the consciousness of general national affiliation instead of religious affiliation, that is, first of all promoting the feeling of being Armenian, and not apostolic, Catholic volunteer.
  The second is the promotion of the consciousness of the common religious affiliation in the consciousness of different layers of the same religion, that is, first of all, the feeling of being a Christian, and not an apostolic, Catholic or Catholic.
7 Negatively perceived religious tolerance implies indifference to the religious beliefs and values ​​of others, which ensures the absence of hostility and conflict on religious grounds.
8 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerevan, 2014, Interview with a fifty-year-old Syrian-Armenian man.
9 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerevan, 2014, Interview with a fifty-five-year-old Syrian-Armenian woman.
In the Syrian-Armenian community, the latter was fully aware, as in the Muslim period, religion was the most important factor in preserving the identity. "Because we lived in the Islamic world, we were considered a religious minority.
 The ratification was like that.
 So, we were obliged to be in Syria Armenian, Christian, either Apostolic, or Catholic, or Evangelical.
 You can not be free to want to belong to the bridge. It must be registered by the state, so that we can have our religion. ”
10 Despite the tolerance of Syrian-Armenians in religious matters, they have intolerance towards Armenians living in Armenia due to their lack of faith / absence, indifference to church and church services, the presence of representatives of other religions in liturgies, ignorance of 11 religious holidays, not to mention them. because there are no bearers.
 "From what I have seen among the Armenians of Yerevan, I can say that the Armenians here are far from God.
 During the conversations here, it happened that four out of five said that they did not believe in God.
 I asked why, there is no answer.
 In my opinion, it comes from the upbringing of the family ... ”
12 The analysis of in-depth interviews allows us to generalize all the reasons that Syrian-Armenians put at the basis of the religious behavior of the Armenians living in Armenia.
 These are: • Awareness of the priority of preserving the national-religious identity of Syrian-Armenians in a different ethnic-religious environment, as opposed to an Armenian-Armenian who does not have this problem in his country; • A state-level policy of atheism in the Soviet era, which affected not only the senior on the religious behavior of the younger generation; • Family upbringing. This is a logical continuation of the previous thought, which, together with many factors, bears the influence of the Soviet years. 10 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerevan, 2014, Interview with a fifty-six-year-old Syrian-Armenian man.
11 During in-depth interviews, a young Syrian-Armenian told: "Last Sunday I went to a liturgy and saw that Persians were gathered on all sides.
 Someone has to deal with this issue, that is, during the liturgy, a stranger, even if he enters the church, has to leave the world.
  They were walking around the church.
  If we were, we would take it out one hundred percent. ”
12 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerjan, 2014, Interview with a 22-year-old Syrian-Armenian woman.
• Poor socio-economic conditions, which take precedence over religious values, being considered a justifying factor for Armenians in Armenia; • Lack of desire to live a church life. In this context, it would be appropriate to talk about the phenomenon of "secularism", which, pushing religious values ​​to the background, gives priority to the relations of secular life, spheres of activity, • alienation from national culture, xenophobia, which, according to Syrian-Armenians, is more typical of the younger generation.
However, the intolerance of Syrian-Armenians often does not go beyond the emotional level not only because they realize the reasons, but also a certain level of adaptation in this context, emphasizing the fact that Diaspora Armenian communities have imitated Armenian religious traditions and customs. distorted և do not appear in the same way in the life of Syrian-Armenians. "You cannot force the system you have lived on on others. We have come, we have to adapt. "
13 Let us now present the data on how Syrian-Armenians express their faith on a behavioral level.
Table 3. Frequency of church attendance by age (%) Frequency Only 56 և Over Total Age Never Sometimes Always Total Quality analysis of quality survey results suggests that church attendance is primarily festive rather than entertaining.
 However, without delving into this issue, let us note that one in twenty (5%) Syrian-Armenians have never gone to church in Armenia, moreover, they are equally "male" and "female" (50% -50%), and in terms of age: Young and older people (see 13 See Hakobyan G., MPI, Abovyan, 2014, Interview with a 39-year-old Syrian man.
Table 3).
  "I am a believer, I am not."
  I am not an atheist, but I do not follow in the footsteps of God every second and I do not go to church. ”14
The number of regular churchgoers is quite high - 39%, և in this respect, males are more active than females (56% -44%).
 In terms of age, obvious activity is observed in the middle age group. More than half of the regular church attendants, 56%, are Syrian-Armenians aged 36-55 (see Table 3).
It should be noted that the church today is not only a means of satisfying the spiritual needs of Syrian-Armenians, but also one of the primary links in trying to support them in providing socio-economic, health, educational and documentary advice, as well as regular communication with Armenians in Armenia. in the process of providing.
 This is evidenced by the results of interviews with church representatives. "By cooperating with the Armenian Evangelical Association, we try to help all our Syrian-Armenian families as much as possible.
  They are mostly followers of the Evangelical Church, but the door is open for everyone. ”
Fasting is one of the most important aspects of the Christian life. 16 Unlike church attendance, fasting is not so widespread among Syrian-Armenians. 62% of them did not fast at all.
  However, there are Syrian-Armenians (9%) who, both in Syria and in Armenia, constantly follow the days of fasting, and, as we see from Table 4, they are mostly female (63%).
  As a result of the combination with the age criterion, the following image was obtained. Most of those who constantly follow the days of Lent are mostly (50%) middle-aged (36-55) Syrian-Armenians.
Table 4. Frequency of fasting by sex (%) FrequencyTotalGenderMaleFemaleNeverWeight 14 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerevan, 2014, Interview with a fifty-six-year-old Syrian-Armenian woman.
15 See Hakobyan G., MPI, c. Yerevan, 2014, Interview with the Armenian Evangelical Church.
16 Fasting is a ban on food or certain types of food for a certain period of time, complete or partial abstinence from food.
  The expressive meaning of fasting is the period of self-examination and contemplation, especially the period of Great Lent, when believers not only abstain from food, but also abstain from carnal pleasures, live a moderate, restrained life through repentance and prayer.
  In Christianity, fasting is a means of strengthening faith, which has a purifying-hermit significance.
 It is one of the features of the Christian church life.
Sometimes Always Just One of the most important issues is the correlation between the religious behavior of Syrian-Armenians and the prevalence of holidays, as traditional holidays are the main holidays that form the basis of the church calendar and are directly related to the faith.
 Religious holidays have existed for almost a century and a half thanks to the church and are fixed in the calendars developed by it.
 The church presents the typology of those holidays mostly from a Christian point of view17.
Table 5 lists the holidays common among Syrian-Armenians, who have performed the function of preserving national traditions, normalizing public relations, as well as preserving individual needs in Syria.
 Each of the mentioned holidays is a set of rituals and customs with beliefs, special church rituals, its own food, feasts, congratulatory reciprocal visits, ways of paying homage, and the main other components.
Table 5. Frequency of celebrating holidays in Syria և in Armenia 18 (%) CelebrationsNew yearChrist's birthSt. Transfiguration of the Virgin Mary (Bless the Grapes) Crucifixion in Syria in ArmeniaAs we can see from the data in Table 5, the three most popular holidays among Syrian Armenians are New Year, Nativity, Easter (99%), followed by Wreath and Blessing of the Grapes, Ascension of St. in the last place, Tiarnendaraj.
  If we compare with the prevalence of celebrating the holiday in Armenia, we will see that the numbers are noticeably not proportionally decreasing, that is, not only the number of Syrian-Armenians celebrating the holiday is decreasing in Armenia, but also the number of 17 See Mkrtchyan S. S., Holidays.
 Armenian folk rituals, customs, beliefs (tradition և modernity), Yerevan.
 Gasprint Publishing House, 2010, page 8.
18 The calculation includes only those points that were in the Republic of Armenia during the holiday period.
It has a change in its prevalence, for example, if Easter was the third most popular holiday in Syria, then in Armenia it gives way to Tsaghkazard, etc.
    The Syrian-Armenians explained the mentioned changes for the following reasons, which are based not only on cultural, but also on socio-psychological, socio-economic elements. 1. Differences in celebrating the holiday in Armenia compared to the horses adopted in the Syrian-Armenian community.
 And this is not accidental at all, as the three republics of Armenia have played a significant role in the formation of the Armenian holiday system, which differ in political structure, ethnicity, attitude to religion or belief, intensity of socio-economic processes and cultural ties, as well as traditional cultural elements. with the potential for adaptation 19.
2. Lack of mood to celebrate the holiday due to the situation in Syria, restless "waiting mood", the fact that relatives and friends are not in Armenia.
3. Lack of financial resources, as celebrating the holiday implies not only participation in the church rites, but also organization of parties in a friendly environment, mutual visits, etc.
4. Lack of time, unregulated work schedule for the holidays, etc.
Thus, the ethnosociological research conducted among Syrian-Armenians provides an opportunity to form an objective picture of the religious behavior of Syrian-Armenians.
 The results of the research testify to the obvious differences between the religious values ​​of two different masses of Armenians in Armenia, the Western Armenians and the Eastern Armenians.
 However, initially the shock situation and emotional intolerance of the Syrian-Armenians have been overcome.
 In this issue, the idea of ​​solidarity with the Armenians and its manifestation in everyday life is primary for them.
Although the behavior of Syrian-Armenians who have moved to Armenia has changed dramatically in terms of "frequency of church attendance" and celebrating religious holidays that are the basis of their faith, for them the issue of faith is an internal issue. S., note work., page 126.
on their direct interactions with Armenians, especially on the decision to settle in Armenia.
Gayane Hakobyan SYRIAN-ARMENIAN-RELIGIOUS BEHAVIOR OF ARMENIAN IMMIGRATION AS A RESULT OF SYRIAN CRISIS Keywords: Syrian-Armenians, religious behavior, religious orientation, tolerance, religion, church
