THE DIASPORA AS AN OBJECT OF ETHNOSOCIOLOGY STUDYConceptual-semantic changes.
  Concepts are made meaningful in relation to other concepts, sometimes even with subtle differences, that is, no concept makes sense independently.
  However, it should be noted that the meanings of the concept change over time, depending on the emergence of other related concepts or going beyond the scientific framework.
 In this sense, the reinterpretation of the concept can be used, which implies shifting the focus of the scientific order from the old meanings of the concept to the new meanings of the "new" concept.
 Accordingly, the frequency of the use of concepts through reinterpretation may both increase and decrease, leading to the departure of the concept from the scientific discourse.
  The current discourse of the concept of "Diaspora" takes place in such a way.
  Today, Diaspora scholars state that the semantic basis of the concept of "Diaspora" is full, which implies not only an increase in the semantic basis of the concept of "Diaspora", but also a change.
  Compared to the 1960s, when the concept of "Diaspora" was understood in relation to the terms "transnationalism", "globalization", "migration", "ethnicity", "exile", "post-colonial" and "nation", in the 1980s . The notions of "belonging" and "citizenship" are at the conceptual basis of the concept.
  This means that over time, the concept of "Diaspora" in terms of volume refers to a larger number of social forms than in its genealogical stage.
  Until the 1960s. Social forces characterized by other concepts began to unite in another common concept - "Diaspora".
 Such a transformation became possible first of all due to discursive policies, such as the super-discursive nature of the phenomenon1.
The change in the frequency of the use of the term "Diaspora" should be viewed not only in terms of purely semantic analysis, but also in terms of changes taking place in the world.
 The old approaches were migrationist, assimilationist, methodological nationalist-teleological.
 Their cornerstone provisions are presented below. Ներն Migrants sever ties with their homelands;։ Migration trajectories are universally oriented;  Migration definitely leads to assimilation2.
1 See Tölöyan K., Rethinking Diaspora (s).
  Stateless Power in the Transnational Moment, Wesleyan University, Diaspora 5, № 1, 1996, p. 5.
The new approaches do not contain such provisions.
  At present, those engaged in Diaspora studies bypass the old traditions, try to build their points of view in comparison with the developments taking place in the world.
These new developments have their effects on our thinking, perceptions, as well as social order and scientific discourses.
  It should be noted that such questions arise, which refer to the new world order, migration policy.
  Can we talk about large border crossings, at the same time taking into account that states have gained more than lost by developing, developing a special policy for citizenship, passports, visas, technologies, databases, biometric equipment, etc.?
On the other hand, it should be noted that the migration policy has undergone changes.
 This refers, first of all, to the fact that the poor, who are looking for work in the developed countries of the world, or the refugees, now face much more serious problems, according to the rules established by the state, than before1.
 Accordingly, they currently have fewer opportunities to move to more developed or safer countries.
The semantic changes in the Diaspora began mainly with the view that it was viewed as positive in Western, political and social circles.
  In that sense, R. Panosyan suggests paying attention to the "Diaspora".
 Although it does not exist in literary Armenian, it nevertheless emphasizes the belonging to a non-state identity. "Being from the Diaspora means having an interesting հետաքրքր,'s, desirable identity connected with the cultures of several centers" 2.
It can be emphasized that in the new approaches the idea of ​​the homeland does not occupy a central place in the concept of the Diaspora, therefore there is no reality of return.
 Multiple identities are emphasized in these approaches.
Diaspora. Characteristics, types։ functions.
  Discussions on the նշանակCriteria of Diaspora significance continue to this day among Diaspora scholars.
  At the center of these discussions are questions such as: what shapes the Diaspora, how should the Diaspora be classified, how does the Diaspora differ from other social forms?
Here are some definitions that allow for discussions on the Diaspora as a concept.
 Գ. According to Schaefer, "the Diaspora is a group that currently lives outside its homeland, but continues to maintain ties with its compatriots."
 Another approach is presented by D. The hatred that the Diaspora defines as "a situation, a condition when the dispersed live in another political organization, which, despite the dispersion, continues to maintain unity" 4.
  However, the definition of the Diaspora must include clear criteria that define the scope of the concept և difference 1 See Hirst P., Thompson G., Globalization in Question, Cambridge, 1999.
2 Panosyan R., Theoretical Concept of Homeland-Diaspora Relations. Investigations, remarks, suggestions, "Diaspora Studies. Issues of theory and history ", Yerevan, 2012, page 33.
3 Sheffer G., Diaspora Politics.
 At Home Abroad, New York, 2003, p. 1.4 Schnapper D., From the Nation-State to the Transnational World.
 On the Meaning and Usefulness of Diaspora as a mobile from other "wandering" species, such as ethnic groups, migrants, nomads, etc.
 The definition should emphasize the analytical framework of the concept.
 According to V. The main characteristics of Safran's definition of the Diaspora are: ից dispersion from the Homeland to two երկր more countries,  the collective memory of the Homeland և the myth, ան separation from the host society, ացումը the idealization of the Homeland as a place of final return, պահպան preserving the Homeland or connections 1.
These are the features that emphasize the ethno-community consciousness of the Diaspora.
 Գ. Chaliand և Sh.-P. Rageu is largely based on V. On the features singled out by Saffron, however, they emphasize the violent essence of dispersion, its unvoicedness in the collective memory, its orientation towards the native collective identity for generations 2.
 R. Cohen's definition, on the other hand, allows us to understand the motives behind Diaspora dispersion.
  In this respect, dispersion can be the result of violent, traumatic or work, commercial aspirations.
  R. Cohen notes that mainly the Diasporas have complicated relations in their hospitable societies, but this does not exclude the possibility that, depending on the hospitable society, they may have a different but quite normal way of life3.
 At the heart of Butler's approach is the idea that the Diaspora should be dispersed in two voluntary countries, so that at least two generations exist.
The definitions highlight և distinguish the strong characteristics of the Diaspora: պեր Dispersion,  Orientation to the homeland, օ Alienation in host societies, խմբ Awareness of group identity through collective memory, history, myths,  Group solidarity.
The last three characteristics R. They are grouped by Brubaker under the concept of "border protection", which primarily refers to the maintenance of sleep 5.
  It may be noted that Saffron and Butler և Cohen find that any list of descriptors is in itself problematic, as there is no society where one can expect all of these criteria to exist.
There are also cultural-postmodernist approaches to the Diaspora, which focus on the study of culture, identity, consciousness, subjectivity, as well as the elimination of the borders of the Diaspora.
  In cultural research, in postmodern approaches, the importance of the Diaspora's ties with the homeland is lost6.
1 Safran W., Diasporas in Modern Societies.
 Myth of Homeland and Return, Diaspora 1, № 1, 1991, p. 83.2 See Chaliand G, Rageau J., The Penguin Atlas of Diasporas, New York, 1995.
3 See Cohen R., Global Diasporas.
 An Introduction, London, 1997, pp. 26, 180.
4 See Butler K., Defining Diaspora, Refining a Discourse, Diaspora 10, № 2, 2001, pp. 192-193.
5 See Brubaker R., p.
6 See Cohen R., pp. 128-129.
The theorists of these approaches, as P. Verbs, the Diaspora is considered as a "transnational social power", which challenges the hegemony of the national state և borders.
 These theorists discuss և emphasize dual or fragmentary consciousness, multiple affiliations, multiple identities.
  In analyzing the Diaspora, these theorists begin to consider the development of new forms of identification1.
The Diaspora does not mean scattered people, whose identity is preserved by having relations with the homeland, where they must return at any cost.
  This is a homogeneous, imperialist, but outdated egg of "ethnicity".
 The Diaspora should be defined based on the judgments of heterogeneity, diversity, the concept of identity, hybridity, which are always reproduced through transformations and differences2.
Cultural-postmodernist approaches address the problems of the homeland.
 The discussion of the concept of "Diaspora" in postmodern approaches is based on the critique of "fixed roots", proposing the priority of the house over the homeland3.
  For the supporters of the postmodernist approach, the homeland is presented as a state in terms of close ties with the categories of ethnicity, which are impossible to unite with the culture typical of the Diaspora.
  Moreover, S. Hall believes that even if communities are connected to a physically existing historical homeland, it is not and cannot be an accurate reflection.
 The homeland in the Diaspora is imaginary, imaginary աղբյուր is a source of different emotions4.
Critics of cultural մ postmodernist approaches are based on personal experience.
  Kh. According to Tololyan's approach, the Diaspora arises mainly as a result of the analysis of individual consciousness and subjectivity.
 In that sense, he notes. "The Diaspora is simply a random reality as a result of the sum of individuals living outside the homeland, each of which has a hybrid subjectivity, which lacks collective practices that would emphasize their differences from the others երը ties to the homeland."
R. Cohen is in favor of the possibility of hybrid identities, but points out that hybrid identities are a living, demonstrated experiment.
 Based on the fact that hybrid identities or cultures are materially and organizationally expressed, however, there is a need to understand more deeply the relationships of actors, collective practices and the processes conditioned by them in the process of their development.
In addition to the definitions of the Diaspora, Diaspora scholars suggest typologies of the Diaspora according to the reasons for migration, their roles, as well as their periods of existence.
  Probably, R. The approach proposed by Cohen is the most common, according to which the Diaspora 1 See Evans Braziel J., Mannur A., ​​Theorizing Diaspora.
 A Reader, Malden, 2003, page 5.
2 See Hall S., Cultural Identity and Diaspora, in Identity.
  Community, Culture Difference, Lawrence & Wishart, 1990, p. 235.
3 See Anand D., A Contemporary Study of 'Diaspora'.
 The Tibetan Version, Diaspora 12, № 2, 2000, p. 220.
4 See Clifford J., Diasporas, Cultural Anthropology, Vol. 9, № 3, Further Inflections.
 Toward Ethnographies of theFuture, 1994, p. 305.
5 See Tölöyan Kh., P. 30.
6 See Cohen R., p. 150.
They can be differentiated as victims, labor, commercial, imperial-cultural.
  This approach is based on the reasons for migration.
  The Diaspora (such as Jews, Armenians, Africans, Palestinians) arose as a result of historical "scarred events" when primary migration was traumatic ադր forced.
  Working Diasporas (such as Indians, Japanese, Chinese) are "recruited" from migrants as labor resources.
  The trade Diaspora (like the Chinese and Lebanese) is the result of the expansion of trade networks.
  The imperial Diasporas were formed as a result of military-colonial resettlements.
 R. Cohen explains cultural Diasporas in terms of constructing new identities and subjectivities1.
  He, based on S. Based on Holly's notion of "hybridity", cultural Diasporas are presented as "new, dynamic, mixed cultural forms" that differ from the two "dominant" cultures of Javelin.
 Although he made the cultural Diaspora a unit of classification, he still views them as "reality builders."
  He highlights the potential gaps in the Diaspora's postmodernist discourse as to who "'s" and "how" underlie the development of hybrid cultures, referring to the processes of agents, collective practices, and processes.
 It should be borne in mind that migration can have several causes at the same time.
  Consequently, diasporas categorized on the basis of migration may have double և multiple eggs, which may change over time.
Schaefer, Van Hir սը Rice classify the Diaspora according to time3.
According to them, this new classification describes the modern Diasporas more accurately.
 Schaefer refers to the classical or historical, modern, newly created (incipient) և hidden or dormant (dormant) Diasporas.
  He finds that classical or historical Diasporas go back in time to the Middle Ages.
  The Diasporas, which emerged in the 17th century, are called modern. starting.
  The newly created (incipient) Diasporas that are still in formation are those who are in a dormant state, whose members are completely assimilated into the host societies and show no interest in mobilizing or acting.
  However, a revival is possible here, ostensibly as a response to the changes taking place in the homeland or in the neighboring Diaspora community (mainly traumatic events).
 Schaefer's classification allows for historical research without being cut off from existing horses.
In his research on the "new" Diaspora, Van Hir addresses not only the emergence of the Diaspora, but also the disintegration or dissolution of the Diaspora.
  When referring to the disintegration or dissolution of the Diaspora, we consider the emigration processes, as a result of which large masses of the Diaspora 1 See Cohen R., pp. 28-128.
2 First of all, it presupposes the cultures of the homeland և at least one of the host societies.
3 See Sheffer G., Reis M., Theorizing Diaspora.
 Perspectives on “Classical” and “Contemporary” Diaspora, International Migration 42, № 2, 2004; van Hear N., New Diasporas.
 The Mass Exodus. Dispersal and Regrouping of Migrant Communities, Seattle, 1998.
They return to their homeland or move to another place 1.
  Hir builds his approach based on the judgment that the Diaspora is dynamic, not predetermined.
  Schaefer և Van Hir's approaches are valued by their consideration of agents in the emergence of the Diaspora.
Rice gives her classification based on three main historical channels that have had an impact on diaspora processes.
 He singles out a classical period, which is mainly connected with the ancient Diaspora, a new period, which includes 1500-1945. The period (this refers to the Diaspora formed as a result of the colonization process) is the most recent period, covering the period from the end of World War II to the present day2.
The functions performed by the Diaspora can be the basis for the classification of the latter.
  The opposite process exists: from the classification of the Diaspora to discussions of their functions.
However, this does not mean that there are no functions that are common to the Diaspora.
The most important function of the Diaspora, on the one hand, presupposes the preservation, development and strengthening of ethnic cultures, and on the other hand, the constant preservation of cultural ties with the homeland.
  For many Diasporas, this function is at the heart of the agenda of Diaspora organizations.
 For the Armenian Diaspora, this function is used, which becomes especially interesting when discussing identity issues.
 Despite the current geopolitical developments, the processes of globalization, nevertheless, the component of "preservation of the Armenian identity" of the Diaspora policy implemented by the Republic of Armenia presupposes the imposition of a specific type of identity on the representatives of ethnic groups outside the homeland.
  In other words, in the context of maintaining and developing cultural ties, the questions of being Armenian and remaining Armenian are examined.
  In that case, the possibilities of forming a selective, negotiated identity different from the state identity are ignored, which may seem problematic.
The next function of the Diaspora is connected with the protection of the social rights of the ethnic group.
  Since the previous centuries, various organizations have been established in the Diaspora, which are directed to the implementation of specific social functions.
  Many of these organizations now pay close attention to employment, political participation, and migration issues.
  The social functions of the Diaspora refer both to the formation of its own ethno-cultural environment in a hospitable society, as well as to the establishment of good-neighborly relations with the host society.
 It is these functions that determine the formation, dissemination and strengthening of trusting and unreliable relations, labeling stereotypes between the ethnic group "dominant ethnos".
The economy occupies a special place among the functions of the Diaspora.
  It should be noted that this function is performed not 1 See van Hear N., pp. 49-50.
2 See Sheffer G., Reis M., p. 41.
all the Diasporas.
 This is a two-way process. First of all, it refers to the expressions of national economic differentiation in foreign ethnic areas, and secondly, the economic function of the Diaspora is connected with occupying a specific sector of the economy in the host societies, as well as investing in specific sectors of the economy in the homeland.
 It turns out that the Diaspora carries out the function of capital circulation both in the homeland and abroad.
 Occupying a specific sector of the economy presupposes being an economic subject of concrete economic activity at the collective level.
  Here we can refer to economic activity related to the products of national special goods or services.
  It should be noted that there are cases when the representatives of the Diaspora occupy a leading, and sometimes a monopoly position in specific spheres of activity.
  The Armenian communities of Eastern Europe were also in such privileged positions, which were involved in the trade of leather and metal goods.
There are Diasporas that are able to carry out political functions.
  The latter are primarily lobbying, with the aim of gaining additional rights and opportunities for members of the ethnic community.
  Secondly, the Diaspora can be an opposition both from the point of view of the homeland and the host state, establishing relevant institutions and organizations.
  Third, the Diaspora can have its influence in international relations.
  Although the Diaspora cannot be a legal entity in these relations, in the negotiation-decision-making processes, nevertheless, its agenda of joint activity with the representatives of its institutions, which, as a resource, can also have an impact on international relations by developing policies.
In this sense, the Jewish case in history is still unique in that it can be said on the world stage that Israel as a state is the result of the long-term targeted efforts of the Jewish Diaspora in Europe in the United States.
Diaspora studies also include analyzes of the latter's destructive functions.
  Although they are not directly related to the activities of the Diaspora, it would be wrong to deny ethnic crimes.
  The approaches to the destructive functions of the Diaspora try to show the existence of the above-described, sometimes presenting the reality one-sidedly.
 This implies that such analyzes are presented from the point of view of methodological nationalism, as they do not consider the phenomenon under the approaches of the theories of national liberation struggle.
  Recent ideas, analyzes, and the basis of their own ethnic, identity, and policy refinement are the basis for the host societies we are witnessing today.
Thus, examining the semantic changes in the modern approaches of Diaspora studies, the factors conditioning them, lead to the conclusion that over time, both nuanced and conceptual profound changes of the research object have taken place.
  These changes were influenced by the scientific knowledge produced and circulated in different scientific directions, as well as the super-discursive nature of the phenomenon, especially in non-scientific circles.
  In this article, we tried to theoretically analyze the peculiarities of the Diaspora as a research object of ethnosociology using the historical-comparative method.
  Theoretical discussions are based on the premise that the Diaspora is a multi-level, complex reality that needs to be described in order to be understood, to try to distinguish the criteria by which it will differ from other social forms, to emphasize a clear analytical framework.
  On the other hand, in order to understand the multilevel nature of the event, the types and functions of the Diaspora were singled out and discussed.
Hakob Matjosyan THE DIASPORA AS AN OBJECT OF ETHNOSOCIOLOGY STUDIES Keywords: Diaspora, migration, dispersion, homeland-center, host country, affiliation, hybrid identity, Diaspora.
