INNOVATIONS USED IN THE MUSEUMS OF RA The museum is one of the important links of cultural communication not only for the local population, but also for the visitors of the given country or territory.
 Studies show that museums are attractive to the public when, in addition to preserving and displaying collections, they develop and apply innovations or innovations.
 At the same time, every year more and more museums are involved in the field of tourism, contributing to the formation of tourist destinations around museums.
The need to innovate in museums arose in order to meet rapidly changing societal demands, increase museum profits, maintain and strengthen positions.
As a result of the researches of the museums of the Republic of Armenia, the most common innovations have been singled out, which contribute to the increase of the number of museum visitors.
 For a comprehensive study of the topic, first the concepts of "museum", "innovation", the most common types of innovations were clarified, based on the research, the innovative processes used in RA museums were presented, a classification was made, their impact on the number of visits was determined.
In the draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On Museums և Museum Fund of the Republic of Armenia" [6] the museum is defined as follows: "gallery, geological museum, house-museum, Matenadaran, treasury, reserve-museum, monument-museum" - other cultural organization with regulated museum objects The collection, the possibility of displaying appropriate buildings for the preservation of their exhibition, carries out scientific research activities, is called to serve the society, to promote its development, is available to the public, carries out activities defined by this law.
There are different definitions of "innovation", but the following are the most common. B. Twist presents innovation as "a process where the idea of ​​invention acquires economic content" [4, 39].
  B. Santo considered that "innovation is a social, technical, economic process that provides economic benefits, which, through the practical application of inventions և ideas, enables the creation of products with relatively high properties» technologies "[6].
Summarizing the studies of scientific sources on the mentioned topic, we can say that innovation is a radical or partial change of the process, as a result of which profit is obtained.
As a result of the research, it became clear that the innovations used in the museums of the Republic of Armenia are different in nature, therefore, they are subject to classification [8, 24].
  The classification was made according to the following criteria:  according to depth: radical, changing, improving,  according to the depth of changes, transition from low-level innovations to high-level innovations,  according to prevalence, unique և widespread, գործունեության by field of activity: managerial, social, production, technological և etc.
Let's discuss the above-mentioned types of innovation and exhibits in RA museums.
The achievements of science allow the museum visitor to choose the language in which he wants to receive information instead of listening to the guide for a long time in the museum, to walk around the museum on his own.
  The latter, in itself, is a radical change in the activity of the museum, which has its positive and negative sides.
  The application of such an innovation in the museums of the city will facilitate the internal management system of the museum, but at the same time will lead to a reduction in the number of museum staff, which in this case may cause a social problem.
However, the application of this measure will contribute to the optimization of the staff work and the implementation of other functions arising from the goals of the museum.
  The History Museum of the city of Yerevan plans to apply such an innovation in its perspective programs.
You can get acquainted with the museum exhibits thanks to virtual visits.
  Today, the Internet allows for virtual visits to museums, but limits the number of exhibits used as a "bait" to arouse the interest of virtual visitors.
  The potential customer feels inside the museum, "walks in the museum", receives information about exhibits and stored items, but partly, which pushes him to visit the museum in person later.
  Due to this change, museum visitors can get an idea of ​​the museum before the visit.
 Most of the museums of the Republic of Armenia are included in that system.
The application of museum marketing and management was a great innovation process in museum work, a vivid example of which is fundraising or fundraising for museums.
Fundraising is a non-commercial marketing that was first used in the United States in the 20th century. 60s [3, 67].
 The right marketing policy promotes the attraction of extra-budgetary funds.
  These managerial-type innovations are quite widespread in the museums of the Republic of Armenia.
 A number of museums also have PR departments, they have introduced a CRM system, due to which the visitor-museum connection is provided.
 Not only the production-functional qualities of the services are used here, but also the consumer quality, for the control of which the museums provide feedback with the visitors, take into account the suggestions and remarks of the visitors.
 The best example of this is the surveys conducted by the History Museum of the city of Yerevan with pre-designed questionnaires.
The increase of the list of services offered by museums caused a big revolution in the museum business.
  The museum of the 21st century is not only an exhibition of items referring to the historical facts of antiquity, but also a cultural, cognitive, educational, and in many cases an educational institution2.
  Such innovations enable the museum not to lose its classic mission, at the same time adding to the list of services provided.
The "Museum Night" event is considered a large-scale program - social innovation, giving the public the opportunity to visit museums for free that day.
 This initiative becomes an occasion for the application of innovations.
  The event gives an opportunity to visit more than 100 museums of RA and NKR for free that day, to communicate national values.
Some museums organize animation programs for visitors, especially tourists.
 Such programs can be witnessed especially during the "Museum Night" event.
 On that day, the excursions in the History Museum of Yerevan are conducted with a pre-staged program - "historical figures".
 One of the theater's actors was chosen to perform the event on the history of beer, who took on the role of Greek historian, General Xenophon, and led the tour.
 Hovh. The staging of Tumanyan tales and various games-competitions are organized in Tumanyan House-Museum.
 Such animations attract hundreds of visitors, due to which the number of visitors in the museums of the city of Yerevan alone during the "Museum Night" event varies from 1000 to 6000 in different museums.
Hovh. Tumanyan House-Museum is one of the most active museums due to the wide range of services offered.
  Adjacent to the museum is the "Beetle School" summer program for preschool children (4-6 years old), which provides an opportunity to help in the further educational process.
 During the course, the children literally mean an increase in funds, growth, fundraising.
2 An example is the Kuwait Museum of Natural History, where classes in biology, astronomy, and other natural sciences are held in the morning for students, and in the evening the museum is open to other visitors (7, 34).
They get acquainted with the museum heritage, visit other museums, organize various cognitive excursions in the city, meet once a week with a specialist - a choreographer, doctor, painter, etc. - who talk to children about their profession.
 Tumanyan Museum publishes books: "Hasker" yearbook, biographical details of Tumanyan և his family - "Lands - family history".
The Tumanyan Museum was named one of the five most famous museums in the world in the New Project category during the 23rd ICOM Meeting in Rio de Janeiro in 2013, thanks to the "Three Apples Fell from the Sky" storytelling festival.
An innovative program was the organization of "Museum University" courses, during which conversations take place in various fields, from navigation to astrophysics, from myths to nanotechnologies, from genetics to literature.
  Classes are held once a week, after which schoolchildren receive graduation certificates from the museum.
During the "Museum Night" event, the museum greets its guests in a non-standard way, but attracts young people who walk around the museum throughout the day in the image of the heroes of Tumanyan's fairy tale.
  In every corner you can meet characters who play fun-educational games with visitors.
 Such innovations make the museum attractive, due to which the flow of visitors increases.
  The museum is publishing an "Exclusive Newspaper" newspaper for the "Museum Night" event, which presents some of the museum's annual programs and news.
 The use of 3D gauges is widely used in the museum.
  Due to the sound-light effects, an attempt is made to display certain objects and objects.
  However, a unique example of innovation in the world is the creation of Tumanyan's holographic image in 3D ("Illusion in the Upper Room"), initiated by Hovhannes. It belongs to Tumanyan's house-museum.
The History Museum of the city of Yerevan carries out interesting events in this field - 3D animations, making the plan of the city of Yerevan a set of moving objects.
 During the "Museum Night" event, a series of events is also held in the form of City Tour, during which visitors have the opportunity to travel by bus from one museum to another in the city.
 By reducing the time and space, foreign guests get the opportunity to visit more museums and get acquainted with the capital.
In other halls of the museum, different holidays are staged by the schoolchildren - the Ascension Day, which was accompanied by the direct participation of the audience (the ceremony).
  In one of the thematic halls of the museum was organized "Meeting 1942. Exhibition entitled "In Yerevan apartment".
 An excursion was held around the showcase dedicated to Armenian brandy, presenting Shustovyan advertisement.
  Various cultural, entertainment and educational programs are implemented in the museums located in the regions, especially in Gyumri and Vanadzor.
  The Vanadzor Museum of Fine Arts implements the "Young Art Artist" educational program, the main goal of which is to transfer knowledge about the history of fine arts to young people.
  Dsegh Hovh. Tumanyan House-Museum had made public the Dsegh area through billboards.
The Museum of the Aslamazyan Sisters has created a pottery center for different age groups.
 Mher Mkrtchyan Museum has created a film lovers' club, where the participants get acquainted with the art of cinema.
Hovh. The Shiraz Museum presented the "Museum as an Alternative Learning և Communication Area" program.
  Dozens of such programs provide a steady flow of visitors.
  The stereotype that one can visit a museum at once is broken after the application of innovations.
 Visitors visit the same museums every year, waiting for even more interesting and innovative ideas.
  This is evidenced by the research conducted during the "Museum Night" event, when the number of museum visitors exceeds several thousand.
From all this we conclude that the museum, by carrying out scientific-educational and cultural activities, gradually becomes accessible to the general public.
 Suffice it to mention the fact that the number of museum visits in 2000 As of today, there were 964 thousand people, and in 2012 - 1949 thousand people.
 It can be stated that the number of museum visitors has more than doubled in 12 years due to the number of visits to Yerevan.
 2012 year. 62 museums of Armenia and Artsakh were involved in the "Museum Night" event, the number of visitors was 135 thousand, in 2013 - 89 museums - 170 thousand visitors, in 2014 - 100 museums, more than 200 thousand visitors.
Examining the innovations used in the museums of the Republic of Armenia, it can be stated that they have an impact on the number of visits.
  Museum innovations are mostly used in the museums of Yerevan, which is conditioned by the increase of tourist flows, the number of potential visitors, the availability of financial and human resources.
  Among the most prominent museum innovations are social innovations (especially the "Museum Night" event), managerial and organizational innovations (museum management - CRM).
 The use of museum innovations is an opportunity to develop and expand the functions of museums.
Nevertheless, there are problems in this area, which need to be addressed: • Increasing the list of services provided by museums, staff training, application of scientific and technical progress, which will create an attractive environment for visitors with a combination of old and new, • Improving functions through management.
  Optimize staff work, define other goal-oriented functions, include in animation programs, • Enhance museum features that do not affect museum function • Establishment of a museum financing system, which will allow solving the existing problems, including building and property conditions, • Establishment of a stable museum-visitor connection, which will allow to continuously improve the list of offered services.
Literature 1. Journal of Museum Studies, yearbook 2009, Yerevan, 2009.
2. Journal of Museum Studies, yearbook 2011, Yerevan, 2011.
3. Hajoyan R., Nikoghosyan M., Marketing in the field of tourism, Yerevan 2011.
4. Khantarjyan S., Sargsyan A., Venture Innovation Management, textbook, Yerevan, 2006.
5. Social status of the Republic of Armenia in 2012, NSS yearbook 2012.
6. Draft Law on Museums և On the RA Museum Fund, Decision և 777-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of July 31, 2014, http.
//www.gov.am/files/docs/1279.pdf.
9. http:
//360yerevan.com/. Amalya Navasardyan INNOVATIONS USED IN RA MUSEUMS Keywords: museum, innovation, tourist destination, social innovation, fundraising, tourist flows.
