THE PICTURE OF THE GENOCIDE IN YERVAND OTYAN'S NOVEL "N 17 KHAFIEN" AND THE MEMORY OF "PAST YEARS" Genocide is the greatest crime against humanity, which aims to destroy a national, religious or racial group
  From the Turkish side in 1915-1923. The genocide committed in Western Armenia is one of the bloodiest pages not only in the history of the Armenian people, but also in the modern history of mankind.
Yervand Otyan was one of the contemporaries and eyewitnesses of that terrible tragedy, who was destined to take those sufferings with his people, to be exiled, starved and tortured in Der-Zor, to see death and deprivation up close.
  The literary legacy left by Yervand Otyan is quite large: "large-scale novels, numerous novels, chronicles, pamphlets, countless publicist articles" 1, but they are not well studied yet, they are not known to the general public.
  And there are few Armenian language books dedicated to Otyan's life and work. They can, of course, be counted on the fingers.
 When writing the article, let us mainly use Doctor of Philological Sciences, Professor Samvel Muradyan's "Yervand Otyan. Life լ Case ”monograph, the second revised edition of which is dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide and the memory of its innocent victims.
In his memoirs, letters, articles, works of art, "Com. B. In the third part of "Panjuni" novel, in the four-volume novel "No. 17 Khafien" մեջ in the memoir "Cursed Years" Otyan described the terrible events of the Genocide, as if to record the exact facts through the eyes of a documentary.
  Ս. According to Muradyan, the episodes and stories described by Otyan "exactly coincide with the historical documents, the testimonies and memories of other eyewitnesses."
The memoir "Cursed Years" was published in 2004. Gr. Due to Hakobyan's efforts, it has been studied a lot.
 Starting from the events of the night of April 24, the vicious events of the Genocide are accurately depicted here.
  Otyan in 1915 He was not arrested on the night of April 11 (24), but later because he was kept in a safe hiding place.
 "If he had wanted, Otyan might have been able to stay in that hiding place for a long time, not even be handed over to the Turkish executioners," says S. Muradyan, "but Otyan did not want to differ from his people by fate."
  The arrests start on the night of April 24. At first, it seems to Otyan that only the ARF members are arrested for obvious reasons, but it soon becomes clear that the arrests are of a mass nature.
  Otyan was at the "Azatamart" editorial office: "Everyone who came in would announce new names of the detainee."
 Mikael Shamtanjyan, Komitas Vardapet, then new names: Hambardzum Hambardzumyan, Atom Yarchanyan, Shavarsh Krisyan, Tigran Cheokuryan, Melkon Kyurchyan, the number of detainees was not known.
  "Two hundred and six hundred were counted," Otyan wrote.
  Then Otyan presents the conversation of his minister Voskan Martikyan, which terrified him. This conversation reflects the Young Turks' conspiratorial plan, even the Armenians, who were scared of exile and barely escaped, had already realized that they were dealing with a bloodthirsty conspiracy to carry out a well-designed plan to carry it out.
"The goal of these people is to annihilate us mentally and materially.
  "They were the first to do so by exile," says Martikyan.
 Optimist Otyan does not want to believe that the exile was planned in advance, it is part of a conspiracy.
  Many thought like Otyan, waiting with faith for the return of the exiles.
  Martikyan reports that even now "rich Armenians 1 Muradyan S., Yervand Otyan, Yerevan, 2012, page 3.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P. 71.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., P.
They have to take matters into their own hands, these people can do anything. "
 "On the morning of June 21, we heard that twenty Hunchakians were hanged.
 This news spread terror throughout Constantinople. ”1
On August 24, Otyan came out of hiding and was arrested on the same day. The hellish period of exile, suffering, and torment begins.
 He remained in exile until September 13, then was exiled to Gonia, and then to Ereili.
  The titles of the chapters of the "Cursed Years" are the record of the evil path of the Armenian people, the mapping of the sufferings of that day: "Prison in exile", "In Tarson", "In Aleppo", "Aleppo Ter-Zor", "ElPusera", etc.
  The Turks continued to persecute the other intellectuals exiled to Otyan.
  Aram Antonyan, who miraculously survived in exile and death camps, quotes a document in his book "Metsochir". "Code of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, addressed to the Aleppo governorate. We will find out that the correspondents of several Armenian newspapers turned around and handed over a series of photos and papers presenting a number of criminal cases and handed them over to the American consul.
  Determine by arresting such harmful people.
  Minister of Internal Affairs Talaad "2.
  This proves that the Turkish officials were not only aware of the deportations and murders, but also knew the whereabouts of the deportees, especially the intellectuals, and specific details about them.
"This editor was the greatest Armenian satirist, Fr. Yervand Otyan… An arrest warrant issued for him… »3.
At first, neither Otyan nor the other deportees imagined the catastrophe, because everyone only knew what he had seen.
  "In its inception, I did not realize the magnitude of the catastrophe, and when I was deported on September 13, 1915 and witnessed hundreds of deaths, I just felt that instead of every disappearing Armenian, I also lacked a part of my soul."
 1915 In December, Otyan reached a place of exile called Islahiye, where 40-50 thousand Armenians found themselves in indescribable mercy.
 Hunger, typhoid, dysentery killed 5-6 thousand Armenians every day.
  In Sepil, anesthetized and death-defying people cold-bloodedly threw their dead or half-dead relatives into the garbage dump, but were still extremely sensitive to the sight of children being taken from their arms.
5 And it is in Sepil that Otyan witnesses for the first time a terrifying act, the sale of boys.
  "The sale of children is one of the most fascinating episodes of the enormous genocide of deportation.
 "One can never imagine a greater humiliation of humanity," Otyan wrote with heartache.
While in Hama, another plague struck, threatening to kill all the Armenians who had taken refuge in Hama and its environs.
Ս. Muradyan quotes A. Antonyan's testimony that "the" Turkification "of the Armenians was a very interesting comedy, that a young Turkish official, Feruzan Bey, would play with the local Arabs, partly on the nose of Talaat Pasha."
  For the Turkish officials, the genocide of an entire nation was a game, all the officials played, each with its own rules, cruelty and robbery were encouraged, it was a unique match, who will be more cruel, who will kill with a more brutal horse, who will kill more.
 On the way to deportation from Hama, the Armenians hear from Feruzan Bey "the inviolable decision to become a Turk in 12 hours".
  Feruzan Bey had predicted that in 12 hours an order would be issued to deport all Armenians from Talaat from Hama, so it was necessary to consider the completion of the Turkification process before then.
  In response to the disgust of the terrified Armenians, Feruzan Bey says that "it is only a simple renaming":
  This is how thousands of Armenians accept the Turkish 1 Muradyan S., page 76.
2 Manukyan S., Yervand Otyan, Yerevan, 1997, p. 297.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Muradyan S., page 78.
5 Ibid., P.
6 Ibid., P.
7 Ibid., P.
8 Ibid., P.
9 Ibid., P.
names. Otyan becomes Aziz Nuri, and Leon Molyan becomes Ali Nutti.
 Feruzan Bey writes to Talaat. "In the whole circle of Hama, there is not even a single milk-bearing child with an Armenian name."
 It is the luck of that part of the Armenians, but in other places the Turkification was of a formal nature, many Armenians forcibly converted to Islam.
1917 At the end of April or the beginning of May Otyan was exiled to Der-Zor or Otyan with the inscription of Ter Ezzor.
 Ս. According to Muradyan, this was "the last great content of the Armenian Genocide hell, which differed from the others in the cruelty of the various forms of murder and the number of victims."
  As in other places, even here Otyan's death would have been inevitable if he had not been recognized and helped even in hellish conditions by strangers and strangers who had respect for the writer.
  Sahak Mesrop and Hayk Kochkaryan greatly help Otyan.
He escaped from Pusera, reached Der-Zor, and with their help went to work as a soldier.
 He stays here until 1918. In January, he fled to Aleppo, walking during the day and hiding at night.
 He was arrested in Aleppo, sent to Gonia, then to Sultaniye.
1918 On November 11, 1945, World War I ended with a ceasefire, after which "miraculously saved survivors were pardoned."
 But the genocide was not a war, the Turks and the Armenians did not fight against each other, the Turks brutally killed the Armenians not for crimes, theft or anything else, but because they were Armenians, this was the "ruthless punishment" of the Turks for their nationality.
After three and a half years of suffering, after sharing hunger and suffering with his people, Otyan returns to Constantinople.
  The events are described in the memoir "Cursed Years" until that moment, in 1918. November 17.
  Grigor Hakobyan writes in his article "The Certificate of Existential Tragedy" that "The Cursed Years" testifies to the complete picture of the catastrophic exile.
 Otyan did not miss a single detail, no detail of the chronicle, from walking on foot in a chariot on the way to exile, from doing hard work to avoid starvation on an Arab farm, to receiving news from the world by various ingenious means4.
 Գ. Hakobyan notes that the memorandum has enormous source, cultural, psychological, social-political, legal significance due to its "unmixed, principled testimony" 5.
  The memoir is the episode and the record, the direct transmission without literary elaboration6.
Immediately after his return, the article written by Otyan begins like this. "Greetings to you, Armenian people, sin! Greetings to you, remnants of the Armenians, far, far away, I will come 7… I will come to the hellish places of the Genocide, where Zohrapner, Aknuni, Khazhak, Zardaryans, Siamantons, Varuzhans, Sjaks, Taghavaryans, and finally a whole was crushed by the worthy successors of the Jenkil khans և Lenk Temur ներու »8.
  But Otyan was optimistic. 1925 he writes. "Ten years have passed since that day and ten more years will pass. The lack of Varuzhans, Siamantos, Hrant Kyurjyans, Tiran Kelekyans, Aknuni, Zardaryans, Taghavyans and other such talents will not be filled.
 But the tribe will live, the seed of those talents in itself, the rich Armenian genius will grow brighter than ever ”9.
  Otyan continued to create, was engaged not only in literary and artistic, but also in public activities.
In Constantinople, Bucharest, Tripoli, he participated in the collection of rescues of orphaned Armenian children, in the creation of Armenian schools և periodicals.
  Otyan was the first to propose to establish a day of remembrance for Yeghen victims.
  In the very first days of his return from exile, the press addressed a question to the Catholicos of All Armenians, George V, to establish a national day in memory of the victims of the Great Genocide, "our new, supreme martyrdom."
To the organizers and implementers of that supreme martyrdom, the new Turkish government 1 Muradyan S., p. 86.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Yervand Odean, Cursed Years, Yerevan, 2004, p. 39.
5 Ibid., P.
6 Ibid., P. 60.
7 Muradyan S., page 94.
8 Ibid., P.
9 Manukyan M., Yervand Otyan, Yerevan, 1965, page 301.
10 Ibid., P.
in 1918 On November 11, he allegedly decided to sue.
  The verdict was upheld on July 5 of the same year.
  But many of the culprits were absent, having previously gone into hiding in safe havens.
 Only the Minister of the Interior Talaat, the Minister of War Enver, the Minister of the Navy Cemal and others were sentenced to death in absentia.
 However, Salih Zeki, the executioner who carried out the Armenian massacre in Der-Zor, was not among the convicts, and not only him.
  "But what happened to Zaki among the fugitives and the survivors? Where did Zaki stay, the most horrible of all those great criminals?" Otyan writes.
Salih Zeki, who considered killing an Armenian a feat, used to say, "What is ten thousand (Armenians), he has a wife, go up a little!"
 This testimony was in the materials of the trial, but the author of those words was not punished.
 The Armenian people already had the experience of that injustice in 1909. No Turkish official was held accountable for the Adana massacre.
  After that massacre, Otyan wrote angrily in the pamphlet "Makhroshosh Taktik" that "these moguls, whose hands are still stained with blood, had a certificate of innocence, the idiots still cry, we are innocent!"
 One hundred years have passed, the Turks continue to shout that they are innocent, they are not guilty, the perpetrators of the unpunished crime demand a certificate of innocence.
 1924 In his article on the fifth conference of the League of Nations in Geneva in October, Otyan writes: "Beautiful speeches were spoken a lot, and after that they will certainly be spoken" 4, but "this beautiful resolution, accepted by everyone, is a small shortcoming, it is completely airy" 5.
  These words can refer to all peace conventions, all documents condemning the Armenian Genocide, which are written in eloquent words, condemn injustice and murder, make heartfelt calls for peace and humanity, but are "on the air" and remain on paper.
Otyan, one of the works dedicated to the most catastrophic events in the history of the Armenian people, the four-volume novel "No. 17 Khafien".
 It is the first and most extensive novel written on the theme of the Armenian Genocide, covering 1913-1916. mainly real-historical events.
  In this novel, Otyan is the first in Armenian literature "reveals the real face of the Turkish state, the real essence of the Young Turks' anti-Armenian policy, extreme nationalism, conspiratorial aggressor aggressor, political, religious, nationalist and psychological motives for the secret organization and implementation of the Armenian Genocide."
  Moreover, in the novel the images of the Genocide և the rest of the cases are presented in a generalized way, in the images of deportation Otyan did not describe murder, massacre and massacre anywhere.
  A. According to Makaryan, the reason is "on the one hand, the great artistic tact, on the other hand, the fact that Otyan was subjectively unable to reproduce the horror and horrors he had endured during the whole exile."
According to S. According to Muradyan, one of Otyan's main tasks in the novel is "the critique of the false democracy of the Young Turks, the shattering of popular notions about the Ittihad state and the discovery of the historical truth."
The environment of Constantinople at that time, on the eve of the First World War, especially during the war, greatly contributed to espionage activities, "the spies, especially the Armenian spies, doubled and tripled the evil."
 Otyan calls that region the "golden age of spies", Constantinople was crowded with Armenian spies, they provided great services to Titahat, his "eyes and ears".
  The description of this period of Turkish policy would be incomplete if Otyan did not refer to this side of reality.
  According to Hakob Siruni, the novel "No. 17 Khafien" is taken from "national life" and presents many real people under transparent pseudonyms, or their real name 1 Manukyan M., p. 307.
2 Ibid., P. 308.
3 Eloyan R., The Political Satire of Yervand Otyan, Yerevan, 1999, p. 100.
4 Manukyan M., page 314.
5 Ibid., P. 315.
6 Muradyan S., page 380.
7 Makaryan A., Yervand Otyan, page 421.
8 Muradyan S., page 382.
9 Makaryan A., page 402.
in. ”1.
  The novel is named after one of the spies - "Number 17 Khafien".
  The spy bearing the number seventeen is Astik Markosyan, who actually existed (real name - Asatur Matyosyan).
  There are other Armenian traitors in the novel: Artin Mkrtichyan, Arshavir Sahakyan (Arthur Yesayan), Hmayak Aramyants, Gamik Sirunyan and other real people2.
"Unfortunately," writes S. Muradyan - "The Armenian spies portrayed in the novel" No. 17 Khafien "were not the invention or the result of Yervand Otyan 's imagination, but the painful reality, people he knew personally, about whom there is reliable information in the press of the time."
  In the preface of the novel, Otyan writes about 1914. The reason for the unrest in the "national circle" at the beginning of the 20th century was the fact that the secrets of the Armenian Patriarchate became known to the Turkish Ministry of Internal Affairs.
  The question was discussed in the National Assembly, "but it was not possible to remove the spy named 17 Khafi", "the suspicion of espionage spread to very large people", then "the incident was extinguished", arrests began on April 24, followed by exile. .
 Otyan meets the "mysterious 17 Khafi" in Ereili, who "fortunately became one of the most persecuted Armenians in the Turkish government with one irony, and eventually died in chains" 4.
  Otyan's spies played a vicious role in compiling the lists of Armenians deported and broken during the Great Genocide.
  But, as Muradyan rightly mentions. "If Astik Markosyan, Artin Mkrtichyan, Arshavir Sahakyan, Emin, Abgar-Serovbe Effendi, Arshak Allyan were not the so-called apostate Armenians, would the Turkish government have given up its criminal plan to deport and exterminate the Armenians?"
 Or was it difficult to find replacements among the thirteen thousand Armenians of that time? ”5
 Selfishness, the desire to get rich, or greed and instinctual fear of the enemy make these people obedient.
  The protagonist of the novel, No. 17 Khafi, Astik Markosyan, is a rich, complex and contradictory character.
 "Despite his versatile abilities, Astik Markosyan was not able to create a brilliant position for himself" և now the only thing to do was to extort money. "Extortion had reached the height of an art" 6.
  The Turkish government entrusts him with compiling the list of Armenian intellectuals "posing a threat to the state."
 At the crucial moment when the selfless figures of the novel - Grigor Zohrap, Zaven Patriarch, revolutionary Shavarsh Misakyan, the others were trying at all costs to neutralize the deadly danger hanging over the Armenians, Astik and the other Armenian spies were intensifying the horror with their activities. to their compatriots.
  Even on the way to exile, they continue their work.
  In exile, trying to save his skin, he proudly confesses that it is No. 17 Khafi who expects salvation in exchange for confession.
  But his expectations are not justified.
Astik receives the punishment he deserves: he dies in a village hut on the way to exile, his hands tied with a rope.
Another disgusting image of the spy is the image of the censoring spy Artin Mkrtichyan, who called "discovering the Armenians, handing them over to the executioners a purge, and wanted to" uproot the Armenian revolutionaries. "
Opposing the spies were several honest and straightforward revolutionaries.
One of them was Shavarsh Misakyan, who did not give in to the brutal interrogations of the Turkish police. "You have already killed all my friends, you can kill me too, life has no meaning for me," is his response to the insidious Turkish policeman8.
 Patriarch Zaven of Constantinople is also a just and kind figure.
  He tries in every way to get the expatriate Armenians out of pity, he does not back down from those who hate Armenians like Serovbe Effendi and Artin Mkrtichyan.
  For that reason he was exiled to Der-Zor.
  It is noteworthy here that the Armenian religious 1 Manukyan M., p. 326.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Muradyan S., page 392.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., P.
6 Ibid., P.
7 Makaryan A., page 411.
8 Muradyan S., page 399.
He was saved from death by the Turkish captain Fikri Bey.
 There were still people left among the Turks, not all of them had become blind executors of the Young Turks' policy.
Another noteworthy fact that distinguishes the novel "No. 17 Khafien" from Otyan's other works, in general, gives a special place in Armenian literature, in this novel is the image of the Turkish Minister of Internal Affairs Talaat.
 Here Talaat is not presented only as one of the leaders of the Young Turks, but as a living human character.
  In the same way, the image of Grigor Zohrap stands out, as an Armenian writer, publicist, represented in completely different epic actions of the National Assembly by completely different artistic means.
Yervand Otyan's novel "No. 17 Khafien" և "The Cursed Years" memoir can play an important role in Armenian literature, in Armenian history, because they accurately represent the whole tragedy of the Genocide.
Marine Sargsyan THE PICTURE OF THE GENOCIDE IN YERVAND OTYAN'S NOVEL "N 17 KHAFIEN" AND IN THE "MISSING YEARS" MEMORANDUM Keywords: Cursed years, memoir, Armenian, genocide, Young Turks, exile, "exile"
