BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IMPROVEMENT PROCESSES ACCORDING TO DUING BUSINESS REPORT For the development of the economy, the state must create healthy competition - necessary conditions for economic activity, the implementation of which is regulated by the business environment.
 In the context of achieving the set goal, the state has the appropriate levers, the complex, purposeful, economically justified application of which should be aimed at creating favorable conditions for the normal development of both economic entities and the whole economy.
The Government of Armenia is implementing deep business environment - comprehensive reforms, offering a favorable business environment for foreign investors and businessmen.
Touching upon the business environment of the Republic of Armenia, it should be noted that the effectiveness of the reforms in the sphere is evidenced by the annual Doing Business reports published by the World Bank, which are compiled on the basis of a summary of questionnaires filled out by businessmen and state bodies.
Figure 1. Business Position of Individual Countries by Doing Business 2012-2016 11 Source: The World Bank. Doing Business in a more transparent world, 2012-2015, pp. 70-74.
It should be noted that according to the World Bank 2016 Doing Business 2016 ranking report published by the International Finance Corporation on October 27, 2015, Armenia improved its position among the 189 countries compared to the results published last year (49th place) by 10 and revalued results (38). 3rd place) by 3 points, rising to 35th place.
As can be seen from Figure 1, Armenia's business environment is the second among Georgia and the CIS countries, second only to Georgia.
Doing Business analysis by the World Bank is carried out in the following areas: • registration of companies, • obtaining construction permits, • registration of property, • obtaining loans, • investor security, • taxation, • international trade, • securing contracts, • liquidation of enterprises .
Table 1. Armenia's Indicators in the Business Sector 2012-2016 Indicator 2 Indicator Indicator Indicator Registration of Organizations Obtaining a Construction PermitRegistration RegistrationConditioning Investor Security TaxationInternational Survey 2 Source: The World Bank. Doing Business in a more transparent world, 2012-2015, pp. 70-74.
Ensuring Contract Execution Enterprises:
liquidation Thus, Table 1 presents the position of Armenia in "Doing Business" in 2012-2016, according to 9 separate areas.
 As can be seen from the table, the Republic of Armenia in 2012-2016. It improved its indexes by 112 points in the field of taxation, ranking 41st among 189 countries in the world, and least by 10 points in the field of property, occupying the 62nd place.
The mentioned circumstance is conditioned by the fact that in recent years the RPA government has carried out reforms aimed at the business environment, as a result of which the process of submitting reports by economic entities has been simplified, as well as the procedure of registration and liquidation of organizations.
 Some reforms have been implemented in the fields of taxation, customs and urban development.
  Let us refer to the spheres where the implemented reforms have had visible results.
As for the field of loans, the following changes should be made: • Opportunity to get loans online (www.e-credit.am), • Access to credit history, • Providing information to the ACRA Credit Bureau from utility companies.
• Provision of collateral by all commercial banks of the Republic of Armenia, • The Law of the Republic of Armenia "On State Registration of Rights to Movable Property" was adopted, which envisages expansion of the scope of movable property used as collateral, • Introduction of a single portal of public registers Office functions, such as existing service offices, will be able to provide services on a one-stop-shop basis.
Figure 2. Lending factors characterizing the sector in the Republic of Armenia in 2012-2016 3 As a result of the changes made, the number of participants registered in the private credit bureau increased, and the number of state credit bureaus decreased to 0%.
  The credit access ratio has increased by 2 points.
RA tax sphere in 2012-2016 In Doing Business, it improved its position by 112 points, ranking 41st out of 189 countries (see Table 1).
The following reforms have been implemented in the field of taxation.
• Clear procedures for providing official և current clarifications on taxpayer inquiries have been introduced, in particular, the rules, deadlines և publication of clarifications have been established.
• The state electronic payment system (epayments.am) has been introduced, which enables the payment of the state fee, local duty, services provided by state or local self-government bodies electronically by paying the administrative fines.
3 Source: The World Bank. Doing Business in a more transparent world, 2012-2015, pp. 70-74.
• An online system of property and land tax payment has been introduced in Yerevan Municipality. Online payments are made through the website of Yerevan Municipality www.yerevan.am.
• The requirement to keep records of products, goods, their prices (revenue) in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, as well as to register (register) books of products delivered or provided or transported in the territory of the Republic of Armenia has been eliminated.
• Companies pay an average of 10 taxes a year instead of the previous 50.
• The number of reports submitted to the tax authorities has been significantly reduced.
• Resident և non-resident organizations, regardless of the fact that they are considered VAT payers, no longer submit financial statements to the tax authority (FY 1 և F2).
 With the changes made in the legal acts, the 1F և 2F units of the state statistical reports were removed.
• The requirement to submit a VAT monthly report has been eliminated for those businesses whose annual turnover is less than 100 million drams instead of the previous 60 million drams.
• When paying income to non-residents, tax agents present a summary of the income և retained earnings tax once a year instead of the previous quarter.
• Regardless of the number of employees, employers submit a mandatory social security payment report to the tax authority every quarter instead of the previous monthly.
• The government allowed businesses to submit their reports to the tax authority electronically (e-gov.am).
  Today, 39 types of reports can be submitted through the electronic tax reporting system, moreover, the system is constantly being improved, including new types of reports.
The number of taxpayers using the electronic reporting system has reached 6100.
• 2013 The RA Law on Turnover Tax has been in force since January 1, 2010.
• An online համակարգ online filing անց (or) refund application system has been introduced.
 The system can be used through the 85th application posted in the "Electronic Reporting System" subsection of the "Electronic Services" section of the official website of the tax authority.
• In order to reduce the number of paper-circulation documents and their preparation time, the settlement documents subsystem has been introduced.
Figure 3. Factors characterizing the tax sector in the Republic of Armenia in 2012-2016 4 As shown in Figure 3 from 2012-2016. The time spent paying taxes was significantly reduced by 265 hours, as was the share of total taxes in profit.
The number of credit payments has been reduced five times, from 50 to 10.
Referring to the tax legislation of the Republic of Armenia, it should be noted that with the large rates set by many types of taxes, Armenia is in a good condition compared to other countries.
 However, the tax system remains the weakest sector that reveals the effectiveness of business.
It should be added that in 2016 the World Bank 4 Source: World Bank: Position on some indicators compared to 2015 in the report. 2015. Doing Business 2016.
  Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises. Washington, DC.
  World Bank Group. DOI.
  10.1596 / 978-0-8213-9615-5.License.
 Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0
regression (establishment of companies - 5th place, liquidation of organizations - 71st place, investor security - 49th place, crediting - 42nd place) or no change at all (payment of taxes - 41st place, registration of property - 14th place) is the result of comparisons or methodological changes with other countries being evaluated.
Currently, the Ministry has developed a Business Environment Improvement 2016. The program, in case of its current adoption and the complex implementation of the measures included in it, under other equal conditions, it is possible to register a 10-point improvement in Armenia.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the implemented reforms should not only be accompanied by changes and additions to the normative legal act, but also contribute to the improvement of the business environment in the country in the context of economic developments.
Tamara Shanoyan ARMENIA ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENT PROCESS ASSESSMENTS ACCORDING TO DUING BUSINESS REPORT Keywords: business environment, economy, reforms, business environment, Doing business
