THEME OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN THE SOVIET ARMENIAN POEM OF 1950-1970 - The policy pursued by the Soviet authorities, the efforts of official Moscow to lead the Soviet peoples through internationalism, which were made to keep the multinational empire free from internal shocks. The "prosperous life of a common, great and invincible homeland" and ideological repressions could not forget the homeland lost at the beginning of the century, the cradle of the Armenian people, the birthplace of Narekatsi and Kuchak, Siamanto and Varuzhan, the house of Sasnaheros, St.
  In other words, the Soviet numbness, the illusion of living a dream life under the red flag, enveloped the Armenian poet.
Among all the possible ways of expressing public moods, it was literature that, with its civic pathos and patriotic spirit, reminded the Armenian people of its lost homeland, millions of innocent victims, forcibly displaced people, and Islamized.
 If historiography falsified or, at best, circumvented the facts under the compulsion of the ruling party, then the literary works, despite the pressures of the political elite, at least ideologically opposed the principles imposed by internationalism, not silencing the manifestations of the historical memory of the Armenian people.
Of course, it would be naive to think that the doors of publishing houses were wide open for such works or authors of exceptional rebellion.
 On the contrary, the citizens-poets of a powerful empire often involuntarily became the preachers of the forced ideology, because one of the main features influencing the formation of a person, and consequently of a writer, was the environment, which at that time was more than denationalized.
  Almost all literary figures were introduced to literature with hymns glorifying Lenin and Stalin, with their deifying hymns, in general, with lines trying to poetize the Soviet land and factory, equipment and labor in every way possible.
  Almost all writers started like that, many of them continued the chosen path, but especially in the 50s. After Stalin's death, the cult of the individual was abolished, turned to forgotten, previously seemingly impossible topics, the question of historical memory was raised, and calls for condemnation of claims were heard.
 At that time, the literature referred to the Armenian tragedy in allegory, with symbolic images, hidden in the footnote.
The history of Armenian literature proves that at crucial moments for the people, when the deadly sword of a foreigner hung over the head of the Armenians and the existence of the state was in question, poetry became active in literature with its fiery nature, easy-to-remember lines, sometimes very similar to folk style. to spread among the people, fulfilling its task.
  And the poem is the genre of literature, which, being written in verse, that is, preserving the above-mentioned features, at the same time with its inner utterance, ideological questions, expresses the utterance of the poet in full, which justifies our 1950-1970 making the poem about the genocide a subject of study.
Yeghishe Charents, who acted in the first period of the formation of the USSR, in his poem "Dantean Myth" presented the image of the lost homeland in the 1910s in a true and high artistic way, developed Being a wonderful basis for the creation of the poem "The Armenian Dantean" of Shiraz, however, he realized to the successors that what happened to the Armenian people in his homeland was a Genocide. He wrote the poem "Vision of Death", bringing a new topic in the national literature for his literary descendants1.
1959 Paruyr Sjak's poem "Silent Bell Tower" was published in Moscow, which was written during the previous two years.
  It was really an exceptional event for that time.
The author had chosen Komitas as the hero of the poem, expressing the collective image of the Armenian people, whose significant life and activities, their tragic interruption, completely coincided with the fate of the Armenians of Armenia.
 At first glance, this was a good way to raise the issue of the Genocide, but today, at the beginning of the 21st century, when it is possible to soberly and critically assess the history of Armenian literature, we think it would be right to state that Komitas' life was not a way to express the Armenian Genocide. The main task of the wheel was to express the life of Komitas artistically, and the most important event of that life and period, the Armenian Genocide, could not be ignored.
 This is evidenced by the fact that only one part of the poem consisting of six parts (combinations) - the "Summon of the Genocide", և especially the "Ringing Genocide" included in it, are dedicated to the bunker.
 In addition, there is the following word of the poet. "All my conscious life I have suffered, if you can say, from Komitas love.
 One of the greatest children of my nation, endowed by nature with all that the convention is characterized by the short word "genius", was born under the luckiest, most unfortunate star.
 Absolutely orphaned, almost forgetting his mother tongue, only due to his voice ("orphanhood") he fell into the seminary of Etchmiadzin, and therefore became a celibate, enclosing his whole enlightenment in eternal love, and finally became really spiritual. ”2
  Unable to bypass the fact that he writes: "Writing about Komitas was equivalent to writing the history of the Armenian people for the last 100 years, with the life and dreams of the people, life and struggle for life, songs and cries, European diplomacy and Turkish barbarism, ethnography, ethnography, past and future." "I have a strong enmity towards poetry based on and about 'about', like a caterpillar on a fruit flower" 3 (emphasis added: H.H.), however, we must say that the poem "Silent Bell Tower" is a literary work. about the tragic events unfolding around Komitas և the fate of the Armenian people, written in order to depict the life of Komitas the most "father, most Armenian",
 Therefore, most of all, the result of misunderstanding Sake, not noticing a certain procrastination of the poem, the false praise addressed to its author (which the latter does not need) is the constant drumming of the idea that the best, genius, unrepeatable It is the masterpiece of the author.
 It is impossible not to agree that "Genocide Alliance" is a unique literary achievement, which was a revolution in the history of Armenian literary thought in the 1950s, the author managed to write lines that artistically reflect the historical injustice to the Armenian people and the inhuman atrocities of the enemy.
 Sack had a wonderful understanding of the historical and political circumstances during which the inhuman crime took place. But Europe also had a way. And as a traveler, he fought dogs with each other, so that his traveler's business would succeed.
The author looks back at the story, which was the driving force of the work, remembering the words of one of the tragic heroes of the Genocide, the genius Siamanto, which suggests that in the years of writing the poem, Siak felt closer to the Armenian geniuses, that is, genetic memory Order: O justice, Let me spit on your open forehead, One of those geniuses smashed with stones shouted, 1 See Muradyan S., Literary destinations, book C, Yerevan, 2010, p. 107.
2 PARUYR SEVAK. THE PAST IS PRESENTED, available at https.
//goo.gl/4Scqkf, available on 04.04.15.
3 In the same place.
Shout not now, Then he shouted, When the mob, like this beast drunk with the same Blood, Motivated only by its savage known reasons, How many times it left ashes from Our fields and gardens, from our temples.
We are sure that the studies on this work will continue in the future, but in order to show the development of the poem depicting the Armenian Genocide in the period under study, the way of reflecting the most important idea, we should add that In the poem) Sjak managed to keep the "Ring of the Genocide" part, which is a tragic image in Armenian literature, free from bloody scenes, naturalistic anti-aesthetic images, which, as much as they give truth to the work, make it lively.
 Even the most horrible scenes, due to the used vocabulary, rhythm, and dynamics of the depicted actions, seem to alleviate and overshadow the inhuman atrocities of Turkey, planning the daily life of the Armenian people first. The mower was slaughtered in the field , I open my mouth.
Grandpa fell in Kali, was pouring his golden rye, In order to pay the duty to the Turks A day earlier… In 1965, when the fiftieth anniversary of the Armenian Genocide was approaching, ում in the period that followed, a wave of patriotism rose in the intelligentsia. P. Siak's poem "Three-voiced Liturgy" (February 1965), which is often considered a continuation of the "Silent Bell Tower", but in fact was the result of new poetic thinking, higher literary qualities, established qualities.
  This poem was already completely dedicated to the depiction of the Armenian Genocide.
The poem consists of three parts, which have corresponding subtitles: "I mourn the dead", "I will break the shanters", "I will call the living".
  The poem begins with the image of Mount Ararat in the center of Armenia, which the author compares to the bells stuck in the ground, entrusting him with one of the main roles. And neither I nor you are ringing. Sis and Masis are ringing endlessly - pause-break.
With the size and weight of Goghtan songs, accompanied by cotton bumblebees… The section "Lament of the Dead" is the smallest in volume, which shows that the main goal of the author is not to assume a tragic role, to reflect the tragic events of the past.
The words of the poet, who has already identified himself with Mount Ararat ("I am Sis-Masis, I say that") are mainly consumed by the artistic performance of the horrific song "Two million people were crucified", as in the case of another philosophical-humanitarian exhortation to the ruthless enemy. would sound like real barbarism if it weren't for the explanation. The foremost coffin ունենալ should be worshiped in life, the wooden coffin's the wall՜.
You should worship the coffin-youth, yes, because if the coffin is not cut, then it is a terrible catastrophe… The prophesied poet, who gives orders in the section "I will break the shanters", presents the sufferings of his martyred people Complaining to Mary that she had remained silent against this barbarism, Mary interceded with Jesus to stop the aggravation of the innocent people. Thus, exactly ten centuries ago, the religious Narekatsi appealed to the human Lady to intercede with God the Son to forgive the innumerable human sins, while in this case the Armenian people were not even guilty.
Szak does not forget about the Armenian male children, the groups of men who, in order to survive, had to trample on their own honor by wearing women's clothes, becoming "dancing men", which was much more deadly for honorable boys than physical death, but also thanks to these groups. It was that only one museum specimen of the Armenian type, it was these "lynx men" who had to take revenge. Oh, tremble from the lice of lynx men endlessly և terrify their revenge… Here you can ask a few questions. Who were the addressees of these lines, "I will call them alive" immediately following them, only the Armenian people, to whom were the quoted lines addressed, only to the heir of the Ottoman Empire, which still denies the historical truth, or? he to the Soviet Empire,
  And to whom were the calls not to assimilate mentioned in the last part of the poem addressed only to the Armenians of the Diaspora or to the Armenians living in the multinational Soviet country?
In any case, if we remember the ideas expressed in "Let There Be Light" and the critique of the darkness in the Soviet Union through symbolic images, footnotes, we will find or at least approach the possible answers to the given questions.
  Let us add that in the "I will live" section, Psak's thoughts on the consequences of not condemning the Armenian Genocide, his appeals to his people to live, create, not to give freedom to foreign lands are not only poetic repetitions, but also words of exceptional importance for the Armenian people.
In the way of evaluating the literary values ​​created not so long ago, we strongly believe that Silva Kaputikyan's patriotic lyric poetry should be seriously studied and valued.
 At first glance, it seems that the literature created by the poet has never been overshadowed, but today, when we approach his works from an analytical point of view, we understand that the inner worldview of Kaputikyan's patriotic work is little studied. The patriotic lyre of a well-known party member, a great publicist in the USSR (who did not have any problems with the political elite before the national awakening in the 1980s, which explains the "miracle" of publishing his national-patriotic lyric poetry) is a symbol of the Armenian Genocide, the lost homeland. The works written about Mount Ararat were quite a bold word in the ruling ideology.
1956-1960s With the poem "Reflections in the middle of the road" written in 1959, the poetess was opening a new era in Soviet-Armenian lyric poetry, which, naturally, was the result of years of reflection and civic maturity.
  Encouraged by communist ideas, the former Communist Party member realized that it was not appropriate for an Armenian poet to use his literary talent on transient themes when he had the image of a lost homeland before him, when it was impossible to silence the cry of historical memory.
  In the same years, 1958-1960, in the poem "Reflections" written on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of his literary activity, Kaputikyan expressed the idea that his poetic path "became as easy and peaceful as shame", while in reality the path of the Armenian poet was different. As the candle in the chapel is dilapidated, They are burned, melted, exhausted, The dilapidated homeland, the people are deaf, And they gave hope and light!
And in the poem "Reflections in the middle of the road" the poetess says a very sincere and convincing word that: What kind of young man is he?
The thoughts expressed in the whole poem, the life and thoughts of the lyrical heroine identified with the poetess completely coincide with the biography of the Armenian people living with the Soviet ideology.
 An Armenian who has seen the "red flag", "October morning", "pioneer word and drum" since the day of his birth should have understood one day that: There was an old, reconciled people, But the world was uneasy. They clashed In this dark work, aiming to examine the artisticization of the ideology of the Armenian Genocide, we must say that the ideas expressed in the "Three-voiced liturgy" section of the poem "I will call the living" sounded about the creators living in Armenia. best used և are idealized in this poem. Kaputikyan, who made the lines of Siamanto's dream to see justice ՝ Tumanyan's poets who did not desecrate their lips with a curse on their lips, correctly oriented himself "in the middle of his way", realizing
  It is time for Tumanyan to realize his dream. The Armenian people have only one way to live in the world. You must take revenge by living, Living stubbornly, a thousandfold. Against destruction by your creation, Against Van by your Yervan, Against exiles from the deaf desert Returning home again With your caravan, You will live like this, with this.
We completely agree with the observation of Kaputikyan's patriotic lyre, which is best valued by the researcher, that "When Kaputikyan destroys Van, he opposes the flourishing Yerjan or the ruined school of Maruta Monastery as a victory, Byurakan Observatory from being the word of the master of the homeland.
 Meanwhile, Kaputikyan "before writing this poem and after that" could not pacify everything about the Armenian poet's mournful soul "1, but it is quite clear that such a Kaputikian vision of the future path of the Armenian people was imperative (but not modern). It was almost the first step in the formation of patriotic lyric poetry, which, following the path of crystallization, gave birth to other works that did not agree with the present and were full of demanding ideas2.
 Moreover, even today we can say that the powerful really have the right to demand. The people who have passed the way of destruction and exile must first become stronger, develop, unite, fill their addressees with their geniuses 1 Ter-Minasyan A., I will address the addressees of "I will call the living", Yerevan, 2005, p. 49.
2 For more details, see ibid.
the treasury of worldly thought, so that its word may be heard, the claim may be real, otherwise the latter will be limited to only a few literary lines.
 Well, we should evaluate the Kaputikyan messages with this way of thinking.
It seems that Sakyan and Kaputyan's calls to live relentlessly, to create unwaveringly, should have reached their peak in Vahagn Davtyan's "Requiem", a relatively late Soviet-Armenian poem on the Armenian Genocide, but here The grief, which should be explained by the fact that Davtyan, unlike Siaki գրել Kaputikyan, began to write his poem under the direct influence of thoughts formed in Der-Zor or Deir el-Zor, which became a fraternal grave for the Armenian people (1977, Aleppo-Yerevan). . A place where every Armenian has something to say to the agitation of the soul, to the silent eruption of the most delicate feelings.
  If the previous poems, being filled with endless sorrow, nevertheless aroused patriotic feelings in the reader, պետք we should examine them along with the poetic utterance, then in the case of "Requiem", where Davtyan reads a peculiar requiem to the Armenian martyrs, we should understand the deep meaning.
 These two events are on both sides of the same event, which must act together.
  Just as a visitor to his lost birthplace, Davtyan recalls the "stars and prophets" buried in the sands of the blond desert, remembering the genius of Western Armenian literature on the flight: I could have paved the forehead of my century with the stars of poetry, but my forehead was crushed with a stone. With his poem he has revived the heartbreaking dialogue of an Armenian mother-child who is on the path of migration, or rather death, realizing that what has been taken away from her is not just a geographical area, but … "Understands that the long-lived crows of the desert, feeding on innocent victims, have not forgotten the memory of the past, the hope of being fed with" pure baby eyes "had brought them to DerZor again.
 In the poem, the poet's protest and revolt are heard. Where are you crows, where have you left?
In conclusion, it should be noted that the examined poems and authors, no matter how rebellious, exceptionally brave in their age, were relatively "harmless" to the Soviet powers, it is not accidental that Shiraz's "Armenian Dantean" on this subject, which is unique in writing about the Armenian Genocide. It is a book of poems, and the author, the greatest literary opposition of the time, was never published during the author's lifetime. The poem, with its uniqueness, combination of poetic prose and verse, with a combination of real and imaginary, claims to be the most successful study on the Armenian Genocide. It deserves very high praise.
Hayk Hovhannisyan THEME OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN THE SOVIET ARMENIAN POEM OF 1950-1970 Keywords: Soviet Union, poem, Armenian Genocide, P. Սևակ, Ս. Kaputikyan, V. Davtyan, historical memory.
