AMULSAR RUTIL SECOND QUARTERS The Amulsar gold-bearing quartzite deposit covers the administrative borders of Vayots Dzor յունSyunik marzes of the Republic of Armenia, on the north-northwestern branches of Zangezur mountain range, on the high tributaries of the Orba river.
  The area of ​​the mine is 12 km north-west of Gorayk village of Syunik region, and 10 km south of Kechut village of Vayots Dzor region.
  The nearest settlements are Saravan and Ughedzor.
According to S. V. According to Martirosyan և others [4], the study area is composed of middle և upper Eocene, as well as oligocene, which in the north are covered with quaternary middle-grade andesite-basaltic lavas up to 80 m thick.
  Modern alluvial-deluvial formations are also widespread here.
The Eocene section begins with middle Eocene-height andesites, their lava breccias, and agglomerated tuffs, which are developed in the south-west of the area.
 The rocks have a similar fall azimuth, with 40-450 fall angles.
  Their capacity is about 500 m.
  The mentioned formations are covered with angular-azimuthal disharmony of the Upper Neocene volcanic layer, which is divided into two subgroups with a lower thickness of 200-250 m.
 It is represented by agglomerate tuffs of andesitic Jandesite-basalt composition, which contain flows of similar composition with a capacity of several meters.
 The stratum consists of three horizons characteristic of eriodacite tuffs with a capacity of 10-40 meters [4, 5].
The upper one, with a capacity of 400-450 m, is represented by andesite-basalt composite tuff breccias.
 Cut upwards (eastern part) are the hydrothermally altered formations of the Yenoligocene, which have a thickness of 700-750 meters.
 These formed at the expense of oligocene medium-sized rock fragments.
  Tertiary quartzites are also found in metasomatites.
Upper Miocene-Lower Pliocene heights are exposed in the southwestern part of the subregion, are inconsistently seated on Eocene-Oligocene heights, and are located approximately horizontally.
They are represented by volcanic crumbs, slag, agglomerates, tuff breccias, andesite basalts, etc.
Upper Eocene և Oligocene rocks form a mildly inclined synclinal fold in the midday direction.
Magmatic formations of the Upper Eocene-Oligocene age-group Gabbro-Monzonite-Granosienite formation are widespread in the region.
According to E. Գ. According to Tonoyan [5], they are small upright bodies, the size of which varies from 0.004 to 0.6 sq.m. km.
 Some of the contacts of the latter were subjected to deer stoning.
  The intrusive formations of the different parts of the region are represented by the intrusions of Kakavasar, Jermuk, Kechut, Kayategh, Amulsar and Verin Vorotan groups.
 These intrusions are of Oligocene height, and their small outcrops tear the volcanic eruptions of the Upper Eocene.
 It should be noted that the outputs of the intrusions coincide with the location and distribution of the location of the border block.
  Kakavasar intrusions are represented by monzonites, gabbro փոքր with small outcrops of granodiorites, which tear the middle Eocene tops.
  Jermuk չ Kechuti intrusions are represented by gabbro, quartz syenites, granosienites և monzonites.
 The intrusions of the Upper Vorotan are represented by granodiorites, granosienites-monzonts, which are exposed under the cover of Miopliocene և Quaternary lava.
The youngest ruptured formations are attributed to andesitic cosmophorite intrusions, which are exposed in the watershed.
In 2006, as a result of geophysical, geochemical and petrographic researches carried out by "Geoteam" CJSC, for the first time in the Republic of Armenia, ores of gold ores were isolated in the second quartzites, in particular, four sites of gold-bearing quartzites of industrial significance: Eratavs, Artashak, Tigranes ].
The approved balance reserves of the C1 + C2 category of the Tigranes-Artavazdes joint site of the Amulsar mine are: 56.4 million tons of ore, 52.66 tons of gold, 210.5 tons of silver (decisions of the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations № 221 as of 23.02.2009 և № 309 as of 16.09.2011). .
The Amulsar mine was formed at low temperatures at shallow depths.
  Mineralization is localized in altered վար quartz crushed formations և controlled by tectonic faults.
 Gold is represented by scattered fine-dispersed eggs.
2016-2017 As a result of petrographic studies of debris samples collected during fieldwork during the year, it was found that secondary quartzites rich in rutile earth oxides and hydroxides were widespread in the Amulsar deposit.
  Varieties of rutile-alunite և rutile-sericite secondary quartzites are rare.
  Below is a brief description of them.
Rutile quartzite. It is a hard rock with small spots of dark cherry iron hydroxides, rarely with chalcopyrite, chalcosine եզ with unique spots of natural gold.
  Iron oxides և hydroxides are represented by ocolomorphic-ribbon-formations, pellets, non-mineral minerals that have grown on them in places.
 The rock is 90% quartz, 7% rutile and 3% geotite.
 Quartzite is represented by recrystallized quartz xenoblast granules with a smallest granular mass.
 It is enriched with recrystallized grains of equestrian aggregates.
  An insignificant amount of orange hydroxide և orange aggregates is present in the microcracks.
  The rutile in the main rock mass is represented by small accumulations of homogeneous, light yellow small prisms.
 Small rutile crystals are characterized by a low refractive index of more than 2.62.9.
Hematite quartzite. It is a dark cherry-colored, flushed rock with saturated mineralization of iron hydroxides և mixtures of oxides.
 Iron oxides and hydroxides appear in the form of granular, xenomorphic, branched, spherical formations.
Hematite quartzite consists of 63% quartz, hematite, geotite hematized magnetite makes 37%.
  Mineral minerals in the quartz granular mass are formed by dense accumulations and branching veins.
 Fake replacement of the magnetic mass typical of dark red with hematite ումը transition to hematite is noticeable.
 Geotite is represented by yellowish, orange-yellowish, small, tiny granules and filaments.
  The main mass of quartzite was formed by the leaching of andesites, on which, in turn, magnetite mineralization was located.
Geotite quartzite ․ It is rich in iron oxides և hydroxides, dirty brown, dark red color, dense, flinty, iron, in which rashes of chalcopyrite, chalcosin, chalcosin-kovelin are noticeable.
82% of geotite quartzite is quartz and 18% is geotite.
 Quartz is a fine grain with recrystallized quartz veins.
 The latter cause dense accumulations with a microgranular structure.
The primary mineral is magnetite, as evidenced by the presence of oxidation effects.
 There is also a change in the initial minerals, the transition of iron hydroxides from brown to bright red.
Geotite-hematite quartzite. It is a dark brown, dark red, dense, sparkling rock, rich in iron oxides և hydroxides.
There are rashes of chalcopyrite, pyrite, chalcosin.
  The rock consists of equart - 60%, և minerals containing iron - 40%.
  Geotite hematite quartzite is a dense accumulation of fine-grained quartz particles, nests and small particles.
The results of the work performed led to the following conclusions: • The mass of Amulsar gold-bearing secondary quartzites was formed by hydrothermal processes of acid leaching of oligocene-grade andesites.
Alkaline (K, Na) և basic (Ca, Mg) elements are released during leaching, in addition to iron, which binds to the aqueous solutions of sulfur brought from the depths of the fluids to form pyrite.
• There are many different types of quartzites: hematite, hydroxide, hematite-hydroxide, hematite-geotite-rutile, quartzite-cerite, rutyl-alunite.
  Secondary quartzites rich in rutile Cerkat oxides and hydroxides are widespread.
  Rutile-alunite, rutile-sericite quartzites are rare.
LITERATURE [1] Aloyan H., in the Erato section of the Amulsar gold-bearing quartzite deposit in the RA Vayots Dzor region, 2007-2013. On the results of the geological exploration works carried out on 01.09.2013 ․ By substantiating the parameters of the conditions and calculating the reserves, Yerevan, 2013.
[2] Aloyan H., in Husavan section, located on the south-western slope of Amulsar gold-bearing quartzite deposit, Vayots Dzor region, RA, 2013 երկր Geological study աբանական On engineering-geological works carried out with the right of entrails use certified by the agreement No. EUH-29/003 of September 20, 2015, Yerevan
1.
50000 in the territories of Vayotskzor and Yuzhno Sevan geologists and economists Gyurjyan Arman AMULSAR RUTIL SECOND QUARITS Keywords: gold mine, secondary quartzites, hematite, geot.
