THE ROLE OF GEOGRAPHICAL MARKETING IN THE SUSTAINABLE TOURISM DEVELOPMENT OF RA In order to evaluate the possibilities of using geographical marketing in sustainable tourism, one must first understand the essence of geographical marketing.
Geomarketing (geomarketing) is a relatively new concept for both geologists and marketers.
 This understanding is based on the interdisciplinary direction of research, which implies the integration of geography and marketing tools.
 The result of this integration is the creation of a new business management tool that can be useful to many managers.
Uncertainty arises in many directions of interdisciplinary research due to the established boundaries of the direction, as well as the lack of a commonly accepted terminology.
 This problem has not bypassed the geographical marketing either. There is no universal definition of geomarketing, besides, its boundaries are not clearly defined.
 Solving this problem is complicated by the fact that not all geographers have mastered the tools of marketing, and marketers are never sufficiently informed about geographical disciplines.
We deal with geographical marketing when delivering the product to the final consumers.
  It determines the activity of this or that object first of all by a geographical factor, in particular, all the data on the market are considered from a spatial aspect.
  Geographical marketing research is conducted, in which marketing data is localized, consumer spatial behavior studies are conducted.
The tourism market consists of consumers with different needs and behaviors.
  This becomes the basis for segmentation of the market based on various indicators (geographical, demographic, psychological և socio-economic).
 Of these indicators, geographic indicators are the most widely used in geographic marketing.
 When selecting a target segment following market segmentation, the organization selects the segment (s) most attractive to it, which should serve as the goal of the marketing strategy to achieve the desired results.
 Spatial market data significantly increases the organization's ability to target target segments [2, 3].
Geographic marketing is based on two main components: the study of consumer spatial behavior, and through it, the selection of the optimal location of enterprises.
 Due to this, it increases the efficiency of the business, contributing to the increase of the level of satisfaction of the needs of the consumers.
  The penetration and application of geographic marketing in the field of tourism requires the study of the spatial behavior of consumers, in this case tourists, ensuring the spatially efficient organization of tourism.
When studying the spatial behavior of consumers, it is possible to understand what motivated tourists to travel a certain distance to visit a given place.
 If we do not take into account the time-financial factors, we will, nevertheless, notice that the majority of tourists prefer to visit countries not far from their place of residence, located in the same region.
 However, everything changes when, in particular, tourists begin to be attracted by the unique tourism resources of a certain area, which tourists are ready to travel hundreds or even thousands of kilometers to see.
This is where the need for geographic marketing comes into play, which, based on the study of tourism flows, contributes to the effective spatial organization of tourism.
 Here, in particular, the separation of tourist destinations is used.
 In fact, the tourist destination is the decisive element of the tourism system.
 It can be described as a center (area) with various amenities, services and services to meet the various needs of tourists.
 In other words, the tourist destination includes the most crucial elements of tourism, which are necessary for tourists.
 The tourist destination region is one of the most important in the tourism system, as it is the destinations և their image that attracts tourists, motivates them to visit, activating the entire tourism system [1].
The development of tourist destinations requires unique tourism resources, objects around them of relevant tourism interest, which are able to meet the needs of people formed in the tourism process [4].
infrastructure.
Tourism resources Geographic marketing should be used first of all when choosing the most optimal location for infrastructure, various service facilities in terms of tourism resources.
  The latter will not only increase the revenue of these services, but also, in general, increase the tourist attractiveness of the whole destination, as most tourists appreciate the convenience of service, which in this case is related to the availability of services to meet almost all needs of tourists in a particular destination.
The principles of geographical marketing are mostly applied by large network economies.
  In the field of tourism, such are, in particular, the world's largest hotel brands (Marriott, Hilton, Hyatt).
 Examining the world tourism flows and their regional peculiarities, it can be argued that these companies locate their facilities in different countries, in tourist destinations.
  Despite all this, the significance of the location should not be unequivocally ruled out.
  The good location of the enterprise, of course, contributes to the increase of the efficiency of the activity աճ the increase of the incomes, but only the well-chosen location is still sufficient.
 Low level of service, small range of services, managerial shortcomings can offset all the advantages of a good location.
 The use of geographic marketing implies the selection of the optimal location, the implementation of appropriate marketing activities, strategic planning, improvement of management methods, market և risk analysis, advertising, media planning, etc. [8].
 It is possible to provide constant monitoring (monitoring) of the obtained results, which will allow not only to assess the current situation, but also to predict the trends of future market changes in order to respond as quickly as possible.
In recent decades, the world community has recognized the need for sustainable human development, forcing tourism workers to change their views on tourism and the relationship between its participants.
 2004 The ADC formulated the concept of sustainable tourism development, according to which the norms of sustainable tourism development management practice are applicable to all types of destinations in all types of destinations, including mass tourism.
 The principles of sustainability refer to the protection of the environment, the economic, socio-cultural aspects of tourism development.
  In addition, an appropriate balance must be struck between these three aspects to ensure the long-term sustainability of tourism.
ComparisonSustainable tourism
The volume of tourism services is coordinated with the ecological, socio-economic attraction opportunities for tourists, which determine the nature of tourism activities.
Mass
(traditional) tourismTourism is oriented towards the constant growth of tourist flows.
 The volume of tourism services is limited only by the capacity of the material and technical base.
During their stay, tourists return to the area they visit in accordance with the culture of the area. Visitors bring a certain amount of tourist behavior to their models.
 The behavior of the visitors does not harm the natural resources, the traditions and customs of the local population.
lifestyle and behavior.
Attitude For visitors's nature և Visitors և բնակ աբեր և։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
Friendly, respectful relations, the purpose of which is the recognition of the new culture.
Knows the consumer attitude of visitors to natural objects.
Formal relations - visitors consider themselves hosts who need to be served.
Table 1. Main differences between sustainable tourism and mass tourism [5] Thus, sustainable tourism should: 1. Ensure the optimal use of environmental resources, are a key element in the development of tourism, preserving the main ecological processes, helping to preserve natural heritage and biodiversity.
2. The socio-cultural peculiarities of the respected communities, preserving the cultural heritage, national values ​​and customs built by them, contributing to the establishment of intercultural understanding and tolerance.
3. Ensure the viability of long-term economic processes, taking into account the profitability of all stakeholders, including the availability of income համար social services and permanent employment for the host communities.
The sustainable development of tourism requires the participation of relevant, interested, competent circles, as well as strong political governance.
  Achieving sustainable tourism is a continuous process that requires environmental impact monitoring and, if necessary, appropriate preventive or remedial measures.
Sustainable tourism must also provide a high level of satisfaction for the needs of tourists by raising their awareness of the sustainability of the results by disseminating practical activities related to sustainable tourism [7].
All tourism activities should be aimed at ensuring the sustainable development of tourism, which, comparing the many advantages of traditional tourism (Table 1), should directly or indirectly contribute to the sustainable development of the whole area, while implementing nature, culture, social and economic development.
Being a recently established direction, there is no great experience in the application of geographical marketing, particularly in the field of tourism.
 The principles of geographic marketing are successfully applied in business, especially in France.
 There is no tendency to apply the principles of geographical marketing in Armenia yet.
  In our country, service և tourist facilities are often built spontaneously, without taking into account the need to provide the most optimal location համապատասխան appropriate service conditions for the convenience of customers.
 Many potential tourism resources lose hundreds or even thousands of visitors a year due to lack of basic facilities and infrastructure.
  This is facilitated by the disproportionate distribution of tourism infrastructure facilities in Armenia.
  Consider the example of the distribution of hotels in Armenia (Table 2).
RegionYerjan Aragatsotn MarzArarat Marz Armavir MarzGegharkunik MarzLori MarzKotayk Marz Shirak MarzSyunik Marz Vayots Dzor MarzTavush MarzGeneral Number of Hotel Facilities by YearsTable 2. The number of hotels in Armenia becomes only About 64% of Armenian hotels are located in Yerevan և Kotayk region.
  These indicators, such as the high concentration of tourism services in the capital, are of great concern; they deepen the differences in the opportunities for tourism development in different regions of the country, hindering the balanced territorial development, which is one of the most important components of sustainable development.
The Republic of Armenia, declaring tourism as a priority direction of development, however, does not take appropriate measures for the balanced territorial development of the sphere.
  The effective application of the principles of geographical marketing can help to overcome these differences, making the organization of tourism in our country more effective, contributing to the sustainable, balanced development of the region.
LITERATURE [4] Кусков А. S., Golubeva V. L., Odintsova T. N., Recreational geography.
 Учебно [6] Cliquet G., Geomarketing.
 Methods and Strategies in Spatial Marketing, 2006, 328 p. [8] Geomarketing research, URL.
  www.geo-marketing.ru.
[9] Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia, URL.
  http:
//armstatbank.am (the link was made on 17-05-2018).
CHINGINGARYAN CHRINGARYAN THE ROLE OF GEOGRAPHICAL MARKETING IN THE SUSTAINABLE TOURISM DEVELOPMENT Keywords: geographical marketing, sustainable tourism, regional
balanced development.
