TRANSFORMATION OF HISTORICAL METHOD IN LATE ANTIQUE PERIOD. Eusebius of CaesareaIntroductionThe special Christian historical writing had a profound influence on the development of European historical thought.
The influence of Christianity extended not only to the idea of ​​historical development, but also to the research styles of historians, the interpretation of events, the description of events.
Researchers have long argued that Christian historiography is far behind the traditional historiographical tradition.
 Researchers believed that Christian historians deliberately falsified or concealed factual motives for political or religious reasons.
Moreover, in the past, medieval historiography was considered the servant of local theology, with the aim not to "study reality" but to "present" arguments for the confirmation and strengthening of biblical ideas2.
 In such conditions, of course, there is no question of disagreement or historical criticism.
Others believe that the medieval chronicle deliberately chose supernatural և impossible facts to prove divine providence.
 For this reason, a problem arose: a number of scholars refused to call medieval historians historians, and their writings "History" 3.
  At best, some of the innovations of Christian historiography in the field of historiography were mentioned.
2 Sventskaya I., Early Christianity.
 pages of histories, M., 1987, p. 175-185. Researchers at one time tended to treat the whole of medieval historiography in the same way.
 They "forgot" that there were three types of historiography in Byzantium.
 In addition to ecclesiastical historiography, the representatives of the royal և heretical 5's historiography were equally creative.
The main target in the field of such a historical discourse, of course, is Eusebius of Caesarea 6, the founder of ecclesiastical historiography.
Eusebius of Caesarea is described as an instrument of political propaganda, the founder of political theology, as well as the founder of Caesareanism7.
 That is why we will try to refer to the principles of his historiography, to the issue of the author's identity.
1. Theoretical questions սկզբունք Principles of historiography Eusebius of Caesarea, realizing the innovation of his work, in a unique way opposes the ancient historians.
 E4 One of the best examples of the historiography of the Byzantine king is Anna Komnina (10831153) "Alexiada" long-suffering (Anna Komnina, Alexiada, Per. J. N. Lybarskogo, SPb., 1996).
 In "Alexiada" Princess Anna Komnina announces the political biography of her father, Alex Komninos.
  These two contain a wealth of information about the First Crusade.
5 A unique example of heretical historiography is the "New Story" of the 5th century Byzantine lawyer ևThe narrator Zosimus (Zosim, New History, translation, commentary, by N. N. Bolgova, Belgorod, 2010), by which the author tells the story of Augustus Ochomarius The events of (410).
  He, being hostile to Christianity, speaks rather negatively about the emperors Constantine the Great և Theodosius (for details on the views of Zosimus, see Ragozina NN, Religious-Political ideology of Zosima, Ancient peace.
 сборник статьей в честь В.В. Struve, M., 1962, p. 611-617).
6 Eusebius of Caesarea (263-340 CE) was bishop of Caesarea in Palestine.
  Being a contemporary and ideological historian of Constantine the Great, Eusebius was able to complete the early medieval understanding of history.
 The author's works "Church History", "Chronology" and "Life of Constantine" are famous for historiography.
  Armenian historians Agatangeghos, Movses Khorenatsi, Tovma Artsruni, Asoghik, Samuel Anetsi and many others have used the historical works of Eusebius of Caesarea, especially "Chronology".
For more on the life և activities of Eusebius of Caesarea, see Ястребов А., Евсе7 Speaking of the political views of Eusebius of Caesarea, the Japanese scholar Satoshi Toda denies the fact of the founder of Caesarean political theology, while insisting on the orthodox Christianity of Caesarean's writings.
  For details, see Toda S., the founder of ecclesiastical historiography on the so-called "Political Theology", in his long-suffering speaks of the kingdom of God, և the heroic struggle for justice for his servants.
  In contrast, ancient historians were more inclined to tell the story of wars and victories.
In addition, Christian advocacy literature repeatedly criticized the harsh policies pursued in the provinces of the Roman Empire.
  At one time, Soviet historiography seemed to target this provision.
  Meanwhile, it is more probable that the protest was not against the ruling regime, but the result of the changes in the value system that took place9.
This view is confirmed by the fact that if for Thucydides the essence of history was the struggle for power, which was accompanied by various wars, then the history of Christian historians was itself the path to the education of mankind to Salvation.
Some scholars are inclined to believe that Eusebius used such tricks to oppose the city of Rome, as a weighty shift of political weight to the east took place during the reign of Constantine.
 However, there are no such arguments in the pages of "Church History".
 Eusebius maintains in ancient historiography the idea of's history as a teacher of life, which he passed on to the Byzantine disciples11.
Beginning with Eusebius of Caesarea, Christian historians begin their work with prayer as an innovation.
  The story of Eusebius begins with the following words: "For which God Himself is the guide of my way, and the power of our Lord our hand, let us ask for help" 12.
 The story also ends with a prayer. "And now, with the voluntary will aroused, let us read aloud to the beggar, that he may save us in this paradise until the end of the assembly, and establish a new eternal peace in the 10th century.
 in the eastern historical mind. Voronezh, 1986, p. 61.12 Eusebius of Caesarea, History of the Church, born of the Armenians in the fifth century, vol. Abraham Gharyan, Venice, 1877, The first school, 1, 3.
Christ Jesus, our Savior, by whom be the glory of the Father for ever and ever. amen ”13.
Here Eusebius's historiographical style appeals to Greco-Roman historiography.
  The trick of appealing to the gods is widely used in the classical Greek economies of erhin 14 և in other speeches15.
 Turning to God through Christianity takes on a unique meaning.
 Orogines still claims that "there are realities that are beyond measure. they are too big, incomprehensible because of the weakness of our mind, the limitations.
 Only the various and at the same time unlimited grace of God, which, according to his plan, comes to us through the mediation of Christ, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, allows us to understand them. ”16
 That is why man can do nothing without God's help.
  In addition, prayer plays an important role in the lives of Christians.
 They do not turn to the immortal gods Jupiter or the Almighty God.
  The works of the famous theologian Augustine the Blessed begin and end with prayers17.
 The works of Eusebius of Caesarea also introduce a number of innovations in the field of historical tradition in connection with the transformation of the Christian worldview.
  Sensitivity, mentality and personal perception become part of ecclesiastical historiography.
  All of this is evident in the presentation of Christian behavior during trials18.
The first Christian historian, in turn, mentions that God is the head of the heavenly and earthly order, calling him Pantocrator, and the emperor the head of the earthly order the Cosmocrat.
  That is, the emperor is the vicar of God և Christ's protector երկրի on earth 19.
13 Eusebius of Caesarea, History of the Church, Book of the Tenth, 4, 72. 14 Encomias (praise) were works of ancient Greek praise addressed to individuals, to the Gods.
  They recited during the holidays accompanied by instruments.
15 A similar example is the praise of Emperor Gaius Pliny Secundus Trajan, for the use of various rhetorical tricks.
  Гай Плиний Чецилий Секунд, 16 Orogines, On Prayer, Man can do nothing without God's help, 1, E., 2007.
17 Augustine the Blessed, Confessions, Book I, I, 1; Book Thirteen, XXXVIII, 53, Yerevan, 2008.
18 Eusebius of Caesarea, History of the Church, Book Five, 1, 11.
19 Eusebius of Caesarea, History of the Church, School Ninth, 2, 7.
At the same time, the title "king" was consecrated in the imperial court.
It was at this time that legends began to be woven about the emperor's visions, according to which he dreamed of a cross flooded with blood21.
 According to Eusebius of Caesarea, the emperor was chosen by God to create a world Christian power as early as 306, long before the army declared Augustus.
  Ghosts are an important part of sacred monuments.
 They express the ideas of medieval man about the eternal struggle between good and evil22.
    Ghosts were widespread in medieval Armenia23.
In fact, the theoretical questions of Eusebius of Caesarea սկզբունք the principles of historiography bear the deep trace of the transitional era.
On the one hand, there are still ancient historical traditions (applied gods, assumptions about the didactic benefit of history, etc.), and on the other hand, a number of traditional principles are being revived in connection with the transformation of the Christian worldview.
In addition, Eusebius presents his narration not in the third person, as was customary before, but in the first person.
  These և a number of tricks were used in the late Middle Ages24.
20 For the first time in 629. Emperor Heracles calls himself "Basil" instead of the title "Roman Emperor" (Lithuanian LG . 61).
21 For details on the vision of Constantine the Great, see Bremmer JN, The Vision of22 Ter-Davtyan K., The Armenian Ethics of the XI-XV Centuries, Yerevan, 1980, p. 22.
23 In the Armenian Middle Ages, the visions of the patriarchs Nerses I the Great և Sahak I Parth լայն were widespread, which are the retellings and localized reinterpretations of the Visions circulated in the Christian reality of Methodius Pataras.
  According to the vision of Nerses I the Great, after the fall of the Armenian Arshakunys, the Persians will conquer Jerusalem, capture the Cross, which must be captured by the Greeks.
  However, the power of the Greeks will later be overthrown by the blows of the "archers" or "throwers" (Seljuks).
 Before long, the "throwers" will be defeated by the military force of the "Franks" (crusaders).
The establishment of Roman rule will put an end to Armenian suffering.
  The vision expresses not only the disappointment of the Armenians towards the Greeks, but also the new liberation expectations.
 Such expectations exist in the visions of Agathon, Hovhannes Kozern, Grigor Tateatsi, Tovma Metsopetsi.
 Kyoseyan H., Tesilq, ChristianArmenia encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2002, pp. 1004-1006.
24 In historiography it is customary to balance Eusebius of Caesarea with "Church History" և the first Lutheran ecclesiastical history, the "Magdeburg Centuries".
 Or a critic in "Magdeburg Centuries" for obvious reasons 2. The problem of Eusebius of Caesarea's objectivity ային author identity Պ The quality և value of historical work depends not only on the factual material in the work, but also on the author ՝'s goals and approaches.
Every author of ancient historiography tended to assure his readers that his work contained objective facts-analyzes.
  At the same time, their only desire is to discover the truth.
 The problem for historians today is complicated by the fact that the coverage of each branch of history and its sources requires special knowledge25.
But the question arises as to how impartial Christian historians are against the "background" of the objectivity of ancient historians.
  The answer to the question that seems easy at first glance is ambiguous.
In particular, the German researcher E. Howald accused the historical father Herodotus of "immorality" and described his "History" as the earliest example of a criminal novel.
 Hippolytus Tenn also accused Thucydides of carelessness and lack of sensitivity27.
Ancient historians, on the other hand, often broke their promises of impartiality.
  Cicero's classic assertions about the author's truthfulness and impartiality were often refuted by his own historians.
  Historian Gaius Salustilos Crispus speaks of impartiality in the beginning of his work "The Conspiracy of Catalina", but soon insists that the glory of a number of peoples and individuals depends on the creators of them28.
  This is best seen in Cicero's coverage of Catiline 29.
The historical methods of Eusebius of Caesarea are discussed, but modern historians argue the stylistic similarity of the two works.
  For details, see 25 Tosh J., Stremling k istine.
 How to master the history of history, M., 2000, p. 81-83. 26 E. He agrees with Howald. News.
 Lurje S., Gerodot, M.-L., 1947, p. 36-37. The issue of authorial objectivity has also been discussed many times during the examination of the works of Josephus Plavios.
 T. Rajjak argues that the coverage of this or that event by Josephus Plavios can not be unequivocally considered objective-impartial, as the narrator is a participant in the events մեկը one of the direct actors30.
From the above-mentioned օրինակ a number of other examples it becomes obvious that the ancient authors often presented facts only in accordance with their ideas և views, very often hiding a number of "unreliable" facts և arguments.
The problem of the objectivity of Eusebius of Caesarea is a rather complex problem.
  All the authors, who to some extent referred to the church historian, could not avoid covering the problem out of impartiality.
One of the most conscientious critics of Eusebius of Caesarea R. Grant, who once tried to address the issue of Eusebius's stereotype in a separate article 31, expressed his opinion on the political dependence of the first ecclesiastical historian.
 R. For Grant, Eusebius deliberately confuses the Roman emperors Antoninus Pius, Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Veros, who at various times bore the name Antoninus32.
 But this confusion is just a fabrication.
 Eusebius of Caesarea blames the persecution of Christians by the "good" emperor Marcus Aurelius on the shoulders of the "evil" emperor Lucius Veros.
  However, the same Marcus Aurelius repeatedly criticizes Christians in his famous "Reflections".
 R. Grant explains the style of Eusebius of Caesarea by the fact that Constantine the Great was greatly influenced by Marcus Aurelius.
If in the pages of "Church History" the Constantine orientation does not seem so obvious, then the work "The Life of Constantine" has been uniquely targeted by historians.
 Of course, the "Life of Constantine" is a classic historical work, as behavioral works are often far from presenting the real picture34.
30 Radjak T., Iosif Flavic.
 historian and society, M., 1993, p. 16-17. 34 According to Knarik Ter-Davtyan, the principles of construction of behavioral-testimonial works were developed in the 4th century within the borders of the Ar-Roman Empire.
 This sacred work has had a profound effect on the Christian world of our time.
 Constantine the Great was later perceived in Byzantium by the very definitions of Eusebius of Caesarea35.
 On the one hand, Constantine the Great is presented as a great military-skilled politician, on the other hand, it is constantly emphasized that the emperor considered himself a servant of God, he carried out his affairs with God's blessing and approval.
 In addition, Eusebius of Caesarea provides an exemplary example of a Christian ruler who would be instructive for generations.
The Christian historian is in line with the demands of the time.
 The whole scientific-cultural thought was directed to the "Hellenic Renaissance", at the same time referring to the classical characters of Greek literature37.
 Probably in the hands of Eusebius of Caesarea was also the "novel of Alexander" 38, the influence of which in the Hellenistic world was simply indescribable.
Back in the 19th century, Y. Burkhard accuses Eusebius of Caesarea of ​​dishonesty for his work The Life of Constantine, which combines behaviors, testimonies, hymns, as well as ceremonies dedicated to the saints, church rites, and singing in the genre of eloquent literature.
  The testimonies come in the midst of great Christian persecution, originally of a purely judicial nature, consisting of descriptions of the events leading up to the martyrdom, interrogation, sentencing, and execution.
  Sacred works of this type have neither a preface nor an epilogue; they do not deviate from the original material at all.
 Gradually, poems dedicated to the martyrs were created next to them, where a great place was already given to rhetoric (Ter-Davtyan K., mentioned work, pp. 17-18).
35 This poem by Eusebius of Caesarea has much in common with the churopedia of Xenophon, one of the most famous generals of ancient Greece, the historian Xenophon.
  The author of "Kyuropedia" tells about Cyrus the Great, the founder of the Achaemenid Empire, considering first of all not the narration of historical facts, but the presentation of the image of the ideal ruler
36 The image of Constantine the Great created by ecclesiastical historians is difficult to evaluate unequivocally.
  Ecclesiastical historians praised not only his virtuous behavior և piety, but also the preservation of the unity of the universal church (Council of Nicaea) և state-building activity (founding of Constantinople ևpublishing laws) (Vayeva I., Konstantin the Great).
 Variations on the face in Christian 4,2013, p. 58).
38 History of Alexander the Great, Armenian editions, Diligence H. Simonyan, E., 1989.
extinguishes the worst behavior39.
 Such opinions were not unique in the 19th century.
  All the actions of Eusebius of Caesarea were an attempt to interpret as deliberate plans to distort the real facts.
  Contrary to such claims, M. Muretov highly assessed the historiographical and sourceological activity of Eusebius of Caesarea40.
A. According to Lebed, Eusebius of Caesarea had no interest in praising Constantine the Great, since the above-mentioned code of conduct was written after his death41.
  It is appropriate to remember the words of Procopius of Caesarea that became the secret of "Secret History". "Գրել It was not possible to write the truth in the previous books, because the actors of the events that took place were still alive!
 And it was impossible to remain unnoticed by the spies, and in case of being discovered, to avoid the horrific execution.
  I could not trust even my closest relatives.
In previous books I have often had to keep silent about the causes of many events.
  Now it is necessary to write down what has been said so far, as և to mention the reasons given in the previous books… ”42.
Most scholars often ignore the crucial fact that Eusebius of Caesarea and Constantine the Great personally encountered very few.
  The bishop of Caesarea, Constantine the Great, first came to the attention of the Council of Nicaea.
According to some scholars, Eusebius of Caesarea tried to use imperial patronage as a "bulwark" during the 4th century church disputes.
  In addition to ecclesiastical disputes, in our opinion, A. Lebed's assertion is also an exaggeration.
42 Procopius of Caesarea, Secret History, 1, Translation from the Ancient Greek Original, Preface և Footnotes: H. Bartikyan, E., 1987.
43 T. According to Barnes, Constantine the Great and Eusebius of Caesarea had only four personal meetings.
 Barnes T., Constantine and Eusebius, Cambridge, 1981, p. 265-267. 44 According to Eusebius, one of the primary tasks of the imperial government was to promote Christianity.
  The emperor is not only the head of power, but also the earthly ruler of Christendom.
  With such extravagance, the emperor must not forget that he is a mere mortal և a child of God like everyone else.
 He is responsible to the Lord for the fate of his subjects.
  In this way, the Byzantine Christian concept prepares fertile ground for the religious ferment in the intra-public life of tsarism.
Socrates Scholatikos reports valuable information that even during the reign of Emperor Julian, pagan masses, many apostates and pagans, acted alongside the persecutors of Christianity and the martyrs of the faith.
However, these և a number of other events in political life are beyond the attention of Eusebius of Caesarea.
  However, all this is not a deliberate step.
  The ecclesiastical historian focuses on the general church, everything directly related to it.
In general, there are quite a few inaccuracies and mistakes in the works of Eusebius of Caesarea.
  Even R., who had a negative attitude towards him. Grant found only three factual errors47.
 Along with all this, the issue of the author's identity of Eusebius of Caesarea deserves special attention.
 In the ancient world, it was not customary for an author to talk about a person or his goals.
The development of Greco-Roman historiography was able to set clear criteria for ancient historians, in whose domain authors often had to remain silent about themselves.
  The first early Byzantine historians faced a more complex problem, standing at the crossroads of two eras.
  Preserving the traditional writing styles, they had to implement a number of innovations in accordance with the spirit of the era.
  Naturally, it was not possible to make the transition at once.
 I. According to Chichurov, the transformation of the author's identity began with Eusebius of Caesarea and ended only in the 9th century, 49 times 50 Theophanes the Confessor50.
for ideological characteristics (Kurbatov G. L., Political theory in the early Vizan Perva half VII century, M., 1984, pp. 103-105).
47 For details, see Grant R., op. cit., p. 259. 49 Theophanes the Confessor (760-818) at the request of his friend George Sincellos wrote 284-813. This story is known as the "Chronology" or "Biography of the Byzantine Emperors".
  In the middle of the 9th century, Patriarch Methodius wrote The Behavior of St. Theophanes the Confessor, which contains rich information about the life and activities of Theophanes the Confessor.
  Using many sources, the founder of Ecclesiastical Historiography begins his long-suffering with a rather extensive preface, in which he tends to present to the reader his aims.
 Particularly well aware of the novelty and complexity of his work, he notes: "On the other hand, I beg your pardon for the good of those who have read it, so that it may be difficult for us to confess our external power, which we promise to carry perfectly, because first of all, we owe it to ourselves to dare to do so. Of course, we do not deserve this." I see the ecclesiastical historians as a stronghold of themselves. I look forward to being the same profitable researcher as my possible story. ”51
Despite this, the bishop of Caesarea was often criticized by later generations for his lack of a unified system of long-suffering.
 However, this statement cannot be considered unequivocally true.
  The first ecclesiastical historian had questions that he tried to answer through a series of innovations.
It is evident that Eusebius of Caesarea left to the readers not a piece with an almost faceless author, but the result of the research of a multifaceted developed individual.
 The image of the person conducting this research is revealed as a result of his / her choice of facts, coverage of goals, understanding of the attitude towards the characters of the work.
The first ecclesiastical historian does not hide his affiliation with the Christian church at all; he expresses dislike for those who persecute Christians52.
In general, Eusebius of Caesarea does not destroy, but transforms the ancient historical traditions, giving them a Christian spirit.
 Following Thucydides and Polybius, he uses a series of reliable documents, to which he makes detailed analyzes, he seriously examines their authenticity, translating a series of important documents if necessary.
 The Chronicle of Theophanes the Confessor was also published in Armenian.
  See Theophanes the Confessor's 528-year chronology of the accused's abbot of Agros Monastery, translation from the original, preface ությունները Footnotes: H. Bartikyan, Foreign Sources on Armenians in Armenia, vol. 13, Byzantine sources, H. D., E., 1983.
51 Eusebius of Caesarea, History of the Church, First School.
ծության.
  At the same time, one of the most well-known literary tricks is found in the pages of church history - the speech, but with unequivocal refinements.
Summary Being under the ancient historical traditions, Eusebius of Caesarea deviates from the accepted rules.
  First of all, the subject of research is changed.
 The history of wars and political processes is being replaced by a long history.
  After that, he refuses to write only the history of the period in which he lived, ostensibly defining creation as the beginning of history.
 At the same time, the first ecclesiastical historian, in opposition to Tacitus' famous style of writing without passion or passion, repeatedly spoke of his likes and dislikes.
For us, the views of historians are more acceptable, who, far from extreme definitions, try to consider the works of Eusebius of Caesarea according to the approaches of the author's time.
  Of course, Eusebius of Caesarea can not be considered a completely objective author, but it is impossible not to emphasize his contribution to the preservation of a number of sources.
We tend to consider Eusebius of Caesarea's critical method as one of the greatest contributions to the development of historical thought.
Gurgen Muradyan TRANSFORMATION OF HISTORICAL METHOD IN LATER ANCIENT TIME. EUSEBIUS CESARATUS Keywords: church historiography, late antiquity, Eusebius of Caesarea, author:
