"BOLO" MILITARY OPERATION AND THE PROBLEM OF VIETNAM AIR DOMINATION IN 1965 On March 2, the US Air Force began bombing North Vietnam (Operation Rolling Thunder) and began intervening in South Vietnam.
 A bloody conflict ensued, which years later will leave its deep mark on the pages of the history of martial arts1 [1].
The war was marked by a number of innovations, which were destined to play a significant role in future military operations.
  For an accurate understanding of these innovations, it is necessary to single out the war components of the Vietnam War.
In the public sphere, the Vietnam War is associated with the land war in the eunuchs, which is just one component of the war;
  One of the famous pages of the air war is the "Bolo" 2 military operation, to which this work is dedicated.
The Vietnam War, in addition to the norm of helicopter aviation, was also marked by the use of new types of jet aircraft, which were capable of performing quite serious military tasks, with a total of about 40 million flights during the war.
The lion's share of the bombings went to B-52 Stratofortress bombers.
 These bombers were quite vulnerable in the fight against the new Soviet MiG-21 fighters ․ That is why they suffered serious losses.
Concerned about this fact, the commander of the 8th fighter jet, Colonel Robin Olds, in 1967. On January 2, he organized the "Bolo" military operation, which was to have a punitive nature.
1 Thousands of books have been written about the Vietnam War.
  1992 According to the data, there were already about 3,500 studies on the events of that war and the US policy during the Indochina wars.
2 The military operation takes its name from the local type of Philippine blade (machete).
3 B-52 (Boeing B-52 Stratofortress) aircraft are intercontinental ballistic missiles, which were used by the US Air Force in 1955.
  It was originally intended to deliver thermonuclear bombs to any part of the USSR.
  These aircraft were widely used throughout the Vietnam War (cid).
0) in total they made about 126 thousand flights, lost 30 planes.
The aim of this military operation was to reach Fuk-yen Airport. Making helpless bombers, to bring the Vietnamese fighters out of hiding.
  The American pilots flew McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II fighters, which were faster than the Soviet fighters, but more easily resembled at low altitudes.
  Realizing all this, Robin Olds cleverly prepared a trap, the bait of which was swallowed by the North Vietnamese.
12 American bombers 4, with 5 inexperienced personnel, were caught early in the morning of March with 14 Soviet fighters.
 The results of March were simply astonishing.
  Although the Vietnamese tried to flee to China quickly, they did not succeed.
 They suffered seven losses.
 In contrast, the Americans suffered no losses at all.
  According to Vietnamese sources, only five MiG-21 PFL fighter jets were damaged that day, the side numbers and crew names of which are known.
These air battles were exceptional.
  First, for the first time, the Vietnamese side did not have a numerical dominance.
  At the same time, the American forces in the role of a regular attacker, applying a number of tactical innovations.
 Making a quick decision in unforeseen circumstances also speaks of Robin Olds' high quality qualities.
 In the past, American pilots preferred long-range combat to close combat.
 Now the picture is changing.
Along with the rich literature of the Vietnam War, many myths about the Indochinese wars have been woven.
 Some of them have already been denied, but it must be stated that the Vietnam War is still perceived as a jungle war.
A thorough study of the air warfare component reveals interesting episodes.
  First, for the first time we are dealing with a helicopter war.
  Helicopters account for most of the flights made by flying machines.
 In addition, high-speed aircraft were widely used to assist American soldiers.
At the same time, new jet aircraft capable of conducting medium-range air-to-missile combat began to be used.
  The role of bombers increased next to the fighters.
  Soviet Vietnam 4 It was planned to use a larger number of fighters, but due to unfavorable weather conditions it was possible to use only 12 units of fighters.
5 In addition to being inexperienced, American pilots were spotted with unique Soviet fighter jets.
  Many pilots were transferred to civil aviation units according to their applications.
 Colonel Robin Olds was able to rectify this demoralizing situation by establishing a special regime, completely changing the tactics of the air force.
The other side tried to counter the bombers with anti-aircraft missiles, but their fight was not effective.
  It is noteworthy that a similar conflict took place in the Middle East during which, during the Six-Day War, the Israeli air force did not leave a stone unturned in the Egyptian air defense system.
The Soviet propaganda machine, of course, had to do everything to hide its self-defeat, to present the image from the opposite side.
For that purpose, many falsifications have been used, some of which have already been revealed today, and some numbers of military losses have been clarified.
 In particular, the calculation of air battle losses gives the following picture: 2․2.
1 in favor of American fighters.
This may explain the fact that the northern side chose the tactic of striking from ambushes or hiding places instead of open battles.
  In addition to the technical equipment of the aircraft, the Americans won with the quality of missiles, which was best demonstrated during the "Bolo" military operation.
It was almost the same on land and at sea.
 The famous Jewish military figure Moshe Dayan appeared on the deck of the largest aircraft carrier 6 [8] (USS Constellation7 [9]) during the Vietnam War, after which he traveled to the coast of Vietnam to travel.
 He was a skilled military man; he often read and heard about such ships.
 However, what he witnessed left an "amazing impression."
 The ship occupied five acres of American territory.
 It could go anywhere without worrying about troubled allies.
 Isolated at sea, the crew did not realize the problem of safety, because the absence of alibi made their work more difficult.
 The ship was protected from "air, water, land, space, and underwater attacks."
 This is based on Martin van Creld's analysis of why Iraq will end up like Vietnam.
The Americans have won in all major military operations.
  All this, however, did not allow the Americans to achieve a complete victory. 6 In general, the US units in the Vietnam War mainly used four aircraft carriers, the efficiency of which was quite high.
The navy was able to solve various tactical problems, at the same time being ready to support the ground attack.
7 USS Constellation (CV-64) was commissioned in 1961. on October 27.
  The main area of ​​service was the Pacific Ocean.
 He took an active part in the Vietnam War.
 It served successfully until 2003, when it was replaced by the USS Ronald Reagan (CVN-76).
because the war was initially waged by the wrong methods.
 The "Vietnamese syndrome" also played a significant role.
Realizing the internal unrest and realizing the deepening of the war crisis, the American government in 1973 On January 27, 1945, he signed the Paris Peace Agreement. In the spring, you finally withdrew your troops from the Indian subcontinent.
That did not end the hostilities.
 1975 On April 30, 1945, the North Vietnamese captured Saigon and celebrated their victory.
That ended the Indochina wars of nearly three decades.
Thus, during the Cold War, the Indian subcontinent became a testing ground for military innovations.
  The Indochina Wars are of great importance for the study of the history of military art և ․ It was during these wars that the problems of air supremacy and information warfare escalated.
In the Vietnam War, the Americans, having a noticeable advantage, however, could not achieve a final victory.
  In honor of the Americans, it should be noted that they learned lessons and were able to correct the mistakes, achieving a brilliant victory at the end of the 20th century during the Middle East "Storm in the Desert" military operation.
LITERATURE UK.
 Osprey Publishing Limited 2001 ․ Якукович Н., Истребитель МиГ-21, Последные [4] Hovhannisyan A., Military Arts, Volume 1, Air Dominance, Yerevan, 2016, pp. 77-80.
[5] Hovhannisyan A., The development of martial arts in the 20th century. Perspectives, Yerevan, 2017, pp. 195-208.
[9] America's Flagship.
 A History of USS Constellation (CV / CVA-64) by Mike Weeks, NavalURL.
https:
//www.history.navy.mil/content/dam/nhhc/research/histories/navalURL.
 https:
//archive.lewrockwell.com/orig5/crevald1.html (Accesssed.
 07.12.2019) .Gurgen Muradyan "BOLO" MILITARY OPERATION AND THE PROBLEM OF VIETNAM AIR DOMINANCE
