THE IMPACT OF NATIONAL AND MASS CULTURES IN THE SPHERE OF TOURISM The multilayered study of the concept of culture is related to the existence of many aspects of the evaluation of the material and its importance in the formation of society.
 Man creates culture, but culture, in turn, creates man and the human.
Culture becomes the subject of scientific research as a unique, man-made phenomenon.
  Culture, due to the epigenetic memory of genetic inheritance, is the self-expression and formation of a given species, which is realized in the territory of historical significance, over the centuries.
  Multi-layered culture is created only by national units (family relations ային household culture, culture of belief - moral value system և world knowledge, music, schooling, architecture, science, etc.) [9].
Culture is a national phenomenon with some features of its regulation.
  The more open the national culture is compared to other cultures, the richer the element of cultural dialogue, the higher it։.
 National culture unites people who live in large areas; they do not have to be related by blood ties.
  The condition for the survival of the national culture is the creation of a writing system.
  It is the writing system that contributes to the spread of ideas և symbols among the literate part of the population, which is national unity.
 As a rule, national culture is non-religious in nature և mostly the result of individual creativity.
 The national culture, in general, is created not by the whole ethnos, but by the educated mass of the society.
 In addition to education, the mass media, as well as various cultural institutions, play an important role in the assimilation of national culture.
 The national culture with its features - economic, political, linguistic, historical-geographical, leaves its mark on the formation of material, caring, economic culture.
As mentioned by T. P. Grigoryan in connection with the study of world culture. "The people are obliged to preserve their national treasures," he wrote, "only then will they be able to invest their own, unique treasury of nations, without which world unity is impossible."
 That is his international duty, not to be like everyone else.
 Whoever forgets about it, not only violates the national feeling of another people, but also harms himself, because he renounces everything that belongs to everyone. ”
 According to the peculiarities of the creation and consumption of cultural values, there are two types of social culture: the mass elite.
  Mass culture, hereinafter referred to as ZM, is the type of cultural output that is created on a large scale և continuously.
 (ZM), the same - low culture.
 In English, two terms are used: "mass culture" և "popular culture", sometimes as synonyms, sometimes, especially in the field of MU, the second as an alternative to the first.
There are a number of views on the emergence of mass culture: մշակ Mass culture is linked to the history of the origin of mankind, or at least to the early stages of the development of Christian civilization, when the Scriptures were simplified for the audience.
-1 17-18 centuries play a big role in the development of ZM. Adventure detective novels created in European literature, which are published in large numbers at the request of a wide range of readers.
Ստեղծ The law on universal compulsory education adopted in Great Britain in 1870 had a great influence on the creation of the ZM.
Իրական The real basis for the emergence of the media is linked to American civilization.
 On this occasion, the American political scientist Zbign-Brzezinski writes: "If Rome gave the world the right, England - parliamentary activity, France - culture, then the modern United States - scientific and technological revolution - mass culture" [7].
As Raymond Williams points out, the word "mass" can be used in a positive or negative sense, depending on how the mass is perceived as a subject or as an object.
  In recent decades, the second use has prevailed.
  Whereas in the Soviet Union for a long time the word "mass" had a positive meaning - the unity of a team free from class dividing lines.
  In Armenian, the word mass has two synonyms ․ Many ություն crowds, which are also often used in a negative sense, but can also have a positive meaning.
Considering the current trends in the development of tourism in the world economy, it is obvious that tourism is one of the most important, highly profitable, most dynamically developing sectors of the economy, at the same time it is included in global systems such as sustainable development and systems of mutual cultural values.
 In the system of cultural values, there are cultural dilemmas in the field of tourism - a national culture, the richness, uniqueness, uniqueness of which is obvious in terms of perception and involvement of tourism, but it should not remain within the framework of national stereotypes, thinking and concerns. as national as it is universal.
  However, it is necessary to emphasize that the existence of the universal in the national culture does not mean the creation of a unified world cultural system or the standardization of these values.
  In other words, the culture, which has developed in the forms of civilization, has already risen to an elite level, enables cultural dialogue, relations, to finally occupy its unique position in civilizations, and mass culture, which is the product of the above-mentioned universal.
  French culturologist J. Friedmann puts it this way: "By ZM we mean the totality of cultural values, which is made available to the public by the mass media."
 Tourism is the area where a group of people flows from one country or region to another country or region, usually the tourist takes with him not only the suitcases and things, but also the customs and traditions, values ​​and norms, customs and rules , which he carries, to hand over the culture of his country.
 And, as it is already clear, there is a clash of two different cultural peculiarities, a transformation of socio-cultural values ​​and norms, which can have catastrophic consequences for societies, starting from family behavior and moral distortion.
The above-mentioned circumstances are obvious in the case of the dominant Armenian nation.
 On the one hand, a national culture that must be properly presented, while remaining unique, which will lead to universalization, on the other hand, we notice that the same universal culture brings a call culture that damages the national identity, being more easily accessible and easy to understand.
It is these factors that complete the urgency and urgency of this research.
From the research purpose, based on the problems of interaction և in the field of national և mass cultures tourism, we have singled out the following research problems: 1. Consider different approaches to the interpretation of the two concepts in the professional literature, 2. Identify the impact of the latter in the field, 3. Assess the effects of the effects.
Referring to the methodological approaches, first of all, the approaches existing in the professional literature on concepts and the importance of the cultural phenomenon in the formation of public life were theoretically analyzed.
 Then, theoretically, tourism was assessed, աստիճ the degree of interaction of terms in the field.
 And through the evaluation analysis, the relevant proposals and conclusions were generalized.
In order to fully understand the cultural impact of tourism, one must first imagine that tourism is a cultural reality.
  The vital activity of tourism is conditioned by the satisfaction of the caring and physical needs of a person.
 Each area can provide minimal resources for the development of tourism, but for the mass development of the latter, the concentration of cultural heritage is necessary.
Tourism has a great impact on preserving the ethnic identity of the nation, forcing governments, community organizations and enterprises to actively participate in the preservation of cultural heritage.
But the study shows that if we look at it from the opposite position, it has a significant negative impact.
  Tourism has created its value requirements, it directly imports, because all other obstacles can be overcome, such as time and space.
  And the so-called cultural communication does not always have positive consequences in its field of communication.
 For example, the unhindered penetration of foreign morals leads to the entry of false civilizational, anti-cultural values ​​and phenomena, morals into the public sphere.
 While historical experience confirms that communication with other cultural realities, the assimilation of relevant values ​​should not be impromptu, but selective, due to nationalization,, should correspond to the nationalized world.
Today, almost everyone thinks that one has to come to terms with the existence of mass culture - mass society (only a few years ago these same terms had a condemnatory meaning, because it follows that mass society is the rotten egg of society, and mass culture itself և try to find their positive sides, if only because mass culture is the culture of mass society, and mass society (whether we like it or not) will continue to be part of our reality in the foreseeable future.
Mass society and mass culture are undoubtedly interconnected phenomena.
 According to Edward Schils, mass society originates when "the mass of the population is included in the society."
 Since the so-called society originally consisted of wealth և those who had free time, mass society really points to a new order in which the masses get rid of the burden of physically exhausting work.
 [10] The main difference between a national society and a "mass society" is that society wants to have a culture, values ​​cultural objects, devalues ​​them into public goods, uses them for selfish purposes, abuses them, but does not consume them.
  Even in their most ancient form, they remained objects, not consumed or swallowed, but retained their worldly objectivity.
  While the mass society wants entertainment, not culture, the products of the entertainment industry are really consumed by the society, like any other consumer product.
  The products needed for entertainment serve the life of the society, maybe they are not as necessary for life.
 They serve, as they say, to spend time; that idle time is not free time, that is, the time during which we are really free from all the worries, affairs, affairs and, consequently, free from the world and its culture.
  Free time, which is supposed to be filled with fun, is a pause in the biologically conditioned cycle of work or, as Marx called it, in the metabolism of man ևwith nature։.
 In modern conditions, this break continues. idle time, which should be filled with fun, is increasing.
  The entertainment industry is facing a gargantuan appetite, as the creation of the industry is disappearing, it must constantly offer new products.
 In these difficult living conditions, producers are delving into the cultures of the past and present in the hope of finding a suitable material.
However, such material cannot be provided as it is. it must be prepared և changed to become fun, as it will not be consumed as it is.
 For all their differences, however, these two cultural processes have one thing in common: they arise when the goods of the whole world, produced now or in the past, have become public, that is, they are connected with society, they are viewed in their purely functional form.
 In one case the society uses և exchange, evaluates և devalues ​​them, in the other case it absorbs them և consumes them.
 The main attitude of the society towards objects, that is, the consumer attitude, destroys everything it touches.
  If we understand by culture what the word originally meant (the Roman word "cultura" comes from the word "colere" - to care for, preserve, cultivate), we can say without exaggeration that a society obsessed with consumerism can not be developed at the same time or to create a culture.
Summarizing the results of the research, we can present them through the following conclusions.
To fully understand the cultural impact of tourism, one must first understand that tourism is a cultural reality.
  The vital activity of tourism is conditioned by the satisfaction of a person's physical and physical needs.
  Each area can provide minimal resources for tourism development, but the development of the latter requires a concentration of cultural heritage.
։ Tourism has a great impact on preserving the ethnicity of the nation, forcing governments, community organizations and enterprises to actively participate in the preservation of cultural heritage.
։ At the same time, the cultural domain of tourism is within the boundaries of mass culture.
 At the same time, it is an important link in the "creation" and "consumption" of mass culture.
 Consequently, as a result of tourism, many national, universal values, creations are commercialized, losing their uniqueness, uniqueness and exceptional significance.
 The imperative of the time is the protection of the national. As a result, nations will begin to lose their national identity and culture.
 Mankind is rich in its nations and what is directed against the national is also directed against humanity, so the strategy built by tourism must be based on the revaluation of national values.
Տալիս Tourism provides an economic component to the preservation of cultural heritage և its proper presentation, at the same time threatening cultural heritage by making it a subject of trade.
  For a country like Armenia, a differentiated type of cultural tourism must be found in order to ensure the quantity of tourism without reducing the quality.
LITERATURE LIST 2. L. Melkonyan, "Ethnic culture և tradition", Phil. science candidate [pp.73-80].
3. Գ. A. Melkumyan, Cultural Studies / textbook, Yerevan, "Van Aryan", 2001. -236 pages [pages37-41].
4. Schils G., Theory of Mass Societies // Man.
  cheek and face, Mass INTERNET RESOURCES 5. http:
//www.bibliotekar.ru/culturologia (05.06-23.
00) 6. http:
//www.arteria.am/en/1433253735 (05.06-23.
00) 7. file:
/// C:
/Users/Matrix/Downloads/massovaya-kultura-i-massovaya-kommunikatsiya-v(04.06-23.
30) 8. http:
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/massovaya-kultura-i-massovaya-kommunikatsiya-v23.
30) 9. http:
//animapsyclub.blogspot.am/2014/09/blog-post_34.html?m=1 (04.06-23.
30) 10. http:
//www.arteria.am/en/1433253735 (04.06-23.
30) Lilit Avetisyan THE INTERACTION OF NATIONAL AND MASS CULTURES IN THE SPHERE OF TOURISM Keywords: culture, national culture, mass culture, tourism, values, cultural interaction, world culture, ethnic
Summary.
