THE ISSUE OF THE ESSENCE OF THE KASKERS IN HISTORICAL HISTORY During the Hittite period in the north-northeastern regions of the Asia Minor peninsula, sources refer to the "cask tribe".
 To this day, the Hittites have no definitive answer as to the ethnicity of these warlike tribes.
 In time Gr. Ghapantsyan suggested that the Casks were close to the Kasites (cuneiform: gal-zu, gal-du, gal-šu; in Akkadian, Kaššū <d kaš-šu-u>) 1.
The genetic link between the Casker language and other languages ​​has not yet been fully elucidated.
 A few well-known words from Cassette do not show closeness to the Semitic languages.
 The connection with Elamite is also doubtful.
 The hypothesis is that Kassiteren is related to the Indian language family.
 L. Klein, based on a number of etymologies, derives Cassiter from the language of the Mitanni Aryans2.
 In the recently published work of independent researchers Arno Fourney և Allen Bormhard, the Kassite language is considered to be related to the Khurra-Urartian languages3.
Plural forms of place-names (such as if the suffix -k (a) is viewed as an ethnic indicator, such as the suffix -ak (Mand-ak, Sis-ak, Bal-ak)) often originate. From the surnames (cf. Hayk "Armenia", Virk "Georgia" - even in historical times - Syunik) 4, then in the leather ethnonym such an ethnic indicator can be considered -k, and the original ethnonym - kaš (leather) 5.
  Some of the Casks are settled in the Zagros Mountains, in Northern Mesopotamia.
  Gr. Ghapantsyan cautiously mentions that in present-day Shiraz (Iran), near the city of Firuzabad, and in Iraq, near the city of Sulaymaniyah, "Kashka" tribes live.
  Based only on the external similarity of the ethnonyms, it is not yet possible to definitively reject or confirm the hypothesis of the identification of the Kassites, but we can bring some arguments related to the achievements of science in this direction in recent years.
It should be noted that the existence of names belonging to any language is indicative of the presence of that language in a particular area (at least for some time. 1 Kapantsyan G., Historical-Linguistic Works, vol. II, Yerevan, 1975, pp. 132-136. The oldest mention of Kasites It is connected with Northern Mesopotamia, west of it, near the middle Euphrates և Alalah VII.
 The latest mention is made in BC. 1st thousand It is in the first half.
 Fournet A., The Kassite language4 Petrosyan A., Traces of the Hittite language in the east and south-east of the Armenian Highlands. Khaldyanzorov…, "Collection of articles dedicated to the 100th anniversary of Boris Piotrovsky", Yerevan, 2010, pp. 26, 65-77.
In such an area, even a small number of such names in the area can not be considered a fact of denial.
According to Gr. According to Ghapantsyan, there are influences left over from the names of the Armenian ministerial houses and places.
  Thus, the name of the ruling house of Kajberuni derives from the root khaj- kaj- "brave" և ber, meaning "tribe".
  Gr. Ghapantsyan considers it possible that the first part, khaj, originates from the khaš (leather) ethnonym.
 In his opinion, several places evidenced by the movement of Kasitian tribes have been preserved in Syunik: Kashatagh, Kashatagh. Weight meadow, Kashuniq with -uni suffix.
  In Syunik there are a large number of place names that are close to the place names of ancient Asia Minor: bal- (pal-), Aza- (Azzi), Xndzorek, Arinj.
The name Casker has long been closely related to the name of the North Caucasian Circassians.
  Q.A. At the end of the 2nd millennium, the Assyrian sources used the surname apishlu (abeshla), which is identical with the surname of the Caucasian Apshua, to the name Kaskerian.
 Thus, through ethnonyms, a connection is established between the Asia Minor Casks և North Caucasian tribes և 1.
Soviet historiography considers the proximity of the Casker language to Hittite possible.
  Igor Diakonov considers the Caspian to be inhabited by Northeast Asia Minor, the southern coastal zone (Pontus) from the upper basin of the Halis River to the Upper Euphrates, west of Yerznka, including the Iris-Likos (Wolf-River: Kelkit) rivers.
 It is not excluded that north-northeast of the Halis-Likos rivers, the present-day Batumi-Batumi regions of Trabzon were also inhabited by Casca tribes2.
But we do not know anything about the's name.
 The point is that the Hittites, by saying "Khatti people", do not mean a society united by language, by virtue, but by geographical meaning3.
 In Hittite texts, the geographical approach of ethnic community complicates the situation.
  By "people of the land of the Caskians" did the Hittites mean the ethnic Caskians or the rest of the population of the region?
 It is the same with the terms "Armenian people" or "People of Pakhua".
  Recent studies have singled out several strata in the population of Hayasa և Pakhuwa: Luwian, Indian, Iranian, Early Armenian, etc.
This already speaks about the fact that by saying "people of the land of the Caskians", the Hittites did not mean the Caskians, but the geographical area of ​​different tribes.
According to A. According to Petrosyan, there are possible parallels between the Urartian "Hittite toponyms of Asia Minor" in Shan, և there are toponyms that can be verified in Hittite (this, of course, does not exclude the existence of foreign-language tribes in these areas) 4.
 We bring the parallels in the form of a table (Table 1). Table 1 Urartian cuneiform toponyms.
3 Glatz C., Matthews R., Anthropology of a Frontier Zone.
 Hittite-Kaska Relations in Late Bronze Age North-Central4 Petrosyan A., pp. 7, 32-34.
Taruiša (often identified with Troy) are the toponyms of the Near East, which, according to A. According to Petrosyan, they are checked with Hittite data, these are: Ariaini - arriya "wash", Elaini - ila (n) "degree", Ešumua - hmmt. -muwa element in Hittite nomenclature, Guriani - "field", Qu'albani (= Quwalwani) - ku (e) luwana "washing place, bowl", Šanatuaini - attanatta "unbuilt", attanattaya, šanatti (?), tuwa "far », Teriani - terya« third », Ueliku-ni / hi - uelku« grass », Uhini - uhhi -« look, see ».
BC In the 2nd millennium, some western regions of the Armenian Highlands, such as the countries of Alz, Isova and Hayasa-Azz, in contrast to the eastern regions, were under significant Hittite influence.
 However, these tribes of the eastern regions are different from the Hittites of Asia Minor. that they could not migrate from the west).
 The dialect (s) related to Hittite could be a source of some borrowing in Armenian in Asia Minor.
  It is possible that the speakers of this Hittite language or dialects were widespread in other northeastern regions of the Armenian Highlands.
Until recently, it was thought that the Casques were established in the northern regions of the Hittite Empire, particularly in the cities of Tilura and Nerik. In the 16th century, during the reign of the Hittite king Huntili.
 From there they launched military raids, forcing Huntili to build a barrier.
  In the past, Labarna աթ Khatusilis was not allowed to cross the Kumušmaĥ River.
1997-2001 The results of the five seasons of work of the Paphlagonian Archaeological Expedition show that the settlements in that area are different from those in other parts of the empire.
  Judging by written sources, the Caspian federation consisted of 12 tribes.
  Hittite texts are divided into North, South, East, and West groups.
During the war, the Casks were able to bring 5-9 thousand soldiers և 800 chariots to the battlefield.
The material culture left by Kasker is identified with the Kmik-Kastemonu monument2.
  It is interesting that archaeologists have not found traces of Kaska burials so far.
  Genz notes that it is not yet known whether the Pontic Late Bronze Age pottery resembled Hittite or was a local Cascaian pottery.
  The issue is so complicated that specialists even rule out the existence of local pottery3.
 An option has been suggested by specialists: 1 Interestingly, some Khurian toponyms can be found here, for example: Azameruni - hmt.khurr. azammi - "statue", azamarule -?, Tarzuaini - taršuwani (= tarzuwani) "humanity" (almost identical to Tarzu'ana-ni south of Lake Urmia).
that the Casks used Hittite pottery, so it is impossible to distinguish.
 This view is also out of the question, as no Hittite pottery has been found in Paphlagonia or Pontus.
The Gavra culture, which archaeologists consider to be the starting point for the Maykop culture, is more logically and chronologically related to the Hittite և casks1.
 Glatz և Matthews considers it possible to identify the Cascaian pottery with the pottery found in Khatusas (Boghazkoy) in the early Iron Age after the fall of Khatti, which really originates from the north2.
 Thus, it turns out that the Kaskeri-Early Bronze Age pottery is different from the Early Cretaceous.
Hittite place-names ending in -iya և -uwa are not ethnic, and the suffix -ška seems to indicate a more specific affiliation, such as Tatiška, Duduška, Munišga, Karikurišga, Zianteška, and even Kaška.
  The u-particle is often found in northern toponyms, for example, Gazziura, Tiliura, Urauna, etc.
 The Hittites refer to this part as "1. spring, 2. fountain ”3.
As for personal names, here, as Itamar Zinger points out, we are dealing with some problems.1. It has already been mentioned that under the name of kasks often appear not natural communities, but groups of peoples standing next to each other in ethno-cultural terms.
2. There are personal names in the texts that contain other ethnolinguistic elements, for example, Kaškaili, where the suffix -aili is a suffix indicating belonging in Hittite4, as well as Kaškamuwa, where -uwa is a typical Luwian suffix.
It can only testify to the fact that there was an element of h-e in the territory of the Caskian tribes, and it is a question of future study what specific speakers of h-e were in that area.
It. Zinger distinguishes between Nakhetian and Cascaian mythological names.
  Some rituals describe the gods of the land of Kaska as the gods of the enemy country, fighting against the gods of Khatti.
  In one ritual it is mentioned that the helmets surrounded the gods of the land of Khatt - Zithariya, the god Ar of the city of Arinna, the thunder god of the city of Nerik - the guardian god Telepinu.
  Zithariya, the head of the Caskians, originated in the northern city of Zithara, where one of its cult attributes was KUŠkurša, something made of sheep wool.
The similarities and similarities between the skins, the Hittite myths, and the experts have led to the idea that the Kask mythology is the local version of the Hittite mythology.
  Hittite similarities are found mainly in the etymologies of toponyms and eponyms.
 Still in 1961. Գ. Georgadze concluded that the Caskis were an isolated, localized version of the Hittite tribes են nested in the north. - [u] m! -ni- [li] (VBoT 2, 24) և ka-ni-šu-um-ni-l [i] (KUB41.14, 8), country Nešite, Neša / Kaniš, see Kloekhorst A., The Etymological Dictionary of the Hittite Inherited During Invasive Invasion.
 There are large traces of the local population in the coastal regions, which, as historical experience has shown, have assimilated into a new, newcomer population, forming a qualitatively new, mixed culture1.
  As It. According to Zinger, the relationship between the Hittites and the Caspians should be viewed from this position, that is, the Hittites lived in the most fertile river valleys, had their political centers, Khatusas and Zalpa, and the isolated population in the mountains is known to us as the Casks.
Some experts distinguish genetic kinship between Central Asia Minor and Pontic tribes.
 It is also possible to have cultural contact between the Hittites and the Khururs.
 Thus, the names and cults of the Hittite gods և worship ազդ are represented by the Hittite moon god Kašku-khurr. Kušuh, Hittite Šimešu - khurr. ։Imegi.
The Hayasa-Azz tribe is located east of the Casker tribe.
 In the treaty between Hukkana and Supiluliuma, the main deity of Hayasa is written with the ideology DU.GUR, which, according to Zinger որ Forrer, corresponds to the Hittite god inkulinkate.
 As we have mentioned, the memory of Tarumu, which corresponds to Ekhat, has been separated south of Halis. To Taru.
 If a Hittite substrate is separated in Armenia, the spread of Hittite tribes expands in the coastal regions of the Black Sea.
Benik Vardanyan THE ISSUE OF CASCIAN ETHNICITY IN HISTORY Keywords: Ancient Asia Minor, Hittites, Caskers, Huntili A, Supiluliuma, Kassites
