THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON PUBLIC OPINION In the current context, the process of communication and information transfer through social media (social networks, blogosphere) has reached unprecedented levels.
 At the same time, the quantitative aspect of the expansion of social networks in terms of quantity, in which people interact in them, often overshadows the effects of the qualitative features of that phenomenon, that is, the formation and change of public opinion as a result of social media.
In particular, today it is very common for opinion leaders - politicians, analysts, journalists, experts - to present personal opinions not on traditional media, but on social networking platforms, such as Facebook or Twitter.
  These opinions, being a subjective opinion almost indistinguishable from the posts of others, immediately became widespread, և reprinted by the traditional media, directly affecting the formation of public opinion.
It is necessary to find out why they use the opportunities of social media when influencing the formation of public opinion, և how they work in comparison with traditional media.
It is possible to study the various tricks (technical, content, image, etc.) that are used in social networks to express opinions and attract the attention of a wide audience.
Another interesting circumstance was noticed. often not only social media is preferred և becomes the primary source of information dissemination, but vice versa. It becomes a platform for traditional media to disseminate information, discuss publications, and provide feedback.
The study of international-national experience shows that the social media platform is actively used in the pre-election campaign, to discuss new legislative initiatives, to express their personal opinion publicly by other politicians, to compare it with the official opinion.
At the same time, the presence of this or that figure on social networks can also contribute to his image, testifying to his "modern", constant presence in information processes.
 The same applies to the departments.
One of the current issues is the issue of legislative regulation of Internet information, in particular, social media.
The discussion and application of these շարք a number of other phenomena in information policy is one of the most important scientific-applied issues.
The ever-globalizing world is entering the age of information society formation.
  What did the information society say?
  It is a society where the acquisition, processing, storage, transmission, dissemination and use of knowledge and information play a crucial role not only through traditional media, but also through social media, which, by the way, is constantly improving due to new technologies [1].
Social media և networks change the way you create and spread news։.
 They affect the media in three ways, namely: 1. by creating content, 2. distributing information և transmitting, 3. becoming a tool for searching, receiving, and accessing information [2].
Therefore, social media allows for more diversity than traditional ones.
  Today, not only governments are shaping the reality of the Internet, but also civil society, industry, media companies, journalists, bloggers and social media users are shaping the Internet of the future.
 From this point of view, "collective responsibility" դի media literacy becomes urgent.
"Facebook" and "Twitter" are the most popular social networks in Armenia [3].
 It is supposed that the developments taking place in other social networks are partially known to the Armenian society.
For example, the websites "Odnoklassniki.ru" .ru "Vkontakte.ru", which are also very popular in Armenia, are not involved in processes that affect public perception, which is mainly due to the lack of necessary tools on those social networks.
 Twitter, which has several hundred million users in the world, is also behind Facebook in terms of its popularity and development in Armenia.
  It is mainly a means of disseminating information about activity on other networks.
Despite various civic movements and initiatives, Facebook's Twitter pages are often interconnected.
Referring to the possibilities of social media and the effectiveness of its use in shaping public opinion in the Armenian reality, from the point of view of its direction, let us single out a few questions and try to give their answers.
 How effective have the civil movements been in moving public issues to virtual platforms? How effective are the 'targeted' և network communication capabilities?
  To understand the potential of social media և to understand the impact, let's list a few public movements that have started on the Internet և have had success in real life in terms of shaping public opinion կապ capitalizing on it.
 Let's bring some examples: "Protection of the summer hall of" Moscow "cinema". In the spring, the government decided to suspend the demolition of the summer hall and build a church in its place.
Movement against the reopening of foreign language schools. 2011 The initiators managed to make this one of the most discussed issues in the society within half a year, to make rather serious changes in the legislative package discussed in the National Assembly, but thus, the adoption of the law was not stopped completely.
Protest movement against the change of benefits for pregnant women. The relevant decision of the government raised a wave of protests among pregnant women and their supporters.
  The group grew at an unspeakable pace, involving both the main beneficiaries and concerned citizens, who immediately took concrete actions, such as holding demonstrations, actively raising the issue in the media, and so on.
The movement aimed at the protection of Trchkan waterfall. The activists managed to force the government to change the decision on Trchkan waterfall, to stop the construction of a hydroelectric power plant there.
The struggle against the construction of green areas in Mashtots Park in the city of Yerevan lasted for several months, ending with the dismantling of shops in the park.
"Electric Yerjan" initiative. Using the possibilities of Social Media, the activists managed to get the movement from the Internet to the streets, getting a lot of noise.
  The process took about a month, and as a result, the price of electricity did not rise as planned.
 The actions of the same group restrained the decision to increase the price of water.
The accumulation of internet protest energy of the group "Against the mandatory payment of 5% of the pension" finally took to the streets.
 Various officials met with the protesters, including the then Prime Minister Hovik Abrahamyan.
 The movement was so successful that, unlike the private sector, the "mandatory" component was extended only to public sector employees.
 Hovik Abrahamyan's statement that the withholding of 5% of pensions would be "mandatory or non-mandatory" was widely spread on the Internet and turned into a meme.
The "Against the Rise in Transportation" movement again succeeded in forcing the responsible officials to abandon the decision to set public transport at 150 drams.
The examples given prove that social media directly influences the formation of public opinion, and in some cases, decision-making.
In the initial period of the development of social networks in Armenia, there was a mutual penetration in the media-social network relationship.
If in 2010-2011. The Armenian media tried to attract as large an audience as possible on the social network, then later began to respond to Facebook content by making publications based on them, simply copying them in other ways.
For example, "Liberty" radio station has a weekly program called "Facebook press conference".
 The issues actively discussed on social networks during the week are discussed with the guest of the meeting in the pavilion, then the Facebook users have the opportunity to ask their question to the guest of the meeting.
 That is, communication with the network society is provided.
Public Radio also has a program called "Facebook Armenia".
 The guests invited here discuss the events of the week live, answer the questions of the radio listeners live.
Many electronic media outlets have a "Blog" section where users' posts taken from social networks on this or that issue are published.
  A similar practice was used in the print media.
Here, on the one hand, the social network acts as a means of communicating with the general public մեծ traditional media, on the other hand, the issues discussed in the social media domain, which have received public attention for the second or third time (or manually), are already circulating on other platforms. on.
With the support of the OSCE Office in Yerevan in 2013 Surveys were conducted in various Facebook user groups, which, among other facts, revealed a remarkable circumstance, which refers to the above-mentioned problem of journalists և media using network content.
Prior to that, due to the fact that the media was directed to this network to acquire an active audience, it seemed that the media representatives should mainly use the Facebook network to disseminate information.
 However, it turned out that most of the journalistic group uses Facebook to receive information, not to spread it.
 It follows from the results that for the journalists interviewed, Facebook mainly serves as a source of information.
The distribution of photos and videos on social networks has a great impact on attracting the attention of a wide audience.
 The timely placement of the photo allows you to provide more traffic to the given page, through social networks to the websites.
  Although the videos are spread mainly through YouTube, but today it has become possible to publicize your own videos on other social networks, as well as to share YouTube videos.
 The scandalous videos become the subject of extensive discussions on social networks, especially on Facebook, then are transferred to traditional media - newspapers, including electronic, then television, radio, etc.
 Now the "live" application is already available on the social network, which makes the transfer of information more dynamic.
This toolkit creates a great opportunity to convey any socio-political event faster, albeit raw and uninterpreted, to both the target and the wider audience.
 From this point of view, the Internet, particularly social media, is used as a means of pre-election campaigns and other political events, during rallies, demonstrations, pickets.
  This platform is a unique "thermometer" to measure public perceptions and attitudes towards this or that legislative initiative, order and decisions.
 The examples are various.
Due to the opportunities of social media to shape, change, and direct public opinion, there is a risk of spreading fake news.
 In this respect, the possibility of ensuring its control, including technically controlling, banning, and reducing the associated risk is problematic.
  Even the RA Law on Freedom of Information and the Law on Mass Media do not regulate the dissemination of social media information, including false information.
 The thoughts published on social networks are considered individual opinions, the ban on expressing which hinders the freedom of speech.
 The Republic of Armenia has adopted the European Convention on Human Rights, which states: "Everyone has the right to freedom of expression.
 This right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. "[6]
 In this case, the dissemination of false information can be balanced only by the opposite, with more active dissemination of real information in the same social media.
LITERATUREArmenia "" Facebook [1] Webster F., Theories of the Information Society, Third Edition, London and NY.
[2] Bayadyan H., The spread and development of modern information and communication technologies in Armenia, Yerevan, Noravank Foundation, 2005.
[3] Facebook in Armenia.
 Users and Using, Results of Surveys Among Facebook Users inURL.
 https:
//www.osce.org/yerevan/108535?download=true (Accessed.
 16.10.2017) .https.
//www.facebook.com/%D5%96%D5%A5%D5%B5%D5%BD%D5%A2%D5%B8%D6%8
1820988144784877 / (Accessed.
 12.09.2017).
[5] Social media source of information for Armenian media. Developing standards և applied practice.
 OSCE Office in Yerevan, 2014, pp. 4-5.
[6] Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as amended by the 11th Protocol, November 4, 1950, Rome, URL.
 http:
//pmg.am/images/convention_human_rights.pdf (Accessed.
 03.11.2017).
URL.
Saroyan Vahagn THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON PUBLIC OPINION Keywords: social media, traditional media, public opinion, society.
