ASSESSMENT OF HYDROGEOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE ARAGATS MOUNTAIN WITH METHODS OF GEOPHYSICAL WORKS Water is an inorganic compound that is almost the most abundant substance in nature.
  2.5% of the water of our planet is fresh (fit to drink), moreover, 98.8% is ice and groundwater.
 Groundwater is water at different depths of the earth, in rock crevices and pores.
  Groundwater catchment is fed by rivers, tributaries and surface runoff.
  It can be very important in the formation of river flow, when the aquifers are of volcanic origin.
  The Kasagh River has a similar feeding model in the Aragats massif, with an underground feeding component of 51%.
 Increasing water consumption to meet the economic and vital needs of mankind, as well as irrational use, will lead to water scarcity in some regions of Armenia decades later, leading to serious environmental problems.
 Despite the fact that the Republic of Armenia is considered to be a "moderately provided" country with freshwater resources, a number of settlements in the Aragatsotn and Armavir regions of the Republic of Armenia still have a problem with drinking water and irrigation water, so it is very important to uncover groundwater formation, transportation and unloading areas. .
  In the past, many researchers have dealt with this issue, Avetisyan V. A, Balyan S. P, Minasyan R. S, Vardanyan VP և others.
 Complex geological-geophysical studies have been carried out [1, 2].
The central part of the Aragats massif is mainly covered by Pliocene-Quaternary volcanic, glacial-land formations.
  The main stratigraphic divisions were given by V. I. By Amaryan [3].
Pliocene rocks have a significant distribution և are divided into two groups: Voghjaberd and Aragats.
  The Voghjaberd layer is composed of volcanic fragments, covered with andesites, andesite-basalts, liparite-obsidian lavas.
  The occurrences of the Quaternary period are widespread, they are represented by volcanic, lacustrine, lacustrine, glacial, alluvial, alluvial-deluvial formations.
 Considering the widespread distribution of effusive coverings, especially in the geological structure of the foundation, we can have a hypothetical idea about the tectonic structure of the massif.
It has been proven that the base volcanoes are on the Eneopaleozoic rocks in the central parts, which are the height of the Upper Cretaceous-Eocene, and the isperipheres on the Oligocene-Miocene.
  Naturally, this suggests an anticline structure.
Geophysical surveys of the southern և south-eastern slopes of the massif were carried out in an area of ​​400 km2, carried out by vertical electrical sounding (UEZ), electrical profiling (EP) methods to detect interstellar, expansive water flows, mapping the expansive relief.
UEZ opening AB = 1000 m.
  The field works were divided into sub-sections (with a fall of 400-500 m in the gorges), 21 probes were carried out with two profiles: 1) Ahagchi-Artik, 2) Artik-Aparan.
 The rest of the probing volume was carried out on the southern slope of the mountain range, in Byurakan-Kosh section (Figure 1).
 For EP method AB = 300-1000 m, MN = 60200 m.
Figure 1. Administrative map of the study area. The works were carried out at altitudes of 1700 to 3200 m, in the conditions of cut slopes with a slope of և 300 more.
 From the results of electro-exploration works it is obvious that the volcanic rocks are mainly represented by basalts, andesite-basalts, andesite-dacites, the specific electrical resistance of which is 1000-7000 ohms, for volcanic rocks (tuff, 200 m3) ): 10-40 ohms.
For water effluent rocks it ranges from 200-400 ohms.
 Thus, such a change in specific electrical resistance is a sufficient basis for the search for extraterrestrial waters as well as for the mapping of the transverse aquifer [5].
 The UEZ method geoelectric sections of the Aragats massif, made on the slopes we studied, are multi-layered.
  UEZ curves are mainly connected with two-layer, three-layer, four-layer type curves: K, AK, AKQ, KQQ, KHK.
 As a result of joint analysis of UEZ curves, we present the following geoelectric sections (Figure 2a, b).
Figure 2. a, b ․ Examples of UEZ method geoelectric sections in the Aragats massif. The first layer is represented by modern formations (alluvial-deluvial, etc.).
 The last, the fourth layer is the most transient layer in the section, which is represented by clay-sand formations with a resistance of 20-30 ohms.
Groundwater is distributed or accumulated here, which affects the decrease in the electrical resistance of the rocks.
The EP method work was carried out in the study area to detect the directions of groundwater distribution.
 The final mapping materials for the individual slopes of the Aragatsil massif were presented with graphs ρ for AB = 1000 m և AB = 300 m.
 Note that the EP graphs for AB = 300 m և for AB = 1000 m describe the rock changes from 50-60 m to 200-220 m depth (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Example of graphs of the EP method ρThe change of geological-hydrogeological conditions is possible here.
 These are the reliefs of the relief surface and the different frequencies of the routes correlated to separate the minimum areas of rt.
Based on the data of electro-exploration works, we have singled out perspective sites for groundwater search.
The characteristics of those precincts have been signed.
Tsaghkahovit site is located on the southern slopes of Aragats, including the villages of Mets Mantash, Tsaghkahovit և Hovit.
In the isolated areas, the electrical resistance of the rocks at depths of 50-60 m was observed.
 For the depth selection, as shown in the graphs, five low-ohm sites were presented ρ tminch և 600 ohm.
  They were separated in the east, in Mets Mantash և Tsaghkahovit.
 The length and width of the low ohm belts found were different.
To the east of the massif, in Tsaghkahovit precinct, the length is 7 km, the width is 100-300 m.
 The remaining zones were 2-4 km long and 80,300 m wide.
The discovered low-lying areas can be considered as promising sites for groundwater search.
 We should not forget that the depth of the underground flow is conditionally determined.
The depth of the study performed by EP depends on the change in the size of AB.
 For example, during studies in the volcanic zones of the Republic of Armenia, the study depth is equal to 1/5 to 1/6 of the size of the AB opening.
 In the case of openings AB = 300 և 1000 m, the combination of graphs shows that the ohmic low bands for the two openings of AB coincide.
  This means that the aquifers are located at depths of 50-60 m մ (in AB = 300 on the map) and continue at depths of 200-220 m (Figure 3).
Ahagchi site is located on the western slope of Aragats և includes Verin Sasnashen, Katnaghbyur, Ahagchi, Pemzashen, Artik և Mets Mantash.
Compared to Tsaghkahovit, the observations of the site have some differences from the geomorphological, geological-geophysical point of view.
 This circumstance is reflected in the graph of EP ρ (Figure 3).
The combination of maps with AB = 1000 m և 300 m apertures shows that the spatial distribution of the lowland zones is not always that the zones are the areas where the existing overlap.
  Thus, ρ թ
Favorable conditions for groundwater accumulation և AB = 300 m ունեն On maps with openings AB = 1000 have different spatial distribution.
It has been proven that there are different geological features in the depth of the same study.
MinQuchak precinct ․ It is located on the eastern արsouth-southern slopes of Aragats massif, in the region of Hovit, Kuchak, Aragats, Artashavan, Ohanavangyughs.
  The observed site differs sharply from the previous two sites in terms of geomorphological and geological-geophysical features, which is confirmed by the difference of ρ in the given site.
No low և high values ​​of ρ are observed in the northern profile, which are characteristic of lava formations (basalts, andesite-basalts).
  The low-lying areas separated here have not been correlated, as the worms are quite equal.
The combination of the graphs ρ τ AB = 300 m և AB = 1000 m shows that the separated zones and areas basically coincide.
 This means that the water-bearing rocks in that area are spread at depths of 50-60 m and continue for 200-220 m (Figure 3).
On the graph AB = 300 m և AB = 1000 m on the graph the wide-spatial differences of the low-lying zones speak of different groundwater distribution և rock water intakes.
Byurakan precinct ․ This site is located on the southern slope of the Aragats massif ում includes Sasunik, Byurakan, Agarak settlements.
 The main works of the EP method were performed by making a graph ρ AB = 300 m և AB = 1000 m, 1.
On a scale of 50,000.
 The given maps describe the lava formations at depths of 50-60 to 200-220 m.
 In contrast to previous precincts, rt graphs are quite complex here.
Based on the results of the study, we came to the following conclusions: 1. In order to solve the geological problems, the geological-tectonic structures of the area were thoroughly studied, the layers where the groundwater was formed, spread, unloaded were separated.
2. Electrospinning UEZ-EP methods were used to study the problem.
3. According to the interpretation of the data of electro-exploration methods, low-pressure zones have been identified along the routes separated in the area, which are considered to be perspective places of groundwater.
4. The geoelectric sections have a special place in the study complex, which provided substantial data on the problem under study.
LITERATURE [4] Vardanyan V. P., Electrical reconnaissance, direct current methods, Yerevan, 2013, YSU Publishing House, 193 pages.
Manukyan SipanARARAGATS MATERIAL WATER-GEOLOGICAL CONDITIONS ASSESSMENT OF GEOPHYSICAL WORKS.
