DYNAMICS AND TERRITORIAL EXPANSION OF "ISLAMIC STATE" MILITARY-POLITICAL ACTIVITY (2014-2018) Dynamics of territorial involvement of "ISHIP" and "IP".
  Starting its activities in the Middle East as one of the branches of al-Qaeda, the "Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant" (ISIL) in 2012. became a conflicting party in the Syrian conflict.
 From that moment on, the structure was able to quickly become an influential force in the Middle East, occupying territories one after another in Syria, and from late 2013 to early 2014 in southern Iraq.
 2014 On June 29, 1945, the structure declared itself a caliphate, renaming it Islamic State (IS) 1 [1].
 Taking advantage of the weakness of the state authorities, inter-ethnic and inter-ethnic conflicts, the IP leadership managed to multiply the circle of supporters և to increase the spheres of influence [2].
  2014 IP had the maximum territorial coverage.
 Islamic extremist group in 2014 In January 1945, he captured the northern Syrian city of Raqqa 2 [3], making it a stronghold of extremist groups in Syria, then the de facto capital of the caliphate, as well as the Syrian city of Dabik 3 [4], Homs and Kobane.
 On June 9, 2014, the second largest city in northwestern Iraq, Mosul, came under the control of ISIS 4.
  Grouping 1 2014 On July 29, the first day of the holy month of Ramadan, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the radical Islamist group known as Ibrahim, announced the cessation of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Islamic State "(hereinafter referred to as IP) with a statement on the establishment of the caliphate.
2 The capture of Raqqa was of strategic importance to ISIS, as the structure was able to gain influence along the northeastern bank of the Euphrates River.
3 The city had a symbolic significance for the structure.
 The IP believed that the city of Dabik was to be the last place of conflict between the Muslims and the unbelieving Christians, where the Muslims would defeat the latter.
  That is why the IP called the periodical newspaper "Dabik".
4 In Iraq, Mosul became a stronghold of the Islamic State, and in addition to its strategic location, it was known for its vast oil and marble reserves.
He established control over large cities such as Fallujah and Tikrit.
 As a result, in 2014 As of October 2013, the extremist group controlled an area of ​​34,000 km2 from central Syria to Baghdad.
However, in the following years, the structure began to cede territories step by step.
In particular, in 2015 As of March 31, the Iraqi authorities had liberated the city of Tikrit5.
  2015 November 2016 In February 2016, Iraqi forces together with the Shiite masses and the Kurds were able to liberate the center of the Iraqi province of Anbar, the Sunni-populated Ramadi, the Kurdish-populated Sinjar region. In June 1945, one of the strongholds of the Islamic State, Fallujah, was liberated.
 2016 The operation to liberate Mosul began on October 17, 2017, and ended on February 19, 2017. [8]
 The number of terrorist acts also decreased 7 [9].
As a result of air strikes by the anti-terrorist coalition in Syria in 2015 On January 25, the border town of Kobane was liberated.
 2016 On August 16, 1945, the Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by Arab Kurdish militants and the US Air Force, liberated the northern Syrian city of Manbij as part of a two-month battle against IS.
 2016 In mid-October, the largest insurgent attack on the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) took place in the Syrian city of Dabik, where jihadists intensified their struggle to turn it into an apocalypse.
  As of October 2017, the organization had lost control of its main urban strongholds, controlling only a small enclave of Syria and Iraq. As of January 2013, IP-Narden controlled only 2% of its territory.
Such a course of events allowed a number of actors involved in the fight against IS, the US-led global anti-terrorist coalition, as well as the current Iraqi authorities, Russia, to officially declare that the war against IS is over, having lost its last. 98% of the territory under its control, and Russia announced the partial withdrawal of Russian troops from Syria.
5 The Iraqi authorities announced the liberation of the city of Tikrit, which has been under the control of the Islamic State for more than 10 months, where government forces launched joint military operations with Shiite militants on March 2.
6 The Iraqi Federal Forces, together with the Kurds, liberated the eastern part of Mosul, then the entire city, with the support of the US Air Force.
7 2015 As of 2014, IS continued to carry out terrorist acts in Iraq, but in contrast to 2014, it decreased by 23% (959 terrorist acts were carried out in 2014, and in 2015 - up to 741).
2017 The capture of Mosul and then Raqqa by US and Syrian Kurdish militants in May 1945 was considered a major victory in the fight against IS, as these two cities were the largest strongholds in Syria and Iraq, and Raqqa was de facto the "capital" of the caliphate.
Factors contributing to the military-political-economic achievements of the IP.
 Islamic State is a unique phenomenon, which has had great success, enormous influence among the Muslim community, and more.
  The success of the "Islamic State" Islamic extremist organization was conditioned by several realities.
First. The IP was a direct result of the new Cold War in the Middle East, which was caused by the inability of the Middle East authorities to control the borders and territory of their own country, to meet the needs of the population, to finally form a common political identity that would unite the country's political thinking. 13].
  In the absence of the weakening of the central government, with the activation of groups of different confessional, ethnic, racial, regional forces, the ideological motive for filling the gaps in the central government, the experience of hostilities, the radical Islamic groups with significant financial and military resources declared a political caliphate.
Second. The Islamic State had sufficient financial and economic power, which allowed the structure to conduct socio-economic activities independently.
  There are five main sources of funding for jihadists.
  The first source. Traditional Islamic taxes, regular donations, charitable donations to the believers, etc. - Zakat 8 [14].
Second source. It is a system of traditional Muslim money transfers called khavalya.
  It is almost impossible to make such transfers.
  Third source. IP was making a significant profit from the war 8 From the inside, the picture was as follows. The fundraising was done to provide for the needy, as well as to promote the ideas of Islam throughout the world.
 But from the outside the picture was different. The money that was legally collected from people was used for illegal purposes, that is, it was not "dirty money laundering" but "clean pollution".
from the plunder received during the 19th century, as well as from the sale of valuable antiquities of valuable historical and cultural monuments in the territories under his control.
 The IP confiscated the property of displaced persons or individuals fighting against Islamists.
 The fourth source was the illegal, shadow business - the illegal import-export of drugs, jewelry, gold.
 In addition, criminal business includes ransom for hostage-taking ($ 20 million in 2014).
 Among other sources of funding, the jihadists' biggest source of income was the sale of hydrocarbon resources (Fifth Source).
  The IP controlled some of Syria's energy-rich areas, where the facility traded oil and gas reserves, particularly the Syrian Al-Tanaq and Al-Omar fields, [17] as well as oil fields in northwestern Iraq.
 The oil sales were carried out both through the Syrian oil pipelines passing through Iraq, as well as using self-made pipelines, trucks, with the help of which they mainly consolidated the oil in the market, selling the oil to the Syrian side, as well as to the Kurdish-Turkish side.
 The main consumer of coal-hydrogen resources under the control of the IP was the Syrian side, official Damascus, which was experiencing a serious shortage of energy resources due to the destroyed infrastructure on the one hand, and sanctions imposed on it on the other.
  The other large-scale direction of oil sales was Turkey.
 It should be noted that the sale in this direction took place in two versions.
  One is directly from the IP to the Turkish side, the other is from the IP to the Kurdish side-Turkish side.
 The intermediate sale of the IP by the Turkish side was carried out by self-propelled polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tankers passing under the Syrian-Turkish border.
In the Kurdish direction, oil was sold mainly by tankers, and then exported to Turkey via the Khurmala Dome-Fishkhaburbanuk section of the Turkish-Turkish oil pipeline.
 IP's annual profit from the sale of oil was 1-2 billion US dollars.
  Most of the cheap oil sold on the market was legalized by joining the oil transported from the Turkish infrastructure and entering the market, providing super profits to the parties involved [19, 18].
 It is noteworthy that in 2014 In September, the IP sold 1 barrel of oil on the market for 35-40 US dollars, and in October for 20 US dollars.
 On average, it turns out that the IP had a daily profit of about $ 22.3 million from oil sold from Syrian territories.
 Approximately 1-1.5 million US dollars a day entered the treasury of the IP from the sale of Iraqi oil.
the fact that the IP received oil from energy-rich areas and sold it, distributing the profits evenly in other cities and settlements, coordinating the pricing of oil.
The third was the controversy between the states fighting against the Islamic State.
  During the Syrian conflict, both regional and global state and non-state actors tried to take advantage of the situation by using other available resources to the benefit of their country's state interests.
  Among the regional players were the two Gulf states - Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Turkey, which is the new leader in the region.
 Saudi Arabia և Qatar, taking advantage of the unstable political situation in Syria, tried to overthrow the current Syrian regime և instead of bringing to power the Sunni-Muslims of their ideology.
 To this end, they began to provide active financial, ideological and military support to the Syrian opposition10, in which in 2012. At that time, it was included in the well-known structure of Islamic extremist radicals, the IP.
 As a result, the IP, being part of the Syrian opposition, a party fighting against the Assad regime, immediately used the possible external support given to the opposition throughout the Syrian conflict.
During the Syrian crisis, the Turkish authorities began to provide direct support to the Syrian opposition.
 Not only the IS militants were passing through the "Turkish highway" of the jihadists, but also a part of the ammunition and other necessary items sent to them.
 The support given to the extreme radical group was first of all conditioned by the "open border policy" implemented by the Turkish authorities.
  This refers to the position of official Ankara. With the latter's knowledge and permission, and often with the help of Turkish special services, the terrorists entered Syria unimpeded through Turkey.
 Over time, Turkey became the main route for militants from Europe, Asia and the United States to reach Syria.
  "For the hundreds of people who joined the IP from Kosovo and Macedonia, from Bosnia to Bosnia, Turkey served the two Gulf states, with the permission of the US ally, seeking to build oil pipelines through Syria, and the IP should be the main tool to control the Syrian ship. .
  However, the attempt to get rich at the expense of Syria failed, and the "weapon" that was to work against the enemy began to work to the detriment of the latter.
as the main transit route. "
  This is why the terrorist organization is often described as a "Frankenstein monster" created by Turkey [20, 21].
  Turkey's decision to support the Syrian opposition had four main reasons.
 The first was conditioned by Ankara's so-called geopolitical orientation.
 As a member of the North Atlantic Alliance, Turkey could not but join the actions of Western forces to overthrow the "bloody regime of violent Assad."
  In addition, Turkey would gain dominance and influence in post-war Syria, making Syria dependent on Turkey, which would allow Ankara to partially satisfy its aspirations to take the lead in the region.
 The second circumstance was Turkey's ideological closeness to the main forces of the Syrian opposition.
  The pro-Islamic Turkish authorities were interested in seeing Sunni Islamic forces in Damascus, of which Ankara had very warm relations with the Muslim Brotherhood.
 The third possible circumstance was the Kurdish factor.
 The threat that an independent Kurdish state could emerge in the Kurdish-populated region of northern Syria (better known in Kurdish as Rojava) threatening Turkey's territorial integrity forced official Ankara to play a significant role in the Syrian chaos.
 The fourth circumstance was about 3 million Turkmens living in the Syrian territory, who are often called Na-Turkomans.
  The IP fought between 1,000 and 3,000 Turkish citizens in the detachments (according to some Turkish opposition forces, that number was as high as 5,000.
   Turkey supported the anti-government struggle of the Syrian Turkomans, as it aimed to counterbalance the Syrian Kurdish forces seeking autonomy in northern Syria.
As for the world players, the latter did not lag behind the regional players.
  The United States did not hesitate to take advantage of the volatile situation in Syria by "using Iraq's less successful experience in Syria" in order to strengthen its position in the Middle East.
  Under the guise of democracy, in order to achieve its political goals, the latter sought to eliminate the anti-American sentiment in Syria at the cost of overthrowing the Assad regime.
 In order to carry out Iskayd, while avoiding direct military presence, in the initial stage of the Syrian conflict, the United States began to provide direct, direct financial, military and other assistance to the Syrian opposition.
  These allocations were immediately used by the IP members.
A number of political analysts, archaeologists, and other experts in the field believe that the IP is an older fact, conditioned by the US invasion of Iraq, separating the four main actions promoting the formation of a terrorist group in Mesopotamia carried out by the Bush administration after the invasion of Iraq.
First. Foreign military occupation, as a rule, radicalizes the local population and gives birth to force.
 The same thing happened in Iraq.
 The widespread chaos, shootings, and torture perpetrated by the United States have led to thousands of Iraqis seeking refuge in Islamic ideological and successful groups, including one led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
 Second, the United States consistently destroyed the entire system of central government, abolished the existing political order, [24] and the new US-established order, the institutionalized democratic system, the Constitution, the electoral system, and the party system, merely contributed to the rise of a Shiite religious group. The former Sunnis who came to power became the country's main opposition և the enemies of US-backed rule in Iraq.
 The third was in 2003. In May, the United States disbanded the Iraqi army.
  The former military had no choice but to join terrorist groups.
 The United States ousted more than half a million well-trained Iraqi soldiers overnight.
  After the fall of Saddam Hussein, there were about 90,000 elements of the former regime in Iraq, including about 26,000 Iraqi special forces, about 30,000 Fida's idiots, about 30,000 former regime officers, other intelligence agents and the military.
 Many of the ISIS militants were former Iraqi army servicemen, officers who were subordinate to Hussein until 2003. US invasion of Iraq.
 Fourth. The United States immediately promoted the spread of radical Islamic ideas by uniting the Islamists, uniting everyone (here we are talking about the path of Buka concentration).
  After the invasion of Iraq, the United States imprisoned members of various disobedient groups operating in the occupied territories (often without charge) at the Buka concentration camp in northern Iraq.
  The Islamists here not only propagated the radical Islamic ideas, but also worked out their future activities.
 Among them was the caliph of "IP" Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
 As for the Russian Federation, another active player in the Middle East developments, Russia's foreign policy priority was to maintain the Assad regime, and only then to fight the Islamic State.
 11 Russia was officially an observer in the Syrian conflict.
  Referring to the situation of the various participants in the conflict around the IP, there were criticisms of both the West-Middle East policy and condemnatory statements on the IP, emphasizing that Russian intervention is possible only in the context of cooperation with the legitimate Syrian-Iraqi authorities.
 2015 In September 2007, at the direct request of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, the Russian armed forces entered Syria, establishing an air base in Hmeimim, a naval base in Tartus.
  Russia joined the fight against IS, but the latter operated outside the US-led global anti-terrorist coalition.
  The Russian air force ևspecial forces did a lot of work, helping the Syrian government forces to take the lead in the fight against the anti-government forces of the IP.
 At present, the primary task of the Russian Federation is to prevent the return to the homeland of persons who have acquired military experience, who are highly skilled in terrorist operations, and to prevent the application of the experience gained by the latter in the homeland.
 The last contributing factor was the wrong choice of struggle against IP.
The fight was against the IP as a single terrorist group, while the IP was not limited to the borders outlined by the Islamic State ․ it was already networked.
 If the main task of the global anti-terrorist struggle in 2001 was to identify and eliminate terrorist structures (al-Qaeda, Osama bin Laden), then in the case of the IP, such a policy was ineffective because everyone in the IP was a leader and the structure was networked. .
  The so-called "delay" policy of the states solved two possible key problems.
 First. The IP attracted all possible terrorist elements like a magnet.
  Thousands of criminal elements came from different parts of the world, from the USA, EU countries, countries of the former USSR, etc., to join the IP11 series. The policy adopted by Russia in Syria was as follows: Control և limiting և intellectual influence, curb radical Islamic extremist groups, control և prevent the sharp drop in oil prices, expand Russian influence in the region.
your brother.
  At the same time, the opposite process was taking place: a sharp decrease in the number of possible Islamic extremist terrorist groups from the above-mentioned states.
 In this context, the main task of the states was to block the possible return routes of terrorists.
  The second problem. To unite all possible elements of radical Islamic terrorism in one place; to destroy it in a certain area, because only a systematic struggle will give the expected results, because it is different when the struggle is going on in a certain place, against a specific structure; it is different when the struggle is spontaneous. against terrorist groups.
Considering the dynamics of the development of the IP after the proclamation of the caliphate in 2017, it can be clearly stated that the fight against the IP was quite effective in terms of material, territorial losses, as today the jihadists have almost no control areas.
 However, the defeat of the Islamic Caliphate was only the defeat of that type of IP, which at the same time became the beginning of another type of IP.
  In other words, if the IP disappears as a controller of territories, then the IP will continue to function as an ideological force, as it has turned into a network that has և will still find new audiences ներ ideologues.
LITERATURE URL:
  https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/world/defiant-message-from-islamic-state-leadera622dae742a2_story.html?utm_term=.2804fe30e834 (Accessed.
 12.12.2017). Hassan H., Weiss M., ISIS.
 Inside the Army of Terror, Bleecker Street, New York, 2016, p. 7.2017, URL.
 https:
//www.pri.org/stories/2017-02-19/timeline-islamic-states-gains-andlosses-iraq-and-syria) (Accessed.
 21.03.2018) .URL.
 https:
//www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/isis-syria-dabiq-islamicstate-daesh-apocalypse-propaganda-army-forces-attack-battle-a7362921.html (Accessed.
URL.
 https:
//mgimo.ru/upload/iblock/e33/e33e2c2042f5315ff21cde7205e7175a.pdf(Accessed.
 12.12.2017). [6] Elias PL, Terrorism 2.0.
 El Nuevo Arma De Estado Islamico, 5º Doble Grado enRelaciones International Madridn y Traducción e Interpretación, Madrid, 2015, p. 22, URL.
https:
//repositorio.comillas.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/11531/397/TFG000356.pdf?seque
nce = 1 (Accessed.
 11.12.2017) .URL.
 https:
//edition.cnn.com/2014/08/08/world/isis-fast-facts/index.html (Accessed.
URL.
 https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2017/world/rise-and-fall-ofisis/?utm_term=.b81ffbff03d5 (Accessed.
 02.12.2018) .Center, URL.
  https:
//www.state.gov/documents/organization/257738.pdf(Accessed.
[10] US-Backed Fighters Take Town of Manbij from Isis, The Guardian, URL.
https:
//www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/us-backed-syrian-fighters-take-town-ofmanbij-from-isis (Accessed.
 02.03.2018). [11] Chughtai A., Syrian Civil War Map.
 Who's in Control Where, Al Jazeera, April 15,2018, URL.
https:
//www.aljazeera.com/indepth/interactive/2015/05/syria-country-divided150529144229467.html (Accessed.
 16.03.2017) .URL.
 http:
//www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-27838034 (Accessed.
 06.03.2017) .URL.
 http:
//www.realinstitutoelcano.org/publicaciones/libros/Informe-Estado-IslamicoEspana.pdf (Accessed.
 12.12.2017) .UK, December 7, 2015, URL.
  http:
//uk.businessinsider.com/isis-funding-zakat-marketcomparisons-taxes-2015-12 (Accessed.
 09.02.2018). URL.
 https:
//www.pravda.ru/world/21-03-2016/1295775-igil-0/ (Accessed.
 11.02.2018) .18, 2015, URL.
  https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/11/18/how-isismakes-its-money/?utm_term=.6312d3c1d860 (Accessed.
 12.02.2018) .policy, October 24, 2017, URL.
  https:
//www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2017/10/24/sdfcaptures-al-omar-oil-field-from-the-islamic-state/ (Accessed.
 16.02.2018). [18] Kocharyan H., Hydrocarbon Capacities of the "Islamic State", YSU Center for Civilization and Cultural Studies, Analytical Bulletin N 7, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 211-2, URL.
  https:
//cccsysu.com/wpcontent/uploads/2015/04/H.-Kocharyans-article.pdf (Accessed.
 19.03.2018) .And Banned By The West, October 25, 2014, URL.
  http:
//www.businessinsider.com/r(Accessed.
 12.02.2018) .URL.
  https:
//www.gatestoneinstitute.org/4698/turkey-frankenstein-monster(Accessed.
16.12.2018).
 L., a senior researcher at the Institute of Archeology of the National Academy of Sciences, Chair of Processes at YSU Political Institutes, Turkologist, speaks about this. Hovsepyan in his interview with us.
(March 6, 2018).
[21] Geghamyan V., The role of Turkey in the formation of the "Islamic State" organization, Analytical Bulletin № 7, Yerevan 2015, pp. 178, 176.
URL.
 http:
//www.hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/serkan-demirtas/more-than-1000-turksfighting-for-the-islamic-caliphate--69867 (Accessed.
 16.12.2017). [23] Aksoy MA, Syrian Turkmen.
 Fighting to Survive, Al Jazeera, August 16, 2017, URL.
https:
//www.aljazeera.com/programmes/aljazeeraworld/2017/08/syrian-turkmen-fightingsurvive-170806082405511.html (Accessed.
 06.03.2018) .URL.
 https:
//www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf (Accessed.
 14.03.2018). [25] Grigoryan S., Islamic State.
  From the origins to the proclamation of the caliphate, Yerevan, YSU, 2016, p. 73.
June 26, 2017, URL.
  https:
//www.20minutos.es/noticia/3072584/0/rusia-ataca-estadoislamico-siria/ (Accessed.
 19.12.2017). [27] Interview: Researcher of YSU Department of Armenian-Kurdish Relations, Lecturer of YSU Chair of International Relations and Diplomacy, Candidate of Historical Sciences, Arabologist S. With Grigoryan.
Rosa Karapetyan "DYNAMICS AND TERRITORIAL EXPANSION OF" ISLAMIC STATE "MILITARY-POLITICAL ACTIVITY (TERRITORIAL EXPANSION) (2014-2018) hydrocarbon resources.
