ARMENIAN TELEVISION LANGUAGE AND ADULT VALUE SYSTEM Mass communication in society takes place mainly through language.
 However, language as a basis for that communication has been the subject of special study relatively recently1.
  Modern media research shows that mass communication is a socially significant area of ​​public-linguistic practices2.
 In the world today, the main part of the use of language is mass communication.
 Media texts, media texts, are one of the most common forms of modern language circulation, the total volume of which is many times higher than the total volume of speech in other areas of human activity.
  Taking into account this role of media language, the article tries to examine the peculiarities of the modern Armenian language television circulation and their value side.
TV texts stand out for their role in the whole variety of media texts3.
  In particular, it is obvious that television has an impact on a child's language, developing ստ enriching speech with new words ներով language structures.
This circumstance, however, apart from the positive side, can have very negative consequences, taking into account the level of literacy of the speech on Armenian TV.
  In this respect, one circumstance can be noticed when comparing the TV series of local and foreign production. Foreign TV series are translated mainly into literary Armenian, գր the literary Armenian sounded in the soap operas does not leave the impression of alienation, unnaturalness.
  The picture is different in the case of local TV series.
According to the research conducted, there are almost twice as many TV viewers among those who prefer Shant TV's "In the Army" TV series, who think that it is necessary to speak according to the situation, and not always in literary Armenian4.
 In my opinion, a detailed examination of this issue may make some discoveries related to the use of modern Armenian, in particular, media use.
In today's globalized world, one can see a certain cliché-uniformity of media texts, when, as theorists testify, stable broadcasting styles are used and spread.
 Experts talk about global cliché 5.
 TV series can be classified as media productions as a TV product եքստ can be studied with the help of the mentioned approach.
Armenian reality TV series penetrated from the Latin American environment in the 1990s.
 Their belonging to a foreign culture, thus a certain distance from the Armenian environment, seem to allow them to find a rather monolingual language through translation.
  Literary Armenian, in fact, is suitable in the presence of that distance from the presented cultural reality.
 The picture is different in the case of local TV series.
  2003 Local TV series that have been produced since then mimic Latin American TV series.
  However, according to the principles of linguistic and cultural study, there is an inseparable connection, organic unity և there is integrity between the national language և culture և.
  And the media texts are full of significant information from the cultural point of view, as they are fixed and reflected in 1 See Chernykh A., World Contemporary Media, Moscow, 2007, p. 79.
2 See Dobrosklonnaya T., Media Linguistics.
 system support for learning the language SMI, (available at http: // www.
//www.ffl.msu.ru/research/publications/dobrosklonskaya/dobrosklonskaya-medialingvistika.pdf).
3 See ibid.
4 For details, see Menemshyan A., Sargsyan Z., Stepanyan V., 2014, p. 19.
5 See Dobrosklonnaya T.
both general and specific aspects of national languages ​​and cultures.
 It is in the media language that first of all the sociological-ideological changes taking place within the society are reflected, new concepts and structures are fixed1.
Consequently, Armenian-made TV series, full of street slang, vulgarity, primitive language structures, contain disturbing evidence of the modern Armenian language and culture.
  The reality that is not foreign to us, that surrounds us, is natural for us, in short, our reality, cannot be transmitted through our literary language.
Of course, the fact that, as linguists note, there are considerable differences between the literary "colloquial layers" of the Armenian language plays a role here.
 However, it should be emphasized once again that when copying non-Armenian TV series, it is possible to find a literary colloquial language that does not leave the impression of unnaturalness, while in Armenian TV series we often find extremely vulgar language.
  Therefore, the choice of street Armenian speaks of the alienation of the related contents of literary Armenian.
  And the adolescent, who, through the mediation of his parents, becomes not a consumer of this media product created for him, acquires not only impure, often street Armenian, but also relevant lifestyles, which is more dangerous, by alienating his literary language.
Therefore, as mentioned, the contents presented on the screen are "interconnected language".
 This is the reason why Armenian TV experts discuss issues of undesirable value-behavioral impact, emphasizing "sometimes gravity" factors, sometimes targeted, sometimes unprofessional.
  Locally produced soap operas are concerned with unfavorable ideas, vocabulary, dissemination of speech, harmful models of family relationships, poor characters, "accustoming" the criminal to the vicious society.
The language of humorous programs and movies is especially worrying. In order to achieve laughter, TV producers try not only to create funny situations, but also funny language.
 And as such, vulgarities and street slang are used almost exclusively.
 The funny characters in the TV series speak mainly literary Armenian. therefore, literary speaking is presented as a factor of ridicule.
  This circumstance can directly affect the language preferences of adolescents by developing caution in literary language and its related behavioral features.
The foreign language titles of TV shows (for example, "Full House" ("Armenia"), "Comments" ("Armenia"), "Arm Comedy" ("ATV"), as well as the frequently used words in advertisements (for example, the product of the Ideal System) are worrisome. In one of the commercials, half of each sentence is said in English).
  With them, sarcasm, fun, comfort, modernity are connected with a foreign language, and consequently with a foreign culture, reproducing in the context, forming the idea that the mentioned qualities are not Armenian.
  These invisible, often unconscious steps create an atmosphere of value, which can not but negatively affect the national self-consciousness of adolescents.
In my opinion, the problem here is deeper than it may seem at first glance.
  Acquiring often pathetic ideas of national-patriotism at school, the teenager receives information on TV with a completely different emphasis.
 There is a noticeable gap between the "impressions" of the knowledge gained in informal environments at school.
  As a result, preference is often given to the latter, while questioning the transmission of formal education in parallel with the acquisition of appropriate value orientations.
These tendencies can indicate quite deep dangers. dangers that are not visible at first glance.
  Thus, according to culturologist H. According to Bayadyan, "In the depths of the current principle of public solidarity, even if such a principle is never openly expressed 1 See Dobrosklonnaya T.
2 See Galstyan D., Manusyan S., Zhamkochyan A., The content of television. Software Orientations: Content Shaping Factors, 2013, available at http:
//www.noravank.am/arm/articles/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=7147&sphrase_id=48770 link).
It has not been formalized, one can see the suspension of the literary jurisdiction of the literary Eastern Armenian language, its closely related values, institutions, etc., if not the rejection, the neglect of their symbolic power ”1.
This fear is corroborated by numerous strong theories of media theory, according to which the texts of mass communication more and more often serve as a basis for discussing the modern state of language.
 Figuratively speaking, if the language of fiction is a "pictorial" way of reflecting reality, the language of mass media, which instantly marks any event, any change in life, is rather a photographic way2.
  Or, according to another description, the most modern means of disseminating "having a great reputation", the language of the media in the information society performs a unique model of the national language.
  It largely shapes the norms of literature, language tastes և preferences, influences the perception of politics, ideology, art, literature ”3.
Thus, the Armenian language on TV is very worrying. It is worrying, on the one hand, as an expression of public attitude towards one's own language, on the other hand, as a fixation of such an attitude և massification.
 The language spoken on television conveys to adolescents not only a distorted language, but also a distorted image of the values ​​associated with it.
Aida Anastasyan LANGUAGE AND ADOLESCENT VALUE SYSTEM OF ARMENIAN TELEVISION Keywords: language, communication, media text, TV text, mass information, global cliché.
