DEMOGRAPHIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE MIGRATION OF THE POPULATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Population migration is a rather complex social phenomenon, which is closely connected with the changes of economic structures and the distribution of productive forces.
Migration studies are used all over the world and are gaining importance because of the consequences they have left.
 As a result of migration, the population of the countries or their regions, the mode of reproduction, the sex-age composition, the balance of labor resources change.
 Population migration can improve or worsen a country's demographic situation.
The huge impact of migration on the demographic situation in Armenia is undeniable.
It must be stated that this impact can be characterized only very negatively, as the emigration of the population of the Republic of Armenia has reached a large scale, which has become a fatal problem for our country.
  The collapse of the USSR and the independence of Armenia had a significant impact on the migration of the population of Armenia.
 The deep radical changes of political and socio-economic nature that took place in the Republic of Armenia changed the directions and volumes of migration, the forms of motives.
  Only in 1991 the migration balance was positive due to the large number of immigrants, which was due to the formation of Armenia as an independent state.
1991 24.6 thousand people immigrated to Armenia from other republics of the Soviet Union.
However, since 1992 the migration balance of the RA population has become negative.
 This was followed by an increase in emigration and a sharp decrease in the number of immigrants.
 For comparison, let us mention that already in 1992 The number of immigrants to Armenia from other republics of the Soviet Union decreased, reaching 6.8 thousand.
 And the tendency of decreasing this index was observed in the following years, in 2000. reaching 1.2 thousand [2].
 At the same time, the number of emigrants was constantly increasing.
 1992-1995 The emigration of the population from Armenia was massive.
It is true that there are no concrete data on the migration scales of that period, but almost all the researches show that the emigration of people from Armenia has reached a huge scale.
 According to approximate calculations, only in 1992-1995. More than 1 million people left Armenia when the number of immigrants was several times smaller.
  The reasons for emigration were various and varied, in particular, the undeclared war, blockades, Spitak earthquake, privatization by Azerbaijan, but the economic and energy crisis in Armenia was decisive in that period.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the emigration of the population from Armenia continued.
 It is true that the socio-economic conditions in the country have improved to some extent, but they have not reached a sufficient level.
  According to the State Migration Service of the RA Ministry of Territorial Administration և Development, the National Security Service has clarified the 2010-2012 budget. The number of people who arrived in Armenia and left Armenia.
As a result, during the above-mentioned three years, the number of departures exceeded the number of arrivals. In 2010 with 37,941 people, in 2011 with 43,481 people, in 2012 with 44,809 people.
 It turns out that in this short period the number of people leaving Armenia was more than 126 thousand more than the number of people arriving.
  The figures show that the negative tendencies of migration observed in previous years are still continuing, the emigration of the population continues to be a key issue of state-national importance for Armenia.
It is known that especially young people show migration activity, that is, the mass of the population that should ensure the reproduction of the population.
 The demographic situation of Armenia as well as of any other region is not a consequence of the processes taking place in the given period.
  Events that took place decades ago can have a profound effect on current demographics.
A vivid proof of that is the example that in the 1990s. At the beginning of the 20th century, children born in the Second World War reached the age of marriage.
 It is known that many Armenians died during the Patriotic War, consequently, the birth rate decreased.
  In other words, it turns out that in the 1990s. In the beginning, fewer young people entered the reproductive age, which led to a decrease in the number of marriages and births.
At the same time, the emigration of people from Armenia had reached enormous proportions. The socio-economic situation of the country was extremely difficult.
 These, in turn, aggravated the demographic situation.
 As the next link in this chain, we can say that the negative consequences of the small number of births registered in the 1990s will be felt more clearly in the coming years, when already in the 1990s. Those born will enter the age of reproduction.
 This is reflected in Figure 1, which shows the age structure of the population of the Republic of Armenia in 2002-2013. as of January 1.
Line 1. How do you see the diagrams from 1, if in 2002? 10-20 years old were relatively large in the population of the Republic of Armenia - about 19.9%, then in 2013. that figure was only 11.3% (4).
  And this is the age group that needs the reproduction of the population in the coming years.
  2002 The share of 50-65 year olds was 11.9%, and in 2013 - 19.4%.
  This means that the age structure of the population is aging, which is a very safe trend for our country, as the number of emigrants from Armenia is increasing, in which, as we have already mentioned, a large number of young people are.
  According to the UN Demographic Aging Scale, if the proportion of people over the age of 65 is over 7%, then such a population is considered older.
 2013 As of January 1, 2010, this indicator was 11.9% in the Republic of Armenia [5].
The impact of migration on the gender composition of the population of the Republic of Armenia is great, which is subject to negative changes.
 If we study the gender composition of emigrants, we will see that most of them are men.
 And gender disparities lead to a decrease in the number of marriages, as potential grooms have embarked on the path of emigration.
  It is also known that a large part of the population of the Republic of Armenia consists of the participants of the temporary migration, who go abroad for work and spend very little time with their family left in the Republic of Armenia.
 The long absence of spouses is the reason for the increase in the number of divorces, which directly reduces the birth rate.
 2013 As of January 1, 2012, the number of women in the permanent population of the Republic of Armenia in the age group 20-35 exceeded the number of men by 20,855.
 20-35 year olds are the target group that makes up the majority of migration participants.
 We must pay attention to the fact that this data refers to the permanent population, which does not include temporary migrants.
  If we take into account the above-mentioned circumstance, this difference will increase sharply, as the majority of temporary migrants are also men.
Returning to Figure 1, let us add that analyzing the age structure of the population of the Republic of Armenia in 2002. As of today, we have come to the conclusion that in 2008-2009. from 2020-2022 Birth rate and mortality rates are expected to increase, as in 2002. At that time, a large part of the population was aged 10-20 and over 65.
 And in 2002 In the next few years, the birth rate was to fall, as shown in Figure 1, a relatively small proportion of the population was between the ages of 20 and 40.
  In other words, it took several years for a group of 15-19 years old to enter the age of marriage and ensure the reproduction of the population.
 Looking at the diagrams 2 և 3, we can state that our conclusions are being implemented so far.
Line 2. Line 3. Analyzing Figure 1, based on the trends registered in the previous 10 years, which were ևpredictable, we came to the conclusion that the relatively high birth rates և mortality rates will be maintained in the next 5-7 years, as in 2013. As of today, the relatively large share in the age structure of the population of the Republic of Armenia is those aged 20-35 and 65։.
 However, according to our forecast, the picture will change dramatically in 2020-2022. starting.
 This drastic change refers, especially, to the birth rates.
  The basis for this forecast is the analysis of the fact that in 2013 As of already mentioned, 10-20 year olds made up a relatively small share in the total population of the Republic of Armenia.
 And people of that age group will enter the age of marriage for a few years to ensure the reproduction of the population.
 As for the mortality rates, we think they do not tend to decrease, as the share of the elderly in the general population is increasing.
  The forecasts are unfavorable, but quite realistic, as there are no tendencies to reduce the volume of emigration.
  Although migration is a phenomenon that, in addition to objective reasons, also depends on a number of subjective reasons that cannot be fully predicted, but if we take into account that the causes of emigration have not been eliminated and no effective and encouraging steps are taken to eliminate them, we regret it. to say that the negative migration balance will be maintained in the forecast period.
In conclusion, we can say that the analysis showed that the current demographic situation in Armenia is unfavorable for our country and the expected tendencies are not only encouraging, but catastrophic.
  In addition, the number of emigrants from Armenia is constantly increasing, which worsens and complicates the current demographic situation.
  Even if the current indicators of migration are maintained in the coming years, the situation will become critical.
  This is already a fatal problem. In the coming years, Armenia will face a very serious problem, which can no longer be described as a problem of socio-economic nature, as it has already acquired national-political significance and directly endangers our national security.
 In order to get out of the crisis, the RA state bodies must implement an effective demographic policy, if necessary, use all methods and measures at the same time (socio-economic, legal, educational-psychological), be consistent in that matter and control possible shortcomings, if necessary, use other countries effectively. experience in solving demographic problems [1].
 The Armenian authorities must find more effective ways to implement a more effective demographic policy, uniting all forces and resources to increase the birth rate in the country, encourage the formation of young families, prevent the current rate of emigration or, at least, partially reduce it.
Literature 1. Tovmasyan V., Demographic Challenges և Population Perspectives, Yerevan, 2013, 216 pages.
2. Khojabekyan V., Reproduction of the population of Armenia և shifts in the 19th-20th centuries, on the threshold of the 21st century, Yerevan, 2001, 479 pages.
3. Manasyan M., Migration of the population of the Republic of Armenia և The problems of resettlement, YSU Yearbook 2012, Yerevan, pp. 451-461.
4. Official website of the RA National Statistical Service, http.
//www.armstat.am/am/. 5. "Caucasus Research Resource Center - Armenia" official website, http.
//www.crrc.am/.6. Official website of the RA CDDS State Migration Service, http.
//www.smsmta.am/. Hayk ManasyanDEMOGRAPHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF RA POPULATION MIGRATION Keywords: migration, demographic situation, population reproduction, gender-age structure, demographic forecast.
