GEOGRAPHY TEACHING METHODS KIRARUMEDPROTSAKANNERI research capacities ZARGATSMANNPATAKOVKani that modern education "public order" to the students not only to empower the knowledge, abilities and skills, but also teach them to find themselves and yuratsnelhavasti knowledge, have decided unfamiliar situations make scientifically sound decisions, contributing to our planet's environmental, Overcoming socio-economic and political problems [2], then the development of students' research skills is the imperative of the time.
The scientific purpose of this article is to discuss the development of students' research skills in the process of teaching geography.
In our opinion, the work aimed at solving the latter should start in the basic school, as this process is time-consuming; schoolchildren should be gradually prepared first in the high school, then to carry out research work in the universities.
Examining the available literature, we noticed that the works in Armenian (books, scientific articles, manuals, dissertations, assignments for the use of tasks by Gylen), which are aimed at developing the research skills of primary school students in the process of teaching geography, will be very limited.
The purpose of this article is to discuss the methods of teaching geography teaching methodology that are most effective in developing students' research skills, as the appropriate use of appropriate teaching methods provides the desired educational outcomes.
 It should be noted that the methods of teaching geography are classified according to the source of knowledge գործունեության the nature of cognitive activity [3].
 The latter is divided into two major groups of methods.
  These are the explanatory (explanatory, reproductive or recollectible) և creative (problem-solving, partial-search և research) methods.
 The group of explanatory methods is aimed at the transfer of ready-made information, the acquisition of a certain amount of knowledge and skills of schoolchildren through the direct mediation of the teacher.
  From the point of view of the development of research skills, it is of limited importance, as the influence of the teacher is very great, and schoolchildren are required to master the transferred knowledge, simple reproduction.
Creative methods are aimed at developing a person's creative activity experience, creative abilities և thinking.
  They promote the independence of schoolchildren, increase their cognitive activity, develop creative ևcritical thinking, enabling them to form a self-opinion և position, present it in different audiences, develop creative, research կանխ creative, research skills.
The problem-solving method is aimed at introducing students to the difficult path of knowledge, where tasks that require proof of a complex problem are used.
  It contributes to the development of research skills: to make connections between different sources of information, to process data, to report, to report results, to use the skills of critical literacy to analyze and interpret information presented in the media.
 For example, in the 5th grade, the changes in air temperature and atmospheric pressure in the context of the "Atmosphere" theme are presented to schoolchildren in the course of their work with statistical data, giving them the opportunity to observe their own pattern and find justifications.
The aim of the partial-search method is to bring the schoolboy closer to the creative work.
 This method assumes self-discovery of the new and, in addition to working with the given standard plan, performs additional tasks based on the acquired knowledge.
 It contributes to the development of the following research capabilities: collect, record, verify data, identify primary and secondary sources of information, find solutions, make informed decisions, analyze data, study different sources, compare, contrast ստեղծել make connections (multimedia) between different media sources և և etc.
 For example, in the 6th grade, based on the knowledge of the natural zones of South America, study the natural zones of North America, using a standard plan, maps of natural zones, the Internet.
The research methods are aimed at studying a completely new topic for schoolchildren.
 Schoolchildren formulate (in lower grades, choose) the research question, compile (in lower grades, are guided by a given sample) a research plan, collect, analyze, summarize information, and present the results of the research.
 This method is aimed at developing both information and media literacy skills.
 For example, in the 9th grade, within the framework of the study of the regions of the Republic of Armenia, schoolchildren can be instructed to assess the potential and prospects of tourism development, compile a list of tourism centers in the regions, design routes, make suggestions for improving the sector.
The use of group research method contributes not only to the development of research skills, but also to the cooperation of group members, to the increase of work efficiency [1].
The first type
The second type
The third type
• A situation where the knowledge available to solve a problem is not sufficient to understand the conventional content.
• The part that is necessary for the problem-solving is selected from the knowledge.
• Schoolchildren should apply previously acquired knowledge in new and unfamiliar situations.
Table 1. Types of problem situations [3].
The above-mentioned methods used to increase the efficiency of the geography teaching process are characterized by the creation of problem situations, problem tasks and issues լուծ the solution of educational problems.
 The fulfillment of these tasks is based on the strengthening of the previously acquired knowledge of the schoolchildren and their new acquisition.
This means finding new ways to solve a problem on one's own or through teacher guidance or applying the knowledge one has.
The existing contradiction between the previously acquired "new acquired knowledge" creates mental difficulties, a problematic situation, which overcomes the schoolchildren to an independent, creative approach.
 The problem situation is mainly created by the teacher, but sometimes it can arise on the initiative of the schoolchildren.
  Three types of problem situations (according to AM Matyushkin) are used in the teaching of geography, which are presented in Table 1.
All three of the above situations are applicable to the development of students' research skills in the process of teaching geography, contributing to the use of knowledge already acquired in new situations, to the development of logical-critical thinking.
 Moreover, they stimulate schoolchildren to do research, to notice the contradiction between facts and ideas, the problem of research, to formulate the question of research.
 Problem situations are effectively used in directed research work when the teacher directs the research activities of the schoolchildren.
Thus, in order to ensure the development of students 'research skills in the process of teaching geography, it is expedient to use creative teaching methods (problem-solving, partial-search-research), which provide them with research tasks, development of students' creative-critical thinking-development skills. .
LITERATURE [1] Hovhannisyan A., Harutyunyan K., Khrimyan S. և Others, Collaborative Learning, Yerevan, Antares, 2006, p. 124.
[2] "Geography" (grades 6-8)) Criteria for "Geography of Armenia" (9th grade) դպրոցի programs of the general education basic school, 2012 by the RA Minister of Education and Science Order No. 1 of January 23, N 49-A / Q.
[3] Minasyan A. A., Methods and means of teaching geography, Yerevan, Hegh. հրատ., 2011, էջ 96.
[4] https.
//www.spps.org/site/handlers/filedownload.ashx?moduleinstanceid=38342&dataid
Mkrtumyan APPLICATION OF METHODS OF TEACHING METHODS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF TRAINERS 'RESEARCH CAPACITIES
