SOME ISSUES OF INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION OF TRADEMARKS The development of market relations and business activities in the Republic of Armenia became the basis for the development of the means of personalization of goods, services, including the introduction of the institute of trademarks.
 In the conditions of increasing competition, including the unfair market, the role of the use of trademarks and their legal protection is already being used.
  However, this can not be limited to the domestic market, և entrepreneurs face many new challenges on the way to the geographical expansion of their products և services և entering the overseas market, as in this case the competition increases, goods and services need to be more protected, ային goods The use and legal protection of the signs go beyond the borders of the native state.
  Presenting goods և services հատկապես under a registered trademark, especially abroad, makes those goods and services շահ the interests of entrepreneurs vulnerable.
  For this purpose, not only national but also international registration of trademarks and legal protection are used.
 1994 should be considered a significant event in the mentioned sphere by the Republic of Armenia. The accession to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks (hereinafter referred to as the Madrid Agreement) on 17 May 2000 and the accession to the Protocol to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks (hereinafter referred to as the Madrid Protocol).
  Armenia, in fact, joined the Madrid system of international registration of trademarks.
  This has created wide opportunities for the Armenian producer to be in a more protected foreign market, to expand his activity there.
  However, before using the opportunities provided by the trademark international registration system correctly, it is necessary to refer to some peculiarities of the international registration procedure, some of the problematic provisions of the Madrid Agreement, which will be presented in paragraph 1 below.
First of all, it is necessary to discuss the issue of the territorial-subjective borders of the Madrid system of registration of marks, that is, the territory of the states within which the Madrid system operates.
 The following questions need to be considered: 1) which countries are members of the international trademark registration system, 2) who can register their trademarks for international registration, and 3) in which countries is the trademark protected when it is registered? receives international registration.
By virtue of Article 1 of the Madrid Agreement և States Parties to the Madrid Protocol establish a Special Union for the International Registration of Marks under Article 1 of the Protocol.
  The significance of this is that it predetermines which country 's citizen or legal entity, as an applicant, has the right to apply for registration.
  Accordingly, the Madrid Agreement stipulates the emergence of the right to register a trademark in the presence of the applicant's "one of the countries of the Special Union", so to speak, "necessary connection" 2.
  It defines the Madrid Agreement as a "country of origin".
 Determining the country of origin allows, first, to determine whether the person can use the international trademark registration system, and second, from which specific country of the Special Union the process of registration of the mark should begin.
Accordingly, the country of origin is determined by Article 1 3 3 of the Madrid Agreement, which sets out the rules for determining the country of origin, in particular: (a) if the person (applicant) is engaged in commercial or industrial activity in any country of the Special Union; It has been a long time since the Republic of Armenia acceded to these treaties, but the topic remains relevant, especially given the fact that the Institute of Intellectual Property, in particular trademarks, is still under development in the Republic of Armenia, and the Madrid Agreement and Protocol are being revised. editing.
2 See World Intellectual Property Organization. Madrid Agreement International Registration sign and protocol to that agreement.
 objectives, basic features, renamings, Publication VoIS, No. 418 (R), 2004, p. 5.
(b) if the person does not have an enterprise or activity in any country of the Special Union, the country of origin is the country of the Special Union in which he resides. (c) and (if) the person does not reside in any of the countries of the Special Union or engage in commercial or industrial activities, the country of origin shall be the country of the Special Union of which that person is a national.
Thus, the Madrid Agreement defines this unique hierarchy, also known as the "cascade principle" 3.
The applicant is restricted to this three-stage procedure, for example, he can not start the process of registration of his mark in the country of Special Union A, where he resides, if in fact he is engaged in commercial or industrial activities in the country of Special Union B.
 In this case, country B will be the country of its origin.
On the other hand, according to Article 2 of the Madrid Agreement, "nationals of Contracting States shall be deemed to be nationals of countries which have not acceded to this Agreement if they meet the conditions laid down in Article 3 of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property" only in the territory of the Special Union established by this Agreement.
  In its turn, the Paris Convention states that citizens of countries of the Union (Union for the Protection of Industrial Property) are equated with citizens of countries which are not members of the Union but have a place of residence in one of the countries of the Union or carry out real, serious industrial or commercial activity.
  In other words, the second article of the Madrid Agreement can be interpreted as follows: Citizens of countries of the Special Union shall be equated with nationals of countries which are not members of the Special Union and who reside in any country of the Special Union or are engaged in commercial or industrial activities.
It should be emphasized that the Madrid Protocol has made significant changes in connection with the issue under discussion.
  First, the rules for determining the country of origin under the Madrid Protocol do not restrict the applicant to choosing the country from which the registration process should begin.
 That is, the rules for determining the country of origin are not "strict", which 3 See Ерпылева Н. G., International Partial Law. Учебник длла бакалавров, Юрайт, М., 2012, էջ 672.
As in the Madrid Agreement, the "cascade principle" has been abolished.
Although the Madrid Protocol stipulates that "the applicant or registration holder is a national of the Contracting State, or resides in, or owns a manufacturing or commercial enterprise in that Contracting State", all categories are listed in the "or" link.
  In addition, if only States are parties to the Madrid Agreement, one of the novelties of the Madrid Protocol is that any intergovernmental organization can become a member of the Protocol, hence the Madrid system, if at least one of its member states on industrial property protection It is a member of the Paris Convention, and the organization has regional offices for the registration of trademarks4.
 As we have noted, the Madrid Agreement և The Madrid Protocol uses terms such as "real, serious commercial or industrial activity", "place of residence", "citizenship".
  The interpretation of these terms is, in fact, left to the domestic law of each State Party.
  However, some clarifications can be made in this regard.
The term "citizen" is used in the Madrid Agreement, in essence, in the sense of "natural" or "legal entity". The issues of the place of residence of a natural person or the location of a legal entity are regulated by personal law, domestic law.
The term "operating a serious industrial or commercial enterprise" is taken from Article 3 of the Paris Convention.
  The initial version of the Paris Convention proposed to introduce the term "enterprise" without any other features, but it was rejected on the grounds that it was too broad a concept5.
  The idea was to use the term "serious enterprise" (French version: sérieux, English ․ real, Russian ․ серьезнoe) to exclude the protection of the rights of fictitious, inactive, counterfeit enterprises.
  The authors of the Madrid Agreement were guided by this principle.
4 See Article 2 (ii) of the Madrid Protocol.
5 See Ерпылева Н. J., the same work.
As for the term "operating", this can be interpreted as follows ․ An enterprise can engage in more than one type of activity in different places; վայր the location of the enterprise և the places of business do not necessarily coincide.
  In other words, the enterprise can be located in one country ել act factually there, but operate in another country ․ This is the fixed idea.
 There may be cases when a legal entity has several serious enterprises operating in several member states of the Special Union; in this case, any of those countries can act as a country of origin, from where the registration process begins.
Thus, the analysis of the համաձայն Protocol to the Madrid Agreement provides a basis for stating that, in principle, a trademark may be internationally registered as a national of a State party to the Madrid Agreement (Madrid Protocol) or a State party to the Madrid Protocol, a person residing there, or a commercial (or) industrial the person carrying on the activity, as well as a citizen of a non-member country of the Special Union who resides in any country of the Special Union or is engaged in serious commercial or industrial activity.
It should be noted that applying for international trademark registration does not mean that it will receive automatic protection in all member states of the system.
  It is clear that the applicant is obliged to indicate in his application the countries in which he wants to provide protection of the trademark 6.
Therefore, the mark is given international legal protection only in the states where such protection has been requested7.
In this regard, there are some rules that every applicant should know ․ (a) if the country of origin, from which the registration process is to take place, is a party only to the Madrid Agreement, the registration application may specify the countries, ie protection may be sought in countries which are also party to the Madrid Agreement.
  In this case, the international application, hence the registration, will be regulated by the Madrid Agreement.
6 See Common Regulations under the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks and the Protocol Relating to that Agreement, Rule 9 (4) (a) (xv).
7 See Богуславский М. M., International Partial Law, 5th ed., M., 2005, p. 194.
(b) if the country of origin is a party only to the Madrid Protocol, protection may be requested only in those countries which are also members of the Madrid Protocol.
  In this case, the application և registration will be regulated by the Madrid Protocol.
(c) and if the country of origin is a party to the Madrid Agreement or the Madrid Protocol, protection may be sought in all countries of the Madrid system.
 In this case, there may be three situations ․1) if the States in which protection is sought are only party to the Madrid Agreement, then the application և registration is governed solely by the Agreement; 2) if the States in which protection is sought are members of the Madrid Protocol, Whether they are a party to the Agreement or not, the application և registration will be governed solely by the Madrid Protocol; 3) if one of the requested States is a Party only to the Agreement and the other to the Madrid Protocol (regardless of whether the latter accedes to the Agreement), the application and application shall be subject to To the settlement of the Agreement and the Protocol.
By the example of the above, if the country of origin of the person is the Republic of Armenia, և the process of international registration should start from the Republic of Armenia, which is a member of the Madrid Agreement and the Madrid Protocol, the applicant can apply for protection in all countries of the Madrid system.
The application for international registration is first submitted to the National Agency, where, in accordance with each domestic law, it undergoes a preliminary inspection, through which it is submitted to the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property Organization.
  After receiving the application from the national agency, the first task of the International Bureau is to check and eliminate the existence of defects in the application.
 This is, in fact, control over the inspection carried out by the national agency8.
  In the event of deficiencies, the International Bureau shall notify the applicant և (or) the national authority, depending on the deficiency and the person responsible for eliminating it. 8 See Bently L., Davis J., Ginsburg J., Trade Marks and Brands .
  An Interdisciplinary critique (Cambridge Intellectual Property and Information Law Series) / eds., Cambridge, 2008, p. 253.
condition.
 Accordingly, three possible types of defects can be distinguished.1. Deficiencies related to the classification of goods and services 2. Deficiencies related to the description of goods and services 3. other shortcomings 9.
In the case of the first type of defects, the International Bureau proposes its version of the correct classification with the deficiencies eliminated, notifying the national agency, as it was last responsible for verifying the application, including և for the classification to be correct.
  The applicant participates in the solution of the above-mentioned problem through the department ունի has the right to express his / her opinion on the problem.
 In the event of a change in classification, the International Bureau shall also inform you of the need to pay new duties as a result of the changes.
  After receiving the relevant opinion from the applicant and the agency, the International Bureau may decide to accept the application according to the classification proposed by it.
  In fact, the final decision on the solution of the problem is made by the International Bureau, the latter may not take into account the opinion of the agencies and applicants in this regard10.
The second type of deficiency may occur when, for example, the International Bureau finds that the terms used to describe a product or service are very vague, incomprehensible or linguistically incorrect.
  In this case, the Bureau notifies the department and the applicant, suggesting either to change the terms or not to use such terms in the description.
 The National Agency, after discussing the above issue with the applicant, may, within three months, accept the version proposed by the International Bureau or submit its version to the International Bureau for the elimination of deficiencies.
  If the International Bureau accepts the latter version, it shall make the appropriate amendment.
If the change proposed by the national agency is unacceptable in the sense that it violates the correct classification of goods and services, then in this case the procedure applicable to the elimination of the first type of defects shall apply.
9 See World Intellectual Property Organization. Guide to the international registration of marksunder the Madrid agreement and the Madrid protocol, Geneva 2014, paragraph B.II.26.
10 See ibid.
As for other types of shortcomings, depending on their nature, they can be eliminated either by national agencies or by the applicant.
  In particular, the national agency is responsible for any deficiencies, such as the submission of the application on an improper form, the non-ratification of the application by the national agency, etc.
 In such cases, the International Bureau shall notify the national agency and the applicant, and the agency shall be obliged to rectify the deficiencies within three months.
 In cases where, for example, there are deficiencies in the applicant's or representative's address, request for priority, or the reproduction of the mark is unclear, there are other violations of the rules for filling in the application form, such as fees not paid or underpaid, the International Bureau informs. He applied to the applicant, proposing to eliminate the existing shortcomings in three terms.
  If the defects are not eliminated within the specified period, the trademark registration procedure shall be suspended. If the duties have been paid, they shall be returned to the applicant, making a deduction of 50% of the basic fee charged for colorless marks (approximately 330 francs).
After submitting the international application to the International Bureau, registering and publishing the trademark there, the mark must be given legal protection by each country requested in the international application.
As already mentioned, the registration of a mark by the International Bureau does not mean that the mark is protected in all the requested countries. The governments of the countries must express their consent on this issue.
  According to the Madrid Agreement, the national authorities, within the period defined by the national legislation of their countries, but not later than one year from the date of registration of the mark in the International Bureau, decide whether to grant or deny legal protection in their country, the International Bureau informs.
  In this regard, it is necessary to pay special attention to the grounds for refusing to provide legal protection of the mark by national agencies.
  The Madrid Agreement and the Protocol specifically state that refusal may be granted only on grounds provided for in Article 6quinquies of the Paris Convention և apply to the national registration of marks.
 In particular, registration of a mark may be refused, 1) if the marks may infringe on the rights of third parties acquired in the country where protection is sought, 2) if the marks are devoid of any distinctive marks or consist exclusively of marks or instructions which may used to indicate the type, quality, quantity, significance, price, place of origin of goods, or which have become commonplace in the common language or in trade traditions where preservation is required; 3) if the signs contradict morality or social order, in particular if they may be misleading to throw to the society.
In fact, the above-mentioned grounds for the Paris Convention are reflected in the domestic law of the member states of the Paris Convention, and since the member states of the Madrid system are also members of the Paris Convention, it means that their domestic legislation is in line with the provisions of the Paris Convention.
  For example, the absolute և relative grounds for refusal under the RA Law on Trademarks are special cases of the above grounds provided for by the Paris Convention, more specific grounds.
Therefore, when the decision to refuse to grant legal protection to a mark is made on the basis of the domestic law of the country, it can be assumed that in principle it complies with the Paris Convention in terms of grounds for refusal, not excluding the fact that domestic law may exist. which are not provided for in the Paris Convention, but may in any case be applied by national authorities only if they do not contradict the Paris Convention11.
An interesting fact deserves attention ևs ․ Article 6quinquies of the Paris Convention states that the article does not apply if the mark for which protection is sought is not registered in the country of origin.
 In other words, in order for the provisions of the above-mentioned article to work, including the grounds for refusing to provide legal protection to the mark, the mark must be registered at the national level, ie it must have a basic registration.
  But on the other hand, as it is known, the Madrid Protocol allows the international registration of a mark to be carried out also on the basis of the main application, when the mark has not yet received the main registration12.
  In fact, it turns out that in the case when the international 11 See World Intellectual Property Organization, Guide to the international registration of marksunder the Madrid agreement and the Madrid protocol, Geneva 2014, paragraph B.II.17.01.
12 See Oplachko V., Changes in the Madrid system of international registration marks 2008 / Intellectual property.
 Промышленная собственность, 2008, N10, էջ 12.
Registration is carried out within the framework of the Madrid Protocol, on the basis of the main application, the authorities are given a legal opportunity to refuse protection of the mark on grounds which do not comply with Article 6 of the Paris Convention կարող may in principle circumvent the Madrid Protocol և Paris Convention.
 In response to our e-inquiry to the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) to clarify the above issue, the WIPO Legal Division clarified that national authorities may have the right to refuse to grant legal protection on grounds other than those enshrined in Article 6 of the Paris Convention. is based on a national application.
 At the same time, he noted that the International Bureau does not discuss the grounds for refusing to provide legal protection to the mark by national agencies, as providing legal protection to the mark is only a matter for the competence of national agencies.
Tigran Dadunts SOME QUESTIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION OF TRADEMARIES Keywords: Trademarks, International Registration of Marks, Madrid Agreement, International Registration of Trademarks, Registration, Special Union, Madrid System
