A VOCABULARY CHARACTERISTICS OF JUDICIAL SPEECH The function of influence is one of the important features of speech.
  Expressive, rich, concise and accurate speech is more impressive and influential.
 The orator must be able to master the voice and its output, to have a correct, clear, expressive accent, in other words, the technique of the master's speech.
 "Speech technique is a combination of a strong, loud voice, a clear accent, the right ևExpressive Intonation" [1].
One of the most important elements of oral speech is tone.
  It is considered one of the objective features of speech.
  "Tone is a set of pronunciation elements based on the sound system of a living language, but higher than it, which includes the increase and decrease of the voice (melody), its amplifications and weakenings, ie various types of accents, including logical accent, slowing down speech. (tempo), its expressive nuances (holiday) "[3].
 It is mentioned in the professional literature that the tone is a complex phenomenon due to the mutually complementing elements.
 "Tone is a communicative phenomenon, it is not marked grammatically. it is expressed in different sounds and pauses. ”[4]
 R. Ishkhanyan considers large or small pauses, lengthening, different accents as components of the tone [5].
 You. Avetisyan notes that the tone "has its specific forms of expression - the smaller pronunciation elements - the tone, tempo or speed, descent, pause" [2].
  Մ. Asatryan considers the pauses, the melody և different accents as essential, syntactically valuable elements of tone, using especially the logical accent [2].
Here we have referred to the tone of voice of the participants of the court speech, the tempo of the speech, the exit, the pauses, the logical emphasis.
  Proper use of each of these components contributes to the phonetic richness of speech, making speech more expressive, persuasive and emotional.
The tone of voice is one of the ways of expressing the tone.
 It can be High-Low.
 The voice must first be heard.
 The speech in the courtroom should be in a tone that will allow the audience to understand each word.
 The tone of voice should correspond to the content of what is to be said.
  "A wrongly chosen tone can ruin the whole speech and clutter its individual parts."
One of the key factors in ensuring the phonetic richness and variety of speech is the change of tone of voice.
 The monotonous voice is dull, weakens the attention of the audience, does not emphasize the main, important thoughts and things to say.
 The speaker should be able to change, lower, or raise the tone of voice according to the situation.
 Important parts of speech should be pronounced relatively loudly և slowly.
The tone of the defenders' voice changes periodically, depending on the communication situation and the content of the speech.
  This enriches the word from the phonetic point of view, makes it more interesting.
Speech is one of the most important elements of this tone.
 The court speaker must return to the speed of his speech, adapt it to the content and circumstances of what is to be said.
  The speed of speech largely depends on the speaker հ emotional state և the material.
 The average speed of speech in professional literature is 120-140 words per minute [2].
 Ն. Ivakina cites 120 words per minute as the best tempo, adding that if this tempo does not change during speech, speech is difficult to grasp, as it is possible to speak of different materials at the same speed.
P. Sergeyich asks which speech is better, fast or slow, high or low, and he answers. "Neither one nor the other. The natural, ordinary speed of solitude is good, that is, the speed that corresponds to the content of the speech, the natural intensity of the sound. ”[6]
 "Mr. Prosecutor, a little slower, higher so that everyone can understand," we hear the judge's remark addressed to the prosecutor reading the indictment.
Interestingly, in the last minute before the reprimand, the accuser read 106 words per minute, which is slower than the average speed of speech.
 The follow-up is clear. The indictment should be read relatively loudly and slowly.
 "The accuser's speech is better understood when it is uttered confidently, slowly, convincingly" [1].
We have noticed a common flaw in the speeches of the Armenian accusers. They read the whole accusatory speech in the same tone and pace, presenting in the tone of enumeration both the actions of the accused and the punishment mediated by them.
 One of the well-known accusers of the Republic of Armenia reads the accusatory speech almost without pauses during the scandalous trial of several defendants.
  After petitioning one of the defendants for 7 years in prison, he went on to describe the actions of the next defendant.
 The pace of the speech was 120-130 words per minute.
Another accuser, obviously speaking fast, read 140-148 words, which were distorted, sounded incomplete and uncertain.
Based on the analysis, we can state that the understandably speaking accusers, whose words were understood without undue tension, were convincing, using an average of 100-110 words per minute.
  We think that the speed of reading the accusatory speech should not exceed this limit.
 The words of the accusers who used more than 120 words per minute were obviously urgent, lacking the necessary solemnity. There were no pauses, and the words were often distorted.
  Relatively slowly, the concluding part of the accusatory speech should be read aloud, in which the accuser petitions the court to impose a sentence or acquit the accused.
The phrase "I mediate" should be followed by a psychological break.
The average rate of defense speeches is 110-120 words per minute.
 We have noticed that during emotional speech the speed of speech reaches 140-145 words per minute.
 The defense speech, unlike the accusatory speech, is less monotonous, is accompanied by an increase and decrease of the tone of voice, a change in the tempo of the speech, which makes listening to the speech more interesting.
 The pace of the judge's speech, compared to the ombudsman's speech, is slower, a maximum of 100 words per minute.
 In most cases, the average rate of a judge is 70-80 words per minute.
 In this way the judges try to make their speech more perceptible and solemn.
Summarizing the above regarding the speed of the court speech, it can be concluded that the court speaker must know both the fast and the slow pace, be able to choose the necessary speed of speech at the right time.
 This will make the word interesting and diverse.
One of the components of tone is the page.
 "Exodus broadly includes the logical emphasis, the tone of the sentence (narrative, interrogative, imperative, exclamatory), the emotional-emotional variations of speech, which can express a variety of nuances: pain, regret, joy, threat, rebuke, command." [2] .
 Emotional-emotional fluctuations of speech are more typical of defensive speech.
 In the speeches of the defenders one can find various subtleties expressed through outbursts, for example, irony. "The investigator, using the experience of the RA Prosecutor General's Office, then the experience gained in the Special Investigation Service, showing his ('s) professionalism, decides to watch the video, but not alone, but invites Vahan Vrtanesyan to Let that examination not be boring for him.
 "After reviewing the video with the investigator, Vrtanesyan remembers that such an incident really took place, but assures that it did not matter to him."
 Raising the volume varies the sound of the speech, the speaker emphasizes the utterance with logical accents;
Exit helps to present a comic situation. "Can you imagine, I hit my nose, my ear is bruised?"
 In this way, the Defender mocks the witness who, in his opinion, gave false testimony.
 Continuing the defense speech, the same lawyer says. "Vahan Vrtanesyan submitted a report on behalf of the head of the Arabkiribazh of the police, describing the inhuman (՜) allegations made against him by Kiviryan in the police car."
 It seems that we are dealing with an ordinary narrative sentence, but by placing a logical emphasis on the inhuman word by choosing the word "click" that does not correspond to the situation (the defendant was accused of biting the injured police officer or that there was no trace of injury in the police officer's hand) Thus inciting the audience to his side, presenting his client as a victim of slander.
The phonetic richness of speech is also provided by psychological and logical pauses.
 From the point of view of expressiveness of speech, the first ones are more interesting, which have different functions.
 Pauses first help to attract the attention of the audience.
 Psychological breaks are used in court speech, especially in the speech of the defenders.
"Of course, one can reject such forms of struggle and outside any revolution, stigmatize Shant for raping his friends over the police, but ... to see them convicted under the (h) unprecedented application of the article of hooliganism is not only illegal, but also immoral. ».
 Here the pause helps to attract the audience's attention, arouses interest, making them wait for the main message.
Psychological breaks help to make the word emotional.
"The trial did not answer any question, no question ..."
They are most impressive when it comes to rhetoric.
"The whole world has appreciated the sincere efforts of our state to overcome the political crisis of the recent past, which was especially evident in the field of police system reforms.
 And what...".
The Defender, wanting to present the expert's conclusion in an unreliable manner, uses irony by using a rhetorical question, which is followed by a pause. "This is the most successful photo among them, what are the unsuccessful ones ..."
 The speaker expresses his indignation by using the rhetorical question and the pause that follows.
The effect of the rhetorical question weakens if it is not followed by a pause.
  "And do you consider that a proper proof that a well-proven incident?"
  In this case, the subordinate clause does not enrich the utterance.
  If there was a pause instead, the impression left by the rhetorical question would be incomparably greater.
The word of the accuser is more expressive from the point of view of tone umiato.
 Judges prefer a slow pace of speech, seldom changing it, but often changing the tone of voice, depending on the function they have at the time.
LITERATURE [1] Ivakina. Н .. Основы судебного красноречия (rhetoric for юристов).
  Учеб.пособие, Москва.
 Юристъ, 2004, сc. 160, 162.
[2] Avetisyan Y., Sargsyan A. և others, Armenian language և culture of speech, book B, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 23, 44, 24.
[3] Asatryan M., Modern Armenian language.
  Syntax. introduction, phrase, simple sentence, Yerevan, 1987, p. 43.
[4] Papoyan A., Badikyan Kh., Syntax of the Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2003, p. 23.
[5] Ishkhanyan R., Syntax of Modern Armenian.
  A simple sentence, Yerevan, 1986, page 51.
[6] Sergei П P., Experience spoken on trial, 3rd edition, Autograph, Tula, 2000, p. 45, 43.
Alexanyan A TONGUAL FEATURE OF LIANAN JUDICIAL SPEECH Keywords: slurred speech, tone of voice, tone of voice, pace of speech, conclusion, defense speech.
