ARMENIAN AND WOMEN'S POLITICAL VERBAL AND NON-COMMUNICATION IN ARMENIAN MEDIA Knowledge in this field is important in any field, because only in that way one can fully express oneself in the relevant field.
In the modern world, various tricks are created in all spheres of society (including politics), ensuring efficiency ընթաց progress.
  This work is based on the study of PR, which has the most important role and significance in the political field, and its possible components are verbal (verbal) and non-verbal (gestures, facial expressions) communication tools.
  There is an opinion according to which it is better to form public opinion than to influence it.
 But in this way, reasonably made PR programs are able to change the public opinion to some extent.
  A person expresses his feelings not only with words, but also with gestures, facial expressions, looks, appearance, distance occupied during communication.
 It has been proven that we get 80% of information about a person through non-verbal means, only 20% in words.
 People often become aware of the fact that their gestures, words and movements contradict each other.
 All this is especially noticeable in the political field, where a huge group of image-makers work with politicians.
 It should be noted that many of these methods are not directly related to today's reality, which necessitates the creation of new strategies to "strictly follow" them. This is what many politicians today do.
The aim of the work is to study the adequacy, image and behavior of verbal-non-verbal communication of RA women politicians.
It is assumed that the appropriateness of verbal և non-verbal communication raises the rating of a given politician, inspiring great faith in his recent activities.
There are two types of communication: verbal (non-verbal) and non-verbal (non-verbal).
  Non-verbal communication is called sign language or body language, in other words, kinetics, when body movements are used instead of or in parallel with speech.
 It is scientifically proven that without body language it is simply impossible to reach a perfect understanding.
 It is an integral part of human communication, written by unwritten laws, ethno-psychological features and secrets [1].
It should be noted that politicians, especially government leaders, are taught by political technologists such non-verbal contacts, with the help of which they look more humane, honest, caring, modest and truthful in the eyes of the society.
 How successful it is is another question.
 In Armenia, with a half-century delay, there is a strong interest in mastering body language.
  Today that snow of communication is experiencing rapid development.
 To know body language well means to understand the other person well, to be calm and self-confident, to feel who can be trusted and who can not, with whom to continue or break ties.
Examining the activities of Armenian women politicians, the women who stood out with their gestures were part of this work. In particular, we referred to Arpine Hovhannisyan, Zaruhi Postanjyan, Shushan Petrosyan, Hranush Hakobyan, analyzing their verbal, non-verbal (kinetic) և habitat (clothing) images.
 The choice is conditioned by the difference between the types of politicians.
  It should be noted that the basis for the analysis was not only the long-term research of the politician pursued by the politician in all its aspects, but also the application of the survey method, combining our point of view with the impressions of the public opinion.
 The polls included the opinions of 200 males aged 18-25, 26-40 և over 41 living in Yerevan.
Arpine Hovhannisyan ․ RA state-political figure, lawyer, NA Deputy Speaker.
 Referring to the politician, it should be noted that for some this open-confident, for others professionally self-disclosing figure, like many others, "betrays" himself through non-verbal signals.
  Examining the interviews, press conferences, speeches of the figure, let's try to analyze his political activity, mostly based on the correspondence of the thoughts and gestures expressed.
Examining Arpine Hovhannisyan's speeches, let's try to separate the typical gestures, giving explanations.
  One of the most commonly used gestures is to periodically adjust the glasses while talking, which is a signal: "I'm following you, I'm very careful" [2].
 From such gestures we can single out the regular correction of the microphone, which, according to psychologists, is a subconscious signal to pay attention to everything he says. aspires to reach the audience [2].
 In almost all of his speeches he speaks with his hands on the podium, which means that the master of the situation's doing what he says.
During the speech, the politician turns his gaze to all the members of the group so that no one feels lack of attention.
  Visual communication allows each person to feel, to notice the reaction of the audience to the words expressed.
 By making a smooth transition from one person to another, the whole group inadvertently finds itself under his control ․ Each member feels that the speaker is speaking for himself.
 This is a very psychological trick, which is brilliantly mastered by Arpine Hovhannisyan.
In the case of this politician, there is always a tendency for the writer to have a handwriting, which implies concreteness, discipline, internal order [3].
 Sometimes the gesture of playing with a ring is noticed ․ It is a sign to focus on such things.
 Contrary to the popular opinion that he is one of the unique political self-confident figures, whose speech is fluent and clearly formulated, in fact it is not the result of self-confidence, but of skillful application of professional knowledge.
  Any question addressed to Hovhannisyan during the speeches ends with additions, which proves the above-mentioned attention.
 In Hovhannisyan's words, professional terms prevail, which can mean two things: full expression of the qualities of the profession, creation of a kind of seriousness, trust.
 He always spices the word with relatives, moreover, both during speeches and interviews.
 This is why the gesture of crossed fingers predominates in him, which, according to the literature, is a sign of hiding something.
In general, in the Armenian reality, especially in politics, there is no art of listening.
  We cannot claim the same in the case of Hovhannisyan, who not only listens to the issue silently, but also shows kindness and patience. This means that he pays great attention to the rules of ethics.
Referring to Arpine Hovhannisyan's habitual image, we can definitely say that she is one of the few women politicians who always looks well-groomed and goes back to her clothes.
  It is obvious that A ․ Hovhannisyan is a lover of color diversity, preferring to wear classic, brightly colored suits, mostly combining with white shirts.
 In business meetings և all speeches are always presented with high heels, and in everyday life, as he mentions, with low heels, although high heels predominate.
  It can be said that Arpine Hovhannisyan is not a fan of trousers, because she can often be seen in skinny skirts, which completely emphasize her figure.
 As for the variety of colors, the latter are preferred by brave people.
  This politician likes to wear jewelry, in particular, necklaces, which may be medium-sized, but immediately stand out due to the bright colors.
 All this speaks again to his brave, self-confident image.
 We can conclude that he does not pay attention to what you say about appearance. He can feel confident and beautiful.
 On the other hand, although he claims that he never follows the fashion trends, the reality proves something completely different.
The next politician we have referred to is Zaruhi Postanjyan, an Armenian politician, former member of the "Heritage" party, now the founder of the "Yerkir Tsirani" party, a deputy of the National Assembly of the 5th convocation.
 Examining the most active female political figure in the National Assembly, we concluded that despite the prominent behavior in the society, the bold and emotional image, Zaruhi Postanjyan is not as "generous" in gestures.
  During his speeches in the National Assembly, he is constantly around, which means that he is interested in opinions about himself, he tries to understand in this way who is interested in his words և և activity. [2]
 The word is mainly unstable, does not inspire confidence, there is skepticism.
  Many people have an irritating voice and accent (we came to the opinions during the survey).
  There is an opinion that when speaking to a large audience you should always speak loudly, but in reality you should not always strive to speak loudly, because it tires the audience quickly.
All you have to do is speak clearly, taking pauses before possible thoughts to make the thought comprehensible.
  When preparing for a public speech, a politician should take into account the most important rule: there should be nothing irritating to his image during the speech, from the dress, the posture to the accent of the voice.
 It is obvious that this politician must work hard to master the skills of self-presentation, because the society creates and breaks all the norms that are necessary for a successful activity.
Postanjyan often uses the gesture of open hands, palm up.
Thus, he expects support and encouragement from the audience, shows the sincerity of the moment and the willingness to say everything.
  He often holds a pen or pencil in his hand, which is a gesture to explain something to the audience. that is, he has a subconscious desire to control and control the audience.
It is often noticed that the closed position of the hands is a cross of the fingers, which is a sign of hiding something from the surroundings until it is not opened to the end [2].
 Postanjyan also actively participates in meetings with journalists, showing readiness to answer questions.
Watching a number of press conferences, we noticed that he always turns his eyes to the right when answering the question ․ This proves that he has a visual memory.
 Psychologists distinguish three types of human perception: visual (visual), auditory (auditory) and kinetic (sensory).
  The visuals are guided by staying true to what they have seen.
Examining Zaruhi Postanjyan's habitual image, we can say that she wears brightly colored suits like Arpine Hovhannisyan ․ This testifies to the activism and activity of the figure.
 In one of the interviews, Postanjyan said that the most difficult task for him is to ensure a proper appearance, adding that a woman should always look good.
 But despite the great desire to look presentable, Postanjyan often does not pay attention to appearance.
 F ․ Postanjyan also prefers white colors (they are predominant especially in the latter's daily life).
  In contrast to Arpine Hovhannisyan, low heels almost always occupy a significant place in the wardrobe.
The next politician we referred to is Hranush Hakobyan, the former RA Minister of Diaspora.
 Studying Hakobyan's speeches, interviews and press conferences, let's try to present the analysis of his gestures, referring in parallel not only to the kinetic, but also to the habitat.
 Like the above-mentioned politicians, Hranush Hakobyan's speech is characterized by the gestures of putting their hands on the podium, opening their palms wide, these are attributes of the desire to rule, to hold everything in their hands, to control [3].
 Let's separate the gesture of regularly touching the microphone, which indicates a desire to make the word audible, in other words, he is afraid that the word will not reach the audience.
 We notice the same with Arpine Hovhannisyan [2].
  At the same time, we must mention the circumstance of looking here and there, which again speaks of demanding attention from the audience.
Besides, he has a constant search for words, he is in a restless state.
The minister stands out with his fingers crossed, which means closure.
 The gesture of putting hands together is a sign of closedness, therefore, we can say that Hranush Hakobyan is a kind of closed person.
Referring to Hranush Hakobyan's habitual image, we should mention that the minister always speaks in a classical style, in accordance with his age.
The clothes are mainly dominated by classic blue, white-red colors.
It is almost impossible to see the minister in business or everyday meetings in pants or loose clothes, he always has a presentable appearance, although he is not fond of innovations.
 She mainly presents herself to the public in high heels, which, according to psychologists, is an important attribute for a woman's gait, because they are the ones that give her femininity.
One can recall that politician Hranush Hakobyan does everything to stay in the image of a woman, to break the stereotype of her more or less "masculinity".
 The politician is modest in the matter of makeup, he does not like conspicuous jewelry.
 He can always be seen with a watch, which means that he is punctual, retrospective, evaluates time.
  All jewelry (mainly rings) is on the left hand, which allows one to claim that one is not greedy և does not do anything for appearance, because, according to psychologists, a person expresses his sincere gestures on the left side of the body.
  Can be found with medium or small earrings.
  There are many pearls, which are a symbol of femininity.
 The business card of Hranush Hakobyan's habitual image has become the jewelry, which she always wears in accordance with her clothes.
The next politician we have referred to is RA Honored Artist, National Assembly deputy Shushan Petrosyan.
 When Shushan Petrosyan speaks, one can mainly see the right hand leaning on the podium, which allows one to conclude that she creates an image, because according to the literature, only the left part of the body shows real emotions, the right one expresses what a person wants to show. to put
During the speeches of the National Assembly, the word gets vague formulations, which either speaks about not knowing enough about the sphere or having a poor vocabulary.
 He always preaches the Armenian word, but by his example refrains from it [4].
  Shushan Petrosyan can often be met with her shoulders raised.
  This gesture is a sign of tension, lies, helplessness, suspicion, disbelief, and crossed arms speak of protection from an orphan, isolation or concealment of a lie.
  It is frequent to meet speeches during which he turns his eyes to the left, which is again a precedent of lies.
Shushan Petrosyan stands out with a gesture of raising her eyebrows, which means surprise.
 This politician can often be met with a hand on his arm, which means that he is bored.
Referring to Shushan Petrosyan's habitual image, we should mention that unlike other politicians, who more or less follow the tendencies of innovation, trying to look appropriate, classic and classic in their position, Petrosyan wears what suits him, giving preference mainly to free ազատ quiet clothes.
  Psychologists believe that wearing sportswear is the best "easy way" to give the impression of a successful person.
  Although we often see details in this color, in any case, it should be noted that this is a love of color and not a way to hide the flaws of appearance, as you can often meet Shushan Petrosyan in brightly colored clothes.
 The latter is also a fan of shades of blue.
 Blue, by the way, is considered the best shade of solidity, classicism և official image [2].
Shushan Petrosyan stands out with too much jewelry.
 I like scarves and scarves of different colors that emphasize the image.
 He wears watches, likes hanging earrings.
 He is restrained in the matter of make-up. In everyday life she prefers simple make-up, she does not stand out at all.
 During interviews, he is rarely seen with red lipstick, which tries to emphasize his self-confident image.
We mostly see him in low heels, rarely in high heels.
  He mainly wears either a long dress or a combination of a skirt and a shirt.
Thus, according to the results of our survey, people consider Arpine Hovhannisyan's political-political activity to be influential among the above-mentioned four women figures - 41.7%, Zaruhi Postanjyan - 35-8%, Hranush Hakobyan - 5.9%, Shushan Petrosyan - 1.1%.
 15-5% think that no one is influential.
Referring to the image of politicians, let us mention that the majority of people, 80%, prefer Arpine Hovhannisyan, 5% - Zaruhi Postanjyan, 4% - Hranush Hakobyan, 2-6% - Shushan Petrosyan.
According to 8․4% of the respondents, the image of none of the mentioned is positive.
5% of the respondents (69 people) consider Arpine Hovhannisyan's word more educated.
Referring to the issue of verbal-non-verbal communication of women politicians, it should be noted that according to 33% of people, Arpine Hovhannisyan's verbal speech corresponds to non-verbal (according to 22․3% - Zaruhi Postanjyan, 8-6% - Hranush Hakobyan, 2% - Shushan Petrosyan).
34․1%, that is, in the opinion of the majority, none of the above can correctly combine the word verbal or non-verbal.
According to the results of our research, the most successful politician Arpine Hovhannisyan is the one who is able to follow the adequacy of her image, both verbal and non-verbal communication.
 Moreover, yes, it lags behind the general attitude, which ensures his influential self-presentation as a politician.
 This means that regardless of the work of image makers, Arpine Hovhannisyan has the necessary knowledge to show a posture appropriate to a politician. He is able to control gestures and facial expressions, forming a serious image.
 As for Shushan Petrosyan, it should be noted that the public attitude towards her as a singer was more positive than as a politician, as she has neither an image posture appropriate to a politician, nor sufficient knowledge in the political sphere.
 That is why the public attitude is too negative with Shushan Petrosyan-political figure.
  This science, indeed, has a special place in the political field, in particular, in self-presentation.
  Politicians spend huge sums of money to get the right advice from image makers ունենալ to have an influential image.
  By studying Arpine Hovhannisyan, Zaruhi Postanjyan, Shushan Petrosyan և Hranush Hakobyan, we got acquainted with four different images, different types, each of which said in an influential way, "A person is accepted with clothes, with intelligence he lets go."
People start to appreciate the interlocutor before he speaks, so it is easy to gain the interlocutor's trust by mastering non-verbal means that can only tell us about the positive.
 We tried to reflect on the most common gestures that experts have been able to decipher, the universal signs that our elected politicians have used to express their emotions and feelings.
  Many gestures are left "behind the scenes".
 The reason is that even in case of great desire we can not study all the details and details of non-verbal communication, summarizing in one article.
LITERATURE [4] "Listen, puppy, I will take your eyes off" ․ Shushan Petrosyan, 11-06-2016, 13.
51, URL.
 http:
//armtimes.com/en/article/77285 (link made: 25-09-2018). Osipyan Liliana ARMENIAN WOMEN POLITICIANS VERBAL AND NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATIONS IN ARMENIAN MEDIA Keywords: non-verbal image, verbal image, kinetic image, gestures, politician.
