THE PROBLEM OF LIMITATION OF ACQUISITION The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia contains articles on the grounds for the acquisition of property rights, one of which, provided for in Article 187, is the statute of limitations.
  According to Article 187, Clause 1 of the Civil Code, a citizen or a legal entity who does not own real estate, but during ten years, in good faith, openly or continuously owns his own property, acquires the right of ownership over that property (statute of limitations). .
Next we will discuss the following issues: 1. who may be holders of property rights prior to acquisition.2. to which the above-mentioned article applies to the real estate belonging to the subjects.3. why only the article applies to real estate.4. or when the ten years in the article start counting.5. what constitute honest, open, continuous notions.
 As a result of a detailed study of the article, it becomes clear that the right of ownership over real estate can arise for both citizens and legal entities.
 The article does not mention whether the state or the community can be subjects of property rights by virtue of the statute of limitations.
 But as we know, in the relations regulated by the civil legislation և other legal acts of the Republic of Armenia և communities, the norms defining the participation of legal entities are applied, unless otherwise arises from the law or the peculiarities of the given entities1.
  Therefore, the state և community can be considered a subject of the mentioned legal relationship, although the article does not mention that, which is the omission of the legislator.
1 See RA Civil Code Article 128.
It is unclear whether the article applies to state-owned or community-owned real estate.
City. Article 187 of the Code does not provide for any exception for the acquisition of state-owned property owned by the state or community by other entities.
  Meanwhile, the RA Land Code, ignoring the civil settlement of the issue, established a settlement that does not correspond to the traditional notions of the emergence of property rights to state պետության community lands2.
The Land Code of the Republic of Armenia not only mentions the right of expropriation by the statute of limitations, but also the emergence of the right of use by the statute of limitations.
  Citizens in accordance with the Land Code - legal entities who have been using the lands of the state or community for more than ten years, openly, in good faith, but without legal exercise of their rights, have the right to acquire land plots with the right of ownership, if it is not prohibited. or, if they are sold or transferred free of charge for the same purpose, if the land plots meet the requirements set forth in Article 64 (2) of this Code3.
As we can see, the relevant article of the Land Code envisages the possibility of pre-emptive right to acquire lands from the lands of the state պետ by virtue of the acquisition of community lands, rather than the emergence of the right of ownership, contradicting the RA Civil և Land Codes.
  The uncertainty in the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, related to the circle of entities that own real estate (land, land), gives grounds to suppose that the following applies to the state-owned real estate belonging to the community. Article 187 of the Code.
 However, it is clear from point 2 of Article 72 of the RA Land Code that the ownership of the land belonging to the state և community can not arise due to the acquisition of the statute of limitations, which leads to a misinterpretation of the articles by the court.
2 See T. Barseghyan, RA Civil Law Textbook, Part 1, Yerevan, 2014, p. 304.
3 See RA Land Code, Article 72, Clause 2.
Avan և The Court of First Instance of Nor Nork communities, by its decision made on 09.03.2007, based on the city. Article 187 of the Code upheld the citizen's claim for recognition of the ownership of real estate belonging to the community, and the Court of Cassation rejected it, considering the court's conclusion on the application of that article unfounded.
  The reasoning of the Court of Cassation is based on civil. Part 4 of Article 1 of the Code, according to which the relations of family, work, use of natural resources և environment protection are regulated by civil legislation և other legal acts, unless otherwise provided by family, work, land, environment բն other special by legislation.
 Pursuant to Part 4 of Article 1 of the Land Code of the Republic of Armenia, the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia is applied to land relations with regard to lands in accordance with the provisions of this Code4.
Therefore, the city. Article 187 of the Code does not apply to land belonging to the state ։Community.
In foreign countries, the issue of applying the statute of limitations for the acquisition of state and community property is regulated in different ways.
  For example, the statute of limitations on acquisitions in Quebec does not apply to state or community property.
 Exceptions are cases when the property belonging to the state or the community has passed to the latter as inheritance or ownerless property5.
Now let's turn to the question why the article does not apply to real estate.
 The same article envisages the emergence of property rights to movable property by virtue of the statute of limitations.
  In Quebec, this institution applies to both real estate and movable property.
  There is a 3-year term for movable and 10-year term for real estate.
 And the de facto possessor can confirm the property right only in court.
6 According to the Italian Civil Code, the statute of limitations for acquisition applies to 'movable' and 'real estate'.
  The statute of limitations for acquisition is set at 3-20 years, depending on 4 See RA Court of Cassation No. 3-1835 A 12.12. . the decision.
5 See Civil and Tariff Law on Cruelty of Vasilyev E. S., Komarov A. S., Moscow, 2004, 1 volume, p. 224.
6 See Civil and Tariff Law on Cruelty of Vasilyev E. S., Komarov A. S., Moscow, 2004, 1 volume, p. 224.
depending on whether the property is movable or immovable, and in the case of movable property, depending on whether the possessor is conscientious or not.
  And in Germany այում in Switzerland the institution of antiquity acquisition applies only to movable property.
  The required term is 5 և 10 years in a row.
In case of expiration of these terms, the bona fide owner is recognized as the owner of the property.
 The same principles apply under Dutch law7.
The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, as we see, regulates Article 187 only for real estate.
 And the acquisition of movable property by the power of possession is regulated by another article.
  This issue is regulated by Article 275 of the RA Civil Code.
  First, it follows from the regulation of the article that it applies to real estate, while such regulation is inadmissible for real estate, as the rights to it must be registered with the state body.
  At the same time, there is a contradiction with Article 187 of the RA Civil Code8.
According to Article 275, Clause 1 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, if the property was acquired by compensation from a person who did not have the right to alienate the property, about whom the acquirer did not know (could not know) in the event that the owner of the property has lost the arbitrary person to whom the owner of the property has handed it over, or stolen it from one or the other, or has left their possession in another way, regardless of their will.
 Therefore, the Civil Code provides for a separate regulation of movable property.
The next questions concern the possibilities of mastery: time, honest, continuous, explicit; Let's try to find the explanations of these elements in unity; different countries have different terms for acquiring property rights by force of acquisition.
  Under UK law, this institution only applies to real estate, with a 12-year tenure 9.
7 See ibid., P. 225.
8 See Concept of Housing Reform of the RA Civil Code on 21.11.2014.
9 See Civil law of capitalist governments E. А. Vasilyev, Moscow, 1993, p. 224.
Possession by RA legislation is 10 years.
 But the following questions arise from the RA legislative formulation: 1. exactly when should the 10 year period be considered to have started.2. Can possession be interrupted?
3. The good faith of the possession may be intermittent (for example, dishonesty will be revealed during the possession). the simultaneous existence of a number of requisites is necessary.
 In particular, they are: 1. Possession must be honest.
  The integrity of the possession is assessed when the property is transferred to the actual possession of the person.
The property must be transferred to the de facto possession of the person without any violence.
 The owner must have the conviction that he is acquiring the property on legal grounds.
  Possession must be based on a fact which may give the possessor sufficient grounds to assume that he will possess that property as property.
2. The de facto possessor must own the property as his own, that is, the de facto possessor of the property must participate in the management of the property, take care of its preservation, as in the case of his property.
 The person must own the property as his own in relations with third parties.
3. Possession must be ten years in a row.
  That is, the possession of property should not be interrupted for 10 years.
 Possession can be interrupted either by the will of the possessor, when he renounces further possession of the property (the property falls out of his possession), or by the actions of the property owner or other persons, which are aimed at returning the property.
4. Possession must be public, ie the actual possessor must not possess the property in secret from third parties10.
In the US state of Louisiana, there are four elements to acquiring property in this way: 1. Possession must be in good faith.2. The transfer of ownership must be certified by a document.10 See RA Court of Cassation No. LD / 1832/02/08 2011.
3. The fixed period provided by law must be observed.4. There should be an object on which antiquity applies.11 In Louisiana, the Civil Code provides for the notion of conscientious objectors. "The person must be sure that he is the owner of the relevant property, but in reality that property is not his…" 12.
In another case, the Court of Cassation noted that the origins of good faith, like other conditions, are exercised at the time of actual possession of the property.
  However, the Court of Cassation found that in some cases, good faith may not coincide chronologically with the actual transfer of ownership of the property.
 In other words, at the moment of transferring the actual possession of the property, the acquirer may lack the good faith ել to arise later.
  In such cases, the existence of the statute of limitations must be ruled out.
  The Court of Cassation responded that in such cases the flow of the ten-year calculation period starts not from the moment of passing to the actual possession of the property, but from the moment of becoming conscientious during the possession.
  The latter, in essence, means that the property has passed into the possession of the person from that moment; at the time of the transfer, the person was honest 13.
As we can see, the Court of Cassation regulates only the issues of 10 years of continuity սկզբ the beginning of the calculation.
  But the question arises whether this regulation extends to the continuity of good faith.
A different approach to this issue has been shown by the French legislation, which states that the institution of statute of limitations is applied to real estate.
  The statute of limitations is set at 30 years from the moment of actual possession, during which the possessor, even showing dishonesty, is not obliged to present the grounds for possession of the property and becomes the owner of that property.
 If the person, being a bona fide possessor, wants to register the right of ownership, in this case, depending on the place of residence of the real owner (in relation to the given real estate), there are short statutes of limitation - 10 և 20 years.
  French law presupposes the presumption of good faith of the possessor ական the debtor's conscientious objector 11 See The Ten-Year Acquisitive Prescription of Immovables, Len Kilgor Volume 36 | Number 4Summer, 1976.
12 See Louisiana Civil Code Article 3451.
13 See RA Cassation Court No. ARAD / 0084/02/12, 05.04.2013.
It falls on the person who disputes the good faith.
 The application of this institution in the case of movable property has its peculiarities.
The statute of limitations for acquisition of movable property applies only when the person possesses the property in good faith.
  The bona fide owner becomes the owner of the property after the expiration of 3 years.
 This is the period during which the property owner has the right to file a claim with the court to return his property14.
The legislator should try to avoid legislative uncertainties.
  Trying to interpret part 1 of Article 187 as much as possible, we come to the conclusion that first of all the state should specifically mention the state-community as subjects of this legal relationship, secondly mention the non-distribution of the state-owned land plot, thirdly clarify ten years about the existence of honest possession բաց the absence of dishonesty.
Grigoryan Seda THE PROBLEM OF EARLY ACHIEVEMENT IN RA Keywords: age of acquisition. real estate, property right, honest, open, continuous, possess Summary.
