THE "LITTLE PRINCE" OF ANTHONY DE ST EXUPERIE AS A PHILOSOPHICAL FAIRY TALE The French pilot who dreamed of conquering heights, who was always moving forward, often looked at every child. "Childhood is a huge paradise, from where everyone comes.
  Where are you from?
 "I was born from my childhood," says Exupery1.
 Antoine was not one of the brilliant students of the school, he did not stand out in anything.
 There was no sign of the future writer's talent.
 But since childhood he had a bright imagination. The role of his mother was great in that case.
 He often told Antoine fairy tales, the allegorical images of which inflamed the child's imagination.
 Paula, the first educator of children, used to tell stories.
  And the little boy's talent was expressed not only by writing poems, but also by painting.
 In his notebook, along with poems, he drew engines that would later shake the world.
 And the love for painting continues to accompany the established pilot.
Exupery is a pilot by profession, but in addition to being an accomplished pilot, he is also an accomplished writer whose key to world fame was his famous work The Little Prince.
The tale "The Little Prince" was written by Exupery in 1942, at the end of his life, when he lived in New York, and was published a year later, in 1943.
  1935 played a big role in the creation of the fairy tale. The accident that took place on December 29.
 Exupery was trying to set a record with the S. 630 aircraft flying from Paris to Saigon, but in the Sahara he crashed, he and his mechanic were saved from thirst on January 1 thanks to the Bedouins.
 The 7 days in the Sahara had a great influence on the writer, և it is expressed in this tale.
"The Little Prince" belongs to the group of fairy-tales created by the author, in the study of which the main emphasis should be placed on the philosophical side.
The main hero of the fairy tale is the Prince.
 He is an imaginary character, but with his thoughts and feelings he is similar to the author, we can assume that the Prince is a reflection of the author's character, thoughts, somewhere, he's life.
  He sums up Exupery's message to humanity, as he reveals the rich philosophical layers of this tale, which are summed up in a simple plot of "finely chosen simple words."
"Please, children, forgive me for dedicating this book to an adult.
 I have to justify myself, that adult is my best friend.
 Besides, he understands everything in the world, even children's books.
 And finally, he lives in France, and there is now famine and frost.
 And he is in great need of comfort.
 If all this does not justify me, I will give this book to the boy who once looked like my adult friend.
 After all, all adults have been children before, only a few of them remember that.
 So I'm correcting Leon Verti in my dedication when he was a little boy. ”4 excuses Exupery by opening the brackets to some extent.
 It may seem like an adventurous fairy tale to little ones, but they will understand it over the years or when they read it again in adulthood, but adults will learn a lot from this story. 3 Ibid., P.
4 Antoine de Saint-Exupery, The Little Prince, Yerevan, 1985, p. 1.
They have something և they need more, like Exupery's older friend Verti (we will be convinced of this question many times in the future).
In his fairy tale, Exupery addresses one of the most pressing issues to date, the issue of increasingly freezing human relationships, which leads to destruction.
  "Adults love numbers very much.
  When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask about the most important thing.
 They will never say. "And what kind of voice does he have?"
 What kind of games does he like to play?
 Does it catch butterflies or not? ”
 They ask. "How old is she.
 How many brothers does he have?
 How much is the weight?
 How much does his father earn? ”
 And after that they wish they knew the man1.
  People are no longer interested in the most important qualities that make a person human.
  This idea pervades the reader from the beginning to the end of the story;
 The prince begins to miss the proud Vardin, his monotonous days full of tears, and the reader begins to feel sorry for him, to some extent discovering himself, the Prince living inside him.
Exupery has made each of his heroes a bearer of an idea, և one hero with his thoughts, judgments helps to discover the other, և all together complete the philosophical chain of the fairy tale, which is rich in circles that raise various questions.
 Thus, the Fox reveals the seemingly arrogant image of Vard, from which the Prince was offended and tired.
 Vard was the queen of the planet Prince, who had a real prototype.
 Exupery was in love with a girl named Louise, who was indifferent to him.
 There was a storm in the soul of the young man, full of strong emotions.
 He often felt lonely and unhappy.
 He once wrote to his mother: “I urge my wife to calm down my inner conflicts and anxieties.
That's why I need a wife.
  It is very difficult to be alone at a young age, mom.
You consider your young life to be useless. ”
2 He could not find himself, he was looking for "his own planet."
 However, his lack of love is complemented by his future wife, Consuelo, who became Vard's prototype.
  Consuelo was also self-confident and self-contained, he liked to be the center of attention, he wanted his husband to admire him all the time, he forgave a little indifference, he often got upset and left home.
 This character completes Exupery very well in his tale, և as the Prince loves և he serves his Vard, so Exupery serves Consuelo.
As mentioned above, the prince's prototype looks like Exupery, and Vard's prototype is Consuelo.
  And so we can assume that the basis of the Rose-Prince relationship is the Exupery-Consuelo relationship.
  Exupery completed the relationship between him and his wife in a Rose-Prince relationship, reflected the atmosphere between them, expressed his love and care for his rose, Consuelo.
The only friend of the prince on his planet was Vard, whose seed had fallen from space, he had convinced the Prince that he was the only one in the whole universe.
 The prince took care of him every day, protecting him from winds and insects.
 Only thanks to Vard does the Prince understand one of the possible conditions of life. To succeed, to achieve perfection, one must patiently go through all the difficulties և ignore the inconveniences, one must tolerate some larvae to see butterflies.
When the Prince sees thousands of roses on Earth, he says: "No matter how angry he was, if you watched this scene ... he would really die. if only it would humiliate me ... And I thought I was the only owner of a flower in the world, like no one else, while it was the most ordinary flower.
 I only had a simple rose ... ”3.
 But after talking to the fox, the Prince's opinion about Rose changes.
 The prince understands how much he loves and misses his Rose, his Princess.
 Thanks to the fox, the Prince understands what he has, begins to appreciate the beautiful.
 The fox teaches him the art of loving.
 And the Prince says to the roses. "You are beautiful, but empty," he continues, "no one wants to die for you."
 Of course, a passer-by, looking at my rose, will say that he is exactly like you.
 But to me alone he is more precious than all of you. ”4
 And the Prince begins to think about his return.
2 "Hraparak", February 8, 2013, Yerevan.
3 Antoine de Saint-Exupery, p. 41.
4 Ibid., P.
The fox is the most powerful link in Exupéry philosophy.
  The prince knows the most important thing about life, human relations, love, even about himself from the Fox.
 The fox is the most meaningful, multi-faceted character in this tale.
  He makes original analyzes և He opens the curtain of profound life before the Prince, which was so foreign to the Prince.
The prince is learning to see the most important. "Only the heart is sharp.
  The most important thing is not to look me in the eye. ”1
The fox teaches the Prince to love and wait. what the Prince had never felt, or perhaps felt at dawn, waiting for the larvae to become butterflies, for the opening of his Rose.
 He learned to distinguish thousands of footsteps from the footsteps of a loved one, which will be accompanied by a heartbeat.
In the words of the fox, there is also the idea of ​​the monotony of life, the struggle for existence. "I hunt chickens, and people hunt me."
 Regardless of the existence of the Prince, regardless of his childish sincerity, life continues in its natural course. Animals survive by eating each other, and humans continue to brutally kill animals.
 And the Fox is surprised that the Prince is looking for friends.
 He is surprised by the naivety of the Prince. Why is the notion of a friend long forgotten?
A branch of Exuperian philosophy is the Serpent, whose philosophy is somewhat close to the philosophy of the biblical serpent.
 The Biblical serpent is the transfigured Satan who, by giving Eve the fruit of the tree of life, condemns him, Adam, and all mankind to death.
 And in the fairy tale of Exupery, the Serpent bites the Prince and returns him to space, his planet, immortality.
 In both cases the Serpent becomes a bridge between life and death, only Adam and Eve walk on that bridge to death, and the Prince to immortality.
As mentioned above, Exupery's accident in 1935 և և 7 days in the Sahara was significant in creating the fairy tale.
 This is why in the fairy tale the writer dedicates a separate passage to the philosophy of water, showing its importance in human life.
 Water is the symbol of life, the source of all living things, one of the four basic elements of the Earth.
  The prince is convinced that people can find what they are looking for in a sip of water.
  In other words, water is the symbol of life, it sums up the meaning of life. "If I had fifty-three minutes, I would just go to the spring to drink water ..." 3.
  In these lines, Exupery summarizes the mental feelings of a man in the desert, the longing he felt for days before he was saved.
Exupery ends his philosophical tale with a nostalgic summary of the idea of ​​death, loss.
 In the end, everyone comes to terms with that thought and is comforted by memories and recollections.
"And when you are comforted (after all, everyone is comforted), you will be glad to know me when."
 You will always be my friend… ”4.
According to Exupery, death is a perfection that everyone achieves in the end.
 And this thought is summed up in the following words of the Prince. "You know, when you are very sad, it is good to see the end of the day."
  The ultimate light leads to perfection, constant self-purification.
  After all, he dies at the end of the day and is born again.
 And the prince needed that perfection, to find himself, to mature and to know himself, which he achieved due to traveling to different planets.
  And finally his features were completed on Earth.
  But it is clear that on other planets mainly the Prince revealed the shortcomings and mistakes of the inhabitants of the Earth, only in the Earth he began to know the good, the sincere, he revealed the secret of true happiness.
1 Antoine de Saint-Exupery, p. 45.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P. 56.
Anahit VardanyanANTOUAN DE SENT EXUPERI "THE LITTLE PRINCE" AS A PHILOSOPHICAL TALE Keywords: Little prince, philosophical fairy tale, Snake, meaning of life, perception of beauty, saltiness
