PAMBAK RIVER QUALITY WATER DYNAMICS 2014-2017 Surface water pollution is a global environmental issue, which is closely linked to population growth, intensive development of industry and economy.
Water is the only natural resource that relates to all stages of human development, sectors (the three major water use sectors - industry, agriculture - household), but the amount of clean water on earth is gradually declining [2].
  One of the main reasons for the scarcity of water is its dangerous pollution.
 Drinking water on earth is polluted for various reasons.
 Moreover, people have not yet learned to use water properly.
Surface water quality assessment is necessary to determine the suitability of self-cleaning of rivers, lakes, reservoirs, as well as sectoral water use (fisheries, irrigation, recreation, etc.), where the limits of changes in hydrobiological and hydrochemical parameters are required.
Armenia is one of the least water-rich countries in the world.
  In Vanadzor, water resources are not only unequally distributed, but the use of water resources in agriculture and industry is unequally realized [1].
Purpose of the work և problems.
 Find out through analysis 20142017. The dynamics of the qualitative change of the water of the Pambak River during
 The basis for the implementation of the work was 2014-2017. Data of the "Environmental Impact Monitoring Center" SNCO of the RA Ministry of Nature Protection.
Workflow և analysis.
  Pambak River (main tributary of Debed) is one of the water-rich rivers of Lori region, the length of which is 84 km, and the catchment area is 1370 km2.
  The Pambak River originates from the springs located at an altitude of 2100 m above sea level in the junction of Shirak and Pambak mountain ranges.
There are a number of factories, buildings, restaurants and houses near the Pambak River.
  In the vicinity of the Pambak River flowing through the city of Vanadzor are the thermal power plant, the silk plant, the Vanadzor chemical plant (once producing about 15,000 tons of carbide, 30,000 tons of artificial corundum (about 400 tons of melamine), the production of Vanadzor chemical fiber plant acetate tapes), the state institute for the production of polymer adhesives, which are not currently operating.
  In the vicinity of the river there is currently a stone processing plant (there are also cottages, the sewage of which is discharged directly into the river), a former sewage treatment plant in the city (currently only mechanical sewage treatment is carried out; whose waste is dumped into the Pambak River or the surrounding area, polluting it.
 The waters rich in heavy metals from the poisonous area of ​​Vanadzor chemical plant also fall into the Pambak ground, which have a great impact on the quality of the river water, change the water microflora, and cause the deterioration of the sanitary and hygienic condition of the city.
  The agricultural factor, especially cattle breeding, also plays a role here.
 The household garbage of the communities, some part of the manure, the rotten remains of plants, the carcasses of animals (dogs, cats, etc.) are dumped into the river.
According to the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia "On determining the water quality assurance norms of each watershed management area depending on the specifics of the area" (Decision N 75_N of January 27, 2011), the surface water quality assessment system in the Republic of Armenia distinguishes five status classes for each chemical water indicator: "(1st grade)," good "(2nd grade)," average "(3rd grade)," unsatisfactory "(4th grade) և" bad "(5th grade).
 The general assessment of the chemical quality of water is formed by the class of the indicator showing the worst quality.
 If different surface water quality indicators fall into different quality classes, the worst-case classification takes into account the worst.
 For example, if one indicator of water quality indicates 'unsatisfactory' (Class 4) status and the rest indicates better status, that water is classified as 'unsatisfactory' (Class 4) status [3].
According to the Ministry of Nature Protection, the observation points selected for the assessment of surface water quality in Lori region are: observation point 10.5 km above Harta village, observation point 2-0.5 km. Below Spitak ", observation point 30.6 km. Above Vanadzor, observation point 4-4.5 km. Inside Vanadzor!
As a result of the analysis, it was found out that the waters of the Pambak River belong to the 3rd, 4th and 5th class pollution.
 The data are presented in Figures 1-5.
Figure 1. Pambak river water quality dynamics in 2014. The chemical quality of the water of the Pambak River upstream, at checkpoint 1 (above Hartagyugh), is of "good" quality (2nd grade), at checkpoint 2 (below the town of Spitak) - "unsatisfactory" (4th grade). ) Due to nitrate ion, in point 3 (in the part above Vanadzor city) - "moderate" (3rd class) - due to nitrate ion, in point 4 (in the part below Vanadzor city) - "bad" (5th class) due to the content of ammonium և phosphate ions [5].
Figure 2. Pambak River water quality dynamics in 2015. The chemical quality of the water of the Pambak River in the upper course of the river, at observation point 1 (above Hartagyugh), is "good" (2nd class), at observation point 2 (below Spitak) և 3 (above Vanadzor): " mediocre "(3rd grade). in observation point 2 (below Spitak town) conditioned with nitrate ion և total inorganic nitrogen (AAA), in observation point 3 (above Vanadzor city) conditioned with nitrate ion.
The chemical quality of the water of the Pambak River in point 4 (in the part below Vanadzor) is "poor" (5th grade) due to the ammonium ion [4].
Figure 3. Qualitative dynamics of Pambak River water in 2016. The water of Pambak River in 2016 is of “good” quality at checkpoint 1 (above Hartagyugh) (2nd grade), at checkpoint 2 (below Spitak town): Insufficient "(4th class) due to nitrate ion, in observation point 3 (above Vanadzor city) -" moderate "(3rd class) due to nitrate ion, with total inorganic nitrogen-dependent particles, in observation point 4 (Vanadzor below the city) - "bad" (5th grade) due to ammonium ion [3].
Figure 4. Qualitative dynamics of Pambak River water in 2017. Pambak River water in 2017 at point 1 (above Hartagyugh), at point 2 (below Spitak քաղաք) և at point 3 (above Vanadzor և) "moderate" quality (3rd grade) due to vanadium, iron, nitrate ions, in observation point 4 (below Vanadzor)) is of "poor" quality (5th grade) due mainly to nitrite, nitrate-ammonium ions [6 ].
Figure 5. Dynamics of Pambak River water quality in 2014-2017. It can be seen from the chart that water quality in 2014-2017 ․ During the year it was rated as "good" only at observation point 1 (0.5 km above Hartagyugh), "average" quality mainly at observation point 3 (0.6 km above Vanadzor), "insufficient" quality mainly at observation point 2 (0.5 km below Spitak և), and in "poor" quality observation point 4 (4.5 km below Vanadzor և).
 Moreover, no positive dynamics of water quality was registered.
 "Insufficient" և "bad" qualities of water are conditioned by the excess amount of nitrate, nitrite, ammonium ions և AAA.
Both ammonium and nitrite ions are indicators of organic pollution.
 That is, the pollution takes place in the whole territory of the city, due to which the waters of the Pambak River, despite the great potential of self-purification, do not manage to purify the Oxygen regime.
The presence of ammonium ions is due to the biochemical processes of degradation of proteins from organic matter, where amino acids are used.
  Annual fluctuations in the amount of ammonium ions to one degree or another characterize the degree of water pollution.
 (NH4) + may be present in both organic matter, proteins and inorganic NH4NO3 (ammonia saltpeter).
 The latter is used in agriculture as a fertilizer for fertilizing crops, from where it flows into rivers through running water.
The large number of AAA again indicates that in the urban area, in rural communities (Vanadzor, Darpas, Lernapat, etc.) the rivers are subjected to organic-inorganic pollution, the source of which is household flows և agricultural waste.
Scientific data on human genetics confirm that various chemicals present in the water, penetrating the human body through the food chain as mutagens, cause a number of diseases.
  Some of these diseases are inherited from generation to generation.
The socio-economic activity of the population in Vanadzor has a very negative impact on the water quality of the Pambak River, which can hinder the sectoral water use opportunities of the river.
It can be concluded that in 2014-2017. No water quality dynamics of the Pambak River has been registered during the year, the main reason of which is the incorrect observance of urban sanitary conditions.
 In order to reduce the degree of water pollution of the Pambak River, as well as to improve the sanitary and hygienic conditions of the surrounding communities of the city, I propose to take comprehensive measures to reduce the direct inflow of household waste and sewage into the rivers.
LITERATURE [1] Zalinyan S. A., “The Impact of Economic Activity on the Quality of the Waters of the Pambak River.
 Dissertation ", Yerevan, 2013, 139 pages.
[2] Khachikyan T. G., "Characteristics of the phytoplanktoniard of the rivers of the Lake Sana basin.
 Abstract ", Yerevan, 2013, 25 pages.
[3] Reference on the results of the environmental monitoring of the RA environment, ARMECOMMONITING (Environmental Impact Monitoring Center), EIMC N 17-1 / 16, Annual 2016, http.
//www.mnp.am//images/files/nyuter/2017/February/axtot_djur_tar2016.pdf done: 14-02-2018).
[4] Reference on the results of the ecological monitoring of the RA environment, ARMECOMMONITING (Environmental Impact Monitoring Center), http.
//www.mnp.am//images/files/nyuter/2016/January/2.2.2_axtot_djur_tar2015.pdf (link made: 13-01-2018).
[5] RA Ministry of Environment, Water Resources, http.
//www.mnp.am/en/pages/189 (link made: 29-10-2018).
[6] Reference on the results of environmental monitoring in the Republic of Armenia, Environmental Impact Monitoring Center, EIMC N (link 2017, http.
//www.mnp.am/uploads/1/1521046228Annual-17.pdf18-1/17, Annual (link made: 19-08-2018).
http:
//www.mynews.am/en/content/%D5%BB%D5%B8%D6%82%D6%80%D5%A8%D5%AF%D5%B5%D5%A1%D5%B6%D6 % 84-% D5% A7 (link made on 14.02.2018).
Nelli Muradyan PAMBAK RIVER QUALITY QUALITY DYNAMICS 2014-2017 Keywords: water quality, household waste, permissible limits, water pollution.
