THE DEVELOPMENT OF MUSEUM TOURISM IN ARMENIA Museum tourism is not a traditional direction of tourism.
 It is one of the cultural-cognitive tourism destinations, including visits to museums, objects of historical and cultural value.
  Taking into account the growth and dynamics of tourism in Armenia, it was predictable that the museums of Armenia would be involved in this process, becoming a way of presenting the country's culture, arts and crafts, why not also a traditional economy.
In order to understand the function of the museum, how it is involved in tourism, how museum tourism can become a separate direction of tourism, և, finally, what are the preconditions and perspectives for the development of the field, it is necessary to study the "museum" phenomenon in detail.
According to the RA Law on Museums և RA Museum Fund [7], a museum (gallery, geological museum, house-museum, Matenadaran, treasury, reserve museum, monument-museum, etc.) is a cultural organization with a collection of regulated museum objects Preservation-appropriate buildings for the organization of exhibitions or outdoor exhibition opportunities, carries out research activities, is called to serve the public և to promote its development, is accessible to the public և performs other functions.
 A brief overview of the history of museum development in Armenia can be used for a comprehensive study of museum tourism.
 It allows you to estimate the value of the exhibits of museums, which are unique in their kind, or the study of museums that are attractive for tourism.
Most of the funds of many museums in Armenia came from the excavations of the remains of ancient Armenian settlements, pagan temples, so the researchers likened it to an open-air museum.
 From ancient times, the temples of the pagan gods had a "museum function".
  The "museums" of medieval Armenia were divided into three different categories: royal, government houses, and church [1, 21].
  The emergence of "church museums" and the functions performed by them were connected with the deposits in the churches, in which expensive church clothes, gold-silver tableware, silver-parchment manuscripts and other items were kept.
  Some of them became manuscripts and Matenadaran.
 And the monasteries or monastic complexes (Sanahin Monastery, Haghpat, Havuts Tar) had treasures built especially for that purpose, in which the wealth of the church was kept.
 In modern times, the first Armenian museum was founded in Transcaucasia by Kh. By Abovyan, who in 1846 From the provincial school of Yerevan he created the so-called "Cabinet of Armenian Antiquities" [1, 24].
 One of the medieval museums of Armenia was the famous Echmiadzin Church Museum (mid-15th century) 1.
Over time, it became clear that it was necessary to create museums that best reflected the historical past, life, culture and customs of the people, which the church museums could not provide.
  For that purpose, M. Khrimyan founded a museum in Etchmiadzin with historical-archeological-ethnographic departments, which was nationalized in 1920, and in 1930. His property was handed over to the Cultural-Historical Museum of Armenia, laying the foundations for the establishment of the History Museum of Armenia.
1 1868 թ. The 4th Georgian Museum of Etchmiadzin was founded by Catholicos George IV, consisting of three halls with a tabernacle [2, 26].
Examining the historical sources of the creation and formation of museums, we come to the conclusion that the authors presented the basics of the creation of museums, which are considered first in the pagan temples, then in the churches, the items collected in the court.
 However, they were not "museum specimens", in many cases they only reflected the wealth of the latter; museums did not perform "museum functions".
  And only in the 19th century. Serious attention was paid to the collection and preservation of exhibits, անգ museums acted as institutions carrying out various socio-cultural functions.
According to the Statistical Service, the number of museums in Armenia has not changed significantly during the last decade (93 museums in 2000, 100 museums in 2012), but the total number of visits in 2000 Compared to that, it almost doubled from 875 thousand to 1 million 950 thousand.
  This is a positive trend, which indicates that along with the increase in tourist flows, museum flows have increased.
The history of museum tourism in Armenia has no ancient roots, it was formed almost simultaneously with tourist visits.
Taking into account the large number of visits, the following museums will be discussed within the framework of this article: Matenadaran, History Museum of Armenia, National Gallery of Armenia, S. Parajanov, Hovh. Tumanyan, E. Kochar Museums, Erebuni Historical-Archaeological Reserve-Museum, Yerevan History Museum, Etchmiadzin Mother Cathedral Museum and Treasury.
Matenadaran 1, which is considered a large museum, holds 18,400 out of 25,000 Armenian manuscripts that have reached us.
  The majority of tourists visiting Armenia, regardless of the destination route, visit the Matenadaran.
 2012 year. On the occasion of Yerevan being recognized as the World Book Capital in just 3 months, 25,000 visitors visited the Matenadaran, most of whom were tourists.
 The tourist flows of Matenadaran are connected with the last one, which is the main means of attractiveness.
 Visitors are here to do scientific research.
The History Museum of Armenia 2 was opened in 1921.
  It is one of the leaders in the number of annual visits due to its geographical location.
  Located in the center of the capital ևSurrounded by adjacent service facilities, provides a regular number of visits.
The History Museum of Armenia cooperates with travel agencies, presents other programs for tourist groups.
  This is a proof of the fact that our museums have successfully turned into a tourist object.
  Becoming an object of tourist visits, museums adapt their activities to the needs of tourists, provide information in foreign languages ​​- guides, often sell souvenirs, symbolic postcards, hold cultural events for visitors with a special program of national anthem and dance.
 The number of visitors during the "Museum Night" event exceeds 6,000, including tourists.
The National Gallery of Armenia was founded in 1921 as one of the five sections of the State Museum, the Art Department.
  Masterpieces of famous artists are kept here, various exhibitions and educational programs are organized.
  The branches of the museum are H. Kojoyan և A. Sargsyan House-Museums, Giotto Studio-Museum, Echmiadzin, Hrazdan, Alaverdi, Sisian, Jermuk, Martuni և Yeghegnadzor galleries, Mher Abeghyan, Minas Avetisyan Museums [6].
  The gallery is a leader in the number of visits due to its location.
  The museum has organized more than 200 exhibitions in Armenia and abroad, various scientific and educational events, carries out publishing activities, since 2005 has been organizing the annual classical concert "National Gallery", combining art and music.
 All this contributes to the increase in the number of visits, including tourists.
 Due to the thematic lectures organized in the museum, the number of internal visits is large.
1 1939 By the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of March 3, 2006 it was transformed into a research institute, next to which 3 sectors were created: scientific preservation of manuscripts, study and publication of originals և translation.
2 The museum has a national collection of about 400,000 items with the following sections: Archeology - 35% of the main collection, ethnography - 8%, numismatics - 45%, documents - 12%.
Erebuni Historical-Archaeological Reserve-Museum was founded in 1968, the number of annual visits is about 13,000-16,000 people.
 The museum participates in exhibitions of museum exhibits abroad.
  Among the foreigners visiting the museum are a large number of tourists from France, Germany, Italy and other European countries.
Hovh. Tumanyan House-Museum is one of the unique ones where the visits never stop.
 This is due to the fact that the museum initiates various cultural and educational events, participates in museum conferences, exhibitions abroad, and also conducts scientific and educational events.
However, in recent years, the age group of museum visitors has been dominated by the middle age group, including schoolchildren.
 The museum has also successfully cooperated with tourism operators (tour operator, travel agent [4, Article 2]), specializing in tourist services.
E. The Kochar Museum attracts many tourists with its fame.
 It should be noted that only during the "Museum Night" event the number of visits reaches about three thousand, including tourists.
A. Parajanov Museum does not feel the lack of visits.
  The number of Russian, French, German and Italian tourists is large among them.
  Only during the "Museum Night" event the number of visitors reaches more than 5.5 thousand.
In addition to the museums of the city of Yerevan, the museums of Etchmiadzin, the Museum of the Mother Cathedral and the treasury, stand out with their tourist visits.
 The large number of visits is connected with the fact that the latter form an architectural complex with the Mother Cathedral; tourists, being in the heart of Armenia, visit the museum.
Data on the current state of the museum case are received in the form of an annual report from each museum, which is summarized by the NSSRA.
 However, in not all cases, information is provided on the number of tourists visiting, their age and nationality, as very few museums still carry out such monitoring.
The index of the quantitative distribution of museums by regions և Yerjan gives an opportunity to analyze the flows of museum tourism և their spatial distribution (map 1, author: Gohar Ghambaryan).
  2/3 of the museums are located in Yerevan, which attracts large flows of cultural and cognitive tourism.
 It becomes clear that for tourism, particularly for museum tourism, Yerjan occupies a leading position compared to other regions of the Republic.
 The existing museums in Yerevan are mostly located in the center, which allows tourists to visit more museums in a short period of time.
Map 1. Number of RA museums in 2012 As of 2012 ըստ Map of the city of Yerevan 2. Number of visits to RA museums in 2012 Currently, the location of museums in the field of museum tourism is a possible condition.
If the museum is located in the area of ​​a tourist center or destination, then it is automatically involved in the field of tourism.
 Visiting a tourist destination, tourists want to study the culture of that country in more depth, they visit museums.
 In the case of Armenia, Yerevan is considered a major tourist destination, a period of service and provision, and the museums located there complete the list of services provided.
  For example, many museums have a large number of visitors due to their convenient location, as they are located in the city center, close to accommodation facilities, at transport intersections.
 Such an example is the History Museum of Armenia, the National Gallery, the History Museum of Yerevan.
The latter is located near the city hall, it is often visited by foreign guests and tourists.
In the regions, the museums that are on the way to the tourist route are constantly visited by tourists, and if they are far from the tourist centers, the visits by tourists are very rare.
2000-2012 The data show that the number of visitors has changed a lot.
  Number of visits to museums in 2000 As of today, there were 964-200 people, and in 2012 - 1949-400 people.
 The number of museum visitors in the museums of Yerevan has increased almost 2.5 times.
 In Shirak, Lori and Vayots Dzor marzes there is a significant increase in the number of visitors to museums.
 The number of visitors in other regions has remained almost the same (map 2, author: Gohar Ghambaryan).
The number of museum visits is the main indicator that shows the efficiency of the museum, as well as the attractiveness of the museum.
  Most of the museum visits are to the citizens of the country, կայուն only in a part of the museums of Armenia there are stable tourist flows.
Such an increase in visits is largely due to the number of tourists visiting Armenia, the culture of the population, the change in thinking that museums are considered important centers of culture.
 All this is facilitated by the various events organized by the museums և the provision of free visits.
 They are mostly carried out one or two days a month by organizing free visits for schoolchildren, students and adults.
From all this we conclude that the museum, by carrying out scientific-educational and cultural activities, gradually becomes accessible to the general public.
Examining the museum activity of the Republic of Armenia, analyzing the available statistical data, the following conclusions were made:
 Emphasize exclusivity in advertising, apply innovations to make it interesting, կարճ develop short-term և long-term development concepts for museums [3] to engage museums in tourism.
 This is especially true for the newly formed reserve-museums1, which specialize in receiving sub-tourist flows, և cooperation between museums can be considered promising, including foreign ones, participation in various cultural and charitable events, museum conferences, and a promising tourism program. Cooperation of museums with travel agencies, jointly developing visitation plans, other cultural events, անհրաժեշտ to increase the number of visits required by tourists to frequent tourist information catalogs, քարտեզ information on museums on the routes or museums along the tourist destination.
1 The best examples are "Erebuni" historical-archaeological reserve-museum, "Garni" historical-cultural reserve-museum.
The museum is first of all a center of visitation of the population of that country, then of tourists.
 Accordingly, there may be interest among the local population, taking into account the seasonal nature of tourism բն the non-intensive flow of tourist visits.
 This will allow to ensure the flow of domestic tourists and visitors throughout the year.
However, as a result of the study of the museum sphere, it turned out that this direction of tourism in Armenia can be successfully developed if a targeted policy is implemented at the state level, the level of service in the sphere պակաս the lack of specialists is supplemented by effective education.
  In order to make museums a tourist object, they should be included in tourist information catalogs, and the subjects of tourism activities should be involved in them when developing tourist routes and offering packages.
  Museum tourism has great potential to become a profitable tourism sector, as it requires less financial investment, but the result is greater.
Literature 1. Hajoyan R., Nikoghosyan M., Marketing in the field of tourism, Yerevan 2011.
2. Ghafadaryan K., From the History of Museums of Armenia, Journal of Social Sciences, No. 10, Yerevan, 1972.
3. RA 2014-2025 Strategic Perspective Development Program, Decision N 442-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of March 27, 2014.
4. RA Law "On Tourism գործունեության Tourism Activity" was adopted on 17.12.2003.
5. Social status of the Republic of Armenia in 2012, NSS yearbook 2012.
6. Official website of the National Gallery of Armenia, http.
//www.gallery.am/en/.
7. Draft Law on Museums և On the Museum Fund of the Republic of Armenia, Decision № 777-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of July 31, 2014, http.
//www.gov.am/files/docs/1279.pdf.
Amalya Navasardyan MUSEUM TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN ARMENIA Keywords: museum, museum tourism, tourist destination, fundraising, innovation, reserve-museum, tourist route.
