MANAGER'S COMMUNICATION FEATURES Human resource management is a comprehensive system through which the organization's work resources are managed to effectively achieve the goals of the organization.
  The manager and the manager have a big role in the development of each structure.
 In this work we will present the peculiarities of the leader's communication, but before that we will talk about the leaders, their types.
Who is the leader? He is the developer of the organization's development program, the implementation of which is the function of the manager.
  According to the theory of personality, leaders are divided into 2 groups. The members of the first group are self-centered, smart, do not like criticism, while the leaders of the second group are modest, weak in professional skills.
  Arthur Ops distinguishes between good and bad leaders.
  Good managers take into account the mentality, opinion, feelings of colleagues, care for employees, protect them, value և maintain employees, create a morally and psychologically healthy atmosphere in the work team, positively value not only themselves but also others, have far-reaching plans, everything They do it openly.
  Bad leaders spoil the appearance of the institution, do not trust people, consider them incompetent, unreliable, follow them with all their might, keep everything secret, have no creative mind.
Most managers are specialists in their field, but have little information about the psychology of staff relations. hence they come as low leaders.
 Lack of basic knowledge about the psychology of human-human relations is one of the problems of managers, heads of personnel, managers of work with staff, as they are one of the reasons for the outflow of personnel in this structure.
 Every manager must be able to establish the right relationships with his employees, take into account the strengths and weaknesses of his employees, serving them for the prosperity of the organization.
If you think that the leader is only a position, then you are only partially right.
 The leader is not only a position, but also a psychology, a way of life, a way of thinking.
 A person can hold high positions, but not be a leader whom everyone respects, listens to and takes into account.
 The manager must be different from the executor of orders, from the specialist with the most important characteristic - responsibility.
  If the executor of the orders carries out the orders and tasks assigned to him կատար is responsible for the execution of the tasks assigned to him, if the specialist is responsible for the quality of the work performed in his field, the foreman should be responsible for all the work done and the actions of his subordinates.
At the end of the work in the organization, the manager undertakes to summarize the work done, both by saying words of praise and by pointing out the shortcomings and mistakes, so that in the future the employees avoid repeating similar mistakes.
  In order to organize all this effectively, the manager must have a high culture of communication, be able to show the right approach to everyone.
A good leader must first have the ability to listen.
 Research has shown that not many people have this ability.
  Listening to a ten-minute speech, one understands, remembers only half of it.
 Two days later he forgets the part he remembered. In other words, one can remember only about a quarter of what was said a few days ago.
 And what is the reason for not listening?
 In some cases, the reasons are obvious: the listener (in this case the manager or subordinate) is concerned about something, the listener is not interested in the subject or does not want to listen.
 However, there are reasons that are not so obvious.
 For example, when subordinates և discuss a topic, each of them focuses on his own words չի automatically does not pay attention to the thoughts expressed by the other person.
 One of the reasons is that the leader, for example, being inspired by the program proposed by him, does not want to hear criticism on that topic, as he thinks that they may hinder his goals.
  To be silent does not mean to listen yet.
  The listening process is an active process that requires a lot of effort and concentration.
 And the leader, as the head of the given structure, is obliged to listen to everyone's opinion, because the key to the success of the given structure can be hidden in the expressed thoughts.
But just listening is not enough, you have to encourage the other person to express his thoughts.
  For that, sometimes it is possible to start laconicizing the answers.
  Neutral answers (yes, how do I understand you?) Allow the speaker to continue the conversation ժամանակ at the same time allow the other person to express themselves more freely and freely.
What the other person wants to say can be understood through gestures, movements and facial expressions.
  In this case, you can talk to the other person with the help of the following expressions: do you look like a happy person, are you worried, did something happen?
Studies have shown that simple, neutral responses or positive head movements encourage the speaker to continue his speech.
However, there may be some complications during the manager-employee communication.
 Among them are.1. Multiplicity of most words. Because of this problem, it is often difficult to understand the other person, because you do not know what the primary meaning of the word is for him.
The same word can have different meanings for the listener and the speaker, therefore, it is necessary to listen carefully to the other person in order to understand the specific meaning of the word used.
2. Coding of expressed thoughts.
  What we inform the other person has a specific meaning for us.
 When we communicate, we express our thoughts through words, so to some extent, coding takes place.
 Therefore, in order for the other person to understand what is being said, he must listen carefully to the whole thought.
3. Problems of free self-expression.
  This occurs when a certain level of formality is accepted in the given composition, which does not allow the speaker to express himself freely. it makes him start with a preface.
Thomas Gordon, during his long working years studying the art of communication, singled out 12 groups of obstacles that can hinder proper communication.1. command, instruction, 2. warning, threat, promise, 3. discipline, 4. advice, suggestion or decision, 5. morality, logical argument, 6. condemnation, criticism, disagreement, accusation, 7. praise, agreement, 8. insult, humiliation, 9. Interpretation, analysis, diagnostics, 10. compassion, consolation, 11. interrogation, 12. Avoid problems, distraction, humor.
These points usually interfere with the interlocutor և break the correct arrangement of thoughts.
  Their use means that the leader wants to change the course of the subject's thoughts, therefore their use forces the other person to defend himself.
As a result of all this, the subordinate, the employee do not express their point of view, they hide their thoughts.
The supervisor may follow these instructions during the communication: Do not accept silence as a result of attention.
։ Do not pretend to listen.
։ Do not interrupt unnecessarily.
։ Do not jump to conclusions.
։ Do not argue.
։ Do not ask too many questions.
։ Do not give in to emotions.
And what is needed to ensure the effectiveness of the manager-employee communication?
 He must create an appropriate environment for the discussion of any topic.
 If the work was not so successful, it is the same, a positive environment should be created for discussion.
  The leader may suggest that each of the staff members present at the meeting express their gratitude to those who helped to build the team.
  It would be more correct if the leader himself was the first to thank each other, presenting at the same time what exactly for which.
Saying a negative word about the past, he must offer new solutions.
 Managers often like to talk constantly և to emphasize the shortcomings. It will be more effective if you present the negative result as a fact and move on to new solutions to the problem.
The clarity, specificity և simplicity of the formulations is possible.
  During the discussion, it is possible that one of the employees will accuse the other of underemployment in his work.
 In this case, the leader should ask that he introduce the given people և give them the opportunity to speak։.
 The manager may suggest that the employee offer his / her solution to the problem.
End with a positive note.
 It is desirable that the leader concludes the discussion with such words. "It is good that joint work is being done, we understand each other, we are ready to listen and support each other."
Non-verbal communication is also possible during manager-employee communication.
Non-verbal communication, known as sign language, involves non-verbal means of self-expression.
  There are several reasons to understand the language of non-verbal communication.1. Only factual knowledge can be expressed in words, but words are often not enough to express emotions.
 They are often expressed through non-verbal language.
2. Mastering the language of non-verbal communication allows us to understand how much we know ourselves.
 Non-verbal language will tell us what people really think of us.
3. Non-verbal communication is so important that it is expressed unconsciously.
  Because of this, although people try to think deeply before speaking, their emotions are often expressed through facial expressions, gestures, intonation, and tone of voice.
Knowledge of these non-verbal elements can help us to find out how true the thought expressed in words is.
Mimicry.
 Facial expression is the main factor in the expression of emotions.
 Especially positive emotions - joy, love, surprise - are easily understood.
  It is more difficult to predict anger, sadness and disgust.
  Emotions and facial expressions are expressed in the following way: • surprise - raised eyebrows, wide-open eyes, lowering of the lips, open mouth, • fear - raised eyebrows, wide-open eyes, lowered lips, slightly retracted, pulled back, stretched may be slightly open. • Anger - drooping eyebrows, wrinkles on the forehead, narrow eyes, clenched lips, clenched teeth, eyes.
 In some cases the outer edges of the lips are lowered, • happiness - calm eyes, the tips of the lips are raised քաշ pulled back.
Visual contact is the most important part of communication.
 Looking at the speaker is not only interesting, but also helps to focus on the material of the conversation.
  It is easy to maintain visual contact when talking about pleasant topics. otherwise we avoid it.
 Often people avoid visual contact when they are in competition with the other person.
The tone of the voice և timbre.
 The listener hears more than words. he hears։ notices the volume and tone of the voice, the incompleteness of the expressions, the frequent pauses.
 The tone of voice is a key to understanding the speaker's feelings.
 In this way it is easy to predict anger and sadness.
  Volume and volume are also important signals in the process of analyzing the other person's speech.
  Some emotions, such as enthusiasm, joy, or distrust, are usually conveyed loudly.
 Anger and fear are also expressed in a loud voice, but in a wider tone.
 One can also guess the feelings of the other person with the speed of speech.
 People speak quickly when they are excited or worried about something.
 Those who try to persuade the other person also speak quickly.
  A slow speech usually indicates a high opinion, sadness or fatigue.
Position և gesture.
  From a person's position եստ gestures կարելի one can guess about his life.
  If he is leaning towards you while talking, he is interested in the topic of conversation ակը the opposite.
Crossed arms testify to skepticism, defensive functions.
 When the hand is under the muzzle, it is a sign of reflection, and when behind the head, it is a sign of admiration.
 The active use of gestures often speaks of positive emotions, but their abuse already implies anxiety, distrust.
Interpersonal distance.
 Another important factor in communication that the manager should know and apply is the interpersonal distance.
  There are several types of interpersonal distances: • Intimate distance reaches up to 0.5 meters, typical of intimate relationships.
• The interpersonal distance is 05.-1.2 meters. Intended for friendly communication.
• Social distance from 1.2 meters to 7 3.7 meters. Informal social and business meetings take place at this distance.
• The public distance is considered to be more than 3.7 meters.
The manager must be well aware of the social distance in the business environment և maintain social distance, as being too close or too far can have a negative effect on communication.
Weakness or mismanagement of human resources can often be encountered, resulting in staff outflows.
 Here are the signs: • Lack of commitment և loyalty of both management and co-workers, • Low organizational skills of the manager, low reputation of the manager, lack of knowledge of human psychology, • Many staffs are a weak team. There are gossips, frequent conflicts, • young staff, where everyone is the same age. often the work suffers due to lack of discipline, lack of business ethics, • wrong methods of hiring, • low morale of employees, their vague goals and values, which need development and training.
These factors are related to both the psychology of human relations and the psychology of human resource management.
  Therefore, the knowledge of the basic knowledge of human-human relations is very important for the leader.
 And what are they?
It is possible to differentiate the employees according to their temperament, that is, to understand who is choleric, who is sanguine, who is phlegmatic or melancholic.
  Temperament is the innate, hereditary, unchangeable, indisputable natural state of mind of a person, on which a person's worldview and mind, his resistance and endurance to physiological load depend.
  Temperament can be distinguished by character traits: behavior, pitch, patience, flare-up.
 Cholera are reactive, uncontrollable, impatient, fiery, agile.
  Sanguines are agile, energetic, disciplined, balanced, cheerful.
 Phlegmatics are slow-moving, balanced, patient, restrained, stubborn.
 Melancholic people have high sensitivity, low reactivity, are timid, shy, tired quickly.
And why do you need to know all this? it is necessary for the manager to be able to properly distribute positions and responsibilities.
  A choleric should not be given a job, such as the job of a manager.
  In this case, you will have to wait, sit idle in the car until the manager finishes the consultation or meeting.
 He will not last long for this work, as his temperament is characterized by active, active work.
 But the melancholic will easily endure such monotonous work.
  Sanguines and melancholics have a more balanced and tolerable character.
  The leader should take into account these features, as they are necessary for effective cooperation, reduction of conflict situations, as well as to avoid possible stresses.
  There is no better or worse temperament.
 Therefore, when communicating with people, efforts should be made, not to correct them, but to use the benefits of a mixed race in a sensible way.
In addition to all this, one must first know the level of communication, ambition and stress of employees.
  Communication is not the same as gossip.
  By communicating in business relations, one must understand the clear expression of thoughts, conveying them to others, conducting negotiations with correct arguments.
Is it good not to have ambitions?
 It is bad when a person is not ambitious or is too ambitious.
When a person has healthy ambitions, it is good, because he can defend his views through arguments or admit mistakes by listening to the arguments of the other person.
Stress resistance is also important because it involves the ability to work in a very short time with people of different personalities.
 It implies resilience in the face of criticism, reprimands, and conflict situations.
Knowledge of these points ումը accounting contributes to the implementation of the right personnel policy ճիշտ to the correct formation of relations with employees.
Elen Chavushyan CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMUNICATION Keywords: human resource management, manager, management,
manager, management, subordinate, manager-employee communication.
