COVERAGE OF KARABAKH ISSUE NEGOTIATIONS ARMENIAN PRESS
 The Karabakh conflict differs from other conflicts in the former Soviet Union in that the people of Karabakh exercised their right to self-determination legally before the collapse of the Soviet Union.
  The Karabakh conflict was the bloodiest conflict in the post-Soviet space, with tens of thousands of victims, hundreds of thousands of refugees, and extinctions.
 The military phase of the conflict ended in 1994. with an indefinite ceasefire agreement in May.
 However, Azerbaijan grossly violates its own trilateral agreements (Nagorno-Karabakh, Azerbaijan, Armenia) on the ceasefire regime (May 1994) and the strengthening of the ceasefire regime (February 1995).
 Negotiations and mediations for the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, however, began in 1994, back in September 1991, when Russian President-elect Boris Yeltsin, President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbay arrived in Stepanakert and met with the NKR authorities.
Later a memorandum was signed, which, however, remained on paper. The Soviet Union collapsed.
1992 In March 1994, the Security Cooperation Council in Europe (since December 1994, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) joined the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in Azerbaijan.
 1997 The Minsk Group Co-Chairs (USA, Russia, France) were adopted, which is the only agreed balance to date.
 It has received a mandate from the OSCE to mediate in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 It was in 1997 that the OSCE MG Co-Chairs presented the first so-called "package" document on the settlement of the conflict, but the document enshrined the principle that the status of Nagorno-Karabakh should be considered in the context of preserving Azerbaijan's territorial integrity was a serious obstacle to further negotiations. by both sides, the Republics of Armenia and the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.
  The second proposal for the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, submitted by the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs in the same year, was based on the methodology of reaching a "step-by-step" agreement between the conflicting parties.
  This approach was taken as a basis by the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, but was rejected by Nagorno Karabakh, as there were no guarantees that after the return of the territories controlled by Nagorno-Karabakh, the Azerbaijani authorities would not suddenly lose the desire to continue negotiations.
  1998 The negotiation document based on the concept of "common state" presented presented a qualitative transition in the adoption of ways to resolve the main components of the conflict.
 In particular, the first issue related to the settlement of the conflict was the reaching of an agreement in principle on the status of Nagorno Karabakh.
 In addition to the above-mentioned wording, the status of Nagorno-Karabakh included the acquisition of powers such as the adoption of its own constitution through a referendum, the attributes of statehood, the legislative, executive, and judicial bodies.
  At the same time, based on the methodology of accepting the "symmetrical compromise" methodology announced by the parties, the document offered solutions for the future status of Shushi and Shahumyan.
  The next stage of the Karabakh conflict settlement coincides with 2001. with the certain activation observed in the negotiation process from the beginning, which was reflected in the Paris-Kyiv negotiations.
2007 The main principles proposed by Armenia to Azerbaijan, which is conducting negotiations on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by the OSCE Minsk Group in Madrid in November 2010, were conditionally called the Madrid Principles.
  A part of the updated version of the Madrid Principles was published in 2009. was born on July 10, in the city of L'Aquila, Italy.
  Later, Azerbaijan accepted this document, but it was rejected by the Armenian side, remaining on the negotiating table, purely as a package of proposals.
We chose the starting point of the mentioned study on July 10, 2009, when the renewed Madrid principles were immediately put into diplomatic circulation.
 Or they have not been published in the past, but have become known in different ways or to some extent.
 Nevertheless, the content of the July 10 statement is especially remarkable in two respects. It is the first official public affirmation of the Madrid Principles որպես, as a basis for a future legal document, not only in terms of content but also in terms of details.
 Moreover, the second part of the statement is especially important, which includes not only the presented principles, but also the previous protocol following them. The basic principles express a reasonable compromise, which is based on the Helsinki Final Act - the principles of non-use of force, territorial integrity, equal rights of peoples - self-determination.
 Of course, the right to self-determination may be defined as the basis for the settlement of the conflict, but it should not be presented or perceived as a concession to the Armenian parties.
  The statutory basis for the establishment of the OSCE is the Helsinki Final Act, which each member state must respect unconditionally.
 This document defines 10 basic principles for the organization և "all these principles are of paramount importance" 1.
 In other words, the Co-Chairs have only recorded what the Helsinki Final Act obliges them to do, highlighting 3 of those 10 principles.
  It should be noted that the principle of territorial integrity does not contradict the right to self-determination, as, by definition, the former operates in the case of normalization of relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia (as OSCE member states), and the latter between the Nagorno Karabakh Republic and Azerbaijan.
  As for the renewed principles of Madrid, according to the announcement of July 10, they are 6 (later it became clear that they are 15).
    It is necessary to consider them separately, as not only their general idea is essential, but also every detail and legal consequence of the wording.
1. Return of the territories adjacent to Nagorno Karabakh under the control of Azerbaijan.
  It is obvious that this formulation cannot be called a principle.
 This is a unilateral step in favor of Azerbaijan.
 It is not accidental that the indefinite wording "Nagorno Karabakh" is used.
 What is it: geographical or administrative territory?
 Even if they mean 1 http.
//www.osce.org/mc/39501?download=true. territory, then by what borders?
 At first glance, it may seem that we are talking about the borders of the NKAO.
 But it is not difficult to notice that it is not so. There is no question not only about the Shahumyan region, but also about the occupied territories of Martuni and Martakert regions.
 Moreover, even if it were mentioned that we are talking about the administrative borders of the NKAO, this could not be acceptable, because a) they were arbitrarily underlined when forming the NKAO, b) therefore they are absolutely unprotected, աշտպանwithout any guarantee, always The danger of a new aggression by Azerbaijan will remain, even after the international recognition of the NKR. c) the current situation was created by the aggression of Azerbaijan, during which the NKR suffered huge losses;
2. Intermediate status for Nagorno-Karabakh, providing security and self-government guarantees.
  This point, like the last one, is a consequence of the fact that one of the main ideas of the co-chairs is the artificial postponement of the definition of the NKR status.
3. Armenia ք Corridor connecting Nagorno Karabakh.
  This point is considered in conjunction with the first point.
  By using the vague word "corridor", the co-chairs created an opportunity for them to maneuver to interpret differently with each of the parties, at least at some point.
4. Defining the future legal status of Nagorno Karabakh through a legally binding will.
  The key issue of the settlement process, the international recognition of the NKR status, according to the presented principles և the sequence of resolving the issues, is the last one.
 It has no reasonable justification.
 The Co-Chairs have never given any reason why the 1991 agreement should not be taken into account. The result of a flawless referendum.
 Moreover, the presence of this item in the agenda of the negotiations, in the conditions of registering the right to self-determination as a fundamental element of the settlement (as a basis for this item), simply shatters the logic of the process. The right to self-determination is recognized as the basis for that, but the self-determined NKR representative does not participate in the negotiations.
 This analysis has been done for years, but as the three representatives of the Armenian press - "Hayastani Hanrapetutyun", "Haykakan Zhamanak", "168 Zham" newspapers, referred to them after the publication of the updated principles.
 The "Hayastani Hanrapetutyun" daily, after becoming aware of the Madrid Principles, as surprising as it was for the readers following the press, was satisfied only with the official announcement.
  It was clear that it took some time to direct further actions.
  Only a week later, on July 16, the newspaper published the article "In the footsteps of the Madrid principles".
  It turned out that the newspaper had to publish some analytical article, because before publishing official messages, the official-minded expressions, there was a need to open the brackets from the official orientation to journalistic-analytical wording.
 In the analytical article "In the footsteps of the Madrid principles", the author states: "Before the publication of the" Madrid Principles "on the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, a significant part of the Armenian society, the representatives of the political circles of the media constantly complained that" they want to get acquainted with those principles, which are probably not in favor of Armenia, "etc.
  After the publication of the "Madrid Principles", the exact opposite happened. Questions arose: "Why were the principles published? Isn't this circumstance connected with the possible soonest settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which, of course, will not be in our interests again?"
  Speaking to his interlocutors, the author of the article seems to create the atmosphere that sooner or later the Madrid principles will be forgotten, remaining on paper.
 For example, the interlocutor of the author of the article A. Iskandaryan mentions. "The presidents will meet on July 17, nothing significant will happen, in a couple of weeks the society will forget about the publication of the" Madrid principles "and the fear of corruption.
 Then there will be the next, hundredth or thousandth announcement of Ilham Ali, another figure of Matthew Bryzaikam. "The information wave will rise again, և the public fears will visit again."
  The article did not address the number of interlocutors, the existence of different opinions, although the essence, dangers and orientation of the principles became less clear than their impossibility.
 The next article "Madrid Principles" already clarifies the official position.
  The interlocutor, at that time, was still the secretary of the RPA press, NA deputy E. Sharmazanov notes. "This is not an agreed final program, but only a package of proposals, which is in the interests of the Armenian side."
 However, the author again leaves out the question of what the Armenian interests are, which points of the principles correspond to those interests.
 There were difficult times in the Armenian political-diplomatic sphere, no matter how wrong it was to avoid assessments, political-government 2 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20090716_4&flag=am (electronic archive) .3 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20090716_4&flag=am (electronic archive). There are so many justified by the society. The Armenian-Turkish protocols were in progress, the dialogue was being simplified, Azerbaijan felt isolated in the Caucasus, Russia's position was hesitant.
  During this period, the abundance of discussions on various Armenian media fronts, the exaggeration of views during them, led to great panic in the general public, the forgotten phrase "they give Karabakh" became relevant again.
  During that time, the newspaper published the articles "There is no reason for panic", "Karabakh will not be part of Azerbaijan, as the latter dreams".
 In the first article, the interlocutor of the "Academy of Political Studies" NGO A. Manasaryan mentions. "We should be a little calm, because I think those who are responsible for foreign policy also have a sense of responsibility, possession of the material."
It sounds kind of pathetic, և despite the conviction in the title, there is no reason for panic, the reasons for that should be suspended in the material.
  The interlocutor in the article "Karabakh will not be part of Azerbaijan" is analyst Richard Kirakosyan5.
 "There has never been a case in history when the conflict was resolved without the participation of one of the conflicting parties.
 "In this sense, Armenia should not have a monopoly on the settlement of the Karabakh conflict," the analyst said.
  The material is built around this axis.
 The journalistic material "Where is the final destination?", Which is subtitled with the rather rhetorical question "The moment of settlement is approaching or the next stage", again tries to point out the further path of Armenia's foreign policy ակը The status of the Karabakh issue in that path6.
The content of the material is not as important as the choice of interlocutors.
  It is clear that the daily has the reputation of an official newspaper, but it does not mean that the interlocutors must necessarily be only representatives of the authorities.
  Firstly, this contradicts the principle of journalistic objectivity, and secondly, this is the reason for the approach that many consider the "Republic of Armenia" newspaper not an official newspaper, but a pro-government or pro-government newspaper.
During this period, the visits and meetings of the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs have taken place, but due to the fact that they are covered in the newspapers only in the official statement 4 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20090715_3&flag=am (electronic archive) .5 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20090715_2&flag=am (electronic archive) .6 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20090722_6&flag=am (electronic archive). In our scientific work, we will not touch upon them, unless they contain a certain directed message.
Before the introduction of the renewed Madrid principles, the press was already talking about them in a vague way.
  Few tried to understand the current situation, to derive what was expected from it.
"168 Hours" published "Karabakh conflict. 15 questions and answers "neither 15 years after war nor peace" article, which was a wonderful attempt to fully understand the current state of the Karabakh conflict7.
 The interview, despite being quite successful, nevertheless remains the expression of the official position.
However, the urgency and importance of journalistic issues make the interview valuable, as it was a great experience to make the situation completely clear during that period.
On July 14, when 6 of the updated Madrid principles were already circulating in the press, the newspaper published the article "Opportunity for a new war, whining, trap ..." 8.
  The latter, it can be said, was the first analytical-journalistic reference in the newspaper, in which the revised version of the Madrid principles became key.
 The article is notable for the diversity of opinions, but from the beginning to the end of the red line, the idea that the principles do not have a positive context from the point of view of Armenia's interests is extended.
 However, in contrast to the general negative background created in the beginning, there was an opinion that for the first time the NKR right to self-determination was enshrined, միջոցով the NKR people will achieve full independence through a referendum.
  The principle of the possibility of self-government began to circulate.
  The newspaper's former RA Foreign Minister A. In Arzumanyan's interview, he refers to the possible realism of this opinion9.
 "There is not a single point in the principles published in the press, which can be considered favorable for the Armenian side, moreover, the point you pointed out.
 This is the first time we are talking about some kind of self-government.
 It is an accepted term, տարածքում All countries in the Council of Europe have self-governing bodies.
 The referendum is a vague wording, which is not clear where it leads, who will decide the will of that will by what laws, "Arzumanyan says in the article.
In just one month, the Madrid principles were revealed, the presidents of the three OSCE Minsk Group co-chairing countries jointly 7 http.
//archive.168.am/en/articles/19252 (electronic archive) .8 http.
//archive.168.am/en/articles/19382 (electronic archive) .9 http.
//archive.168.am/en/articles/19451 (electronic archive). In a statement, the presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan were urged to reconsider their differences.
 In just one month, Serzh Sargsyan and Ilham Ali met twice.
 It became known that Russia and the United States, which are more interested in resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, intend to change their co-chairs in the Minsk Group.
  It was also announced that the Minsk Group Co-Chairs are preparing a new "Krakow version" of the Madrid Principles, which will be presented to S. Sargsyan and I. To Ali!
 Doesn't such a development indicate the end of one stage of the NKR conflict settlement and the beginning of a new stage?
  Are the allegations that no progress was made during the Moscow meeting or that any document was not signed?
 Or maybe an oral agreement has already been reached to sign some document?
 These questions became a priority in the press.
Naturally, the "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily could not but refer to such a development, but compared to the other two newspapers, the coverage of this newspaper has a number of peculiarities.
The first article on the Madrid Principles was entitled: "What is put on the table is very dangerous."
 From the very first paragraph, the author mentions that a real panic has started in the political media over the Karabakh issue.
 Referring to the coverage of various speeches of the US Co-Chair of the OSCE Minsk Group Matthew Bryza in a number of media outlets at the time, the author of the article summarizes: The international mediation is trying to reach a full framework agreement on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by the end of 2009, but there is a risk that Armenia and Azerbaijan will fail at the last minute.
In another article, "The danger of war is growing," the journalist tries to find out whether such a path to the negotiation process leads to war, and how likely it is.
  The question was topical, but not unambiguous in that respect.
  It is true that the political parties made statements one after another, not ruling out the possibility of a resumption of the war, but it still remains at the level of rumors, there was no serious internal or external influence to understand that the resumption of the war is imminent.
10 "What is on the table is very dangerous", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 14.07.2009.
11 "The danger of war is growing", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 17.07.2009.
If other periodicals discussed the issue more in the context of foreign policy, the solution of the "Haykakan Zhamanak" issue was more in the background of domestic political developments.
  The Madrid Principles are mostly presented in a negative light in the newspaper, referring to the points written by the mechanism of concessions.
  My article "Principles: More Uncertain and Dangerous" is about the dangers of these points12.
 The journalist also considers dangerous the statement of the Russian co-chair of the Minsk Group Yuri Merzlyakov, where in particular it is mentioned that after the agreement of the basic principles, when the elaboration of the text of the agreement begins, the NKR representatives should take part in the process.
 In the interview "There is no difference for NKR" the interlocutor is Major-General, NKR NA deputy Vitaly Balasanyan13.
  The purpose of the article is to find out about the situation in Karabakh.
  "In general, there is a point in the Madrid Principles that is acceptable to the Karabakh side.
 The reasons are different.
 They were accepted without the participation of Karabakh.
 It is another question whether the Karabakh side would take part in the discussions or not.
 "Maybe if Karabakh had participated, we would have approved it with some suggestions, but since Karabakh did not participate, any option is unacceptable for us," said the interlocutor.
 The article mainly emphasizes the fact that Karabakh does not accept the ongoing negotiations.
The July meeting of the presidents did not change much in the information atmosphere.
  The article "Will it be signed in October?" Of "Haykakan Zhamanak" newspaper refers to the results of the July meeting and the further guidelines of the "Sargsyan-Ali" meeting to be held in October.
 "Despite the fact that the participating countries have officially assessed the meeting as constructive, on the contrary, the OSCE MG Co-Chairs have given contradictory assessments to the Sargsyan-Ali meeting.
  "The Co-Chairs' statement that they are disappointed with the outcome of the meeting," he said, adding that such disappointment was understandable, as it was expected that a settlement document would be signed or at least that the Presidents would not agree on agreed principles.
12 "Principles - more uncertain and dangerous", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, July 21, 2009.
13 "There is no difference for NKR", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 25.07.2009.
Due to political views, opposition, sharp, but sometimes grounded opinions and views are always noticeable in the articles of "Haykakan Zhamanak".
The meeting of the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in Chisinau was imminent.
  On the eve of the meeting, the Armenian society was divided into two groups: extremists and indifferent people.
  For the first group, this meeting was the final acceptance and concession of the renewed Madrid principles, the second group thought that the meeting was another unchanging stage, which has a rather formal nature.
 Before the meeting, President Serzh Sargsyan answered journalists' questions at Zvartnots Airport.
  The "Republic of Armenia" presented this interview with questions and answers, without reducing, editing or analyzing.
 The newspaper often uses this option when the messages of high-ranking officials on very important issues are presented live.
 On the one hand, it gives an opportunity to get acquainted with the questions, answers, without shadows, reductions, on the other hand, there is no journalistic analysis and criticism, which can be supplemented with at least one other material.
 The newspaper wrote about the 6th meeting in that year the article "There is no military solution to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, there is no alternative to the negotiation process", which had the content of an official statement14.
  "Haykakan Zhamanak" wrote about the same meeting in the article "Peace Agreement Today". "Negotiations on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict with the participation of the OSCE Co-Chairs took place within the framework of the informal CIS summit.
  We have already informed that according to reliable sources, a framework agreement on the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict was signed during the last Sargsyan-Ali meeting on July 17 and the tripartite meeting with Medved on July 18.
  According to the same sources, a decision was made to keep the fact of signing the document secret. ”15
  The phenomenon of reliable sources in the Armenian media field is still quite large with its applicability.
 This is an unacceptable approach from the point of view of journalistic reliability, but the daily often takes this step.
 In terms of the Karabakh conflict, this measure is unacceptable due to public interest and possible panic.
14 http:
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20091124_16&flag=am (electronic archive) .15 "Peace agreement today", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 20.11.2009.
The expected meeting of the presidents of the conflicting parties in 2010 took place in June.
  "Haykakan Zhamanak" newspaper referred to the meeting, first publishing the articles "Quality instead of numbers", then "Armenia did not respond, Azerbaijan ...".
  "168 Zham" newspaper wrote the article "Is the format of the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict changing?" "It is difficult to remember when Azerbaijan has recently shown such a contemptuous attitude in the case of the co-chairs and the meetings with Armenia.
  Thus, the President of Azerbaijan clearly showed that he can oppose Russia's wishes, and his Foreign Minister made it clear to the whole world that they will not back down from their terms, that the next meeting with the Armenian side can create the impression of making concessions.
The next meeting of the presidents took place on October 27 in Astrakhan.
  It was almost closed, the official messages were clumsy, the coverage of the newspapers did not stand out with its analysis.
On March 5, 2011, the Sargsyan-Ali-Medvedev trilateral meeting took place in Sochi, during which a three-point statement was adopted, which affirmed Russia's special role in the Karabakh process.
 The newspaper wrote on this occasion the article "Serzh now" lied "to the USA" 17.
  "In a word, with this document Russia managed to fix the growth of its role in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict settlement, which Russia failed to do in Astana.
 "It was allowed by the United States and France, which initiated the document signed in Astana," the article says.
 According to him, this meeting will lead to the Minsk Group appearing in the shadows and assuming the role of the sole postman.
However, the most important meeting of the year was to be in June in Kazan.
  The "Republic of Armenia" newspaper published "The Kazan meeting. Frustration or Outcome? ”Article 18.
  The answer to the question in the title is given in the very first sentence. "In case of great, exaggerated expectations, any other result is perceived as a disappointment.
  The Kazan meeting of the Presidents of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Russia did not yield any concrete results in terms of the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.16 http.
//archive.168.am/en/articles/22798 (electronic archive). 17 "Serzh" lied "to the USA even now", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 06.03.2010.
18 http:
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20110628_7&flag=am) (electronic has its objective-subjective reasons, which it is impossible to "put aside" and sign a document at once ".
2012 should have been a crisis in the negotiation process.
  The brutal murder of an Armenian officer in Hungary on ethnic grounds in 2004 was perceived differently in both Armenia and Azerbaijan.
  An information war broke out in the media, which, as a rule, allow themselves to say more than officials.
 Margaryan's funeral became a state-level event in Armenia.
 Eight years later, for unknown reasons, the Hungarian government agreed to return Safarov to Baku within the framework of a declaration signed by both sides.
 According to that agreement, the prisoner could serve his sentence in his homeland վել be released early only after 25 years.
  Instead, Safarov was immediately pardoned.
  However, apart from the fact that the Azerbaijani authorities pardoned him, they also made him a hero.
 Yerjan severed Hungary's post-diplomatic ties, and international observers, following the negotiation process over Karabakh, which was already on the verge of rupture, anxiously awaited how things would develop in the future.
Numerous articles were published in the press.
  Most of them remained in the emotional field.
 "168 Zham" newspaper published the article "Refusal from the negotiation process is a demarche not to Azerbaijan, but to the USA, France and Russia", where the chairman of the ANM board, MP of the "Armenian National Congress" NA faction Aram Manukyan to freeze the negotiation process The issue is mentioned. "I think it is a glove for the Minsk Group Co-Chairs, it can be a basis for the failure of the negotiation process."
  In the article "The European Parliament condemned Azerbaijan's action" of the "Republic of Armenia" newspaper, the author refers to the resolution on the inadmissibility of pardoning Safarov by the Council of Europe, quoting the points of the resolution20.
After a two-year break, the meeting between Armenia and Azerbaijan took place on November 19, 2013 in Vienna.
 "Haykakan Zhamanak" referred to the meeting, in particular, noting that the talks are resumed in parallel with the two important political events, after the well-known announcement of joining the Customs Union on September 2, at the forthcoming EU Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius.
//168.am/2012/09/06/123649.html (electronic archive) .20 http.
//www.hhpress.am/index.php?sub=hodv&hodv=20120914_4&flag=am խիվ).
 "And whether a general background was created or the negotiations were frozen after Safarov's extradition, as a result, the reality was that they were only interrupted in connection with two republican, parliamentary and presidential elections in the two countries.
 This has been the case throughout the history of the Karabakh talks. "During the pre-election years, on the eve of the elections, the negotiations were interrupted," the newspaper writes.
However, the meeting did not change anything in the negotiation process.
  The negotiation crisis reached its peak in August 2014 due to the tense border situation.
  The meeting of the presidents of the conflicting countries became imperative of the day.
There were great expectations from the August 9 meeting.
 "Haykakan Zhamanak" writes after the meeting. "After the trilateral meeting of Serzh Sargsyan, Vladimir Putin and Ilham Aliyev in Sochi on August 9, the prospect of a Paris meeting circulating before that" darkened "."
  Nevertheless, the Paris meeting took place in October of the same year.
  The newspaper touched upon the meeting in detail, trying to present the views of different political forces and analysts on the expectations of the meeting.
 The article "Paris meeting on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict - assessments of political scientists" is a good example of such coverage21.
  First, the official opinion on the meeting is presented, then the article presents the opinions and views of US Ambassador to Armenia John Heffern, Deputy Director of the Caucasus Institute, political scientist Sergey Minasyan, political scientist Tigran Grigoryan, thus creating the expected vision of the meeting.
  However, the presidents of the Republic of Azerbaijan sat at the negotiating table only a year later, in December 2015, in the city of Bern in the Swiss Confederation.
  However, such meetings in the press began to receive little response.
  The coverage of the negotiations, in its turn, was passive.
  The day-to-day increase in border tensions gave different directions to the media coverage.
21 "Paris meeting on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict և assessments of political scientists", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily, Yerevan, 14.11.2014.
Amalya Karapetyan NEGOTIATION OF THE KARABAKH ISSUE NEGOTIATION PROCESS IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS (2009-2016) Keywords: Karabakh issue, closed-door, negotiation, negotiation, peace process, negotiation, negotiation
