EARLY NEW PERSIAN FORMATION Today, Persian, the official language of Iran, belongs to the southwestern group of Iranian languages.
  Persian is one of the few languages ​​that have passed through three stages of historical development: old, middle and new.
 In Old Persian (VI - IV centuries BC) a number of inscriptions were handed down to us. From VI-V centuries, left by the Achaemenid kings Darius, Xexes (Bihistunian inscription, etc.).
In Middle Persian (IV BC - IX century BC) we were given not only rock inscriptions (Hajiabad, Paykuli, Tagh's Bustan, etc.), but also written religious and secular sources ("Karnamak-e Artashir"). Papakan "," Dankard "," Bundahishn "," Khudayname "և etc.).
  Norparske was formed in the IX century, divided into two sub-regions: classical (IX-XVI centuries) and modern (XVI-modern days).
In the Middle Iranian language period, the most widespread of the Iranian languages ​​was Middle Persian, which is the official language of the Sasanian state, with which "inscriptions", "religion" and "geography" were written.
 However, the Parthian, Sogdian, and Bactrian languages, which were largely spoken in the northeastern states of the Sasanian state, continued to exist, with Middle Persian following Old Persian as the colloquial language in the south.
  After the Arab invasions հետո After the fall of the Sassanid Empire (VII century) Arabic became the official language in Iran, although the people continued to speak Persian or Iranian, the orders issued from the center of the caliphate were given in Arabic.
 Despite the Arab invasions, Iran became a predominantly Islamic state for several centuries, but Arabic could not be established here for a long time. .
 This movement started in the VIII century and was one of the most powerful protests against the Arab rule.
 Representatives of these movements sometimes took extreme measures, trying to completely break with the cannabis world.
  Writers of Iranian descent gradually began to reject Persian, which had entered a new era, that is, a new Persian period.
The famous medieval show, historian, philosopher Ibn Mukaffa (Ruzbeh, VIII century) in one of his works, referring to the languages ​​spoken in Iran, mentions that after the fall of the Sassanids there were five main languages ​​used: Pahlavi [d] (Dari (the palace language used to write masterpieces of classical literature)), Farsi (the ritual language of the Zoroastrian magicians in Fars province), Khuzi (the local dialect of Khuzestan province), and Sorani (the language spoken in Persian-Iraq).
In addition to this mention, from the IX-X centuries a number of texts have reached us, the language of which is accepted in scientific literature as Hebrew-Persian, because they were written in Hebrew script.
 The language of these texts contains grammatical և verbal forms that are absent in the newly formed Arabic-language literary Persian sources, but were widely used in Middle Persian literature.
 For example, instead of "hastam", "hasti", "hastim", "hastand" we have "hoary", "hi", "him", "hand" horses.
  He also uses the middle Persian words "asgahân" ("lazy"), "abâri" ("other"), ustâm ("trust") in his vocabulary, which are not found in early modern Persian sources.
  The grammatical similarities between Judeo-Persian and Middle Persian և confuse whether there was a special connection between the Jews and the Zoroastrians who created Middle Persian in the ninth century.
 The anonymous Gilbert Lazar, however, finds that the peculiarity of the language of the sources written in Hebrew-Persian has nothing to do with the language of the Iranian Jews, but it leads to the local dialects of the southern territories of Iran.
 This view is reinforced when it turns out that the texts in Hebrew-Persian were written in Khuzhastan և ազ Lazar notices in those texts տ remnants of the Shiraz dialect of that time [2].
While working in the Astana-e Lods Library in Mashhad, Iranian scholar Ali Ravaghi discovered a powerful source, which he developed and published under the name of the Qur'an-e Lods.
 It is the Persian translation of the Holy Qur'an.
Since the first and last pages of that source were lost, Ravaghi could not find out the author թվական's writing date.
 After writing a deep linguistic research in Arabic, they started a struggle against the Arab culture.
 The Shubin raised the issue of human freedom, promoting the idea that the culture of the conquered peoples was in a higher position than the Arab culture.
  The caliphate persecuted many Shubis, but failed to prevent the spread of this movement, which eventually led to the weakening of the caliphate.
Based on the lexical and grammatical features, the researchers concluded that this monument was written in or near Sistan (the text contains "gwishtar", "bishtar" ("more"), "gwâd" - "bâd" (" wind ")," gwâfte "-" bâfte "(" woven ")," ginad "-" binad "(" sees ")," gahisht "-" behesht "(" paradise ") and the grammatical forms in which he notices Compared to the original Persian, the word "b" in the beginning of the word "w" appears with the letters "gw-" or "g-", which according to Lazarus is an indication of the text being from Sistan, as a similar transliteration has been preserved later in Sistan. in the language of the Baluchis).
  In the context of the Qur'an, the same grammatical units are found as in the case of the verb "to be", which we find in the Hebrew Persian texts ("ân պարyatha-ye ketâb didvar hand" - "The signs of the book are clear"). ).
We can conclude that in fact the language of the Hebrew texts is not of Tehrian origin, but is typical of the dialects spoken in a particular region of Iran (in this case we are talking about southern Iran, given the fact that the texts in Hebrew Persian were written in Khuzestan, southwestern Iran, and the Qur'an Rhodes in Sistan, in the southeast of Iran).
From their common linguistic features and similarities we can assume that in the IX-XI centuries in the south of Iran they spoke the same dialect of Persian with some differences [2].
With the establishment of the Sasanian dynasty in Iran, not only geopolitical but also linguistic changes are taking place.
 The Sassanids from the Persian province gradually ascended from the south of Iran to the north, Hamadan, Atrpatakan-Khorasan, spreading their language apart from power.
 Settling in northern Iran, especially in the former Parthian capital Tizbon, the Sassanids spread Middle Persian to the local Parthian-speaking community.
 In the period after the fall of the Sassanids, in the period after the Arab invasions, Persian was already under the influence of the local languages, Parthian, Sogdian, and other dialects, creating a new linguistic reality in northern Iran.
 The Persian language penetrated Tizbo as a result of the Sassanid kings' relocation of the court, then, according to Arthur Christiansen, the Persian language reached հասStrengthened in the distant Khorasan by the Sassanid army, which by modern terminology had military bases there;
  This dialect, common in the northern states, is called Lazarus, the northern dialect of Eparchy.
  In fact, the Sassanids spread to the north the language used in the southern provinces of Iran, which at that time was standard, classical Middle Persian, and already in the north, Middle Persian came into direct contact with the widely spoken Parthian (Sogdian). expelling the Parthian language from Khorasan and the Sogdian language from Soghd, which became the basis for the emergence of a new Persian language in northeastern Iran.
Comparing the Middle Persian "Parthian" texts of the same Manichaean source published by Henning with Lazarus, Lazarus finds that the Middle Persian text has grammatical and syntactic similarities with the new Persian, but lexically "we find more words used in the Parthian text." big "," rawshan "-" bright ") [2].
It is clear from the above that the new Persian language is formed in the northeast of Iran, in the territories of the historical Khorasan ող Soghd, և quite different from the texts written in Hebrew Persian և the Qur'an-e Ghodsilezv.
 Lazarus makes the following assumption: In the first centuries of the spread of Islam in Iran, Persian had two main dialects: the first was spoken in the south of the country, and the second in the northeast (possibly in the north-west).
 Moreover, we see that the southern dialect has more similarities with Middle Persian, and the northern dialect was formed at a later period, influenced by Parthian and Sogdian.
 This is why the Hebrew texts and the Qur'an-e Lods have more in-depth lexical commonalities with Middle Persian.
In one of his articles, Omid Salar addresses the issue of early Persian.
  He puts forward the theory of the existence of two colloquial state-official languages ​​in the Sasanian state.
  In other words, he sees literary Pahlavi (Middle Pashto) as the official language, and the dialect version (Salar calls it "Persian") becomes the basis for the new Persian language, which, calling it the standard language, gives the commands used by the peoples of the vast empire. They were made available to the people, and the delegates sent to Tizbon communicated with the delegates from other regions in the language of this standard.
 This is similar to the linguistic environment in Iran today, where each of the peoples living in the states speaks their own language, but when it comes to public relations or communication with the state, modern Persian is used as the standard language.
According to Lazar, the Persian languages ​​of the century mentioned by Ibn Mukaffa are two versions of the same language: written-literary-spoken.
 Persian is the spoken language of the southern regions of Iran (it was widespread among the population of the historic province of Fars), and in the century, the literary language was the language of the official, administrative, religious and written sources of the Sasanian state.
  Ibn Mukaffa reports that "the 4th century is spoken in the court և the language of the capital is Tizbon" (the word "century" originated from the words "dar" - "door", "darbar" "court").
 In fact, the century is exactly the same northern dialect we talked about above.
 In our opinion, the formation of the new Persian language took place in the territory of Tizbon, because it was here that the first Parthian language, Middle Persian, met and interacted with each other.
We think that the lack of written sources from Tizbon does not allow us to prove the argument that the new Persian language was formed in Tizbon, but all these are mere assumptions without being based on clear, undeniable facts.
  Now the scientific community is inclined to think that the new Persian language was formed in the territory of Khorasan.
The Arab invasions ումը The fall of the Sassanid state made it possible for the colloquial language, the new Persian embryos, to become a orthographic language.
 In other words, if the Sasanian state had continued to exist, the colloquial speech spread among the people would not have received the status of a literary language.
  According to Salar, after the fall of the Sasanians, in fact, the use of Middle Persian was limited, while colloquial Persian, which became popular among the people, continued to exist և already in the IX century it received the status of a literary language [4].
Some authors claim that Middle Persian was used as the language of literature in the 11th century.
 That is why those who wrote in literary Persian found it right to distinguish the fact that they did not use literary Middle Persian, but wrote in "another" Persian, which was written in Arabic letters, called "Dari" from the distinctive Middle Persian.
2 Later, when Middle Persian became practically a forgotten language (it limited its use to Zoroastrians only), the name "Century" became obsolete; new Persian was simply called "Persian" or "Farsi".
2 It is believed that the new Persian language was written in Hebrew before the transition to the Arabic alphabet.
This view was put forward by Henning, who came across a text in Hebrew-Persian from Dandan-Willigh, the language of which differed from the language of the Jewish-Persian texts mentioned in the previous pages of our work.
  According to Henning, it has more similarities with the new Khorasan Persian.
Henning thought that the formation of the new Persian language was rather slow, citing the example that if Firdusu's "Shahnameh" had been read by Sasanyanarka Khosrov Parviz, he would have understood it ninety percent.
  From this we can assume that the roots of modern Persian date back to the pre-Islamic period, but no sources written in colloquial language were found in the Sasanian period, as the creation of written culture was the monopoly of the political-religious elite, which ordered them in the official language.
 Professor Garnik Asatryan thinks that modern literary Persian differs slightly from the classical period, which in turn did not differ much from late Middle Persian.
Based on the fact that the main differences between Middle and Modern Persian are due to syntax, and there are similarities in vocabulary and phonetics, we can state that Persian has not undergone significant changes for more than a thousand years, which is not typical of Iranian languages ​​(at the same time). with the Persian language, the other languages ​​belonging to the south-western group continued their dynamic development).
 Professor Asatryan explains the "stop" of the development of the new Persian language in time with its unique status, that is, being the language of literature.
  Persian does not undergo "deep" linguistic development, but stops in its late Middle Iranian state, becoming the language of cultural և interethnic communication.
In one of his articles, the Swedish scientist Bo Utas expressed the following idea: "If we accept that modern Persian is the direct successor to the Middle Persian orthographic variant, we will omit the fact that some colloquial dialects formed the basis for the creation of a new literary language."
  Thus he questions the fact that he is the direct descendant of the new Persian, Middle Persian; he notices that the new Persian is a completely re-created language.
 However, later Utas compared the Middle-New Persian languages ​​from a grammatical, lexical-syntactic point of view, noting that although the differences in terms of vocabulary are obvious, the Middle Persian-grammatical-grammatical systems are still more simplified in the new Persian.
 And as we know, as the language develops, it goes to simplification.
  Thus, in spite of the many Parthian and Sogdian borrowings in modern Persian, its foundations should still be sought in Late Middle Persian.
Let us briefly touch upon the geographical question of the formation of the new Persian language.
  In scientific circles, the question of the Eastern origin of the new Persian language is beyond doubt, as the creation of unique gems of medieval poetry is attributed to the poets who worked in the palaces of Iranian states in the eastern states.
 However, the absence or scarcity of such written sources in Western and Central Iran does not at all prove the fact that the new Persian language did not develop in those territories.
  If we do not take into account the fact that Persian is the language of literature, then small reasons can be made for considering the territories of Central Iran as one of the cradles of the development of the modern language.
After the Arab invasions, after the formation of the caliphate, Arabic was initially given the status of a dominant language in the territories occupied by the Arabs, and the administration of the state-economic life was carried out in Arabic.
  However, Arabic, being the official language of the caliphate, did not spread to the common people, who continued to speak Persian.
  Moreover, due to the weakening of the caliphate soon, nationalist formations were formed in Iran, where Persian was spoken "in the palace" and outside it.
  The famous poets and scholars of the time began to write in new Persian, and it is not accidental that the Iranian Islamic preachers, who were fluent in this language, spread it in their mother tongue, Persian.
  We can conclude that in the IX - XII centuries Persian was the language of the spread of Islam.
 Proof of this is the new Persian words found in a number of religious sources found in the Maldives, which replace Arabic terms that are unfamiliar to the locals.
  In other words, the language of the texts is the local dialect, but the special terms typical of the Islamic content are taken not from Arabic, but from Persian.
  For example, in one of the texts the phrase "Prophet Muhammad" meets "petambarun".
 It is noteworthy that the word "petambarun" comes from the modern Persian word "peyğâmbar" - "prophet", but in Arabic the word "rasul" is used more often.
  Other examples are the words "namadu" - "namâz" ("namaz"), "roda" - "rouze" ("fasting").
 It is noteworthy that a number of texts with waqf content from the Maldives state that Orislam brought a certain Abdul Barakat Yusuf al-Tabriz to that country, whose name speaks of his Iranian origin.
 In fact, in the early stages of its development, modern Persian was also a language of Islamization from Iran due to the activities of Iranian preachers.
LITERATURE [6] Asatryan G. S., Этническая композиция Iran.
  From "Арийского простора" to Sahakyan THE FORMATION OF A NEW PERSIAN LANGUAGE Keywords: New Persian, Century, local dialects, Pahlavi.
