CONSTITUTIONAL WAY OF AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA The development of human society from the depths of millennia to the present day has taken place simultaneously with economic development.
 It originated from agrarian sources, gradually forming industrial rivers (agro-industry), lakes (light industry, other branches of industry), gradually filling the post-industrial social ocean.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Armenia was characterized as a backward agrarian country.
 In the following decades, as a result of the rapid development of agriculture and industry, by the end of the 20th century, Armenia had already become an industrial state, about half of the gross product of which was provided by industry.
 However, as a result of the dramatic changes that took place, Armenia entered the 21st century neither as an agrarian, nor as an industrial, nor as a post-industrial country.
  The current imperative of evolutionary economic development is to put agriculture at the center of economic policy as a starting point on which to base the development of the agro-industry and then the entire industry, which in the long run can be the only guarantee for the transition to a post-industrial society.
The role of the Constitution can play a role in this, on the other hand, the development of agriculture itself will be a factor in the establishment of the RA Constitution, allowing the numerous norms envisaged by the Constitution (such as education, medical care, adequate living standards, including housing, etc.). the right to improve living conditions, rest, choose a job, engage in entrepreneurial activities, etc. 1) become a living reality for the villagers, the largest class of Armenian society.
Let's find out what is the main problem of the RA agriculture, what constitutional solution needs to be proposed to it.
The main problem of RA agriculture.
  Hovhannes Tumanyan says in his title of the Armenian Relief Committee. "Finding peace, he went to work, he, the great sufferer, the real owner of Armenia, the Armenian villager.
 Famine, sword, and destruction have not suppressed his famous endurance and constructive spirit.
  He has made many sacrifices, but he does not leave his grandfather's home; he is standing on his native field and will remain so, no matter how much the authorities go. ”2
 Unfortunately, every Armenian poet made a mistake in his predictions, the Armenian villager did not stand still in the 1990s. From the beginning of the 19th century, as soon as the first authorities arrived, the path of mass emigration changed, the villages began to be emptied, the school classrooms were closed, the gender and age structure of the rural population was distorted, the "red book" of Armenian villages began to appear.
1991 The law on "Rural Collective Farms" adopted in 1959 started the process of land privatization in Armenia, the first among the post-Soviet countries.
  The privatization of land with lightning speed was conditioned more by political than economic motives, which was later formulated as "not a policy of giving land to the peasant, but of giving the land to the peasant."
Instead of the former 860 collective-Soviet farms, about 340 thousand farms were formed (300 thousand of which were still in 1991 3), 1 See Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (as amended), 2005, art. 32, 33, 33.1, 34, 38, 39, 48 (point 12) (available at http: // www.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=75780 link).
2 See H. Tumanyan, Selected Works, Yerevan, "Soviet Writer", 1978, p. 496.
3 See Armenia's Social Profile ությունը Poverty, NSSRA, 1996, p.
On average, 1.38 hectares of land were allocated, located in 3-4 separate plots of land 1.
1990 compared to 1994 The share of those employed in agriculture in the structure of those employed in the general economy doubled (from 17.7% to 33.9%), which was an unprecedented social setback2.
  Agriculture, in fact, turned into a "cushion" absorbing the surplus of thousands of labor, which is getting rid of industry and other sectors of the economy, which, at the same time, was accompanied by a sharp decline in labor productivity in the agricultural sector3.
Due to the temporary break between the privatization of land (1991-1992) and the rest of the agro-industrial complex (processing-supply industry, procurement-commercial enterprises) (1996-2000), the Armenian villager was left alone not only for production, but also for production. with worries 4.
The allocation of the usable agricultural land fund of agriculture in a sparsely populated country like Armenia to about 1.2 million plots of land, not exceeding half an hectare on average, was a political-economic short-sightedness that did not allow any development of this important branch of the economy in the medium to long term.
  As a result, Armenia's commodity-intensive growing agriculture became a patriarchal, handicraft-based nature farm in a matter of years, with 2/3 of its output consumed by farms6, and "microscopic" lands precluded the use of agricultural machinery. Intensive development of agriculture, specialization, improvement of socio-economic conditions of those engaged in the given sphere.
  As a result of the implemented "reforms", 20% of the previously performed mechanical works are mechanized7, about half of the previously irrigated lands are irrigated8, and about 1/3 of the arable lands of Armenia 9 have been left out of agricultural circulation, mainly due to unfavorable benefits for farms.
What happened to the RA agricultural sector can be briefly summarized as follows: "With one blow of the government hammer, the mirror representing the RA agriculture was divided into hundreds of thousands of small pieces, which will take years to assemble, but even then the mirror will not get its former look."
The constitutional way of solving the main problem of RA agriculture.
  As it is noticeable, the main problem facing the Armenian village is over-fragmentation, one of the solutions of which is the enlargement of agricultural lands, which can be effectively implemented only in one way, through the rapid development of cooperation between farms.
In the second half of the 20th century a new scientific direction was formed and began to develop rapidly - constitutional economics.
 For the establishment of that direction, its founder is economic 1 See Number of farms, commercial organizations և agricultural lands as of January 1, 2006, NSSRA, 2006, p. 3; Nakhshikyan A., Tsosyan A. Pricing in the Agricultural Products Market, Working Paper, Central Bank of Armenia, Yerevan, 2002, p. 6.
2 See A. Nakhshikyan, A. Tsosyan A., 2002, p. 5.
3 See Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, Yerevan, 2003, p. 19.
4 See Manaseryan N., The Agrarian Question Yesterday and Today, Yerevan, Economist, 2005, p. 98.
5 See Social Profile of Armenia և Poverty, NSSRA, 1996, p. 8.
6 At present the productivity of agricultural production is at a rather low level.
 In 2013, it amounted to 56.4% (including bargaining transactions), and the rest was directed to the internal use of agricultural holdings (See Sale (use) of agricultural products by farms in 2013, NSS RA, 2014, p. 2).
7 See Manaseryan N., 2005, p. 114.
8 Currently irrigated lands make 154.2 thousand hectares (7.5% of agricultural lands) in the 1990s. Compared to 275 thousand hectares.
 As a result, there is a loss of quality characteristics of agricultural lands with all its long-term negative consequences (See 2013 Government Decision No. 1184-N of 17.11.2013 on the Report on the Availability and Distribution of the RA Land Fund).
9 2012 As of today, 448.4 thousand hectares of arable land, the sown areas of agricultural crops have made 304.2 thousand hectares, ie 32.2% of the arable land has not been used for a purpose (See Statistical Yearbook of Armenia 2013, NSSRA, 2013, pp. 296-300).
Sagittarius James Buchanan in 1986 He was awarded the Nobel Prize 1.
  According to Buchanan, the main distinguishing feature of constitutional economics from ordinary, unconstitutional economics is that it focuses on the choice between rules, as opposed to the second, which focuses on elections within existing rules2.
  In this case, it is a matter of choosing between the following two rules: divided farms or agricultural cooperatives?
 The question itself shows that this discussion is in the constitutional domain.
Armenia is one of the few countries in the world that, on the one hand, is characterized by very low soil, on the other hand, 37% of the total households are engaged in agriculture 3 (2012), and 77% of households in rural areas4 (2008). ավել The value added of this sector is 22% of GDP (2013).
  By comparison, agricultural land in the United States accounts for 45% of the total area, which accounts for 1.2% of GDP, accounting for 1.6% of those employed on the farm.
 For the United Kingdom, these figures are 71%, 0.7% և 1.2%, respectively, in France, which is known around the world for its agricultural products - 53%, 1.9% և 2.9%.
 That is why there is no need for such a constitutional regulation in many developed as well as developing countries; in the case of the Republic of Armenia, it completely stems from the internal reality.
However, the international constitutional experience is not so poor in this respect.
In particular, the Greek Constitution stipulates that the state is obliged to take care of the development of agricultural cooperatives (Article 12, point 4).
  According to the Constitution of Nicaragua, the state must promote the voluntary association of peasants in peasant cooperatives; it must support the resources necessary to increase their technical and production capacity in order to improve the living standards of the peasants (Article 109).
  According to the Panamanian Constitution, in order to meet the goals of agrarian policy, the state must promote the establishment of cooperatives for production and distribution (Article 126, paragraph 3).
 According to the Constitution of Paraguay, the establishment of agricultural cooperatives must be encouraged by the state (Article 114).
  Particularly noteworthy is the Portuguese Constitution, which provides for the exclusion of very large farms and the rescheduling of very small farms.
  The latter stipulates that without harming the right to property, the state should, according to the law, facilitate the revision of the size of small agricultural units from the size appropriate for the purposes of agricultural policy, which should be done through legal, fiscal incentives for their structural or purely economic integration. in particular in the form of cooperatives or means aimed at uniting land plots (Article 95).
Thus, based on domestic realities, as well as international constitutional experience, it is proposed to introduce a new constitutional norm in the RA Constitution: "the state promotes the development of agricultural cooperatives."
 It is proposed to introduce it as a new point of the article (Article 48) "on the main problems of the state in the economic, social and cultural spheres", with the following wording: "to promote the development of agricultural cooperatives".
  The constitutional enshrinement of this norm will be followed by the legislative "Program Branches", the implementation of which will have a great contribution to the development of agriculture and the establishment of constitutionality in the Republic of Armenia.
1 See the official website of the Nobel Prize http:
//www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1986/buchanan-facts.html.
2 See Buchanan JM, The Domain of Constitutional Economics, Constitutional Political Economy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1990, pp. 2-3.
3 See Statistical Yearbook of Armenia 2013, NSSRA, 2013, page 59.
4 See Report on Main Survey Results of Rural Communities, NSSRA, 2009, p. 8.
5 See World Bank Database (available at www.databank.worldbank.org).
Jirayr Mkhitaryan CONSTITUTIONAL WAY OF AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT Keywords: constitutional economics, constitutional rules, agriculture, problems, constitutional solutions.
