THE FEATURES OF PERFORMANCE WERE HADAYAT'S "HORSE OWN" STORY In the twentieth century, rapid changes in times and lifestyles left their indelible mark on all directions of art.
 The worldview of transformed human consciousness, no longer satisfied with the "old" methods of reflecting life, sought to reincarnate their reality, the external, and, most importantly, the inner world.
  The result of that aspiration, in fact, can be considered the beginning of modernism, a direction that was already ingrained at the beginning of the century and had already been dug in the middle of the century.
 The philosophy of modernism evolved և In the 1970s it was reincarnated as postmodernism or postmodernism, that is, everything that comes after modernism, that follows modernism.
Postmodernism is characterized by abstraction, playfulness, coincidence, chaos (rhizome), anarchy, dispersion, fragmentation, irony, denial of petrified values, the tendency to consider everything artistic, etc.
 And perhaps the most important circumstance that characterizes the art of postmodernism is the boring, indifferent person who suffers but is indifferent to his suffering, who has no sacred values, who plays with everything, no matter what.
 It should be noted, however, that this game is also a unique way to dispel boredom, to dispel silent and eternal loneliness.
 And this, in turn, is the contradiction that divides the person into many selves, innumerable essences.
These characteristics characterize the man of the 20th-21st centuries.
 This man has found himself in a whirlpool of time and space, for which neither religions, nor nationalities, nor the geographical borders between countries, nor the color and color of the skin matter.
  That vortex involves Man in general.
  And it is not accidental that the Iranian writer, separated from the world by the centuries-old barrier of tradition, perceives and depicts the soul drama of the man of his time with the same depth, seeing in it his own drama, on the one hand, enriching that drama with elements of national thinking and Eastern culture.
One of the most famous works of Hedayat in the center of our study refers to the Iranian novelist Sadegh Hedayat (1903-1951).
Hedayat is one of those writers who go beyond the stereotypes of national thinking and are often persecuted for it.
 And maybe those endless searches led to many suicide attempts and eventually to suicide.
One is the novel "Kor ow" (1937).
The novel begins with an introduction by biologist Rene Lano. "In this book, the meaning of art, in the most honorable sense of the word, is obvious."
 Undoubtedly, we must agree with R. To Lano's assessment, since Hedayat's novel is so multi-layered, the psychological cycles are so deep and rich that the reader-researcher-literary critic cannot put down the pencil even for a second, not stopping at this or that expression which gives rise to reflections and hides a symbolic meaning.
 That is to say, there is a rich system of signs in the novel, binary-opposition anti-union pairs, the elements of existing enif-use-myth-destruction, surrealism with its collage of nightmares, the aesthetics of aromas, etc.
The plot of the novel is small. The anonymous hero, who illustrates pens, thus trying to dispel his boredom and loneliness, falls in love with the playmate of humanity, but the deified woman was actually a devil. If they marry the boy by conspiring to deceive him, then the marriage becomes a marriage, the woman spends every night in the arms of a scoundrel.
 And the husband "loves" and "hates", but in the presence of the wife he is miserable and ready to embrace her sweet look and a kiss.
 The endless psychological torments bring him to a borderline state, when he is neither in this world nor that, everything becomes meaningless.
 In order to take revenge, he goes to the woman's bedroom, the desired sexual intercourse takes place, but at the peak of pleasure, the married man stabs the woman in the body.
  Then the crime committed at the moment of madness must be hidden. he wraps the woman's body, puts the suitcase և tries to bury it without a doubt… This is the whole process of the action, and the logical end of the compositional aspect becomes the structural beginning (A3-B1-C2).
The chronotope of the novel is also narrow - a tomb-like room, a real tomb, everything is foggy and gloomy, it seems that it is foggy and rainy all the time. "
The actions take place at night, everything is shrouded in darkness.
Let's try to separate the main motives through which an image is created in the novel.
a. The sign system in the novel, b. Binarism, c. Freudianism (wife, hero, mother-in-law, father-in-law, wife's brother), d. Syncretism.
As mentioned, the novel has a rich system of signs, which can be grouped as follows: • eyes-mirror, • shadow-mask, • laughter-giggle-rumble, • sound-scream-creak, • wine, opium, • grave-abyss-pit , • knife-blood, • door-wall-curtain, • fir, nunufar, petty, • golden beetle, flies, owl.
The eyes are constantly trembling in the novel.
  The hero tries to make sense of his existence in the eyes of his beloved woman.
 They are still the magical eyes of a childhood friend: "eyes full of bitter reproach, captivating, magical, astonished, threatening, alarming and inviting" (12).
 The soul shines in the eyes, they become the symbol of life, opposing death (extinguished, cries).
 The eyes often meet in parallel with the mirror.
 In the image of a woman, they evoke the unknown feminine essence, the coquettish, the magical-seductive, in which the hero finds only his destruction and death.
In another case, the mirror is a way to find the author's lost self, which becomes a unique borderline between the hero and "other people". "In my limited life, the mirror occupies a greater place than the world of non-beings who have nothing to do with me" (46).
 It is interesting that the hero sets himself apart from other people.
 He is filled with deep hatred towards humanity, the word "man" is hardly used in the text, instead we often meet the definition of "world of scum".
 This is life-death և the belief of a person standing on the border of this world-world about people like him.
The mirror meets in parallel with the shadow.
  The hero is afraid of losing his love, but he is afraid of facing his own self (shadow). "I am afraid to look in the mirror, to look out of the window.
 I see a double image of my own shadow everywhere ”(42).
 The mirror-shadow parallel is not accidental. No matter how much they reflect the reality, the reality in them is false. Both are just inverted faces of reality.
 For a non-psychic hero, the shadow is his interlocutor, he is a twin. "It was a pleasant game for me to hear the echo of my voice in the air.
 Maybe I was talking to my shadow to dispel my loneliness ”(94).
The shadow-mask, shadow-owl pairs are remarkable.
 The horrors, the nightmares, all the horrible thoughts from which the hero escapes, but which persistently pursues him, are shaped by the egg of shadows.
  Especially the butcher is like that.
 This character is endlessly giggling, monstrous, there is something demonic in him, he is omniscient, like a executioner he sucks the blood of the hero, his victim, reads his thoughts, predicts his past and future mistakes, sins.
  The shadow of the butcher accompanies the author to the most unexpected moments, it creates a deadly atmosphere.
 He looks like a mask. He is sometimes in the guise of a potter, sometimes a coachman, sometimes a gravedigger, sometimes an old man, sometimes a woman's lover, or even the author himself.
 Postmodernism is characterized by the abstraction of the relationship between the hero and the butcher. We can even say that the butcher is none other than the hero himself, one of their many selves.
  "My shadow had become more real than my essence.
  The clumsy old man, the butcher, the nanny, my greedy wife, all were my shadows.
Shadows in which I was imprisoned.
  "Terrible images from the walls and doors, from the curtains, shook me and made me frown" (104).
  And the cruel persecutions are his divided essence, the contradictory thoughts.
 "All those faces were in me և mine.
 The movements of a finger-smashing, terrifying, and funny mask were changing.
  "All these faces were in me, but none of them belonged to me" (97).
The author also refers to the mask of death. Do you see at least at the time of death whether a person is free from the falsification of masks or not? "It is probably only at the time of death that the face is freed from those hesitations and acquires an irrational state and appearance" (97).
  It is not by chance that one of those pursuers more often appears in the guise of a butcher.
  This seems to emphasize the image of the executioner, who slaughters with a bloody knife, gets the greatest pleasure from his work, roars with a satanic terrifying voice.
 In all cases, the mask-shadow is lame, bent, flaky, the face is wrapped in a scarf (a sign of secrecy in the shadows).
In the novel, laughter comes up the stairs - giggles, growls.
 As we mentioned, the most influential sign of a skinny old man is a giggle.
 The most eloquent determinants of his giggle are dry, unpleasant, hoarse, vain, awful… "echo coming out of emptiness" (14), "shrugging to the point of shaking shoulders" (31), "A hoarse and unpleasant giggle sobered me up", " The old man growled dryly and unpleasantly "(33)," His shoulders shook with laughter "(34)," His shoulders shook with a degree of trembling and unpleasantness, which made me cringe "(53).
Besides the old man, the mother-in-law's corpse laughs. "The deceased seemed to be making fun of us with a protruding denture" (53).
 And at the end, like an old man, the hero cries even more terribly. "Suddenly, to the point of thorns, I snorted hoarsely, unpleasantly and terribly.
 I did not know my own voice, like a voice coming from the ground.
 The child ran out of the room in horror "(97)," Holding my hands in front of my face, I involuntarily started to giggle.
 It was stronger and more horrible than before.
 A deep giggle that was not known was coming out of a hole in my body.
 A vain giggle circling in my throat, coming out of emptiness ”(107).
In the novel, along with the satanic giggle, the murmur is heard - a muffled voice, which is a scream erupting from the soul of the hero, nightmares, cries of horror, which, however, comes out, is heard as a drowning throat, remains only a snarl He stays with his worries.
 That voice is more often so different from the real one, so far away that the hero does not know.
  That is, the person is divided again, the selves become unknown and foreign to each other.
"I did not know my own voice, it was like a voice from outside" (97).
 The sound coming from outside, the echo, is in fact a mask, like a shadow, a mirror, the reality of which is inverted և approximately.
  That fading voice gradually disappears into the noise of outsiders. "The more I immersed myself, the more I listened to the voices of others, like animals wintering in caves, and I heard my own voice only in my throat" (85).
 "I could hear my own voice in my throat, but their meaning was incomprehensible to me.
  In my head these sounds merged with other sounds ”(90).
  Only at the end does that drowning snarl erupt like a giggle, which was the cry of saved nerves and inner vanity.
 Munch's painting "Scream" inadvertently appears in the imagination, the hero of which is a man who has been silenced by noise, fleeing, alone, terrified by vanity, like the anonymous hero of a novel.
In the "Kor ow" novel, it is noticeable that the hero is addicted to narcotics.
 Wine, opium and other drugs take him into oblivion, give him a pleasant dizziness, and the epic atmosphere is covered with mist.
 It is as if the breath of that soft smoke or fog is transmitted to the reader.
"Now I want to squeeze my whole life like a bunch of grapes in my hands, its juice, wine, drop by drop, as holy water, dripping into my dry throat in the shadows" (40).
 "I want to say the lice of my life, dripping the bitter wine of my life drop by drop in the shadow of my throat. "Here is my life" (42).
 Note that wine has preserved the meaning of this sacred drink in this work. It is perceived as a life-giving liquid, the lymph of life, holy water.
 The mystery of wine as a sacred drink has deep roots. It comes from Iranian classical poetry (O. Khayyam), receiving more vivid manifestations in Sufi mystical perceptions (according to Sufism, wine symbolizes divine love).
Wine is also a deadly liquid, in addition to being the lymph of life, it was given to the killer by his mother. "Apricot wine, an eternally quiet reward."
 Probably he, too, had given his life as a bunch of grapes to the poisonous one, from the poison from which my father died, he had given it to me ”(51).
  "My thoughts slowly brightened, grew and became charming, and I sank into a half-asleep, half-asleep immortality" (36). This is the destructive effect of opium.
As we have already mentioned, the most basic color of the novel is the darkness, which is the color of death, it creates a deadly environment.
  Therefore, the fact that the hero lives in a coffin or a grave-like room is not accidental at all.
 "Time loses its meaning when a person is in a cemetery.
  This room was the graveyard of my life և thoughts ”(59-60).
"My whole day passed, and now it passes through the four walls of my room.
My whole life has been spent in four walls ”(9).
 The whole life and monotony of the hero are reminiscent of the pit of vanity, ոչ perhaps not accidentally his scream explodes from the pit of the body. "J. A deep giggle that was not known was pouring out of a hole in the body" (107).
The grave atmosphere is completed by the closing of doors, walls, signs of impenetrable cracks.
  Thus, in the metaphor of "the door of the room was opened like a dead mouth" (14), the couple դու the door of the dead mouth creates an alarming image.
  Or, "There were no holes or cracks outside at all."
 The niche was completely closed and turned into a piece of wall, as if it did not exist.
 I pulled the cart forward, hit the wall madly, and listened.
  "Nothing was left of the niche," my blows to the thick, solid wall were in vain.
 The wall turned into a piece of hermit lead ”(15).
The picture of the curtain is interesting.
 "As soon as I opened my eyes to Adamut, the image of the handmade curtain hanging in front of the door came to life."
What an amazing and terrible curtain!
 A skinny old man, tied with an Indian yogi-like turban, holding a stringed musical instrument in his hand, was sitting on a string.
 In front of him was a beautiful girl with chained arms, like Bugham Dasi, a dancer of Indian pagan temples, who seemed to have to dance in front of an old man.
 J. Probably my father or uncle sent it from distant places.
 I was horrified when I looked at that picture carefully ”(71).
In the novel, the same image, scene or description is often repeated, as if serving as ready-made "templates" that complete the creative texture and give it a collage character.
 One of such repetitive images is the above-mentioned scene of a handmade pen, a jug, a curtain, an old man sitting in the shade of a fir tree, a girl in a dress standing or dancing.
 It is not accidental that these images appear on the handmade object.
 The hero mentions that the illustration of pen pots was intended to dispel his boredom, to save time, therefore, the same scene on a handmade pen, a pottery jar and an Indian curtain testifies to the murdered, wasted, meaningless death.
The fir, the nunufar, the managor have a symbolic meaning.
It is known from mythology that fir is a symbol of death.
  This explains the fact that fir is found in cemeteries.
  In ancient times, this tree was considered a symbol of longevity, the tree of life, the heavenly life that begins after death.
  In the midst of Greek mythology, it was one of the "tools" of the kingdom of Hades, which in the Christian sense embodies endurance, human perseverance, and self-sacrifice.
 In any case, the symbolism of the border of life and death is obvious.
Nunufar and petite are the symbol of love.
  The girl is depicted in a jug with a blue nunufar in her hand.
 Manragor is considered by the Persians to be a plant of love and tenderness, a herb.
  "He appeared to me as a dream created by opium… He aroused in me the same warmth of the love of a monster.
 "It was as if she had been pulled out of her lover 's arms. Եւ It was like a tiny female snail" (13).
The representatives of the animal world - flies, beetles, worms, snakes, the owl - are also symbols.
  Flies are generally the embodiment of sin, torment, and inner torment.
  Let us remember even the "Flies" of Sartre, whose buzz is reminiscent of the stings of the human conscience.
And in this novel, the flies are the symbols of the hero's loneliness, boredom: "In general, the previous courage had left me.
  I was like the cold and lifeless flies that entered the room at the beginning of autumn, terrified by the sound of their own banging.
 For a while they remain motionless on the walls, and when they realize that they are alive, they knock fearlessly on the door at dawn, their lifeless bodies fall all four of the room ”(80).
The worms, the golden beetle are found in the last part of the novel.
These are the insects that revolve around the corpse.
 "My clothes were torn from head to toe, I was polluted by blood clots.
 Two golden beetles were flying around me; little white worms were crawling on my body, the weight of some corpse was squeezing my chest ”(109).
 The beetle symbolizes the movement of life. In Egyptian beliefs, it is associated with the worship of sun and fire.
The snake is one of the parts of a woman's essence.
 In the novel, this woman is presented with divine Satanic natures.
 He enchants like a snake, traps it.
 The symbolism of the snake opens mythical layers. The hero's mother, dancer Bugam Dasi, puts the cobra to the test of the two men she falls in love with, the hero's father and uncle, on the condition that she marries him, who will come out of the cell alive.
 This mythical motif, which is found especially in epics and fairy tales, is connected with the ancient ritual of marrying a girl.
It is one of the key signs of the novel.
 The title "Korbu" is not accidental.
  No bird or animal would be more suited to the heroic temperament and mood than the original.
 The owl itself is considered a bird of death, a symbol of meaninglessness, insight, loneliness, night darkness, sadness, and sadness [4], which completely coincides with the hero's mentality.
At the end of the novel, the human-shadow-owl transformation takes place. "At that moment I was like an owl, the sighs drowning in my throat were in the form of blood stains.
 Maybe someone who thinks like me has some pain.
 I was looking like an owl lying on the wall, reading my notes carefully, bent over.
 Of course, he understood well.
 Only he could understand.
 I looked at my shadow with my tail and I was terrified ”(104).
If we try to generalize the sign system of the novel, we should mention that the signs we point out appear in pairs, forming binocular series, such as eye-mirror, mirror-shadow, mirror-mask, shadow mask, shadow-owl, giggle-scream, scream-scratch , scream-echo, shadow-echo, noise-silence, blood-wine, wine-lymph, life-wine, wine-mortal, wine-making, opium-immortality, history-door, door-impossibility, burial, room-grave, room Matchbox-grave, this-world-underworld, people-scum, donkey people-vavashot stupid women, knife-wielding, body-hole, woman-angel, woman-devil, cobra-woman, woman-amphibian, life-beetle, love- nunufar, death-fir, death-owl, night owl բացի In addition to these couples, there are also more universal, common pairs working in the novel, such as life-death, life-dream,dream-reality, sleep-dream, night-day, light, sky-earth, up-down և etc., և etc.
The myth of the serpent or the cobra was briefly discussed in the section on the serpent.
 Let's talk about some of the manifestations of mythology.
 For example, the ancient belief about the movement of souls, according to which "in those houses and destroyed buildings J. There are people whose bones have already rotted; the cells of some parts of the body still probably still exist in the blue nunufars ”(37).
 In some respects, the myth is reminiscent of the myth of Little Mher. Baby Mher was born with his hands closed and blood in his palms.
  The mythical manifestation of blood is in the case of the hero's wife: "Even in the cradle, my wife used to bite the nails of her left hand to the point of bleeding" (57).
 The left hand is not accidental either.
In another part we see the folk superstition, which the hero believes in, mentally prepares for death. "He did not have a shadow head.
  I have heard that if anyone's shadow is headless, he will die before the end of the year ”(68).
In the novel there is also the idea or myth about the afterlife typical of all progressive religions, which is denied by the hero, that is, it takes place in mythical destruction. "I felt unusually calm, throwing away the opinions wrapped around my neck.
 The only thing that comforted me was the afterlife and destruction.
 Living a second life terrified me ”(85).
 Or, “I did not need a prayer book or any scribble, writing, or thought.
 Why did they need their vile lies? ”(75)
There are relationships between the characters in the novel that take us to Z. In the footsteps of Freud's theory.
  Thus, the hero marries his cousin's daughter, a blind man.
 On the one hand, incest takes place here, on the other hand, the author explains the reason for such a step. "I accepted my aunt, whom I loved very much, as my mother.
 And out of that love, I later married his daughter, my blind man, because he was like her ”(52).
  Or the sexual desire of two brothers, moreover, twin brothers, for the same woman, the destruction of one of the twins during the cobra test.
 "My uncle falls in love with my mother and finally cheats on her.
 The inner's outward appearance with my father makes that task easy ”(50).
In the bride-mother-in-law relationship, the well-known Freudian theory, the Oedipal complex, appears, that is, the mother's unconscious drive to the child, the jealousy towards her son's wife. "With what cynicism and dislike does he talk about the bride, as if he were a hen (two women with a common husband, who become hens for each other, K. B.), who had stolen the love and passion he had for his wife.
 The bride was probably beautiful ”(74).
There is also an element of homosexuality in the novel, which is manifested between the hero and the barren. "She was like a sister with two and a half apples.
 … .I sat down and hugged him and hugged him.
 The body was warm, the calves were like my wife's calves, they had the same unobtrusive movements.
 His lips were like his father's, but what made me hate and hate him was attractive and appealing to my son.
 I kissed her half-lips, which seemed to have just parted from the long, warm kiss, "like my wife's lips" (67).
 A remarkable circumstance. The hero almost always calls the woman a bitch, which emphasizes the duality of the woman - the divine, the immoral, the serpentine.
The hero aspires to his wife with great sexual desire, և the more he is rejected, the stronger that desire becomes. "All the cells of my body wanted him, especially my internal organs.
  They shouted that they wanted to.
  … .The ring of tormented and sick light wants with all its might and pulls towards itself the ring of light flickering in his body ”(62).
  These unsatisfied desires overflow with words. "In such moments, everyone relies on the only weakness of his life and the strength of the habit.
 The drunkard is drunk, the writer is writing, the mason is cutting stone, և each one has his bile, the accumulations of mental dissatisfaction, faced with the strong shocks of life, emptied and liberated.
  In such cases, a real artist is able to create masterpieces ”(23-24).
  The author adheres to Freud's theory of considering art as a dream. ելի he begins to write, creating the atmosphere of a pleasant pleasure provided by the wine.
In the novel, there is a vividly expressed consciousness of the hero, a generational connection, which he tries to erase in every way, tries to get out of the burden of heredity.
 It reminds K. Jung: collective unconsciousness. "It seems that one of the most important things in life was to pass on the gestures, thoughts, dreams and customs of the ancestors to the next generations through sayings and stories.
 They have spoken the same word for thousands of years, they have had the same gatherings, sexual intercourse and child headaches ”(58).
  In this way, the eternal cycle of life is once again emphasized.
  The synonymy typical of the "Kor ow" novel (syncretism).
 Here you can find many dream studies.
  These dreams are mostly nightmares, the result of a gloomy, drug-inflamed imagination.
 In one of them, for example, the hero wanders in an uninhabited, desolate city, whose inhabitants "died and died unknown."
 Two drops of blood dripped from their lips and landed on their clothes.
  Whomever I touched, my head would fall off and fall.
At the butcher's shop, in front of our house, a man with a scarf like an old man, a scarf around his neck, a knife in his hand, with inflamed eyes, the pages of which seemed to have been cut, was staring at me.
 I wanted to take the bony knife. Sometimes the boundaries between dream and reality are mixed, the dream falls from the hand, the head is torn off and falls.
  I fled in alarm.
I ran through the streets in horror.
  Everyone was frozen in their places.
I was afraid to look back.
  Near my father-in-law's house, I saw my son sitting on a sack.
I took two cookies out of my pocket and tried to give them to him, but as soon as I touched him, he was beheaded and fell.
 I screamed and woke up ”(81).
is a doorway to reality, or reality appears in a dream.
In such images, the mirror has its own place, for example, “The nanny's face seemed to reflect in a crooked, concave mirror.
  He looked incredibly funny.
 Long and thin, as if a huge weight had pulled down on his face "(70).
 The hero's hatred is manifested in imaginary and nightmarish images. He is terrified that after death his bones will merge with the bones of other people, scum and sinuses, so he dreams of "having long hands and sensitive fingers after death so that I can carefully gather and store all the parts of my body with both hands" (84).
There are many manifestations of transformation in the novel.
 One of them is the shadow-ou transformation, which we have already referred to.
 The transfiguration was to be expected, as many masks had to be torn in succession.
 In metamorphosis, reductions and exaggerations replace and complement each other.
  "The forgotten horrors came to life again and again.
 Terrified by the thought that the feathers of my pillow would turn into the blades of a dagger, the button of my jacket growing into a bitter stone.
 Terrified by the thought that the lavash would fall to the ground and shatter on the glass, that if I slept, the oil of the lantern would spill on the ground, the city would be set on fire, and the legs of the stray dog ​​would start to touch like the hooves of a horse.
Anxious at the thought that the sleepy old man sitting in front of his backpack, suddenly, uncontrollably and endlessly giggling, turned into a worm in the backyard of the house (place for washing feet - K. B.) turned into an Indian snake, changed my bed around the tombstone through his hinge , և Marble gears will be attached to each other.
  Terrified at the thought that my voice would be cut off, "no one will respond to my cry for help" (87).
 In this part, the feather-dagger, button-stone, lavash-shattered glass, oil-burned city of lantern, shund, worm-snake, bed-tombstone, shout-broken voice transformations become unique binary-opposition pairs.
  In another episode, the hero again turns into a plant under the influence of opium. "Opium, the spirit of plants, the sluggish spirit of plants was injected into me.
  I travel in the ibus world.
 I became a plant ”(89).
In the following example, the transformation also shines in the mirror: "I stood in front of the mirror.
 Terrified, I covered my face with my hands.
 I was like… No, I was completely transformed and became a sleepy old man.
 My hair and beard were like the hair of a man who came out of a cobra.
 My hair was white, my lip was cracked like an old man's, my eyes were deprived of newspapers.
 J. A new soul had penetrated my body.
 I was thinking with a different egg, I was feeling everything with a different egg, I could not get rid of the clutches of the one who woke up in me ”(107).
In another part, the room-coffin transformation is reminiscent of Abalzak's Shagren's skin. "Sometimes my room was getting smaller and smaller, as if I were in a coffin.
  My temples were burning.
  The limbs of my body were preparing for the slightest movement ”(104).
The novel makes the colors and aromas visually visible.
A woman's smile, for example, is reminiscent of the Mona Lisa's mysterious smile.
  Scents create a unique aesthetic.
 The scents in this novel are gloomy and heavy, as the whole atmosphere of the novel is gloomy and heavy.
  In general, they are the smell of death, the world's.
 Here is the description of the hero's coffin room. "The smell of sweat, the smell of old diseases, the sharp smell of mouth, feet, urine, rotten oil, rotten mat, burnt omelet, burnt onion, boiled herb, paper, baby stool և the smell of the room of a young man who has just calmed himself from sexual passions .
  Dead or suffering flocks from the street vapors, all of which are alive, have retained their characteristic uniqueness.
 There are many other scents, the origin and composition of which are unknown, but have left their mark ”(45).
In one part, the hero is so captivated by the charm of the eyes of the woman he loves, that everything in the wall becomes impossible for him, he removes the eyes of the corpse, just like P. The hero of Zuskind's "Perfume", after squeezing the scents of the victim's body, threw away his useless body.
 "Now I had those eyes.
I had the soul of my eyes on paper, and I did not need the body that became food for the mice of the worms in the doom of doom ”(26).
Only once does the universal gloom lighten, and the aromas become sweet and pleasant.
 This is the moment when the hero remembers his childhood: "The heat of the wind blows and sweats my body with thousands of mouths."
  The bushes of the desert turned yellow under the bright sun.
Like a sickly eye, Ar radiates its rays from the depths of the sky to the silent and dead nature.
  The pungent odor of the local vegetation։ soil immediately reminded me of my childhood.
 J. I fell into a kind of sweet dizziness, as if I was born again in a lost world.
 This feeling had an intoxicating effect: sweet, like old wine, it left its effect in my veins and lymphs, to the depths of my being ”(64).
  However, the intoxication is short-lived, the empty and sad present returns everything to its original gloomy and vague state.
The relationship between the hero կնոջ the beloved woman creates a beautiful scene of fragility, reminding B. The main motive of Vian's novel "Foam of the Days" is the aesthetics of fragility.
  "He was a chosen person.
I realized that those nunufars were not ordinary flowers.
  And if it was washed with ordinary water, I was sure that the face would decay, and if he picked natural nunufars with long, fragrant fingers, the fingers would peck at the petals "(16)," My heart stopped.
 I held my breath, afraid that it would disappear like coal or a cloud from my breath ”(20).
Let's generalize.
  In addition to the undeniable sting of Arcel in the novel "Kor owl", the influence of the modern literary directions of the West is equally obvious.
  Our analysis was aimed at identifying the means of imagery that are most typical of Western literature, such as structural-semiotic analysis, active comparative or anti-alliance, binary-opposition pairs, myth-application, Freudianism, Jungism, dreams, transcendence, reality, intertextual links.
LITERATURE [1] "Kor ow", Collection of translations (Sadegh Hedayat, Sadegh Chubak, Houshang Golshiri), Yerevan, 1992, page 7 (the rest of the quotations from the novel will be enclosed in parentheses).
[2] Short encyclopedia symbol, URL.
 http:
//www.symbolarium.ru/index.php/ (data entry.
 16.09.2018). [3] URL.
 http:
//www.starfate.ru/ezo/ (date of publication.
 12.09.2018) .URL.
 http:
//www.newacropol.ru/alexandria/symbols/owl/ (date of publication).
 04.09.2018). Christine Bagratyan PECULIARITIES OF IMAGINATION OF SADEGH HEDAYAT "KOR BU" STORY Keywords: Sadegh Hedayat, "Kor ow", modernism, postmodernism, structural-semiotic analysis, a.
