THE CONTINUOUS VALUE OF A FEW WORDS ABOUT MIGRATION IN ARMENIAN The phenomenon of leaving the homeland, leaving the homeland և to settle in other places, voluntarily or by force, ող the closely related realities in Armenian Gharib, Nzhdeh, deportee, displaced, exiled, refugee, astandakan, colonized, foreigner Gail.
  Some of these words և derived from them, other words composed of words are used as a term today, և it is necessary to pay attention to their uses and subtleties in the scientific literature, on the one hand, because the primary feature of the term is nonsense, on the other hand, the ability to translate them. is a precondition for the term.
 "Diaspora. Khachik Teoleolyan, editor of the Journal of Transnational Studies, a Diaspora theorist, examining the discursive transition from exile to diaspora in the Armenian reality, briefly touches upon a few words related to migration in Armenian, noting that it may be the subject of a separate philological article 1.
 The idea of ​​writing the work came from there, that we will try not to conduct a purely philological examination, but to make some observations on the terminological value of some of those words. Diaspora, world of migration, dispersal, community, community, foreigner, refugee, migrant, exile, exile, deportation.
The definition of the term Diaspora today is largely linked to the American multidisciplinary Diaspora discourse, where it is one of the most debated issues.
 The Diaspora, which was first used to name the Jewish, then the Greek, the corresponding Armenian-Armenian social formations, in the 1960s. It has since begun to occupy a wider semantic domain, including realities such as ethnic minorities, refugees, exiles, deportees, etc.2.
  Researchers take a non-aligned approach, either using certain characteristics to apply a term to a group3, or considering it indiscriminately applicable to any group outside the homeland, regardless of the cause of the spread.
 In the case of the Armenians, it is clear that it is one of the ancient, "classical" Diasporas.
 For the Armenians scattered in Armenian, the word "migration world" is used as a collective, in addition to the Diaspora.
The Diaspora is the equivalent of the diaspora.
 The origin is the same: "disperse" from the native Indo-European sphere 4.
 The root colony of the world of emigration is a native Semitic word, the simple root of which is gala, meaning "to evict the inhabitants by evicting the country" (Hebrew: galut) to be exiled, exiled 1 Tölölyan Kh., Elites and Institutions in the Armenian Transnation.
  Conference on Transnational Migration.
  ComperativePerspectives. Princeton University, 2001, http.
//www.transcomm.ox.ac.uk/working%20papers/WPTC-01-21%20Tololyan.doc.pdf.2 Tölölyan Kh., Rethinking Diaspora (s).
  Stateless Power in the Transnational Moment, Diaspora.
  A Journal of Transnational studies, 3 The most frequently cited paradigm is V. The Saffron Paradigm: 1. The members of the group or their ancestors spread from the center of origin to two or more foreign (peripheral) regions; 2. Preserved a collective memory, vision or myth about the physical location, history and achievements of their true homeland; 2. Consider it impossible 4. They consider the homeland of their ancestors to be their real, ideal homeland, where they or their descendants will eventually return; 5. Collective forces contribute to the preservation or restoration of the homeland, security, and prosperity. Continue to remain personally or indirectly connected to the homeland;
  See Safran W., Diasporas in Modern Societies.
  Myths of4 See Jahukyan G., Armenian Etymological Dictionary, Yerevan, 2010, p. 698.
migrants ”) 1.
 In modern Armenian, in addition to the meaning "colony, colony", "the country, the territory where the emigrants settled" also means "a country occupied by the imperialist state", "a place to hold prisoners" and other meanings2.
  From ancient times the diaspora in Hebrew is expressed in the Jewish sense of the word galut, in which there is obviously a negative connotation - "deportation" 3.
Although the word "migration world" in Armenian dictionaries can be explained by the word "Diaspora", "Armenian colonies established in foreign countries together, Diaspora" 4, but in historiography it is accepted to divide the history of scattered Armenians into Armenian Diaspora և The Armenian Diaspora (Diaspora) based on the fact that after the Genocide feature, undertook new tasks, made a transition from a worldview և organizational point of view to a qualitatively different new dimension5.
 In other words, the pre-genocide and post-genocide realities are called, respectively, the world of migration and the Diaspora.
In studies written in English, the diaspora, the Diaspora, is used for pre-genocide reality, for example, S. Aslanyan calls the trade network of New Julfa a trade diaspora6.
  The reason is not simply that the English equivalent of the word "world of migration" 7.
  As a social formation, the Armenian diaspora is a typical Diaspora phenomenon in the current perception of the word Diaspora, moreover, with the most demanding approach to the use of the word8.
It is noteworthy, however, that the word Diaspora, as a self-identifying word, was not initially used among the Armenians.
  Referring to that question, E. Melkonyan notes that in the mid-1920s, this new historical reality gradually began to be called Diaspora in Armenian publications abroad, corresponding to the Greek diaspora.
  Referring to the "New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language", the author concludes that neither here, nor before him, in the writings of medieval Armenian historians, nor before, the word was used about Armenians9, և explains the reality by the fact that the Armenian nation was not scattered. Despite emigration, the vast majority of Armenians have always lived in their homeland10.
  It should be noted that the "New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language" dictionary, which is a monumental work to Jughensha in Armenian lexicography, is interesting in this case in the sense that its authors were the Mekhitarist Congregations settled in distant Venice, who, in fact, do not consider themselves Diaspora.
Earlier, H. Meliksetyan, trying to clarify the concepts of the words "Armenian" in the colony, "Diaspora", which were equally used in reference to Armenian communities living abroad, says: "These old and new Armenian communities differ not only in their origin, but also in their role and nature in the Armenian reality.
  Therefore, in our opinion, it is more expedient to use the word Diaspora Armenian for the present communities of the world.
  The former Armenian colonies arose են existed at that time 1 Acharyan Hr., Armenian Radical Dictionary, h. 1, Yerevan, 1971, page 505.
2 See Explanatory Dictionary of the Modern Armenian Language, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1969, page 364.
 See also Aghayan E., Modern Armenian Explanatory Dictionary, h. 1, Yerevan, 1976, page 217.
  Words consisting of the root colony are: migrant, migrantist, migrant, migration station, migrant building, migrant Armenian, personal name: Gaghtuhi.
3 Militarev A., On the Contribution of the Term "Diaspora" (Development of Definitions), Diaspora, N 1., 1999, p. 29.
4 Aghayan E., h. 1, p. 216.
 See also Djerejian G., Tonigian P., Der Khachaturian A., New Dictionary of the Armenian Language, vol. 1, Beirut, 1992, p. 316.
5 Yeghiazaryan A., The Periodization of the History of the Armenian Diaspora, Issues of Armenology, Yerevan, 2014, p. 33.
  See also H. Meliksetyan, Homeland-Diaspora Relations և Repatriation (1920-1980), Yerevan, 1985, p. 3.
 See also Melkonyan Ed., Diaspora, "Armenian Diaspora", encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2003, page 9.
6 Aslanian S., Trade diaspora versus Colonial State.
  Armenian Merchants, the English East India Company, and the High Court of7 Խ. To explain the meaning of the word to those who do not speak Armenian, Teoleolyan literally translates it as galut-word, see Tölölyan Kh., Elites and Institutions in the Armenian Transnation.
 Conference on Transnational Migration.
 Comperative Perspectives.Princeton University, 2001, http.
//www.transcomm.ox.ac.uk/working%20papers/WPTC-01-21%20Tololyan.doc.pdf.
8 Levon Abrahamyan notes that in order to avoid differences between the Diaspora and the Diaspora (the world of migration), G. Bartakchyan prefers to use the word dispersion instead of diaspora.
 See Abrahamyan L., Armenia և The Armenian Diaspora. separation և meeting, 21st century, 1 (11), 2006, page 38.
9 The word is spread. Space everywhere or side. գ A scattered nation.
 Then, examples are given that refer to the Jews.
 See New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language, Yerevan, 1979, pp. 765-766.
10 Дловтлов В., Мелконян Э., Армяская диаспора.
 Glasses of Socio-Cultural Typology, Yerevan, 2009, p. 42. while the overwhelming majority of the Armenian people still lived in their homeland.
 Meanwhile, the modern Armenian Diaspora was formed as a result of the genocide organized by the Turkish government, after the mass deportation of Western Armenians, when a large part of the historical homeland of the Armenian people was simply deprived of its Armenian identity. ”1
One of the first uses of the word Diaspora as a self-identifying word is in the Greek version of Yervand Otyanivep's novel, "Hay Tiasbora" 2.
 And later, in the issue of strengthening and spreading the position of the word, there was a lot in Beirut in 1958. The influence of the "Diaspora" weekly published by Simon Simonyan (Kh. Teoleolyan) 3.
It is obvious that the migration of Diaspora-Diaspora in historiography refers exclusively to their qualitative differences, and not to theoretical generalizations.
 Iskerb diasporan is used for the pre-genocide reality, it is meant that from the point of view of the theory of the modern Diaspora, the Armenian diaspora is definitely a Diaspora.
Another name of the scattered people is tsronik4, the dictionary explanation of which is as follows: "Tsruil (of the people), shaking" 5 «1. to disperse is to be dispersed, 2. the place from which dispersal begins ”6.
 As we can see, the dispersal does not indicate a specific circumstance of dispersion, the reason պատճառ may refer to the dispersion of any people և quite appropriate to the term dispersion, as a concept that includes all types of dispersion.
  Kh. Teoleolyan notices that the tsron has a coloring, it belongs to the high style word layer7.
  And various stylistic or emotional expressions are not acceptable in the case of the term8.
  It may be objectionable, but we think this does not preclude dispersion-translation.
 You should choose a neutral word for the term, and maybe the word will lose its stylistic nuance when it starts to be used as a term.
Colony, colony և In parallel with the words colony, community is used in the scientific literature.
 It, unlike the first ones, does not contain the meaning of separatism, but separatism on different grounds: "racial, tribal, national, linguistic, cultural, internal administrative, class, but especially religiously organized group among the inhabitants of the country, society, people" , community "9.
 The colony, the colony, is not a permanent unit at first, it can cease to exist.
  From the moment when the colony acquires a permanent character, creates structures and institutions necessary for the organization of internal life, it becomes a community.
The homonymous series that points to a person who has left the homeland is quite extensive: migrant, exile, foreigner, Gharib, Nzhdeh, exile, deportee, refugee Gyle.
  Here the series of exile-deportee-deportee-exile indicates involuntary, forced removal from one's own country, with slight nuances. exile (Greek: εξορία, borrowed mediated from Assyrian: aksoria, eksoria) - "to drive out of a city or out of the country as a punishment" 10, to expel (Pahlava vitar - to pass over a horse) - "to drive away" 11, to deport - to go beyond) to be expelled from the homeland, from the permanent residence 12.
  The word "refugee" is forcibly removed, the definition of which is given in detail in the UN documents.
 It is a legal definition, which 1 Meliksetyan H., page 49.
2 Otyan E., Hay Tiasbora (from modern astronomical life), Yerevan, 1999.
3 Khachik Tololyan, The Diaspora ությունը Diaspora Studies in the last decade, 24.08.2012, http.
//www.arteria.am/en/1331123076.
It was named after them - one of the most famous villages in the Moush plain.
 It is mentioned for the first time by Movses Khorenatsi.
According to the legend, 30 sons and 15 daughters of Tarban, the youngest son of Noah, son of Noah, lived here.
 The province is named Taron after Tarbanian, and the village is named Tsronk, because here his sons are divided.
 The village was destroyed and most of the inhabitants were exterminated during the Great Genocide.
  See Barseghyan. H., Dictionary of toponyms of adjacent regions of Armenia, h. 5, Yerevan, 1986-2001, p. 165.
5 Rev. Kranian A., Dictionary of Armenian Language, Beirut, 1998, p. 469.
6 Djerejian G., Tonikian P., Der Khachadourian A., h. 1, p. 1019.
8 Yezekyan L., Stylistics of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 2007, p. 35.
9 Djerejian G., Tonigian P. Der Khachaturian A., h. 1, p. 1117.
  The community also has an organization of the inhabitants of the town or village, the generality of the inhabitants as a collective unit և other meanings.
 See Aghayan E., h. 1, page 803.
10 Acharyan Hr., H. 1, page 370.
11 Ibid., P.
12 Explanatory Dictionary of the Modern Armenian Language, vol. 4, Yerevan, 1980, p. 457.
It is given in terms of who can be recognized as a refugee and who can not.
 In short, a refugee is a person physically alienated from his or her country because of a threat to his or her liberty or extreme discrimination against him / her, who is forced to leave the country to seek refuge in another country1.
In the case of the words Ghandib (Arabic, Persian: garib) there is no meaning of coercion, if we do not take into account that the socio-economic conditions created in the native country are in some sense coercion.
 Exile is a temporary exile to earn a living.
 It has spread among Armenians since the time of foreign conquerors, especially during the rule of the Ottoman Sultanate2.
  Nzhdeh is explained by the word foreigner in most dictionaries. The semantic nuances are mentioned by Hr. Acharyan: "The difference between the two is that Nzhdeh emphasizes living in a foreign country, and living in a foreign house" 3.
 We think that the so-called residence in a foreign house, Hr. Acharyan derived from the fact that one of the several options for the etymology of the word "foreigner" is to connect it with the word "guest".
  In some cases, Nzhdeh is equivalent to naftarand, which, as mentioned, has the meaning of coercion4.
We have already mentioned the negative semantic nuance in the word galut.
  Some dictionaries emphasize the meaning: "To leave one's homeland, one 's place of residence, to move to another country after a catastrophe" 5, some - not to "leave one's homeland to settle in another country" 6.
 It is obvious that the word (as in the Semitic root) initially has tragic nuances, but in modern Armenian there is an expansion of the meaning of the word, առն the word immigration is perceived as quite neutral, including all the ways to leave the homeland.
  This was the basis for suggesting the expressions migrant, migrant or migrant service instead of migrant, migration service7, which is quite acceptable.
 A small reservation though. referred to in the article Melkonyan, taking into account the dictionary explanation of the word migrant, mentions how fair 1915 is. After the genocide, deportation forced people to be called migrants in the world: "Most of them did not" leave "their homeland as a result of the disaster, nor did they" flee "elsewhere leaving the homeland.
 They had just been deported from their homeland by the Turkish authorities and are still deprived of the opportunity to return to their homeland.
 In other words, they are a separate type of immigrant, which clearly reflects the term deportee ”8.
Agreeing with the accuracy of the term deportee, we think that the use of the migrant is wrong, not only because of its comprehensiveness, but also because what he says in his explanation of "disaster" may also refer to genocide. In Diaspora Armenian literature, in the words of Diaspora Armenian intellectuals, the Genocide is often called the Catastrophe.
To summarize.1. The terms Diaspora pora Diaspora correspond to the term diaspora, provided that they refer to qualitatively different stages of the same dialect.
2. We suggest translating the term dispersion into a word, taking into account that it has a certain style, which, however, can be lost during the use of the word as a term.
3. The words colony, colony, colony, community are equally used as equivalents.
 One of them is the meaning of the existence of certain institutions and internal organization in the community.
1 For more details, see G. Avagyan, The Content Description of the Refugee Concept, Journal of Social Sciences, N 1, 1999, pp. 89-95.
2 The words Pandukht, Nzhdeh Gharib are used in the sense of human transit in the world. day, I am a stranger in front of you, nzhdeh և passing, as all my tribute (Ps. L-13).
 In medieval Armenian literature, in my homeland, there is that motive: My այս this world is yours, in which և you are an alien… (Deacon Hovhannes).
3 Acharyan Hr., H. 1, p. 449.
4 Kranian A., p. 336.
5 Explanatory Dictionary of the Modern Armenian Language, vol. 1, p. 364.
 See also Acharyan H., h. 1, page 505.
6 Aghayan E., h. 1, p. 216.
 See also Malkhasyants S., Armenian Explanatory Dictionary, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1944, page 407.
7 Melkonyan E., Immigration, repatriation discursive terminology in Armenia-Diaspora relations, Armenian emigration և Homeland-Diaspora relations in 1918-1985, International scientific conferences, Yerevan 2011, p. 4.
8 Melkonyan E., page 4.
4. In modern Armenian there was a semantic expansion of the word migrate. It has started to include all ways of leaving the homeland, not just leaving after a catastrophe.
5. The words "exile", "refugee", "exile", "exile" all refer to the words "forced", "alien", "nzhdeh", "gharib".
Hratsin Vardanyan THE CURRENT VALUE OF A FEW WORDS ABOUT IMMIGRATION IN ARMENIAN Keywords: Diaspora, dispersion, colony, community, migrant, akora, exile, refugee.
