GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE STAGE OF INITIATING CRIMINALS The fight against crime is one of the priority tasks of every state, as it causes significant damage to the rights of citizens, legitimate interests, as well as to the whole society and the state.
 Among the tools of the criminal policy of the fight against crime, the improvement of the legislative regulations, the correction of misinterpretations and omissions are of key importance.
The stage of initiating a criminal case has also been given a significant place in the theory of criminal procedure law [1].
Although the institute of criminal proceedings has been repeatedly studied in the theory of criminal procedure law, many of the issues that existed in the previous legislation have not been resolved in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
As a result, the elaboration of the new draft of the RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) was directed to the solution of the existing problems.
 From the legal regulations found in the draft, the stage of initiating criminal proceedings necessarily stands out.
  One of the guarantees of conducting any professional investigation is the effective use of criminal justice resources.
 The process of verifying reports of crime can be a way to prevent the waste of criminal resources.
The proof of the above is that according to the summary information of the RA Police under the Government of the Republic of Armenia, in 2016 18,764 cases of crimes were registered during the year, 17,043 in 2015, 17,546 in 2014, 18,333 in 2013, 15,776 in 2012, and 16,572 in 2011 [3].
  For comparison, let us just mention that in 2016 Only 4,895 criminal cases were instituted during the reporting period, ie approximately 1 in 4 cases.
 It turns out that ensuring the correct verification of the information received on crimes can significantly save money from wasting criminal resources.
Due to the above-mentioned necessity, the norms regulating the relations announcing the beginning of criminal proceedings and the issues related to their implementation have always been in the center of attention of both forensic experts and practical lawyers.
As mentioned by M. Ս. Strogovich, through the activities in question, the investigative bodies, the investigator, the prosecutor respond to the case of a known crime, if it is necessary to immediately identify the perpetrator, to identify and ensure his criminal responsibility [5].
 It is appropriate to mention V. Ya. Chekanov's statement that the state, through the relevant body, initiates the investigation of a criminal case, responds to the signs of a crime by carrying out a series of legal actions to identify the person who committed the crime.
Other forensic experts emphasize that the preliminary investigation, as well as the investigation bodies, determine the answer to the following questions at the stage of initiating criminal proceedings. Is there the necessary information to start a criminal investigation? How to respond to the facts that have become known to them, which contain features of a crime, is it necessary for the intervention of the judiciary or not? [7]
  Ս. A. According to Schaefer (we unequivocally agree with the latter), given the principle of publicity of criminal proceedings, the competent authorities authorized to initiate criminal proceedings և bodies do not have the right to ignore any sign of a crime by responding to them as actively and quickly as possible.
Based on the analysis of the above positions, it can be concluded that the essence of the issue in question is the proper reporting of a crime committed by a competent official or a planned crime, their prompt response, whether or not the existence of criminal features can be clarified. There are grounds to initiate criminal proceedings.
According to the current legislation of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the preliminary investigation of all criminal cases is mandatory, the beginning of which is announced by the decision to initiate a criminal case as a result of the stage of initiating a criminal case.
 In fact, it can be argued that this stage ensures the legality and justification of initiating a criminal case, the protection of citizens' rights և legitimate interests, which could be violated in case of initiating an unfounded criminal case, as citizens would be unjustifiably involved in criminal proceedings, possibly in court proceedings. [9], while the legal regulations governing the mentioned stage create many problems and controversial issues in law enforcement practice, leading to unnecessary waste of criminal resources.
 The imperfection and ineffectiveness of the initiation stage of the criminal case is evidenced by the fact that it was not reflected in the new draft of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. It was replaced by the stage of initiating criminal proceedings, which is radically different from the stage of initiating a criminal case, both in terms of role and significance, and the legal status of the subjects of criminal proceedings, conditioned by that, within the scope of powers and issues to be resolved at that stage.
The stage of initiating criminal proceedings announces the beginning of each case, reflecting the state's response to each crime.
 It turns out that the incomplete legal regulations of the stage in question can, on the one hand, lead to restriction or violation of the rights of victims of crime, allow perpetrators to avoid criminal liability (for example, on the grounds of expiration of the statute of limitations), on the other hand, lead to unnecessary restrictions waste.
We believe that the stage of initiating criminal proceedings lays the foundations for further investigation of the whole criminal case, so the omissions made by the legislator in the legal regulations of this stage may lead to irreversible consequences, reducing the effectiveness of the criminal fight against crimes.
The new draft of the RA Criminal Procedure Code defines the stage of initiating criminal proceedings as the beginning of criminal proceedings.
  Unlike the current legal regulations, the new draft of the RA Criminal Procedure Code does not envisage a separate stage of initiating a criminal case.
Part 1 of Article 173 of the draft stipulates that the prosecutor and the investigator are obliged to initiate criminal proceedings within the limits of their competence, if the proper report on the alleged crime is received from a natural, legal person, state or local self-government body or its official. - from the body carrying out intelligence activities, from the investigator, the prosecutor or the judge in connection with the exercise of their powers.
It follows from the systematic analysis of the above provision that the legislature reserved the power to initiate criminal proceedings only to the prosecutor-investigator, in contrast to the current criminal procedure, when a criminal case could also be initiated by the investigative body.
We consider that not giving the investigative body the right to initiate criminal proceedings is fully justified for the following reasons: According to the current criminal procedure regulations, the investigative body also has the right to initiate a criminal case or to reject the initiation of a criminal case.
 It turns out that in cases where the issue of initiating a criminal case is decided by the investigative body, the investigator may not be informed about the report of the crime at all, in the conditions when the subject conducting the preliminary investigation of the criminal case.
 In particular, in cases when the investigative body makes a decision to reject the initiation of a criminal case, it also makes a final court decision on the given case.
 The question arises whether in case of conducting a preliminary investigation of the case the investigator could not find features of a crime envisaged by the RA Criminal Code, if the issue was the subject of the latter's investigation, as the main procedural actions in the criminal case are to be carried out by the investigator.
If the investigative body decides to initiate a criminal case, if there are no legal grounds to transfer the case to the investigator, an investigation would be conducted within 10 days, then the criminal case would be transferred to the investigator for preliminary investigation.
  Separation of bodies conducting the proceedings, segregation of actions, weak / ineffective forms of cooperation, insufficient specialization, shortcomings in law enforcement practice lead to the fact that eyewitnesses are not identified, material evidence is not found, no investigative measures are taken at the scene. Many crimes are not revealed.
In addition, the draft includes an investigation - significant changes in the criminal-procedural relationship of constitutional concepts, in particular, the incorporation of operative-investigative activities into the Criminal Procedure Code, the process of conducting operative-investigative measures during the criminal proceedings, the aim of making it more predictable. domain, which is a possible guarantee of ensuring the rights and legal interests of a person within the framework of criminal proceedings.
 The investigation will cease to exist as an autonomous stage, otherwise it would not be justified to endow a judicial entity with the right to initiate criminal proceedings, which has ceased to act as the body conducting the criminal proceedings.
In contrast to the current criminal procedure, the draft has taken a different approach to initiating criminal proceedings on public-private charges.
 In particular, if the act or omission documented in the report may be subject to a preliminary legal assessment of a criminal offense classified as a private charge, the obligation to initiate criminal proceedings arises only if the report was filed by the alleged victim or his / her representative. It is not the alleged crime committed.
In other words, in cases when the report on private charges was filed by a person who has not suffered from the alleged crime, or is not the representative of such a person, the obligation to initiate criminal proceedings does not arise for the competent body.
 In addition, the Draft will take into account the fact that even in cases where such a report has been submitted by the injured party or his representative, criminal proceedings should be instituted if the alleged perpetrator is not known.
For other cases, the draft provides for an independent procedure for private charges, reserving such jurisdiction to the victim of an alleged crime who may file a criminal complaint in court.
  Taking into account the principle of humanitarianism պարտ The responsibility of the state for the protection of human rights, the prosecutor allows the draft to initiate criminal proceedings if the victim of an alleged crime is unable to defend his or her legal interests due to his or her helplessness or dependence on alleged harm.
We consider that the differentiated approach to initiating criminal proceedings on private charges is justified, as the main purpose of initiating criminal proceedings, thus initiating pre-trial proceedings, is to find out the characteristics of a crime in public charges, to identify the perpetrator, to prosecute him, comprehensively, comprehensively. creating the necessary conditions and conditions for the examination of the criminal proceedings in court by conducting an investigation, as well as, in cases provided by law, confirming the innocence of the person prosecuted or the impossibility of continuing the criminal proceedings.
The set of legal relations և actions that constitute the content of the pre-trial proceedings must ensure the promptness, speed and efficiency of the investigation, which implies a clear separation of judicial functions in the conditions of maximum protection of individual rights and freedoms.
 Under the current legal regulations, a number of problems arise in the legal practice of private prosecution cases, leading to unnecessary waste of criminal resources, burden on competent state bodies, which directly affects the efficiency of public prosecution cases.
Moreover, there are a number of omissions in the current criminal procedure, which create a deadlock for law enforcement agencies, leading to a short-term investigation of the criminal case and the implementation of related legal actions.
In particular, according to Article 35, Part 1, Clauses 4-5 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, “A criminal case cannot be initiated. A criminal prosecution cannot be carried out, and the initiated criminal activity is subject to termination if the applicant is absent in the cases provided by this Code. the complaint, և if the victim has reconciled with the suspect or accused. ”
 From the analysis of the cited provisions, it appears that the current criminal procedure legislation, conditioned by the fact of less public danger, clearly separates and defines the scope of private prosecution cases, for which a special procedural procedure is envisaged.
  Private prosecution cases may be instituted solely on the basis of a complaint by the victim;
 At the same time, it establishes an unconditional ground for terminating the criminal case, excluding the initiation of a criminal case, terminating the criminal prosecution, that is, in cases provided by law, the complainant (victim) is absent or the victim has reconciled with the suspect or accused.
 The Criminal Procedure Code does not oblige the body conducting the proceedings to take into account the opinion of the alleged perpetrator when deciding to dismiss the criminal case or to terminate the criminal prosecution, including obtaining his consent. not to initiate proceedings or to terminate the initiated proceedings, which, however, leads to the violation of the rights of the person who allegedly committed the crime.
The RA Court of Cassation expressed a legal position on the above-mentioned issue, stating that the body conducting the proceedings is obliged to reject the criminal case or terminate the criminal prosecution on the grounds provided for in Article 35, Part 1, Clause 4 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. to take into account the position of the person who allegedly committed the crime.
In legal practice, there are cases when the applicant points out the person who allegedly committed the crime, and then states which of the complainants is against the latter.
 As a result, a situation is created when the body conducting the proceedings is deprived of the opportunity to complete the investigation of the criminal case, it is obliged to find the given person in order to find out the latter's opinion on the mentioned issue.
  Sometimes the actions aimed at finding the person do not work, մարմ the body conducting the proceedings, due to legal impediment, is obliged to suspend the investigation of the case until the discovery of the alleged perpetrator in case it is not possible to continue the investigation after the discovery, because the victim is not complaining. presented.
Consider another situation that directly demonstrates the ineffectiveness of the current legislation.
 Imagine a situation when, on the basis of a complaint of a person accused of a private accusation, an investigation is carried out into a criminal case, and at the end of the preliminary investigation, the victim reconciles with the accused.
  In other words, there is an obvious waste of resources spent by the body conducting the proceedings, as it is the latter's responsibility to terminate the criminal proceedings in this case.
We consider that the draft regulations are more effective as the above-mentioned differentiated procedural procedure for initiating criminal proceedings on private charges: 1. deprives the injured persons of the opportunity to waste state resources, because, except in certain cases, the competent state body has no obligation to initiate criminal proceedings; 2. deprives the injured persons of their right to reconcile with the accused; exploits the right to abuses; 3. Allows victims to file a personal lawsuit in court if they want to restore their allegedly violated rights, and reconciliation with the alleged perpetrator in court does not lead to a waste of criminal resources. 4. In the absence of a complaint when the alleged crime is known;
 In this case, the reconciliation of the victim և the accused does not lead to the termination of the criminal prosecution.
Summing up the above, we find that the legal regulations in the draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia offer more effective solutions in terms of the use of criminal resources as a result of criminal investigation, in addition to preventing their unnecessary waste, ensuring the rapid implementation of the idea. exposing them, making a lawful and reasonable verdict against them depends on initiating a quick, reasonable, legal criminal proceeding [11].
Moreover, unlike the current legal regulations, by differentiating the procedures for initiating criminal proceedings on public-private charges, the Draft has limited the possibility of abuse of their rights by alleged perpetrators, without conditioning the proceedings already initiated on the latter's will.
LITERATURE Москва, Госюриздат, 1954, c. 88. Hovsepyan A., Shahinyan V., Problems of pre-trial proceedings in criminal proceedings of the Republic of Armenia, scientific-practical manual, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2009, p. 772.
[2] Dilbandyan S. A., Ensuring the protection of personal rights Ան legal interests in the pre-trial proceedings of the criminal proceedings of the Republic of Armenia, monograph, Sci. edited by Ghazinyan G. S., Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2011, p. 142.
[3] Legal Statistics, URL.
 http:
//armstat.am/file/doc/99499418.pdf (Accessed.
 13.08.2017).
[4] Socio-statistical section, URL.
 http:
//armstat.am/file/article/sv_12_16a_540.pdf (Accessed.
 11.07.2017).
[8] Schaefer S. A., Assembly of Evidence in the Soviet Conversational Process.
[10] 2014 decision of the RA Court of Cassation Decision No. SHD / 0012/11/13 of March 28.
Ghazaryan Tigran GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE STAGE OF INITIATING THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Keywords: initiation of criminal proceedings, initiation of a criminal case,
Registration, crime report.
