CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DANGER The issues of human և citizen կյանքի life, health protection and protection have always been և continue to be in the center of attention of criminal law.
Along with the development and progress of the society, the importance of morality grows in people's lives, քաղաք the citizens' legal awareness rises.
  People become more intolerant of indifference and heartlessness.
 One of the ten commandments - help your neighbor - has been enshrined in the Criminal Code.
 The proof that the above-mentioned moral norm is accepted and protected in our society is that Article 128 of the RA Criminal Code envisages responsibility for leaving it in danger.
  The public danger of this crime is reflected in the fact that it can have serious consequences for the person in danger.
 We consider it necessary to mention that there are problematic issues in the current Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia related to the fixation of this type of crime.
 In this scientific work we will try to raise the problematic issues of the crime that envisages liability for endangering and to give possible solutions to the problems based on the study.
Legislation in different countries defines the criteria by which not providing assistance to a person is considered a crime.
 The reason for the existing differences is not only the legislative technique, but also the different approaches to the solution of the issue (moral, worldview, political, etc.).
 This institution is enshrined in a number of other criminal laws of Russia, Georgia, Turkey, Iran, Poland, Bulgaria, France, Germany, Israel, Spain, Ukraine, Belarus, Latvia, Switzerland, Sweden, Estonia, Japan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
Some countries consider not providing assistance a crime only if they have an obligation to provide assistance. In the absence of the latter, the said act is not considered a crime.
  For example, Article 125 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation provides for liability for leaving in danger only if there is an obligation to care, if the offender has put the person in a life-threatening condition.
 A similar approach is currently present in the current draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, in contrast to the current Criminal Code, the former Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, which provided for liability in the absence of obligation.
 In this regard, we should consider referring to the different positions of some scientists related to the issue.
 D. V. Davtyan wrote. "Today, the obligation to provide assistance to persons in a life-threatening state of health is only a moral duty for ordinary citizens, but it is easy to correct, it is enough to enshrine a corresponding norm in the" civil rights "obligations of the Russian basic law."
 The opposite position was expressed by I. I. Gorelkin writes that the provision of universal responsibility implies that any witness in a situation dangerous to another person's life has a special duty to provide assistance, and in the case of a similar duty, the latter is imposed on anyone, which is against the law.
The correct perception of a special duty is of practical importance.
In the German criminal code, assistance is required by law, unless of course it threatens the life or health of the person providing assistance or a third party.
  The above-mentioned condition for providing assistance was also enshrined in the former Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, in contrast to the current draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia.
 We believe that the fixing of the mandatory requirement to provide assistance should be accompanied by the mandatory fixing of this condition, otherwise the crime would lose its purpose, which is reflected in the need to protect the health of the person մարդու citizen և citizen և.
  In addition, in Germany there is a feature related to this crime, which we should consider.
  In particular, in addition to the request for first aid, it is prohibited for the victim to submit further claims regarding the fact of the assistance provided by the victim և related to its quality, unless, of course, the person providing assistance acted reasonably in accordance with his / her readiness.
 Let us quote from the case law of Germany.
 On October 3, 2016, an 83-year-old man fell in the waiting room of one of Borbek banks.
 The video recorders recorded how the four customers entering the bank were indifferent to the victim, who was physically impossible not to notice in the given case, only the fifth customer called an ambulance.
  The man died at the hospital from head injuries after falling down.
 The court of general jurisdiction of Borbek has decided to hold the bank's customers liable for endangering them by imposing fines.
 Two of the clients regretted what had happened, while at the same time justifying that they thought the man was a sleep beggar, but such an excuse was severely criticized by the court, as the victim was well dressed, lying in the bank and not outside.
 The prosecution stressed that the verdict should be a signal that we are not moving towards an indifferent society, and Judge Carl Peter Winterberg told the defendants that there was only one for them, that someone was lying and needed help.
 Even the fact that, according to the forensic examination, the man was going to die, regardless of the speed with which he was taken to the hospital, was not considered by the court as a mitigating circumstance.
The above-mentioned feature of the German legislation is present in a number of US states.
 There is a so-called "law of carnival" [4], the idea of ​​which is that it is forbidden to make any claim to a non-specialist caregiver, even if there are unfavorable consequences.
  In our opinion, such a guarantee is not only acceptable, but also obligatory, taking into account the widespread motives for providing assistance.
 We believe that people who have the opportunity to provide assistance often prefer not to provide assistance because they have a real reason to fear further prosecution by the victim or his / her successors, so fixing such a requirement will be a mutual guarantee for both the provider and the practice. to rule out cases of non-assistance.
Legislation in some countries obliges any eyewitness to at least inform the relevant authorities of the need to provide assistance.
 It is clear that the above-mentioned is a minimum requirement. It has been enshrined in France, Spain, Israel, and in our current criminal codes.
  The Georgian Criminal Code provides for several independent crimes to be endangered, and the Bulgarian Criminal Code has six articles criminalizing endangerment.
In a number of European countries, mastering first aid tricks is required to obtain a driver's license.
 We think that the approach is acceptable to the extent that it will help the driver to help the victim.
 The analysis of Article 128 of the RA Criminal Code shows that the legislator envisages responsibility not only for the cases when the criminal was obliged to take care of the victim or put himself in a situation dangerous to the victim's life or health (part II), but also for cases when the criminal He was not obliged to take care of the victim և he did not put him in a life-threatening situation (part one).
  In other words, the obligation to inform the relevant bodies about the need to provide necessary or obviously urgent assistance to a person in a life-threatening situation is imposed on any person, but the first part of this article has been decriminalized in the draft RA Criminal Code.
 In our opinion, such an approach enshrined in the draft RA Criminal Code is controversial.
 Recognizing that there are some omissions in the first part of Article 128 of the RA Criminal Code, which cause problems in law enforcement practice, we nevertheless believe that the complexity of the evidence is not a basis for excluding the obligation to provide assistance to decriminalize the case. by changing the disposition.
Referring to decriminalization, we consider it necessary to emphasize that if we decriminalize the general requirement to provide assistance, the latter becomes only a moral obligation, and the approach of some cases, in our opinion, is unacceptable.
  For example, failing to provide assistance to a person whose life-threatening condition has occurred if the person had the opportunity to provide it without harming himself or herself or a third party should be considered a crime, taking into account the latter's public danger.
  Our approach is based on the principle of humanity, as well as the fact that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia proclaim human rights and freedoms as the highest value, and the protection of the right to life enshrined in the Constitution is the responsibility of any state. with the help of coercive measures applied by the state based on it, otherwise the mentioned right will be of a purely formal nature.
  Of course, the best regulator of human behavior is morality, especially when it comes to the crime in question, when a person acts not out of fear of criminal responsibility, but out of a sense of morality.
 However, at a certain stage of society's development, when moral values ​​begin to decline, it is criminal law that contributes to the formation of moral legal awareness, especially when the protection of human life and health is one of the most important issues of criminal law.
 Moreover, we believe that in most cases of endangerment it would be possible to prevent the death of a person through the slightest intervention.
  We believe that the majority of the society knows the rules of first aid, taking into account the fact that the latter is a compulsory subject in RA higher education institutions, but mastering the rules of first aid is not enough to reduce or at least minimize the cases of first aid. It is necessary for the members of the society to be informed about the criminal liability for providing assistance, as well as about the relevant guarantees that need to be enshrined in the RA Criminal Code.
In our opinion, one of the serious gaps in the current RA Criminal Code is the lack of appropriate guarantees for the person providing assistance, which causes justified fear and mistrust in the person providing assistance, so in order to free the person providing assistance from further unfavorable consequences and persecution. Legislative prohibition on submitting related assistance requests to the provider.
 A guarantee must be considered, as we have mentioned, the condition that the person providing assistance or third parties does not endanger the life or health of others.
It should be noted that the case law study [5] shows that the first part of Article 128 does not apply, but that fact can be seen as a justification for the decriminalization of the relevant part of the article, as criminal liability for failure to provide assistance to a person in danger. First of all, we think that the lack of application of the relevant part of the article is not due to the fact that such cases do not happen, but mainly due to the fact that the law enforcement agencies do not pay enough attention to the detection of such cases. .
  Of course, the detection of such cases, we think, is quite difficult.
The difficulty of disclosure is one of the main reasons for the decriminalization of Article 128։ 1, but given the developments in science, we find that the disclosure process is difficult but impossible.
 Moreover, we believe that in practice there are many other crimes that are committed, for example, in a deserted place, late at night, and the tools and witnesses of the crime are missing, but the complexity of detecting such cases is not a basis for excluding criminal liability.
  The substantiation of decriminalization can also be the argument that according to Article 183, Part 1, Article 128, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, cases are initiated in a way other than on the complaint of the victim, the suspect or the accused in case of reconciliation with him, they are subject to termination.
  Suppose that if there is a complaint, then there is a person who has allegedly committed a crime, and in such cases, of course, problems with disclosure, we think, will not arise.
 What is more worrying is the fact that not informing the relevant bodies about the need to provide assistance is, in fact, not punishable under the draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia when it does not require any special knowledge or training, moreover, the latter, as already mentioned, is only a minimum requirement. is.
Article 128 2 2 provides for liability for leaving a person in a life-threatening condition, deprived of the opportunity to take self-preservation, helpless if the offender had a genuine ability to provide assistance to the person, was obliged to care for him or herself, or had placed him or her for life. in a dangerous condition.
 It follows from the content that he / she has an obligation to provide self-help if he / she had a duty of care, which may arise from law, other normative acts, contract, marital relations, etc., or when the subject behaves in a life-threatening manner. , including lawfully, he put the person in a similar situation և, while having a real opportunity to help, he showed inaction.
  For example, when the driver of a car runs over a pedestrian who violates the rules of crossing the road, he leaves him helpless and leaves in case he has a real opportunity to help.
  When discussing Part 2 of the Article, we consider it necessary to refer to Article 244 of the RA Criminal Code, which provides for liability for leaving the scene of a traffic accident, as in practice the relevant part of Article 128 is most often used to endanger the victim after traffic accidents. in connection with.
Let us bring an example from court practice. N. was charged with Article 242, Part 2, Article 128, Part 2, Article 244 of the RA Criminal Code for violating the requirements of Article 2.2.1 of the Criminal Code, not having a driver's license, driving his car. subjugated V., who died from his bodily injuries.
 In addition, N., having a real opportunity to help the victim immediately after the collision, left the scene of the accident and drove away.
The public danger of this act is that it not only violates the rules of the road, but also makes it difficult to discover the objective truth about the circumstances of the accident.
 From the criminal disposition arises the obligation of the person to remain at the scene of the accident, for which there is no liability for action or inaction.
  It becomes clear that the disposition contains uncertainty, as a result of which the latter is sometimes identified with Article 128 2 2.
 In order to exclude such confusion, it is necessary to clarify Article 244.
  In Russian criminal law, this issue is in the center of attention of researchers.
  In this regard, we consider it necessary to quote Judge A. of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation. L. Konovalov's position on the issue.
  The latter, answering the question whether a norm envisaging criminal responsibility for leaving the place of the accident is necessary, or the criminal responsibility envisaged for leaving the danger is enough, said: "It is required to at least clarify the content of the crime, the meaning and content of the objective side, the responsibility imposed on the person - the correlation of this crime with other crimes" [8].
 Thus, the Russian legislator finally went the way of criminalizing leaving the scene of an accident in 2003.
 In the circulating draft of the RA Criminal Code, this problem has been solved in the same way, which, we think, is the right approach.
The next question we would like to address in connection with Article 128 2 2 is the content of the phrase "he put the person in such a state", which contains some uncertainty, և causes difficulties in terms of perception.
 We believe that we are talking about any behavior, both lawful and illegal, after which the victim finds himself in a life-threatening situation, which results in the obligation to provide assistance to the offender, ie the basis of the duty is the previous behavior of the offender.
 It is natural that if the perpetrator intends to kill the victim or cause serious damage to his health, there can be no mention of the crime, but in the relevant part of the article there is no clarification of the intent to kill or cause serious harm, which, in our opinion, is omitted. is in the draft of the RA Criminal Code.
The third part of the above-mentioned article envisages endangering the most dangerous type - the act provided for in the second part of the same article, which caused death or other serious consequences.
  It follows from the disposition of the third part that in relation to the death of the victim or other grave consequences, the criminal may also show intentional intent, which, we think, is unacceptable.
 The fact of causing the mentioned consequences by negligence is ignored, which is also not justified.
 In our opinion, the problem can be solved in two ways: either to correct the existing omission, or to exclude the mentioned consequences as an aggravating circumstance of the act.
  In the circulating draft of the RA Criminal Code, the solution of the problem was given as follows: The death of the victim or other serious consequences are not considered as aggravating circumstances, instead there is the aggravation of aggravating circumstances: the crime provided for in part 2 of this Article, committed: 1) against a minor, 2) against a pregnant woman or 3) materially or otherwise dependent on the perpetrator with respect to [9].
It is clear from the wording that the legislator conditioned the more dangerous act by the vulnerable condition of the victim.
  In our opinion, such an approach is justified, և in this regard, we consider it necessary to note that in some countries attention is paid to the victim being in the most vulnerable position, but with one difference that such victim status is considered only a mandatory feature of the crime.
 In other words, the vulnerable state is used, but is not considered as an aggravating circumstance.
 Such an approach exists in the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, as well as in the Criminal Code of Japan.
  We agree with the approach in the draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, because such a vulnerable situation of persons increases the public danger of the crime, therefore it should be punished more severely, և it was wrong to satisfy such situations of persons as a mandatory feature of crime, considering only self-defense.
Thus, summarizing the approaches of different countries to the crime under discussion, the problematic issues raised on the basis of the study, our positions on them, as well as based on the studied practice, the draft of the RA Criminal Code, let's try to formulate our proposals for improving the institute.
  First of all, we think that the first part of Article 128 of the RA Criminal Code, which envisages a general obligation to provide assistance, should be observed.
  However, it is obvious that in the current criminal code of the Republic of Armenia, we will have an increase in crime.
 The growth will be conditioned by a wide range of subjects, which may include this corpus delicti, which in turn will complicate the already complicated procedure for detecting such acts.
 We think that the problem can be solved in two ways.
 The first way is to narrow the circle of subjects, envisaging responsibility only for the cases when the help provided by the criminal is the only hope for the victim's salvation.
  Such cases can happen in a deserted place, at a late hour, when the victim is in an extreme state. Միակ The only way to save him is the help of a passer-by who realizes this fact, has a real opportunity to help without hurting himself, but even leaves the need for help. without notifying the relevant authorities.
It is natural that such cases cannot be ignored by the legislator, as in these cases we are dealing not with ordinary indifference and heartlessness, but with an act of public danger.
 At the same time, this method of problem-solving cannot be considered perfect. In practice, it will create situations when the helper, who has found himself in such a situation against his will, և his help was the only hope for the victim's rescue, will be held accountable, and the helper will be released only on that basis. from responsibility.
 Naturally, the law cannot create such unequal conditions, so it is relatively expedient to second-hand the responsibility of linking the act to the high public danger.
 The high level of public danger must in each case be identified, assessed by the court in the light of all the circumstances of the case, and discussed in detail, following the example of the judgment cited by the German court.
The solution may be: Next, we propose to establish guarantees for the person providing assistance together with the obligatory provision of assistance.
The guarantee that the donor or third party will not endanger the life of the donor արգել the ban on making further claims related to the assistance provided, even if certain adverse consequences have occurred, should be fixed in the article under discussion.
Based on the draft wording of the RA Criminal Code, we propose to formulate Article 128, which envisages liability for endangerment, as follows: “1. "Failure to provide obviously urgent assistance to a person in a life-threatening situation or failure to notify the appropriate authorities for assistance if the offender had a real opportunity to provide assistance without harming his or her life or that of a third party" if the circumstances of the case are high.
2. Leaving a person in a state deprived of the opportunity to take self-protection measures in a life-threatening or health-threatening condition if the offender had a genuine opportunity to provide assistance to that person, was obliged to care for him or herself or put him or her in a life-threatening or health-threatening condition. He did not intend to cause harm.
3. The crime provided for in part 2 of this Article, which was committed: 1) against a minor, 2) against a pregnant woman or 3) against a person who is materially or otherwise dependent on the criminal.
4. It is prohibited to submit claims related to the quality of the victim (his / her legal successor to the person providing assistance). ”
LITERATURE URL:
 https:
//rvs.su/statia/ostavlenie-v-opasnosti (date of application.
 19.03.2018). [4] Law on Good Samaritan, URL.
  https:
//ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%97%D0%D0%B8%D0%BD%D0%B0 (date of publication.
 16.03.2018). [5] DataLex Judicial Information System Website, URL.
 http:
//datalex.am/ (The link was made on March 18, 2018). [6] URL.
 http:
//www.datalex.am/dl_case_view_page.php?caseType=1&courtID=0&caseID=33214047251857848 (Accessed.
 15.03.2018). [7] "Criminal Law of the Republic of Armenia", Special Part, for textbooks, Yerevan, 2011.
Шевякова.
 Formation of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation from 25 Apr. 2001 [9] Unified website for publishing draft legal acts, URL.
 https:
//www.e-draft.am/ (The link was made on 15.03.2018).
Begoyan LALACRICAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR RISKING IN DANGER Keywords: life-threatening situation, endangerment, general need for assistance, relevant partial decriminalization of the article, difficulty of disclosure, moral debt, guarantee of help for the demonstrator, real guarantee
