CULTURE OF THE SOUTHERN BASIN OF LAKE SEVAN IN ANCIENT AGE (PITCH AND BORDER STONES) Early Armenian (Achaemenid), Hellenistic-Roman-Roman period
  Although very few archeological excavations have been carried out in the archeological sites of that period in this region, but in the museums of Yerevan and Martuni a considerable (mostly accidentally acquired) material has been collected, and the joint Armenian-Italian archeological expedition has been carried out since 1993. until 1999 He collected a considerable amount of surface material from hundreds of ancient sites, which allowed us to pre-date these sites, as well as to form an idea of ​​the types of pottery in the southern basin of Lake Sanaa and their local features in common with the rest of ancient Armenia.
When studying the pottery, the quality of surface treatment, firing, the color of the base of the angobe, the visible features of the sand grains, the clay mass, the clay layers, the sub-layers were taken into account1.
Pottery of the Achaemenid period in the southern basin of Lake Sanaa.
 Achaemenid pottery significantly replicates the material of other places in Armenia, particularly Armavir (which is the best studied for this period) 2.
 This pottery has been composed separately since the Early Iron Age, responding to the pottery of Gyumri 3, Karmir Blur, Dvin 4, as well as the material of Khartanots and Golovino.
 This collection is vases with very short necks, beaded horizontal belt, wavy, overhead or horizontal.
The jars have a very weakly coagulated surface5.
 They are decorated with engraved lines, triangles and their chains, painted light brown or dark red.
The polished delicate vessels 6 respond to the traditions of the Bronze Age, are decorated with beads, triangles and deep grooves.
The jars are mostly bare, light brown, with a thin layer covered with a belt of weakly pressed grains, leading to the prototypes of the Urartian era7.
The exceptions are the onychoyas (trinukadz), which are perfectly processed and fried.
  The drink-glasses, which date back to the Urartian era, are perfectly polished.
  These are known from Kolpal 8, and the jars have a prototype in the Bronze Age, covered with light brown or gray angobe.
The pottery of the Hellenistic era in the southern basin of Lake Sanaa.
  The largest collection is the pottery of the Hellenistic era.
  Moreover, the early Armenian in the Saniavazan "seems to be a bridge between the Urartians and the Hellenists".
1 Hakobyan H., Experience in the Study of Post-Artistic Pottery (Southern Basin of Lake Sanaa), Culture of Ancient Armenia, XII, Republican Scientific Session, Principles of Reports, Yerevan, 2002, pp. 58-59.
Lake Basin, I. The Southern Shores.- Documents Asiana VII CNR.
 Inst. Di Studi Sulle Civilta Dell'Egeo E Del Vicino Oriente, Roma, North-Eastern Frontier Urartians and Non-Urartians in the Sevan Lake Basin, I. The Southern Shores.- Documents Asiana VII. CNR.
7 In the same place, salt. 7.13.
8 In the same place, salt. 6.5.
The jars are almost indistinguishable from the jars of the previous era1.
  All of them, unfortunately, are very fragmentary, but it can be determined that they are predominantly biconvex or with a painted waist, a weak or conspicuously protruding crown, usually with a beaded belt.
Pitchers have a convex body, a slightly protruding crown, a low, broad neck, and a round shoulder. They usually have no handles.
 Their shell is very high quality անից from a fine-grained basin2.
 Usually the outer surface of the vessel ակը the crown և is painted red on the inside.
 Separate jars have profiled crowns 3.
The jars are made of wood with well-kneaded clay, their texture is reddish or pink.
  They are often decorated with a belt made with the click of a finger.
Some of them are kitchen, crisp, gray, and a considerable part of them looks quite regular.
 The earliest examples are in line with Redkin's lager 4, Red Hill 5, as well as Noratus's "Scarecrow dichotomy" 6.
The small jars that are tableware have different colored surfaces, are bare-walled, well-fired և have small and medium-sized grains of sand in the pot 7.
  Such vessels have a well-known surface with a smooth surface8.
  Angob is usually brown, in some cases painted red, or red is mixed with angob when made.
  It is similar to the similar pottery of the Ararat Valley և Shirak9.
The bowls repeat the Urartian-Early Armenian prototypes in composition, but their elaboration and baking are of better quality.
  Their early Iron Age prototypes have a flat floor, an inward or outward inclined crown, and are decorated with a compressed ornament10.
  Some parts of the composition are similar to the prototypes of the Bronze Age, for example, Gegharkunik pottery.
In the Urartian era, such bowls are red, baked, the surface is barren, which is not always typical of Urartian pottery, they are deep, flat or round, sometimes with a convex bottom on the inside.
  Often profiled 11.
  The very bowl-shaped profile of the basin's is a slightly protruding lip with a slightly protruding lip, sometimes with an accentuated band below the crown.
  Half of this type of bowl has a perfectly fried surface 12.
  However, only a very small part has a very smooth surface13.
 In addition to red angob, the coloring of acquaintances is very common from the inside, for example, in the form of intersecting lines.
  The polished bowls have a mirror-like surface14.
Glasses usually have an omphalos (protruding from the center of the floor, a hole on the inside).
15 There are many such parallels from Garni, Armavir16, Karmir Blur17, Vardadzor18.
  The colored bowls replicate the designs of other Hellenistic sites.
Their surface is sometimes gray, but sometimes a brown angobe or a red crown can be seen under the frost.
 Separate plates are semi-oval, with a round end 19.
 Profiled 1 Karapetyan I., The Early Armenian Fortress of Norashen, Historical-Philological Journal, 1974, №2, fig. 1.5, 6.7.
3 In the same place, salt. 37.7.
5 In the same place, fig. 73.3.
6 In the same place, fig. 76.19, salt. 38.7.
8 In the same place, salt. 38.3, 38.5.
9 Tiratsyan G., Ancient Armenian colored pottery, Lraber, 1970, № 1, salt. 1.3.
 Tiratsyan G., Archaeological works in Armavir, Lraber, 1973, № 5, pp. 95-103, fig. 3, 4.
 Khachatryan S., Garni. V. Ancient necropolis (results of raskopokologogic data). Yerevan. 1988, p. 118-119, res. 25.1. Hakobyan H., Vardanyan R., Zinjirjyan V., Preliminary results of archeological excavations in the Akhuryan river (Jradzor և Hoghmik villages area), Archaeological works in new buildings of Armenia (1986-1987), Yerevan, 1992, p. 55, salt. 139.9, 125.3.
about the material culture of the ancient Armenians. Bulletin of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 1961, № 8. pp. 69-84.
Martirosyan A., tab. 23. Khachatryan J., Armenia BC A typical pottery of the VII-I centuries, Historical-Philological Journal, 1970, № 2, pp. 269-278.
13 In the same place, salt. 5.5, 36.4, 37.3.
14 In the same place, salt. 5.3.
16 Khachatryan J., page 270.
18 Khachatryan J., page 270.
19 Hakobyan H., The Surface Pottery of the Early Armenian…, tab. 5.7.
The plates are perfectly fired, the weakly profiled ones have a very smooth surface, a shell with fine sand 1.
The small jars either have handles or are without them, the surface is smooth or less polished2.
 The surface is light brown3.
 Lines are painted in red on this color.
These vessels are often decorated with wavy ornaments or a chain of intersecting triangles.
  Individual vessels repeat 5 examples of Gozlu 4 և Jrarat.
  The vessels are decorated, for example, with a horizontal wave on a light brown angobe. In exceptional cases, angob is absent, but the shell is of high quality.
Three-crowned jars, oynokhoyans, are rare.
  They have a very smooth surface, fine kneaded clay with very small grains of sand 6.
  These are either painted on the outside or are red-walled.
The pottery of the Roman era in the southern basin of Lake Sanaa.
  In this region In the 1st century, the breath of technical innovations gained from contacts with the Roman world is observed.
  The vessels usually have a sufficient or very high quality surface, which does not require additional processing.
 Only 20% of the vessels in the jars have low quality roasting.
  Sangar specimens have a brown surface without angobe.
7 Vessels differ from samples with an uneven surface 8 to smooth or even polished surfaces 9.
  The Hellenistic tradition of dishwashing is still going on, but there are fewer such dishes.
  The quality of clay is much higher. 32 out of 45 jar fragments have very high quality roasting և fine-grained shell.
 Individual jugs are decorated with deep lines, some with ropes, 10 with deer and crescents.
 In the Roman era, there are also oynohoya, with a very high level shell, like Ashnak և Garni m. թ. Samples of 1-2 centuries 12.
50% of the jars in this region have a shiny surface.
 Their handles are oval in cross section.
The trays have a high quality shell.
 2/3 of them are unpaved, the others are not.
 A design of this circular tube differs little in quality and appearance from the well-known Hellenistic designs.
A narrow brick found in Albert (10 cm wide, 14 cm long preserved) is magnificent, similar to the bricks made in Roman camps.
Boundaries.
 Land policy զգալի, in particular, land demarcation boundaries between community lands and farms13 occupies a significant place in Artashes I's extensive reform program13.
 According to archeologist H. According to Hakobyan, the border between the two lands was marked by a pair of boundary stones at some distance from each other14.
It is known that in the Old World border stones were used by many peoples.
  They were especially needed in lowland lands, where plots of land often lacked natural boundaries.
The Mesopotamian Kudurri border stones, for example, carried, in addition to the text, high-sculpted images of the king տ totems, symbols of the deities.
The following features are typical of Artashesyan border stones. They are made of stone, they have a crown-end, the waist is recorded (tail (the tail is stuck in the corresponding wall 1 Hakobyan H., The Surface Pottery of the Early Armenian…, tab. 5.6.
2 In the same place, salt. 42.2.
3 In the same place, salt. 33.2.
5 Тирацян Г., рис. 9.
7 In the same place, salt. 42.7.
8 In the same place, salt. 5.11.
9 In the same place, salt. 39.21.
10 In the same place, salt. 4.5.
11 In the same place, salt. 42.7.
12 Кинжалов Р., Ашкакскиь могильник, Труды Государственного Эрмитажа, V, Ленинград, 1961, с. 56, 58.
 Khachatryan S., s. 43.13 Hakobyan H., Hmayakyan S., Karapetyan I., New Inventions of Artashisyan Border Stones from the Shan Basin, Mashtots Readings, Oshakan, 2001, p. 18.
14 Hazeyan N., Hakobyan H., Hmayakyan S., Two newly discovered Artashis frontier stones from Vardenik, Culture of Ancient Armenia XII, 2, Proceedings of the conference dedicated to the anniversary of Emma Khanzadyan, Yerevan, 2002, pp. 76-77.
in the settlement), have Aramaic inscriptions, marked the borders between the villages1.
The translation of their brief text is as follows: "King Artaxerxes, son of Zareh, Yervandakan, divided the land between the villages" 2.
To date, 15 border stones have been found in the Sani basin, 4 of which (Vaghashenin, Lichkin, Karchaghbyurin և Vardenik II) have been transformed into khachkars3.
Avetis Grigoryan CULTURE OF THE SOUTHERN BASIN OF LAKE SEVAN IN ANCIENT TIME (PITCH AND BORDER STONES) Keywords: Ancient period, pottery, Artashis border stones.
