FEATURES OF COVERAGE OF THE PROBLEMS OF THE SCIENCE SPHERE IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS
  Or, I think, the Armenian press is more politicized, full of publications of various politicians, their opposition and government views, nevertheless, science has its stable place in the media field.
  We need accurate and targeted coverage of this area.
  There are incomparably few serious researches, like specialized journalists, which in its turn gives birth to an unprofessional approach.
For this study, several leading periodicals published in Armenia were selected: "Aravot", "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily and "Azg" weekly.
"Azg" in 2014 In January, it changed its status from a daily to a weekly.
 In general, in the case of "Azg", half of the research was done as a daily, and the other half as a weekly.
  The study of the newspapers was carried out for two years (2013-2014).
  The aim of the research of the above-mentioned newspapers was to present the coverage of the existing problems in the field of science, their peculiarities.
 As a result of the research, not only the most serious problems of the scientific field in the given period were revealed, but also the effective and ineffective methods of presenting them from a professional point of view.
  The problem was not to present the negative aspects of the sphere at all, on the contrary, more attention was paid to the consistent work of journalists with the media.
  In the case of the mentioned newspapers, the differences are obvious.
The aim of the article is to reveal the response to the existing problems in the field of science in the RA Press.
 The work raises several key issues: to present the journalistic features of publications on current issues in the field of science (media sources, citations, material structure, title choice, etc.), to study the genre features of those publications, to examine the means and "tools" presented in the field. publications.
Using the scientific environment in terms of consistency of press publications, coverage, we have analyzed and presented it in the conditions of scientific reforms.
  We examined the existing problems on the topic and the omissions of the publications through concrete examples, presented the Armenian press as a controller of the state policy implemented in the field of science.
Examining the above-mentioned periodicals, we have also presented the issues that have always received attention and appeared in the pages of the print media.
Science is a special kind of cognitive activity aimed at obtaining, correcting, creating objective, systematic, substantiated knowledge about nature, society և mentality.
  The basis of this activity is the collection of scientific facts, their regular updating, coordination, analysis, synthesis or summarization of new scientific knowledge on the basis by scientists, which not only characterize the observed natural or social phenomena, but also allow constructing causal connections, as a consequence. to predict.
  The exact natural sciences, hypotheses, which are based on facts, experiments, form the laws of nature or society.
 Science is the centuries-long tireless work of thought to generalize all the cognitive phenomena of the world through the system.
  Truth is what withstands the test of experience.
 In a broad sense, science includes all the conditions and components of scientific activity, from laboratory equipment to scientific knowledge.
In the modern world, life is impossible to imagine without science.
 As a result of combining the existing problems and challenges of the time, the scientific field is moving in line with the prospects for progress.
  In developing countries, everything possible is done to develop scientific thinking and thinking, as well as to seize new opportunities.
 Such attempts are being made in Armenia.
 Taking into account the fact that the basis of scientific work is scientific novelty, studies are regularly conducted, research centers are established, analyzes are performed, etc.
There are scientific unions in which there are quite a number of scientific organizations.
 Volunteer companies play an active role in the development of science, whose main task is to exchange scientific information during conferences and publications.
  Membership in scientific societies is voluntary, often free, և may require membership fees.
  The state can provide various assistance to these companies, and the company can accept a position agreed with the government.
The activity of a scientist ումը the qualification should be recognized by the scientific community.
  The main feature of the recognition of qualification is the publication of research results in authoritative scientific journals զ reporting to authoritative scientific conferences.
  For example, in Russia, an attempt has been made to separate authoritative scientific publications from others in the form of a list of publications that qualify as approved by the HRC (Higher Qualification Commission).
 As a rule, international publications and conferences have a higher priority.
 The reputation of a scientist ումը the recognition of a qualification is connected with his / her popularity among a narrow circle of specialists.
  An attempt is made to build rankings from the works of other scientists by the number of references made to the work of that scientist.
Reforms in the field of science, as well as problems, are in the center of attention of the Armenian media.
 It would be wrong to say that everyone is backward about the field, and the existing publications cannot be considered unequivocal.
On the other hand, considering the tendencies of the development of the scientific sphere, it should be noted that the publications in the modern Armenian press are mainly about scientists and their researches.
  The study of the Armenian press allows to single out the topics that were regularly paid attention to in 2013-2014.
  Among them are: • Politics և scientific titles, • Alienation of scientific potential, • Plagiarism and dissertations, • Higher Qualification Commission and young scientists. Missed connection, • Underfunded և Properly underestimated science.
Let's talk about the most discussed issues.
Plagiarism and dissertations.
 When talking about plagiarism, it should be noted that in such cases, not only researchers but also those who give them scientific qualifications often come into the spotlight.
  As in many countries, so in Armenia, the HRC is persistent in dealing with cases of plagiarism, checking the parts of the research that were done without proper references.
  Those who do not believe in these studies, as well as the references in them, make accusations in the print media under the heading "Open Letter".
In the article titled "Plagiarism was discovered" 1, Doctor of Pedagogical Sciences Sergey Manukyan sent a letter to the editorial office of "Haykakan Zhamanak" newspaper, noting that Kh. An incident took place at the sitting of the professional council for the defense of dissertations at the Armenian State Pedagogical University after Abovyan.
Plaintiff Anahit Petrosyan "The problem of social education" topic 1 Manukyan S., "Plagiarism was discovered", "Haykakan Zhamanak", Yerevan, 4 (3158), 11.01.2013.
The problems of the research presented in the dissertation, the novelty and the provisions to be defended by the member of the council L. In his speech, Asatryan considered L. Murakyan's 2010 transcript copied. defended from the dissertation.
Another issue on the topic of plagiarism is mentioned by "Aravot" daily, presenting the publication "The fired member is looking for a stain on the deputy minister's dissertation".
Doctor of Pedagogy Sergey Manukyan has repeatedly appeared in the press against the dissertation of the Deputy Minister of Education and Science Manuk Mkrtchyan "Methodology, Theory, Practice of Implementing the Collective Way of Organizing Education".
  Ս. Manukyan applied to the HRC on that issue, which returned the eloquence to the Defense Council to review the work twice.
In general, the mentioned publication of "Aravot" daily presented the problems that exist in S. Manukyan և M. Mkrtchyan.
 Speaking about the presentation of the material, as well as the content peculiarities, let us mention that this article was presented in "Aravot" from different points of view.
 Unlike "Haykakan Zhamanak", "Aravot" presents similar materials in its pages, pointing out the facts.
 It is true that in some cases there are insults in them, but at the same time, both sides have the opportunity to present themselves, expressing their point of view and comment on this or that issue.
Referring to plagiarism, it should be noted that the main causes of plagiarism can be divided into two major groups. First of all, there is no clear requirement to fight plagiarism in the university, as plagiarism is not considered a serious problem in our university system, there is almost no course on scientific writing in universities.
 The second group of reasons refers to the fact that in our university system written works are considered as simple ways of reproducing knowledge.
"Azg" daily hastens to inform about this topic in its pages. "The German minister was deprived of his academic degree due to plagiarism."
  Excluding this publication from the international news, it is presented that the Minister of Education of Germany Anetta Shavan was deprived of her academic degree due to plagiarism.
 "Azg" pointed out that Shavan's thesis was entitled "The Individual և Conscience".
 It turned out that Shavan's thesis had been written from 45 other sources և had insufficient clarity.
Underfunded և Properly underestimated science.
  The socio-economic situation and economic development of each country depends on the quality of staff.
 But other than that, the extent to which the state supports scientists is also important.
In 3 publications "Science money does not serve the right purpose" Doctor of Biological Sciences, Professor Senerik Hayrapetyan emphasizes that science has been the national wealth of Armenia, it could be made profitable, but in the last 22 years, according to him, ignorant policy has emerged, and if If science became profitable, then our scientists would not leave Armenia, we would have greater scientific potential than Israel.
In this publication, Doctor of Psychological Sciences Samvel Khudoyan speaks about the fact that there are false scientists in our society who have received scientific degrees, but have nothing to do with science.
 Instead, they receive funding.
"Aravot" also expresses a position on the same issue by publishing "Science underfunded, improperly evaluated" 4 open letter of 32 young scientists working abroad in Armenia ՀՀ to RA President Serzh Sargsyan, copies to RA Prime Minister Hovik Abrahamyan and RA Minister of Education and Science Armen Ashotyan.
  The authors of the letter referred to the current state of science in the letter.
 The letter contains comparatives related to foreign scientific institutions.
We believe that in the process of awarding a scientific degree, the number of publications of a given person in international journals with an impact factor should be taken into account, which is one of the most important criteria for scientific activity.
 In our country, customs 1 Manukyan S., "The dismissed member is looking for a stain on the dissertation of the deputy minister", "Aravot", Yerevan, 124 (4468), 04.07.2013.
2 "The German Minister was deprived of his academic degree due to plagiarism", "Azg", Yerevan, 14 (5097), 08.02.2013.
3 Hayrapetyan S., "Science money does not serve the right purpose", "Azg", Yerevan, 112 (5115), 03.07.2013.
4 "Open letter. Science is underfunded չ not properly evaluated "," Aravot ", Yerevan, 238 (4829), 09.12.2014.
Due to the inflexibility of the system, the acquisition of scientific equipment or materials from abroad has led to unnecessary bureaucratic hassles, which often result in a huge loss of time-ordered materials.
In addition to the problematic materials, the newspapers regularly present information about the conferences held in the republic.
 They are incomparably more especially in "Azg" weekly.
  The events and conferences held at the Armenian State Pedagogical University are mainly presented.
  An important part of them are the meetings with various scientists and leading specialists in the field of education.
It should be emphasized that "Azg" regularly refers to the Armenian scientists, their lives and activities, who have left a great mark and name in the scientific world.
  The essay materials present individuals who have played a significant role in history.
  References to their lives and research achievements help readers to form a more comprehensive picture of Armenian scientists.
 Underscoring their merits in the field of science, the newspaper continues to constantly direct young people to the scientific world.
  The newspaper contains extensive reviews about Eduard Ordyan, Hrachik Simonyan, Perch Stepanyan and others.
Referring to the genre peculiarities of the coverage of science issues, it should be noted that the publications on scientific topics are mainly the focus of our research in the genres of news, article and interview in three newspapers.
 Or an attempt was made to use other journalistic genres.
There are criteria of novelty and value in journalism. "According to the accepted classification, there are 6 features that give value and novelty to the material.
 Four of them are aimed at the audience, they differ according to the audience and the place of residence.
These are influence, closeness, popularity և unusualness.
 The two are common to different audiences in different places: operativeness ևConflict ”1.
When presenting scientific issues, the reader often has to deal with conflict.
  These criteria of novelty and value are typical of the news genre.
With the availability of the Internet, the operativeness of newspapers has taken on a different tone.
 Modern theorists of journalism say: Even the most important event has as much life as raw fish.
 In order to satisfy the reader's request for operative information, these three newspapers publish the event immediately after the performance in the newly published issue of the newspaper (except for "Azg" weekly).
  During the research, no event material was published that was published two or a few days later (except on Sundays and Mondays), as the newspapers in Armenia do not publish on those days.
"Aravot" daily referred to the problems of the scientific sphere several times during the month in the form of interviews.
 Through this genre, the personality of the interlocutors is emphasized more.
  If in the case of a news or article, the interlocutors are different people, then in the case of an interview, one.
  There are different types of interviews in journalism.
  The most frequently used type in a newspaper is information.
  In general, informative interviewing is the most common type, which aims to gather news materials.
  As a result of strict time standards, this interview stands out with its rather dynamic course.
 The most common interviews are used to report specific news, fact, event2.
The article is the most used genre in "Aravot" և "Azg".
  It is considered the most typical genre of analytical group.
  They write an article about a global problem, in which there must be facts, then the article writer makes an analysis, and finally comes to a conclusion.
The events in the press dominated, which allows to prove that the events carried out in the scientific sphere contributed to a retrospective reference to this or that issue.
  For example, there were even publications in "Aravot" daily when the topic was 1 Mitchell K., "News Resolution", Yerevan, 2011, page 11.
2 Demuryan A., The secrets of the interview, Yerevan, 2005, page 16.
submitted for one or several weeks.
 Moreover, the authors of the publication are not only journalists, but also experts in the field of science, teachers or lecturers.
In addition to the event materials, there are many authorial materials in "Aravot" daily.
Their authors are experts in the field of education, who present the problems of the field of education at every opportunity.
School, Bologna system, master's degree, postgraduate study. Education expert Anahit Bakhshyan and Doctor of Economics, Professor Armen Chughuryan regularly addressed these topics during the study period.
  They substantiate the problems with facts, analyze the situation, as well as offer solutions.
 The newspaper is ready to provide the respondent with a media space to express itself: "We are ready to publish the other party's point of view as well" 1.
Unlike "Aravot", "Haykakan Zhamanak" newspaper has a different political orientation, although it gives the right of expression to its readers, who also support the newspaper's political views.
  Under the heading "Open Letter to the Editor", many readers also send their grievances to the newspaper's editorial office, including those related to changes and processes in the field of science.
 In the pages of "Aravot" the author's approach is presented, the problem մոտեց the facts, then և solution mechanisms are offered.
 The official messages are a predominant part of "Azg" publications in 2013.
 There is no backwardness in the issue of publications related to the educational sphere.
"Azg" has the longest press history of the newspapers taken for research, however, in the pages of the newspaper it does not find clear headlines, both in terms of content and design, while the majority of readers get their first impression of its structure.
 The headlines, photos and the line of materials affect the psychology of the readers in one way or another.
  The "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily has no principle of using clear headlines.
Scientific topics deserve a lot of attention not only in Armenia, but all over the world.
  And among students, graduate students, as well as parents, this attention is connected with the programs introduced in the science system.
  Experience shows that new scientific programs, although difficult to accept by the society, nevertheless receive a wide response.
 The print media reflects on this reality.
 The problems in the scientific sphere, as well as the achievements, are mainly covered by the journalists of the newspapers ("Aravot" daily - Gohar Hakobyan, "Haykakan Zhamanak" - Anna Zakharyan).
 They are considered to be responsible for the educational and scientific materials of these newspapers.
 "As in the case of all other spheres, when referring to education and science, we proceed from the principle of being as objective and impartial as possible, we try to present the views of all parties related to the problem.
 We mainly refer to the problems with the expectation of drawing attention to them and seeing them corrected.
Of course, this does not mean that we do not notice and do not cover the remarkable achievements and successes. ”2
Thus, studying "Aravot", "Haykakan Zhamanak", "Azg" newspapers in 2013-2014. In the period, we come to the following conclusions: 1. At present, the scientific system of the Republic of Armenia is at a stage that can be called "experimental", which has its positive and negative sides.
 In that sense, the press is in the process of overcoming these trials.
2. As a rule, event events are the information occasion of publications related to the field of science.
 Therefore, such publications do not stand out with in-depth studies and detailed examination of the topic.
  They are more of a protocol nature.
3. Only "Aravot" daily stands out with a clear separation of the headline "Science".
 Of course, this is not an end in itself. In this way, an attempt is made to orient the reader correctly and purposefully in the media space.
  The publications under that heading are և´Revolutionary, և´ author materials, through which the concerns of the problems related to the sphere are examined.
1 "Aravot", Yerevan, 190 (4781), 02.10.2014.
2 From the interview with A. Zakharyan, journalist of "Haykakan Zhamanak" newspaper, Yerevan, 26.02.2015.
4. The choice of genres in the Armenian press is the same.
 The most commonly used genres are news, interview, correspondence and article.
 Moreover, the articles (և not only) do not fully meet the standards of the genre.
 In some cases, a fusion of genres is observed.
5. There are many ethical violations in publications on science.
Journalists and the media sometimes allow themselves to violate professional ethics by reporting unreliable information.
  Moreover, news that violates his dignity and reputation are published.
6. The expression of political views in the publications of "Haykakan Zhamanak" daily is obvious.
 It is not accidental that mainly such materials are published here, which record only the problems and omissions of the sphere.
7. One of the most obvious omissions in the press is the lack of photos of photos related to the field.
 They can be a valuable addition to the information provided.
Taking into account the above conclusions, we propose: 1. It would be desirable for specialized journalists to write materials on scientific topics, as in that case superficial coverage will be replaced by in-depth analysis.
2. The "Education" weekly, which is considered to be the official newspaper of the RA Ministry of Education and Science, should address the existing problems in the field of science, but in case of not presenting political views in the newspaper, more readers will tend to read the weekly.
3. Organize training courses for journalists.
  In the future, it will contribute to literate and consistent work, to be more aware of the innovations and shortcomings in that field.
Hovhannes Vardanyan SPECIFICATIONS OF COVERAGE OF SCIENTIFIC PROBLEMS IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS Keywords: scientific issues, scientific environment, field advancement
prospects, academic titles, failed communication, improperly evaluated science,
Genre features of coverage
.
