RELATIONSHIP-RELATIONSHIPS OF CROWN CONSULTATION IN ARMENIA One of the seven sacred sacraments of the Armenian Apostolic Church is the marriage crown, which is consecrated by the union of a man and a woman according to the divine blessing according to the Ukrainian rite.
 The crown is a symbol of the continuity of the human race.
 No human covenant or bond can bring a man and a woman as close as a married marriage.
 This is how the great Grigor Tatatsi speaks about Psak. "The crown is the fair compensation of two worthy persons in a combination.
  In addition, the crown is a fair marriage and the wife, keeping the couple inseparable.
 A righteous couple for the sake of saying that it's not necessary to be, if not for the sake of giving birth to a child in the service of God. ”[1]
The crown has found its rightful place among the sacraments of the church, because of its importance բազմաթիվ many places proving its significance, first in the Old and then in the New Testament.
  The manifestations of the essence of marriage are observed in the book of Genesis.
 In the first story of the creation of the universe, the fact that people are created in the image of God is immediately followed by the fact that they are male (Gen. 1:27).
 This is immediately followed by the divine message, by which God, so to speak, instituted the sacrament of the crown, it was He who showed its power and privilege. And God blessed them and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. and possess it. and rule over the fish, and over the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over all cattle. and all the earth, and all the creeping things that creep upon the earth ”(Gen. 28).
 In these lines, God's command and message are used to use the goods of the earth, to rule them, to form a family, to ensure the change of generations.
  When Eve descended from Adam's rib, then she became a forerunner. This is now the bone of my bones, and the flesh of my flesh; he shall call him, because he hath taken him away ”(Gen. 2:23).
 That is why he "left his father and his mother and followed his wife" (Gen. 2:24).
 And they shall be one flesh (Gen. 2:25).
  In addition to these words, the evangelist Matthew says: "Now that God has joined together, let no man depart" (Matt. 19: 6).
The next noteworthy passage in the New Testament, which speaks of the essence of this council, is the wedding of Cana in the Gospel of John, in which Jesus Christ personally participates, where He performs His first divine miracle by turning water into wine (John 2: 1-12). .
  The apostle Paul, in his letter to the Hebrews, gives the following assessment of the sacrament of marriage. "Honorable marriage at all, and a holy bed. but my children and my harlots are judged by God ”(Heb. 13: 4).
  And in his epistle to the Ephesians he urges women to obey their husbands, for the wife's head is the husband, as Christ is the head of the church, and she instructs the husbands to love their husbands as Christ ought to betray the church's betrayed himself for her (Eph. 22: 22). 23, 25).
 And indeed, the relationship between a man and a woman finds its expression in the relation between Christ and the church.
  In his first letter to the Corinthians, he advised the apostles and widows not to marry like him, but if they did not have restraint, let them marry, "for it is better to be married than to be unmarried" (1 Corinthians 5: 8).
 In the same letter, the apostle emphasizes the fact that he allows a Christian to live with a Gentile, hoping that by the grace of the counsel the unbeliever will be cleansed (1 Corinthians 5:14).
The marriage is performed by the anointed priest, and the place of consultation is the church.
  It is carried out when there is no law forbidding it, in accordance with the church charter.
 Let's mention some of them below. a) mutual love established by the newlyweds in the church, b) their union must be agreed upon by both parties, c) they must have an adult age based on church rules, d) no one must use violence to perform the marriage, e a) the coronation is inadmissible if one of the spouses is related to someone by the coronation and it is not dissolved yet, f) if the groom is celibate, g) if the order is performed on inadmissible days, h) if there is any religious or religious prohibition, և finally i) if there is a kinship, guardianship or paternal immaturity [3].
  Below, according to the topic of our work, let's stop at the barriers of blood ties, seeing how this problem has progressed from ancient times to the present day.
Kinship is considered to be a blood relationship of persons from one another or a common ancestor.
 Kinship is the blood relationship of individuals [4].
 It can be near or far.
 Close or distant kinship is determined by the degree of kinship.
 It is called a descendant or a generation.
 In the Eastern Armenian translation of the Bible, this word is translated as "burning with passion."
the distance of one person from the other according to birth.
  When calculating the degree of kinship, one should start with the connecting person, that is, the person with whom the blood distance will be determined.
  The father և mother is not considered a separate degree, because according to the divine law, they are considered one body (Gen. 2:24).
  The stairs are connected by a line.
 That line becomes a footnote when we count the births from the connecting person downwards, for example, grandfather, son, grandson, great-grandson, grandson, cousin, redline, when we count deprivations, for example, great-grandson, great-grandfather, great-grandson (great-grandfather) grandfather), grandson grandfather's father (son), sideline, for example, cousins, cousins ​​և etc. [3].
The laws forbidding the marriage and cohabitation of close relatives are mentioned in the book of Deuteronomy, given by Moses.
 The latter explicitly instructs not to approach his father, mother, cousin, grandson, aunt, aunt, cousin, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, his niece, nephew, niece or nephew, brother-in-law (XIX 17: 6-18).
  After this, Moses placed a fourth-generation barrier.
 Here we did not miss an interesting fact. The prohibition of kinship established by Moses is related only to the person who binds, that is, unlike the cases, which we will discuss in more detail below, he does not stipulate that they can not marry the grandchildren of two brothers or grandchildren of two brothers, but only the person who ties the crown with his relatives is not allowed to marry. to his grandson և brother's grandson.
And this is where the fourth niece barrier comes into play.
  The marriage of a brother and a sister is noticeable in the ancient history of Armenia.
 An example of such a couple is the Armenian king Tigran IV և Erato, who were ք sister and brother (Eraton was Tigran IV's step-sister; they were cousins), ամուս husband and wife.
 H. Manandyan notes that the marriage of a brother and a sister is permissible according to a certain Greek religion, under certain Greek legislation [5].
 Taking into account the fact that in that period (I BC - I century BC) our ancestors were pagans, it becomes clear the inviolability of such a union with pagan religion.
 It was not only a disgusting and reprehensible phenomenon among the Armenians, but also hindered the provision of a healthy generation change.
 However, in order to be objective, it should be mentioned that it was a heavenly or ritual marriage, it was not widespread among ordinary people.
Now let 's try to see the reflection episodes of this story in the hustle and bustle of history, in chronological order.
  The first stop is the Apostolic Assembly, whose LG. The rule is entirely related to our problem.
  This rule confirms the message given by Moses to keep the prohibition of the fourth generation's kinship. "Let every man approach to every choice of his body, to reveal the blood of his neighbor, do not reveal your child to your daughter, do not reveal your child to your father-in-law or to your mother-in-law, do not reveal your father-in-law to your wife. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy uncle, thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy unclean uncleanness unto them.
 It is interesting that the rule establishes the ratification of the laws given by Moses, but here only the prohibition of the first, second and third descendants is clearly seen.
 In any case, there is no prohibition of the fourth cousin in the listed kinship.
It is expedient to mention that the first offspring is the marriage between the father's daughter, the mother and the son և the father and the bride (son's wife) և.
 In the case of a father-bride marriage, the first offspring is considered to be due to the fact that the bride և is considered one body.
 The second generation is seen between sister and brother, step-sister brother, step-brother and sister, brother and brother wife, sister and sister husband և.
And by saying the third niece, one must understand the kinship with an aunt, aunt, uncle, cousin, niece, nephew, niece, nephew.
 The fact that our third-generation cousin is counted as a diagonal egg is extremely important here.
 The third grandson is considered to be the grandson, counting from the grandfather, in a footnote.
  It is noteworthy that N. Melik Tankian considers the fact that Christians, according to this canon, follow Judaism worthy of attention, but there is nothing surprising in this circumstance, because Christ himself said, I have not come to destroy, but to fulfill ”(Matt. 5:17).
 Even John the Baptist followed the law given by Moses ․ He rebukes Herod the tetrarch for having illegally married Philip, his brother's wife, Herodias (Matt. 14: 3-4).
The first canonical decision known to us in the Armenian reality was made by Catholicos Nerses the Great, in the case of the crown, setting the distance of blood kinship to the fifth nephew.
 In this regard, IB. In the rule we read in particular: "Let not the fifth rule, let the fourth repent, and let the third go and repent." [7]
 By the way, the rule does not clearly state how the calculation is done by saying the prohibition of the fourth nephew, as no examples are mentioned.
  But it's likely that the rule reaffirmed Moses' message and did just that.
The next canonical decision among the Armenians was established in Shahapivan in 444. in the congregation.
 Canon XIII. The decision says in particular: "… No one's to be worshiped in Christianity and Christianity, and to be baptized as a lord, to seal and seal a king, a sister or a cousin or a nephew, or any other nation to be there until the fourth birth of a woman."
 In contrast to the Apostolic Assembly LG. According to the decision, which mentioned the same kinship, the above-mentioned clause of the Shahapivan assembly clearly prohibits the marriage of the fourth nephew, not the fourth, allowing the marriage of the fourth nephew.
 In fact, the meeting of Shahapivan reduced the ban by one degree.
  This may be due to the fact that the order has been violated many times, the church has simply canonized it.
 The next stop of the ban on immaturity of the same degree is Vachagan Pious Constitution J. is the rule. "Do not make a man of the third nation, and do not make a brother." [7]
  The constant repetition of the prohibition of immaturity of the third generation in various congregations hints at the crucial fact that this rule, in spite of the prohibitions, has not been observed, that the message forbidding consanguineous kinship has been violated since time immemorial.
 We meet the same prohibition in Partavi 786. B. meeting in the rule.
 We can conclude that until the middle of the 8th century, the ban on the third cousin of blood ties was not observed, the reason for which, we think, was the long-term rule of the Zoroastrians, Persians and Muslim Arabs on the Armenians. The blood-marriage restrictions of those peoples' religions were much narrower.
V. Hakobyan notes that if in the Apostolic, Shahapivan և Vachagani above-mentioned rules the problem concerns all the layers of the society, then in the Partav meeting the fact of the princes' marriage is especially emphasized. "Now we will see the solution to the problem, especially the liberated, regular issue, the difference between their neighbor and their disorderly marriage.
 From now on, the fourth generation will not be allowed to marry. "[9]
 If they disobeyed the commandment, they would be cursed because they would have to answer at the time of God's judgment.
Catholicos Nerses Shnorhali addressed this issue in detail in "Paper General".
 He particularly mentions. "No one is united, whose blood is close, gives a crown of blessing, but until the leaders of the fourth nation on both sides are perfect." [10]
 This is how Shnorhali explains why the church fathers regulated the border of the fourth generation. For the natural elements of the flesh of the body, from the four elements to the fourth, until the fourth, which is like this: Divided into two brothers at the same time, they are equal in their own creation. and to their offspring, half the blood of the brotherhood. and the third birth, that the sons of the brethren, the only half of the blood. and the fourth birth, that of the social, the fourth part of the bloodshed.
 And this is the border and point of blood closeness "[10].
  It should be concluded from this that Shnorhali imposed a ban on the fourth nephew, allowing the marriage of the fifth generation.
 What is even more important is the fact that the prohibition of the fourth cousin he approved was completely different from the law forbidding the marriage of a descendant of the same distance given to Moses.
  The Armenian Catholicos, by forbidding the fourth generation, allowed the marriage of two different branches of the pope when the two brothers were grandchildren.
 That is, he allowed the marriage of the ninth and tenth degrees.
 To make what is said understandable, let's bring the branch. If we accept a connecting person as a grandfather, then we should count his sons (I և II degrees), grandchildren (III և IV degrees), grandchildren (V և VI degrees), grandchildren or grandchildren [11] (VII և VIII degrees), blinds ( IX և X degrees).
 It should be noted that by saying the prohibition of the fourth cousin, one should mean that it is not permissible to marry the two grandchildren of the grandfather (children of different sons), to marry the brother of his brother or sister.
  And by saying the fifth generation prohibition, one can understand the inadmissibility of a grandfather's grandson-grandson marriage, as well as the marriage of a connecting person with his brother or sister-in-law or his grandson, although one circumstance is clear that the latter two are physically impossible.
 It is also interesting to note that in his work, Shnorhali stipulates that the permissible age for marriage is 15 for boys and 12 for girls.
The fourth niece barrier is also found in Mkhitar Gosh's book "Book of Judgment", where the author allows the fifth generation of marriage, taking into account the reality, as Nerses Shnorhali said. "Tell them this. The beginning of the fifth, because the orphanages were loved by nature, they were created with mercy, they softened the boundaries, but the best is the native, in which your holiness is aware. "[12]
According to our study, the last canonical decision in Armenia was Ssi 1243 B. in a meeting in which H. The rule states: "Let the crown be made by choice, the blood of six births removed from the family. the bridegroom is not less than thirteen years old, and the bride is less than twelve years old. ”[13]
  It is clear from the canonical decision that the permissible limit of marriage is the seventh generation, that is, the grandson of a son of the same grandfather can be married, the grandson of the other son can be married in the same way, one grandson or the other grandchild.
 Perhaps the problem is that here the age limit set by Shnorhali is reduced by one year - 14 years old.
 As we see, Ssi B. The assembly violated the order established by Nerses Shnorhali, the reason for which, we think, was the irreversible human losses caused by the Mongol invasions.
  It is noteworthy that Dzagavan in 1270 G. of the General Rules of the Assembly As a rule, the bridegroom's bride sets the age limit at 15, 14 years, but the bride is allowed to marry at the age of 12.
 It is visible that S. was restored. Nerses Shnorhali defined by a certain edition.
It was necessary to ensure the generation change.
 It is clear that those ages are very small today, տ Article 10 of the Family Code defines 18 years of age for married people.
 However, it is stated that a person can get married at the age of 17, with the consent of his or her parents, adoptive parents or guardian.
 It is stated that a person can get married at the age of 16, if there is the consent of the above-mentioned persons, մյուս the other person getting married is at least 18 years old [15].
The decision of the Ssi B assembly on the distance of blood was used in Armenia for quite a long time, about seven centuries.
  The idea of ​​"ochtport" is very popular among the people.
 As noted by N. Melik-Tankyan - Catholicos Mkrtich Khrimyan in 1899 On December 17, the Synod gave the order to marry in the seventh degree of kinship.
 And already the same decision in 1900. It is repeated on February 24 with the ending.
 In fact, Khrimyan Hayrik ratified the relevant rule of the 1243 B assembly of Ssi.
 The reason was the various defects and violations committed in the mentioned issue.
Our further searches led to the discovery that the next decision on the issue was made in 1919. August 28, when the Catholicos of All Armenians Gorg E. Surenyants reduced the ban on cohabitation between relatives to the fifth degree, that is, it allowed the sixth cousin marriage. [16]
  In fact, it was a step backwards from the previous decisions.
  The reasons are very obvious. The crime against humanity committed in 1915, the one and a half million Armenians of the Armenian Genocide և The irreversible losses of the Armenians who died in the First World War.
  The Armenians needed demographic reproduction to ensure continuity and to preserve generational change.
 1919 The procedure established on August 28 is the last and unchanging event of the day.
 Ethnographer Lilya Vardanyan, in her work "The Family Rite of the Tavush People", notes that nowadays the custom of surprising seven relatives during a marriage is no longer strictly observed;
 It is clear from what has been said that even in settlements where the church order is not maintained, people do not fulfill the divine message under the influence of Soviet atheism.
LITERATURE [1] Book of inquiries to our blessed Holy Father Grigor Tatevatsu, K. Polis, 1729, p. 609.
[2] Ghazaryan R., Grabar Dictionary, Volume B, Yerevan, 2000, p. 428.
[3] Melik Tankyan N., Armenian Church Law, Etchmiadzin, 2004, pp. 911-2, 919,529.
[4] "Family Law of the Republic of Armenia", Yerevan, 2008, p. 94.
[5] Manandyan H., Examination Theory of the History of the Armenian People, Volume A, Yerevan, 1977, p. 292.
[6] "Armenian Codex", volume A, diligently by Vazgen Hakobyan, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 48, 446-7.
[7] "Armenian Codex", volume B, diligently by Vazgen Hakobyan, Yerevan, 1971, pp. 260-1, 96, 12.
[8] Letter to the General Creator of the Three Blessed Sacred Patriarch Nersis Shnorhalu, St. Etchmiadzin, 1868, pp. 85, 84.
[9] Malkhasyants S., Armenian Explanatory Dictionary, Yerevan, 1944, p. 230.
[10] Gosh M ․, Book of Judgment, Yerevan, 1975, p. 386.
[11] Gandzaketsi K Հայոց, History of Armenia, work. K. Melik-Ohanjanian, Yerevan, 1961, pp. 304-5.
[12] "The assembly of Dzagavank և its canon", preface և translated by S. Mkhitaryan, "Armenian theologian", E, Yerevan, 2013, p. 106.
[13] "Family Code of the Republic of Armenia", HO-123-N, ARPA 2005, 01, 19/4 (376), 09.11.2004.
[14] Documents on the history of the Armenian Church, Book XIII, Yerevan, 2005, p. 495.
[15] Vardanyan L., Tavush, Socio-cultural processes, 2014, p. 171.
Galstyan Gor WEDNESS-RELATIONSHIPS OF MARRIAGE CONSULTATION ARMENIAN GREAT Keywords: crown, council, counseling, prohibition, theological, study, examination, historical-comparative, process, blood-relatives.
