CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA AND RUSSIA Before comparing the higher education systems of the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation, it should be noted that the educational systems of the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation have the same effects on the education system of the Soviet Union. Only after the collapse of the Soviet Union did each system develop in its own direction.
Russia is the first in the world according to its territory, making about 18 million square meters.
 Russia's population is currently about 146.5 million people, according to Jade, it is the ninth in the world.
 The territory of the Republic of Armenia reaches about 30 thousand. The population is 3 million.
 According to the data of 2013-2014, the number of state universities in Russia reached 578, and the number of non-state universities - 391.
  The number of state universities in the Republic of Armenia is 24, and the number of non-state universities is 33.
  The number of state universities with a population of about 600 ից from the territory of the Republic of Armenia 48 times larger than the number of state universities of the Republic of Armenia is about 24 times, and 11 of the non-state ones.
 If we consider the number of students in each country in relation to the population of that country, it turns out that students in Russia make up about 3.8% of the total population (5646.7 thousand students), and in Armenia - about 3.3% (100854 students). ).
The system of higher education of the Republic of Armenia is regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the Law of the Republic of Armenia on Education (adopted in 1999), the Law on Higher Postgraduate Professional Education (adopted in 2004).
  The higher education system of the Russian Federation is regulated by the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the Federal Law on Education, as well as other laws and legal acts.
  The new Russian law on education was adopted in 2012 and came into force in 2013.
 Prior to that, the Federal Law on Higher Postgraduate Education (adopted in 1996) was in force, which was repealed in 2013.
Referring to the main systems, it should be noted that licensed higher education institutions, state higher education standards, educational programs, state accreditation standards, education governing bodies, etc. are an integral part of the educational system in the Republic of Armenia1.
 Russia's higher education system includes federal state educational standards ային federal state requirements, educational standards, educational programs of different types, degrees և direction, organizations carrying out educational activities2.
 The system includes the federal state bodies, the subjects of the federal government that exercise state administration in the field of education, as well as the local self-government bodies, their advisory or other bodies, the organizations providing the educational process, evaluating the quality of education, their unions, their employers. , non-governmental organizations operating in the field of education.
It is noticeable that the constituent elements are basically the same, but there are some differences, such as the two types of state educational standards in Russia and the involvement of employers in the field of education, as well as NGOs.
 The existence of federal educational standards և state educational standards in Russia can be interpreted as follows: Russia differs from Armenia in its state order և administrative-territorial structure.
There is one essential difference in this regard. Institutions in Russia that are designated as "Federal University" or "National Research University" have the right to develop their own educational standards for all levels of higher education.
 Unlike Russia, the state educational standard in Armenia is one. The procedure for the formation of the latter is approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia. 1 Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Education”, 1999 Chapter 2, Article 8.
The standards are developed and approved by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia.
Educational programs are the edge of comparison between educational systems.
 There are peculiarities here.
 Higher education in the Republic of Armenia is implemented through bachelor's, master's and diploma specialist educational programs.
  In contrast, the main educational programs of higher education in Russia are bachelor's, specialist, master's, postgraduate, residency, assistantship-internship educational programs.
 Until 2013, the Federal Law on Higher Postgraduate Professional Education was in force in Russia, which defines postgraduate education.
 However, according to the Russian Federal Law on Education, which came into force in 2013, separating the term "postgraduate", the educational programs that are considered postgraduate education in Armenia are included in the list of higher education curricula in Russia.
Speaking about the main forms of organizing education through the existing educational programs in the systems, let us mention that the legislation of the Russian Federation, in addition to the forms of education in the Republic of Armenia, also separates the existing and distance education.
The legislation of the Russian Federation defines the network of educational programs.
 The training network allows you to use the resources of several institutions implementing the curriculum, including international ones.
The implementation of the network horse is based on the agreements signed between the institutions.
  This makes it possible to make education better, to meet the needs of key stakeholders.
  Although, unlike Russia, our legislation does not yet define network education, there is already a prototype of it in Armenia, in the form of a CIS network university.
 The project of creating a network university was initiated in 2008 by the Russian University of Peoples' Friendship.
  The main goal of the project is to develop academic mobility, strengthen inter-university ties և cooperation in the field of higher education, increase the attractiveness of the quality of higher education in the CIS.
 The member universities of the Network University from Armenia are Yerevan State University, Yerevan V. Brusov State University of Linguistics and Social Sciences և National Polytechnic University of Armenia.
From the point of view of comparison, the types of universities operating in the studied countries are also used.
 In Russia, there are universities, academies and institutes.
 It is also mentioned that in the name of the higher education institution, according to the peculiarity, there may be a special name (for example, conservatory, etc.) 3.
 According to the RA legislation, the above-mentioned main types of universities are differentiated.
A possible indicator of the comparison of systems is the licensing process, the licensing requirements set by the state.
  In this respect, there are no significant differences in the RA ՀՀ RF systems.
 There are some peculiarities in terms of the licensing body regulating the process. In the case of Russia, it is stipulated that the licensing of educational activities is carried out by the body supervising the relevant sphere of the federal executive body or the body of subjects of the Russian executive power, which exercises the powers transferred to Russia.
 Licensing in the Republic of Armenia is performed by the authorized body of the state administration of education, in the person of the attached licensing agency.
  In secondary education systems, educational activities are authorized by the public administration body in the person of a subordinate service or agency.
 Both in Armenia and in Russia, in order to obtain a license, the legislation stipulates the existence of a relevant area, building, construction, technical means, the presence of a professionally qualified teaching staff, Gyllen.
  It is noteworthy that the relevant federal law stipulates that other requirements may be included in accordance with applicable law.
    Requirements may also be included for the use of online learning in educational programs, as well as for the use of e-learning and distance learning technologies in the implementation of educational programs.
  The above allows us to conclude that in Russia both online and electronic, distance (distance) learning is given a lot.
  Accreditation is a type of state regulation of educational activities. There are some significant differences here.
  It should be noted that the accreditation in Armenia is carried out by the National Center for Quality Assurance in Vocational Education (ANQA), and in the Russian Federation the state accreditation is carried out by a body subordinated to the Ministry of Education and Science, the Federal Service for Education and Science (Rosobrnadzor). with the support of the National Accreditation Agency for Education under its auspices.
 It is obvious from what has been presented that the body carrying out accreditation in the Republic of Armenia, based on its organizational and legal status, is an independent body, it is not under the subordination of the state department.
 In Russia, on the other hand, accreditation is carried out by the sector control service.
 We think that the above-mentioned difference in the Republic of Armenia gives more independence to that process, compliance with European standards.
Referring to the process itself, let us mention that there are a number of differences here.
 One of the differences is that accreditation in the Republic of Armenia is conducted in an institutional and / or program version4.
Such a version is not mentioned in Russia.
 It is only mentioned that the accreditation is carried out according to the educational programs.
  If the decision on accreditation in the Republic of Armenia is made by the ANQA commission on the basis of the self-analysis և expert report submitted by the university, then in Russia there is no provision on internal quality assessment or self-analysis by the university in the "Accreditation of the educational process".
 Accreditation in Russia is carried out according to educational programs, և the decision is made based on the results of the examination.
 The relevant order also states that the requirements for the qualification, selection and expert organization of the experts of the expert group are defined by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation.
 Special attention is paid to the accreditation of religiously oriented educational programs, as well as those containing state secrets.
 In these cases, the expert group includes members with appropriate qualifications.
 The procedure of "state accreditation of educational institutions implementing their professional educational programs in the Republic of Armenia and their specialties" does not define anything about the above-mentioned processes.
4 Procedure for state accreditation of educational institutions implementing their professional educational programs in the Republic of Armenia, their specialties, 2011, Chapter 1.2.
Of particular interest is a provision of the RF accreditation process. The body conducting the educational activity may refuse its application for accreditation և terminate the process until the decision is made throughout the accreditation process.
 Our legislative field does not define whether the RA educational institutions have this right or not.
In Russia, if the results of the expertise are positive, accreditation is granted for a period of 6 years.
 There are some differences in terms of dates.
 Accreditation periods in the Republic of Armenia are considered to be 4 years or 6 years.
 Accreditation is granted for a period of 4 years in case of low risk of existing deficiencies.
In addition, accreditation in Russia has a significant impact not only on the reputation of the university, its activities, recognition of compliance with federal state standards, but also on the activities of the university management.
 In the case of the federal state educational institutions of the Russian Federation, it is stipulated that if the university is completely deprived of accreditation, then the rector as the person in charge of quality and the vice-rector in charge of the relevant line are dismissed.
  In the past, accreditation in the Republic of Armenia mainly affected only the rating of the given university.
 Now, according to the changes made in the order, in case of rejection of the accreditation application or conditional accreditation, the given university has certain restrictions both in terms of opening new educational programs and the allocated funds.
  Undoubtedly, this is an important provision that encourages universities to be more consistent and progressive in quality assurance processes.
One of the most important tools in identifying differences and similarities in education systems is the study and comparison of management systems.
  If the state management of the system in the Republic of Armenia is carried out by a body authorized by the Government of the Republic of Armenia, the separation of powers in the Russian Federation is a little different.
 It is logical that this difference is mainly conditioned by the administrative-territorial structure of Russia.
 The authorities on general, systemic issues in the sphere of the Republic of Armenia are reserved to the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  The authorized state body for education, represented by the Ministry of Education and Science, implements in the direct system of the sphere.
  If the approval of a number of documents and procedures is mainly within the powers of the Government, then the Ministry of Education and Science is already mainly engaged in their elaboration, as it also establishes control over their implementation.
Competencies in the field of education in Russia can be divided into 4 parts. The federal state bodies, the bodies of the subjects of the state power of the Russian Federation, which exercise the powers transferred by the Russian Federation, the bodies of the state authorities of the Russian Federation, the local self-government bodies of separate self-governing territories have competencies.
  The main management of the education sector in Russia is carried out by the federal bodies of state power.
It is interesting to note that in addition to general education in Russia, the local self-government bodies of certain self-governing areas and urban regions have certain authority.
 In the Republic of Armenia, their competencies are limited only to certain functions in the field of general education.
  In Russia, they can act as founders in their regional higher education institutions, as well as provide free higher education on a competitive basis in higher education institutions of Russian subjects.
There are more pronounced differences in terms of management at the university level.
  Higher governing bodies in the Republic of Armenia և their basic competencies (for universities with the status of SNCO) are defined by the Law of the Republic of Armenia on Higher Postgraduate Professional Education.
 In Russia, the competencies of the governing bodies are not defined at the level of law, that is why we have to make a comparison according to the differentiated bodies և defined powers in the charters of the universities.
  4 different universities of the Russian Federation were considered: • a federal state university regulated by a separate federal law, • a national research university, • a federal state university, • a state university.
In both Armenia and Russia, the management of universities is carried out in combination with collegial principles.
Referring to the governing bodies of the RA higher educational institutions, let us mention that in the case of the higher education institutions with the status of SNCO, the governing bodies are the Council, the Scientific Council եկտ the Rector.
 The governing body of the universities having the status of the Foundation is the Board of Trustees, the Academic Council is the body of the university, and the managing-rector is the sole manager.
 However, there is no law in Armenia that will clearly regulate educational funds.
The main collegial governing bodies in Russian universities are the General Assembly / Conference (Conference), the Academic Council, as other collegial governing bodies can be established: the Board of Trustees, the Governing Board, the Supervisory Board.
  The governing bodies are defined according to the university charter.
The competencies of the highest governing bodies in the Russian universities և The Academic Council mainly coincides with the competencies of the relevant governing bodies of the RA higher educational institutions.
The main collegial governing bodies of the observed Russian universities are the Conference և the Scientific Council, moreover, the main management is carried out by the Scientific Council.
 The conference, as well as the Board / Board of Trustees of the HEIs, elects the Rector and listens to his annual report.
  In the case of universities with the status of a national research university and a federal state university, the rector is elected not by the Conference but by the Government of the Russian Federation.
  In Russian universities, the Conference approves the charter of the university or makes a decision on making additions and changes to it.
  In the case of universities with a foundation status in the Republic of Armenia, this authority is vested in the Board of Trustees, and in the case of universities with the status of a SNCO, a proposal is submitted to the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
The conference elects the members of the Academic Council of the University.
The Academic Council of the University consists of the Rector (who is also the Chairman of the Academic Council), the Vice-Rectors, the General Scientific Secretary, the President of the University, and other persons according to the decision of the Academic Council.
The other members are elected to the Scientific Council.
  The Scientific Council is formed for a period of 5 years.
 The number of members of the latter can not exceed 140.
The current management of the university is carried out by the rector, who is either elected by the University Conference (RF), the Board / Board of Trustees (RA) or appointed by the Government (RF) for a term of 5 years.
In Armenia և In Russia the functions of the university rector generally coincide.
  In the case of federal state universities, the rector, who is appointed by the Russian government, is dismissed if the university is deprived of accreditation.
There is also a post of president in Russian universities. He also participates in the management of the university.
  The powers of the President are defined in agreement with the Rector.
 In the universities where the rector is appointed by the Government, the candidacy of the President is nominated by the Government.
 Persons with experience in the position of rector are nominated.
The National Research և Federal State Higher Education Institutions also has a Supervisory Board, which is defined in RA universities.
  It is called to control the main activity of the university.
 The members are 5-11 people.
 The candidates are approved by the RF government.
  The Rector may participate in the sessions with the right of consultative vote.
Interestingly, the rector has the right of advisory vote in the Supervisory Board, and in the Conference, which elects the rector in the case of universities of the above status, the Plenary is chaired by him or the elected chairman.
 The rector of the Republic of Armenia could not be a member of the highest governing body of the university.
National Research Universities may also establish a Board of Trustees, the purpose of which is to promote decision-making in the field of higher education, to attract additional funding for development priorities.
Despite the name, the functions of the Board of Trustees of RA universities and the Board of Trustees of the Russian National Research Universities are completely different.
  This once again proves the necessity of the law on educational foundations in the Republic of Armenia.
When talking about in-university management, it is necessary to refer to the structure of collegial governing bodies.
  If the Republic of Armenia stipulates that there should be representatives in the governing bodies from the Government of the Republic of Armenia, the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia, the teaching staff of the university in a 25% proportion, then in the case of Russian universities there is no structural separation.
  Referring to the involvement of students in the governing bodies, we can say that, unlike RA universities, the opportunities given to the student staff are more limited, as the candidates for the current student indicators are considered accepted in the Academic Council if more than 50% of those present voted for them.
 There is already a clear limitation of autonomy here.
 The same point applies in case of candidacies of representatives of structural subdivisions.
When comparing the two systems of education, one of the main links is the reforms implemented in the given system, their directions.
The Qualifications Framework is a tool that describes what knowledge, abilities և skills թե the graduate has acquired at a given level of qualification, contributes to the transparency, comparability և recognition of qualifications.
 National qualifications frameworks and descriptors are adjusted according to European qualifications frameworks.
  The qualifications framework in the RA was approved by the RA Government in 2011.
 It includes three levels of higher և postgraduate education (bachelor, master, researcher (degree: PhD)); their general characteristics according to knowledge, abilities և skills.
 The first framework of qualifications in Russia was approved in 2008.
Structurally, the qualifications of Armenia և Russia are different.
  The framework of qualifications approved in the Republic of Armenia in 2011 describes the qualifications of bachelor, master, researcher (scientific degree - candidate of sciences) according to 3 characteristics.
The RF Qualifications Framework describes the relevant qualifications according to the characteristics տալիս gives the ways to achieve it for each level.
  The names of the descriptors differ within these qualifications, but, in fact, they are the same in terms of content.
 The draft of the new National Qualifications Framework of the Republic of Armenia is already closer to the one set by the European Qualifications Framework, as a certain credit range is defined for each level, which was not defined either by the RF 2008 or the 2012 draft.
  Currently, RA-Armenia is working to create a framework of sectoral qualifications.
 We believe that the framework of sectoral qualifications will contribute to the successful implementation of a number of provisions enshrined in the Bologna Process.
The main one of the provisions of the Bologna Process, which is interrelated with a number of provisions, is the introduction of a credit system.
 Both Armenia and Russia have introduced the ECTS credit system.
 Preparations for the investment in Russia started in 2002, and in Armenia in 2006.
 Instead of the term academic credit, Russia mainly uses the term "Starting Unit".
Figure 1 presents the main features of the credit systems of the Republic of Armenia և Russia, related to the weekly և annual study loads.
Figure 1.
 Main features of RA և RF credit systems1. Duration of the academic year2. Maximum weekly load 3. Annual full training load 4. Number of credits required in one academic year RA 40 weeks 45 acres. hours 40 weeks 54 ac. hours 1800 ac. hours 2160 ac. It can be seen from the chart that the main feature of the credit systems of the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation is the volume of educational load equivalent to 1 credit.
The volume of "1 ECTS" credit in Armenia is 1800 hours / 60 credits = 30 hours.
The volume of "1 ECTS" credit in Russia is 2160 hours / 60 credits = 36 hours.
Russia has maintained the Soviet-era load of 54 hours a week.
  It is connected with the duration of the academic week.
 The duration of the academic week in Armenia is 5 days, in Russia - 6.
 Thus, the main difference between the introduction of a credit system in these two systems is the burden.
Artsvik Sargsyan FEATURES OF RA AND RF HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Keywords: RA և RF education systems, education systems management, educational programs, accreditation process, qualifications framework
.
