THE NEED FOR FORMATION OF TOURISM DESTINATIONS AS A UNIT OF TERRITORIAL ORGANIZATION This article discusses the importance of the spatial organization of tourism, its importance in the spatial organization and development of tourism.
The concept of "tourist destination" has been clarified, a number of approaches of different authors on the definition of sub-tourist destinations have been discussed, they have been clarified.
  A comprehensive և comprehensive analysis was conducted to substantiate the need for tourist destinations.
In the case of tourism development, there was a need to study the geographical environment, its diversity and differences in order to increase the efficiency of creating and selling tourism products.
 It is due to these differences և diversity that the distribution of functions takes place between the territories, as a result - competition և cooperation.
The territorial organization of society is the result of this process, which is used in the scientific literature in two senses, as a process, the result of the process [2, p. 123].
 Territorial organization [3, p. 304] makes it possible to regulate the process of placement in different spheres of public life as a result of a certain interconnected process.
 If in the case of location we consider the location of the object in space, then during the territorial organization we also discuss why or how the object is located in space.
  In case of development of any sphere, it is desirable to place objects jointly, to place them in relation to each other, considering them as separate elements of the system.
 Territorial organization allows to increase the efficiency of work, to facilitate ոնregulate the activities of public entities.
As a result of facilitating the study of the geographical environment, as well as exercising and controlling the pre-administrative functions, the territories began to be circled, as a result of which the concepts of "circulating" and "circulating" were introduced in the scientific literature [2, p. 128].
In scientific language, the phenomenon of circularization developed, areas of different sizes and content were formed with their features [2, p. 128].
The location of individual branches of tourism can not be considered as an isolated sector of public life.
 It is conditioned by many factors, connected with natural conditions and resources, their quantity and quality, geographical location of the object, and many other phenomena.
  In any case, the placement of objects is directly or indirectly influenced by several factors.
Taking into account the rates of development of the tourism sector, spatial inclusion, territorial-functional differences, implementation of administrative-control functions, the phenomenon of regionalization և gradually developed in the tourism sector, which was manifested by the formation of tourist clusters և tourist destinations։.
The tourist destination [4, p. 91] became a unique unit of territorial organization in the field of tourism.
 If in the case of the region it was a unique area with its own features, with its own characteristics - distinctive features, then the tourist destination became not only a unique area performing a tourist function, but also an administrative body, where social, economic and administrative spheres were combined.
  In order to understand the need for planning a tourist destination, let us discuss the approaches of several authors to the definition of a tourist destination, the essence, significance of which, the need for planning, have not been clarified in scientific circles.
Different views have been put forward in the scientific literature on the definition of the concept of destination.
  In the dictionary of tourism terms, destination is defined as a region, region, city or other area endowed with tourist attraction, which stimulates the interest of tourists, and also the development of tourism [5, p. 165].
From the point of view of the customers, the destination is an area where the tourist spends his main time during the trip, using the offered services.
 It is chosen by the tourist, who, in the latter's opinion, best suits his needs.
Depending on the administrative boundaries, the tourist destination should be separated according to the administrative division of the area (for example, the city or local self-government entity).
 Administrative divisions lead to some problems, as administrative units often represent only a portion of the destination կարող often destinations may not coincide with administrative boundaries.
According to N. According to Lepper, "a destination is a limited area that a tourist chooses to visit; he or she spends some time there, an area where tourists interact with the tourism infrastructure."
Ս. Cooper և D. Fletcher considers the tourist destination to be "a set of means and services aimed at meeting the needs of tourists".
B. Ridge և D. According to Crouch's definition, a tourist destination is a limited area with administrative borders. country, macro-region (whole of several countries), state or region within a country, city, national park or monument.
O. According to Nikitina, a tourist destination is a geographical area with a high density of tourism resources, which is characterized by the necessary infrastructure that also supports and serves it [7].
E. According to Pavlova, a tourist destination is a socio-geographical place chosen by a tourist or a segment in demand for tourism, has all the necessary organizational, accommodation, service and entertainment facilities.
A. According to Zorin's definition, the tourist destination is an object of regional localization of recreational-territorial systems. country-regional landscape-center-route [7].
V. Framke gave two approaches to the destination: classical or business-socio-cultural approach.
  Destination is a set of interests, different types of functions, services, entertainment infrastructure, which characterize the uniqueness of the area.
  According to Framke, five main interrelated aspects have been identified to define the tourist destination: • geographical-territorial, • infrastructure-resource, • marketing, • social, • administrative [7].
All of these interconnected elements can form a destination.
 Studies show that the separation of destinations through territorial organization solves a number of problems.
  In the first place, the implementation of management functions contributes to the efficient use of space, development of development programs, cadastre of resources, evaluation, rational use and involvement in the field of tourism, solving social problems by ensuring income distribution among people involved in the "tourism sector".
  By creating a destination, territorial management creates an opportunity to solve other problems arising from the concept of social, economic and sustainable development.
 Consequently, the investment of the earned income in the economy, social employment, the development of interest in the area, the investments made, the advertising-marketing promotion programs contribute to the increase of the interest in the territories in the tourism market և the tourist flows.
The market environment is a factor in the formation of destinations.
 According to some experts, the boundaries of destinations are determined by market relations;
The tourist approach to destination formation is a little different.
 According to the definition of the World Tourism Organization, "a tourist destination is a physical environment where tourists spend at least one night.
  The destination has physical և administrative boundaries, which separate the destination management system, the image, which characterizes the market competitiveness of the latter "[7].
In the case of destination, great attention is paid to the management process, when different points of view are put forward for the development of the area.
 Studies of the unit of territorial organization, the destination, show that the task of developing it is placed on the destination management organization (DMC), which in turn develops the development plan of the data area [6, 4].
 Destination segregation is not always based on administrative division, so the administrative circle can never control the process of destination development.
Therefore, first of all, it is necessary to clarify the administrative boundaries.
The need for destination planning is also related to the rational use of territories, as the destination management organization studies, evaluates the resources հնարավոր the possibilities of their use.
 Destination planning is necessary for sustainable development, as social, economic and environmental aspects are taken into account when managing destinations.
  As a territorial organization of tourism, the need for destination planning is conditioned by the priority of sustainable development.
 Studies show that in the case of destination, the process is more systematic and efficient.
The destination is different from the place of permanent residence, it has certain features, due to which the tourist chooses.
 But, in the case of territorial organization, it is determined which preconditions, resources and attractions have which territories to become destinations.
In order to become a tourist destination or, as they say, to attract the attention of tourists, a number of conditions must be met: • the area must have tourist attraction, interest to provide tourist flows, • transport accessibility, • must be provided to serve tourists with the necessary infrastructure provided ությամբ a variety of services; • access to information systems [1, p. 47].
However, not all areas can become tourist destinations.
 The theoretical analysis will prove that the formation of tourist destinations is a process that contributes to the sustainable development of tourism, և in the case of such progress in tourism development, it is an effective unit of territorial organization of tourism.
Thus, the need to create tourist destinations stems from the goals of sustainable development of tourist centers, regions, as a result of which it becomes possible to manage and control the tourism process in any area.
The need to build a tourist destination in connection with the rational use of the assessment of tourism resources in a specific area, while ensuring the effectiveness of the economic, social, environmental and administrative management of limited areas through the development of market relations.
LITERATURE [1] Sayadyan H., Tourism Economics (macro-micro economics), Yerevan, 2014, 208 pages.
[2] Valesyan L., Introduction to Social Geography, Yerevan, 1999, 228 pages.
элемент туристской систеы, Вестник КемГУ, 2012, №4 (52), т. 1, cc. 131-6, URL.
http:
//tourlib.net/statti_tourism/kiryanova2.htm (contact date.
 05.04.2018) .URL.
 http:
//tourlib.net/statti_tourism/seraya.htm (contact date.
 05.04.2018). Navasardyan Amalia THE NEED FOR FORMATION OF TOURIST DESTINATIONS AS A UNIT OF TERRITORIAL ORGANIZATION: Keywords: tourism, development, tourism, environment
