ON THE ISSUE OF CRIMINAL CONTENT OF "BRIBE" AND "BRIBE" CONFERENCES
  It significantly discredits the state authorities, degrades the capacity and content of their activities.
  This divergence causes skepticism in the society that various issues cannot be solved without bribes, in legal ways.
The Republic of Armenia, being a member of the Council of Europe, has undertaken international obligations to adopt equivalent legislative acts to effectively combat both active and passive corruption, imposing appropriate criminal penalties for them.
 Its purpose is to prevent the disproportionate action or inaction of an official from creating a discriminatory situation in the protection of the legitimate interests of human rights and freedoms.
  This is more than just the abuse of official position, because the consequence of it leads to the distortion of the basic principles of the rule of law. Not only is the official not guided by the rule of law, but he also creates a discriminatory situation in the protection of the rights of individuals.
Proceeding from the importance of the issue, from the imperatives of the establishment of the rule of law, it is necessary to ensure the organization of an effective fight against corruption, which will contribute to the strengthening of democracy, rule of law, protection of human rights and freedoms.
Despite the urgency and urgency of the issue, a number of issues remain controversial, leading to both theoretical debates and complications in legal practice.
  In particular, there is no common concept of "corruption" in the legal literature, which characterizes the manifestations of high-risk public corruption.
As a general and collective concept, "corruption" includes all possible crimes related to bribery, criminal activity - bribery, bribery, mediation for bribery - even the provocation of bribery1.
Prominent expert in the observed field, Professor S. V. Maximov defines bribery as the use of their status by state, municipal or other public servants (including judges-deputies) or employees of other commercial organizations (including international) for the illegal acquisition of property, rights, services or privileges. or the provision of such property, rights, services or privileges (including property) by such person 2.
Chucha gave a narrower definition of the concept of "corruption" in the comments of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. "The essence of it is that an official receives illegal material remuneration from other persons for his official powers or official position" 3.
We think that the inclusion of bribery only in the concept of "corruption" is not justified, does not follow from its essence and does not express the high public danger of that phenomenon.
According to another view, bribery is a mercenary crime, the essence of which is that an official receives illegal remuneration from another person or organization due to his / her official behavior or position held4.
Trainin mentions that bribery means receiving a bribe.
  At the same time, bribery և bribery mediation was viewed as a special form of bribery.
N. expressed a different position in this regard. P. Kucheriavin.
 Finds that receiving bribes in bribery, giving bribes և 1 See Tovmasyan A. T., Soviet criminal law.
  Education manual lawyer. fact number, -Yer., h. 4, special part, edited by M. I. Uzunyan, 1983, page 183.
2 See Максимов С. V., Corruption. Law. Responsibilityь.-M.
 Инр Инфо Р, 2000, page 9.
3 See Comments on the Code of Conduct of the Russian Federation // ed. A.I. Чучаева. -M.
INFRA-M - 2009 (Consultant Plus) - page 503.
4 See Volzhenkin B. В., Служебные преступления. M.
 Юристъ, 2000, p. 189.
5 See Trainin A. N., Rule of Law. Part One. Юридическое انتشارтел Н Н.К.К.РСФСР, - М., 1927, էջ 249.
Mediation of bribery is the commission of the same crime in a special way6.
Ն. D. Durmanov views bribery as a common crime, which combines bribery and bribery.
  He writes: "It would be more correct to view bribery տալ bribery not as two independent crimes, but as one complex crime."
In addition to the above-mentioned main approaches, in the scientific works of some authors, more flexible, differentiated approaches have been included in the definition of corruption.
  Thus, B. V. Zdravomislov thinks that bribery requires two separate features: bribery in the broad sense and bribery in the narrow sense.
 Bribery in the narrow sense means receiving a bribe, and in the broad sense, all three crimes - receiving a bribe, giving a bribe - bribery mediation8.
As O. mentions. Kachmazov, "although there is a close connection between giving and receiving bribes", nevertheless, they are independent crimes, as they have a special relationship with each other only by the signs in them.
 In particular, only the fact that the subject of the crime is different is such an essential circumstance that does not allow them to be considered as one crime ”9.
It is noteworthy that receiving bribes և give bribes to different objective parties, characteristics of the subject - interests, motives for actions - goals.
  Agreeing with the approach that receiving and giving bribes, bribery mediation are different crimes or are conditioned by each other, let us mention that it also has a legal basis.
 Both in the criminal code of the Republic of Armenia and in the criminal codes of foreign countries, in international legal acts, different articles are directly separated for bribery, giving, and in some cases for mediation.
We find that the crimes that constitute bribery are interconnected, forming a "necessary complicity", because if there is no fact of giving a bribe, there is no fact of receiving a bribe 6 See Кучерявый Н. P., Responsibility for high school law, -M., 1957, p. 41.
7 See Durmanov N. D., Ritual responsibility for high school law, -M., 1957, p. 41.
8 See Здравомыслов Б. В., Должностные преступления. Pony and qualification, -M., 1975, p. 124.
9 See Kachmazov O. H., Responsibility for high-ranking law on Russian legal rights, - Vladikavkaz.
 Iriston, 2000, p. 30.
միջ Bribery mediation.
  We agree with A. Yakovl's view that the crime of receiving a bribe could not be considered over if it had not been given.
  Nor can the crime of giving a bribe be considered over if the subject of the bribe has not been received.
 That is, each of the mentioned crimes cannot be committed independently, without connection with the other 10.
This is how G. interprets the notion of "corruption". Bakhtadze, noting that receiving and giving bribes is considered a complicated crime.
 It always presupposes the performance of two logically connected actions: receiving a bribe and giving a bribe.
 The first is done by the giver and the second by the receiver.
 Giving always logically precedes receiving, if there is no giver, then there can be no recipient, on the contrary 11.
Agreeing with the presented point of view, we find that bribery and giving bribes are two closely interconnected criminal acts that cannot be completed on their own.
It turns out that the bribe-giver "supports" the bribe-taker so that the latter completes his publicly dangerous act.
Thus, summarizing the above, we consider it necessary to emphasize that bribery includes three independent crimes against the normal functioning of the state apparatus, which are interconnected and form part of a common chain, that is, bribery, bribery, and bribery.
The notion of "bribery", which is the subject of corruption, gives rise to legal disputes.
  Bribery is, in a broad sense, any material benefit, including property rights and obligations, for example, the recipient of a bribe is exempt from paying the debt and repaying the material assets taken in advance.
Many scholars believe that the subject of bribery is bribery12.
 In particular, O. Kh. Kachmazov considers it correct to define the subject of a crime as any item in the material world, due to certain properties of which the criminal law connects with a specific crime.
  Based on this, he claims that the subject of bribery can be related to the subject of the crime 10 See Comments on the Code of Conduct of the Russian Federation. Special part / Under the order of G.I. Скуратова, В. М. Лебедева ,. M., 1996, p. 450.
11 See Bakhtadze G. ,., К вопросу о понятии взяточничества // Сб.
  Problems of prosecutorial inheritance practices, Tbilisi, 1993, page 6.
12 See Klspitsky I. А., Реинов В. И. Half of the knots are made by the Russians. - M., 2001, page 11.
because in this case the object of public relations is violated by bribing an official13.
  However, by interpreting the subject of the crime in this way, it becomes impossible to separate it from the means of committing the crime.
Contrary to this approach, some authors note that it complicates the detection of the elements of the crime enough և requires a substantial revision of the criminal doctrine.
  That is why it is suggested to stick to the old traditional point of view, especially when in judicial practice bribery is called a subject of crime14.
Regarding the issue under discussion, we consider the view that bribery is not a subject of a crime, but a means of committing it, as the subject is the material reflection of the object, and the bribe has nothing to do with the object15.
We believe that the subject of bribery is, in fact, a means of crime, with the help of which a publicly dangerous act is committed, in particular, through it it influences the official to perform the actions that constitute the purpose of bribery or to refrain from performing them.
 Its presence is considered a mandatory feature of the objective side of "giving a bribe".
It should be noted that in the RA Criminal Code of 1961 the legislator did not reveal the essence of the subject of the bribe.
 In contrast, the current RA Criminal Code clarified the concept of the subject of bribery, defining it as money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage.
By dram it is necessary to understand both the Armenian dram, which, according to the RA Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, is issued.
  As for money withdrawn from circulation, it is not considered a subject for receiving or giving a bribe in that sense; it should be assessed as other assets.
13 See Kamchazov O. H., Responsibility for securities according to the Russian rule of law.
dis. канд. юрид. Science, M., 1999, pp. 71-72.
14 See Яковенко Е. V., Role-playing fight with the high school.
 Dis. канд. юрид. Science, Vladivostok, 2004, p. 88.
15 See Quiz AK, Debt Replacement. M., 1992, p. 16, Egorova HA Convenient legal forms of struggle with corruption in new economic conditions.
  Dis .. .kand. юрид. scientist.Saratov, 1996, page 63.
The essence of securities is revealed in Article 146 of the RA Civil Code, according to which a security is a document certifying property rights, defined by the observance of the obligatory requisites, the implementation or transfer of which is possible only when presenting it.
 Article 153 of the RA Civil Code lists the types of securities by which securities are classified: bond, check, ordinary bill, transferable bill (payment), stock, bill of lading, bank certificate (bank book, bank certificate), double warehouse certificate Certificate, investment fund share և Other documents, which are classified as securities by the securities laws.
Other benefits include benefits of any property or non-property, such as free repair of an apartment or car, construction of a house, etc., such as debt forgiveness, repayment of a debt on behalf of a bribe taker, waiver of a civil lawsuit, grant a soft loan, promotion sponsored by Gill 16.
He also referred to the issue of the plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, noting that the property benefits should be understood, in particular, the reduction of rent, the reduction of the price of goods sold, the reduction of interest rates on bank loans.
The above property benefits should be given a specific monetary value during the interim negotiations between the bribe-giver and the bribe-giver17.
 A clear definition of the latter is important for the qualification of the act.
In addition, the UN Convention against Corruption, adopted on 9 December 2003, defines the term "property", according to Article 2 of which "property" means any property, whether tangible or intangible, movable or immovable. expressed in the form of objects or rights, such as legal documents or acts affirming the right of ownership or interest in such values.
It follows from the above that even a positive description, critique, opinion for the actions of an official is still considered a subject of bribery, as the current criminal law 16 See Комментарий к Уголовному кодексу Российской Федерации // под ред. A.I. Чучаева. -M.
INFRA-M - 2009. (Consultant Plus), page 503.
17 See Establishment of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation from 10.02.2000, N 6, "On the fateful practice of dividing the Eastern and Commerian bribes", point 9.
It includes other benefits in the sense of providing.
  In this regard, it is unequivocal that the provision of non-property benefits is endowed with no less public danger.
We consider it necessary to emphasize that the analysis of the RA Criminal Code shows that there is no common concept of "bribery", which causes obstacles to the application of criminal law.
  The legislator, not observing the requirements of the RA Law on Legal Acts, gave different interpretations to the concepts of "receiving a bribe" or "giving a bribe".
The mentioned conclusion is substantiated by the following reasoning.1. According to Article 311 of the RA Criminal Code, as well as Article 200, receiving a bribe in person or through an intermediary is to receive or demand money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage for oneself or to accept or accept the promise or offer to receive a bribe. for the sponsorship or permission of the service provider or the person representing him / her to perform or not perform any action within the scope of his / her authority or to use his / her official position to perform or not to perform such action.
2. Part 1 of Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code envisages criminal liability for receiving bribes from candidates in person or through a mediator on the condition of voting for, pro-participation or refusal to participate in any of the candidates.
  In other words, receiving a bribe in the sense of the article under discussion is limited only to passing it on to the recipient of the bribe, as the disposition of the article specifies the actions for which the bribe is paid.
  That is, the concept of receiving a bribe does not include the purpose of its fulfillment.
3. According to Article 201 of the RA Criminal Code, “(…) bribery, ie those persons (eg athletes, referees, coaches, team leaders or other participants and organizers of professional competitions, as well as organizers of solemn commercial competitions and the award committee) receiving or claiming money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage for themselves or through another person or through an intermediary, or accepting a promise or offer to receive it.
  It follows from the literal interpretation of this provision that the concept of receiving a bribe does not include the purpose of its implementation, for example, influencing the results of competitions or tenders.
We consider that in the mentioned case the non-fixation of the goal is simply omitted, as the legislator directly envisaged it when defining criminal liability for giving bribes to the persons mentioned in part 1 of the mentioned article.
From the study of the above, it becomes obvious that the legislator has defined concepts with different content with the same term, that is, receiving bribes.
 Moreover, to take bribery is not to define the concept with the relevant content, that is, to receive illegal remuneration from a public servant who is not an official.
The above differentiated approaches by the legislature in legal practice give rise to legal disputes և controversies that may lead to the avoidance of criminal liability by the perpetrators (for example, when evidence of bribery or bribery is found to be the result of a non-commissioned officer when resolving the issue of criminal prosecution).
Taking into account the above-mentioned, we propose to define the notion of "bribery" in the general part of the RA Criminal Code, which will solve the issue of criminalizing the perpetrators by the relevant articles of the special part of the RA Criminal Code.
 In particular, we propose to make a provision in the general part of the RA Criminal Code with the following edition: to abstain. ”
  The provision of this provision will free the RA Criminal Code from repeating the definition of the same concept in each case, as it will ensure the monetary perception and application.
In the event that an official, using his official position, facilitates the performance or refraining from actions of another official, his actions will be qualified as assistance or mediation of bribery, depending on the factual circumstances of the case.
  As for the other actions that constitute the purpose of bribery or bribery, such as tolerance or patronage, they by their nature imply either certain actions (for example, promotion) or refraining from certain actions (for example, not being subject to a disciplinary sanction). , therefore included in the concept of bribery.
 Therefore, we consider that it is not expedient to further emphasize permission and patronage as a type of action (inaction) performed by a person in the case when the same criminal responsibility is provided for them.
Tigran Ghazaryan ON THE ISSUE OF CRIMINAL CONTENT OF "CORRUPTION" AND "BRIBE" TERMS Keywords: Corruption, bribery, bribery, bribery, bribery, bribery, bribery, illegal
