THE SYMPTOMS OF INTERNET ADDICTION ... Nations, know once and for all that nature wanted to keep you from science, like the one who snatches a dangerous weapon from his child.
 Everything that is hidden by nature is evil, it protects us from it, the difficulties of research are one of its many fortunes.
 Ժ. Ժ. The societies of the Russian-Western model are commonly referred to as "knowledge-based societies", where knowledge performs the functions of exercising power.
  One of the hallmarks of modern civilization is that societies united around economic resources are being replaced by societies united around information and knowledge1.
 It is no longer accepted that "technology և technicalization, science և scientism have become a monster that threatens to swallow humanity and give birth to humanity" 2.
 The growing popularity of Internet technologies allows us to view the "World Wide Web" as a new social sphere.
 The "winds of change" blowing from the west have brought the "www web" to our continent, and in recent years they have been used steadily by the people of our country.
 Today's predictions lead to a more radical conclusion, noting that in a few years what is happening in "virtual reality" will determine our existence in the "real world".
  According to research conducted at Oxford University, in 20 years 47% of human work will be mechanized3.
 For millions of people, the Internet has replaced reality.
 Ordering food և various products via the Internet has become quite widespread in the capital, through which people back up their bank accounts, participate in stock exchanges, e-auctions, conclude transactions, 1 See Harutyunyan E., Law of Supremacy of Transitions // Socio-Cultural Transformations of a Transitional Society 8, Yerevan, 2011, page 41.
2 Bogomolov A. S., Contemporary bourgeois philosophy, Yerevan, 1983, p. 323.
3 See Khachatryan S., Bridges instead of walls, Yerevan, 2014, page 6.
attending casinos կատարում making payments with virtual money.
The Internet is a unique space where you can find everything from shoelaces to friends.
 Only everything we find is virtual.
 In order to actually be able to tie shoelaces or hug a friend, it is necessary to log out of the Internet.
  Nevertheless, the illusion of reality is very strong.
 It seems that a new reality is emerging in parallel with reality.
  And if something does not work in the "real reality", the temptation grows to live where the surrounding world will be built according to their own desires.
  By not adapting to the "gray" reality, people "create" new truths for themselves.
  Since the formation of the information society, when a new space for socializing, such as the Internet, has emerged, people in social life have been able to choose their gender, age, and skin color at least on a virtual level.
"Already doubting the justice and truth of the orders established by nature, people" create "new truths for themselves."
4 This new phenomenon, which has given endless opportunities and facilities to humanity and civilization, is becoming more and more dangerous with its addictive danger, which, according to some predictions, will become the "plague" of the 21st century.
 Such a deep penetration of virtuality social սոցիալական personal life allows us to talk about the virtualization of society.
  Born from medieval Christian philosophy, undergoing changes in different eras, today the notion of "virtuality" has moved far away from the original understanding, it is considered as an intermediate, neutral notion of the real.
 It is mostly connected with electronic և information technologies.
  In order to discover the concept of "virtual reality", one can draw a parallel with the simulation theory, which is actively discussed in the concepts of the representatives of poststructuralist "postmodernism" (J. Deleuze, J. Baudrillard) 6.
  Deviating from this new socio-cultural reality 4 Babajanyan L., Socio-cultural preconditions for the formation of cynicism, "Banber Yerjan University", Philosophy, Psychology, 141.4, 2013, p. 41.
5 See Ivanov D., Virtualization of Publications, Petersburg Vostokovedenie, 2000, p. 41.
6 See Deleuze G., Simulcr and Ancient Philosophy // "Logic of Sense", M., 1995; J. Baudrillard, http.
//istina.msu.ru/media/publications/articles/796/1cc/720487/Virtualnaya_realnost_i_simulyakryi.pdf
.
From philosophical analysis, henceforth, the dependence of the Internet on the subject of our analysis as a psychological problem.
The concept of "Internet addiction" (Disorder (IAD)) was proposed by an American psychiatrist E. Goldberg.
  This concept means a completely different type of addiction, alcohol or drug addiction, according to which it is not a medical problem, but mostly psychological, related to the weakening of the level of self-government, which in turn causes human development problems.
  In the medical sense, addiction is defined as the need to use a sticky, restless, habitual object, which is characterized by its tolerance, as well as the expression of physiological and psychological symptoms.
  Using the Internet, no substance literally becomes a habit.
  The nature of addiction is different here than in the case of alcohol consumption.
 The use of a substance that has become a habit has the property of replacing it with another substance.
  It is noteworthy that with psychological dependence there is also physical dependence, that is, a demand at the level of the organism - a pulling force, a tendency.
  While using the Internet, there is no physical dependence, but the psychological component is manifested in a vivid way.
 Of course, not all people can be “targeted” by Internet addiction.
 There is reason to believe that the weakest "trap" is the range of individuals who are predisposed to different dependencies.
  For example, according to research, people suffering from alcoholism and drug addiction who are treated in clinics often turn to the Internet in search of respect, love and significance, which seems unattainable in the environment.
  The factor of communication anonymity on the Internet is favorable here, by which it is possible to overcome alienation.
There are opinions that anyone who has access to the Internet can become a "captive" of Internet addiction, but those who have a computer at home are most at risk.
There are various types of Internet addiction, mostly based on the choice of websites.
  In particular, they include addiction to virtual sex, viewing pornographic material, harassment via the Internet, frequent visits to virtual casinos, intensive betting, irregular chats, forums, etc.
As with any addiction, Internet addiction has a well-defined psychological cause.
 The Internet often attracts people who have low self-esteem, are dissatisfied with themselves, or are unable to build harmonious relationships with others in real life.
 Virtual space provides some "substitute" (of course, incomplete) substitute for live communication.
  It also has beneficial properties. Anonymity is an opportunity to end unpleasant communication, to avoid danger, to avoid responsibility, which is an opportunity to feel the power and to control the situation.
  Virtual role-playing games are widespread, through which a person can become whatever he wants, overcome his own limitations, express himself, think and feel like imaginary heroes.
 But when the game is over, the virtual "magic melts", և everything around becomes dull, gray and gloomy again.
  There is a desire to return to that world, where he is human, free, satisfied with himself, where man is a master, a hero.
"With irony, they view social spaces as a haven of psychological and existential salvation, where it is possible to overcome the 'injustices' caused by nature."
It should be noted that the Internet will have quite a big impact on the general education system.
  "If quantitative changes continue in the education system in the coming years (length of study, number of subjects, content to be taught, increase or decrease in time), if we can not offer attractive and quality alternatives to children and free them from IT addiction, technology leaving teachers alone in the classrooms. ”8
  "Virtuality is becoming an ideal haven for modern cynicism, as subconscious people are given the opportunity to believe in their own truthfulness of the desired nature."
 Despite the obvious concern about this phenomenon, there may be an opinion that the medical term "addiction" is not applicable to Internet users, it can be described as a hobby.
 Of course, on the contrary, it can be argued that the hobby, unlike addiction, does not cut a person off from real life.
7 Լ. Babajanyan, in the same place.
8 Ս. Khachatryan, Bridges instead of walls, Yerevan, 2014, page 11.
9 Լ. Babajanyan, in the same place.
 And so, in order to distinguish the hobby from addiction, there are several symptoms that are typical of Internet addiction.
  As a rule, one of the symptoms is combined with other symptoms: և If a person has four symptoms at the same time for a long period of time (not less than a week), then the condition is thought-provoking: • Frequent e-mail checks; in front of a home computer, • Internet access due to work needs, • Complaints from relatives for sitting in front of a computer for too long, • Loss of time, • More frequent communication in a virtual space, personal meeting, work responsibilities, public life,Ignoring the deterioration of health due to scientific work or being on the Internet; • Inability to reduce the time spent on the Internet; • Missing food, classes, meetings, as well as restricting sleep for the sake of being on the Internet for a long time; • to get rid of fatigue after leaving the Internet, agitation, low mood, as well as an insurmountable desire to return to the Internet, • access to the "secret" Internet using the absence of family members, accompanied by feelings of lightness or guilt,Skipping meetings, such as restricting sleep for the sake of being on the Internet for a long time; • Going online to avoid problems, helplessness, guilt, depression; • Getting out of the Internet, fatigue, agitation, mood swings. • Access to the "secret" Internet in the absence of family members, accompanied by feelings of lightness or guilt; • Denial of dependency.Skipping meetings, such as restricting sleep for the sake of being on the Internet for a long time; • Accessing the Internet to avoid problems, helplessness, guilt, and depression; • Getting out of the Internet, fatigue, agitation, mood swings; • Access to the "secret" Internet in the absence of family members, accompanied by feelings of lightness or guilt; • Denial of dependency.such as an insurmountable desire to return to the Internet, • taking advantage of the absence of family members to access the "secret" Internet, accompanied by feelings of lightness or guilt, • denial of dependence.such as an insurmountable desire to return to the Internet, • taking advantage of the absence of family members to access the "secret" Internet, accompanied by feelings of lightness or guilt, • denial of dependence.
Unfortunately, the computer "shadow" that appears in our lives is not consumed by only one problem - the development of Internet addiction.
  Here, computer malware is not only related to the Internet space.
  It can cause distress, as well as deterioration of professional, social, family, interpersonal, psychological or physical functioning.
  There are also computer games that promote the manifestation of human aggression.
  Feelings of such emotional similarity gradually move from the "matrix" to real life, becoming a matter of serious concern.
Thus, emphasizing the potential dangers of accessing the Internet and computer use does not mean that it should be perceived as an undoubtedly dangerous phenomenon, which should be avoided unconditionally.
  This new phenomenon, of course, has many positive aspects.
  Then the negative effects of the Internet should be seen as a so-called additional inevitable consequence of progress.
Armen Khachatryan SYMPTOMS OF INTERNET ADDICTION Keywords: Internet addiction, knowledge base, information society, virtual reality, virtuality, simulation, poststructuralism, post-Summary.
