CLASSIFICATIONS OF CLASSROOM OFFICES IN THE CONTEXT OF GLOBALIZATION (EXPERIENCE OF GRAPHITES EXAMINATION OF YSU FACULTY OF HISTORY OFFICE) After the independence of Armenia On the one hand, the Armenian culture of the pre-Soviet period is being revived;
  If changes take place outside the context, they begin to create an environment of uncertainty in which the unifying role of the value system, which forms a caring commonality between sections of society, including ethnic communities, is disrupted1.
It is one thing if only internal changes take place in a country (political, economic, cultural), it is quite another if internal changes are intensely influenced by external influences.
 In this work, let's conditionally call the external influences in Armenia the cultural influence of globalization.
The aim of the work is to present the manifestations of the cultural influences of globalization in Armenia in the manuscripts left by the students on the classroom desks of YSU Faculty of History or in other words in the classroom graffiti.
 The theoretical basis for measuring the impact of globalization was the factor typology of the American sociologist Peter Berger, according to which the following factors underlie cultural globalization: 2. • Language, • Business elite, • Intellectual Club, • Social movements, • Mass culture.
Every year more and more people learning and speaking English.
 One of the main reasons is that today English is a stimulus for a good career.
 Here we must take into account that the new language brings with it a new way of thinking.
 As Berger points out, knowledge of any foreign language has an indirect emotional impact.
Speaking about the business elite, let us mention that the main driving force of globalization is the economy.
 The members of the business elite carry the Davos culture.
  The driving force of Davos culture is world business, which is driven by economic and technological globalization.
When talking about the club of intellectuals, Berger refers to those who formed the main value system of the period.
 It happens through the Internet, numerous charitable foundations, public and scientific structures.
  These intellectuals can engage in educational, scientific and social activities in different countries, as well as on the Internet, which knows no cultural boundaries.
  However, the members of those same intellectual clubs can also be anti-globalists.
Berger connects social events with intellectual clubs, noting that social events, such as environmental movements, take place on their ideological basis3.
1 Gabrielyan M., Dabaghyan A., Tadosyan A., Margaryan N., Principles of ensuring sound security and protection of moral values ​​in the context of national security, Yerevan, 2002, p. 3, http.
//www.noravank.am/upload/pdf/5.Mkhitar%20Gabrielyan.pdf.
2 Berger P., Huntington S., Multiple Globalization.
 Cultural diversity in modern peace, Moscow, 2004, p. 65-66.3 Ibid., P. 67.
Berger considers the type of mass culture that is widespread in the world today to be American, which is spread mainly through the media.
 He notes that under the influence of American mass culture, versions of local mass culture are created, the content of which is not the same in any case.
The subject of the presented work is the graffiti of the classroom desks of YSU Faculty of History (the notes and pictures left by the students).
 The following considerations have been taken into account when choosing desk graffiti as a subject of research: • The sign (semiotic) manifestations of the driving forces of cultural globalization are quite complete and comprehensive in classroom graffiti.
• The youth (in this case the students) is the fastest responding social group to assimilating them.
• The knowledge offered to students in the Faculty of History refers to various models of identities: historical, political, ethnic, global-local, aesthetic, professional, etc., the relationship and transformations of which can be traced back to office graffiti.
• In the choice of identity models mentioned in the previous point, the tendency of transformation from nationalism to geo-citizenship, or, more importantly, from ethnocentrism to ethno-relativity, is especially evident.
 During the research, the touchstones that prevent a more complete and objective picture were taken into account.
  For example, we mean that not all students leave their mark on the tables, չենք we can not get an idea of ​​the whole student through desks.
  Besides, in many cases we do not know the exact authors of the writings, therefore the motives and motives of the writings are not clear, as well as the addressees of the written messages.
 The fact that the phenomenon in question is a marginal practice was taken into account with some reservations.
  Taking into account these other similar circumstances, we have tried to build our analysis based mainly on the symbolic-semantic aspects of the scriptures.
Taking into account the expressive and content peculiarities of the materials registered during the research, we have singled out the groups with classroom graffiti.1. Symbolic-image messages • Ideas (fascism, peace, eternity…), • Logos of organizations, companies (sports clubs, car manufacturing companies…), • Ethnic identity symbols • Uncoded images2. Verbal messages • Personal names, • Toponyms, • Names of musicians (or groups), • Excerpts from poems, • Well-known companies (brands, names of taxi services ...), • Sports clubs, athletes, • Names of parties, • Other ... One of the most striking patterns in the scriptures is the use of foreign language symbols.
 Most of the inscriptions are in Latin letters.
 There are even words written in Latin letters that refer to the symbols of the Armenian ethnic identity.
  For example, "Armenia", "Ararat", "Tigran THE GREAT", "Garegin Njdeh", etc.
 And why is that?
 After the independence of Armenia, when Western culture penetrates Armenia with great intensity without obstacles, before independence only for those who saw what was allowed in the Soviet system, it seems to become a free platform for the fulfillment of all unfulfilled (or even unconscious) desires.
 And it is no coincidence that most of the writing on the tables is in Latin letters, as the post-Soviet generation can more easily assimilate contemporary (աշխարհում widespread) culture or forms of identity expression than go back 70 years.
 It seems that "the Latin alphabet is the ideological weapon of the West" 1, through which indirectly spread Western values.
Excerpts from the Western culture of table painting can be explained in the same way.
  As for the Russian language, after 70 years of domination, today we can see only rare fragments on the student desks, which are very interesting, they mainly represent the criminal ("thieves") subculture.
  It turns out that if in the Soviet Union Russian was considered the "language of the elite", today it has become part of a marginal culture, the "official language of thieves' jargon" with Russian words in Armenian grammar and is expressed on student desks.
  The existence of verbal messages written in foreign languages, apart from being pro-Western or pro-Russian, can also be explained by being the main languages ​​of network communication of those languages.
  The above-mentioned linguistic phenomena are unequivocally explained by the students' desire to master foreign languages ​​(especially English); more specifically, we are dealing here with an ideal identity or supernatural.
 However, in reality the students' desires remain at the level of desires, the knowledge of English mainly remains within the limits of a very limited vocabulary related to mass culture.
  In addition, we often encounter grammatical errors.
  In this faculty, the educational process takes place mainly in the Armenian language, but in order to relate to world science, students have to read English or Russian literature, and then reproduce in Armenian.
 As a result, we encounter a paradoxical phenomenon. Students mostly prefer to read Russian literature or Russian translations of literature written in other languages, but they mostly write Latin letters on the tables.
 Here the contrast of students' real և ideal identities with their ideas is best expressed.
There are inscriptions in Spanish on the tables, which, in addition to language, include another driving force of cultural globalization: mass culture.
 These posts are mainly related to sports, especially football.
  In addition to Spanish football clubs, we also meet the names of German and British clubs and football players.
  In addition to the fact that these countries are the football leaders, their popularity in Armenia is connected with the broadcasting of local TV channels, which mainly showed the football championships of those countries.
 We can consider music as a mass global culture.
 Among the musical genres on the table are mainly rock rap, both Western band performers and Armenians.
 However, it should be noted that the names of Armenian performers (groups) written on the tables speak more about the localization of that culture, rather than being local, as the above-mentioned genres are again a product of Western culture.
 With the advent of globalized mass culture, some slogans are becoming widespread, for example, on one of the tables we see a phrase from one of the American animated films ("wish it, dream it, do it"), which can be considered not only as the slogan of the film, but also A cultural slogan that does not exclude anything.
  In my opinion, for non-Armenian nations, Western culture is especially attractive because of that.
Another factor of cultural globalization, which has found its expression on the tables, are social movements.
 If we consider the parties as such, we should note that on the tables are mainly the names of two parties, which were created earlier than the other parties in Armenia, they are more radical, one of them operates with a pronounced nationalism.
 Interestingly, there are no notes on the tables about the ruling party with the most members.
If we consider religion as a social movement, the writing on the tables will avoid it.
 Christianity is mainly expressed in different expressions.
It seems that Christianity is also an inseparable part of the Armenian identity; it is difficult to change it under the influence of global culture.
 But the picture is different.
 1988 Religious organization penetrating Armenia for social, economic and political reasons 1 Maslennikova N., Alphabetical Globalizers.
 Latin alphabet as an ideological weapon of the West, http.
//www.stoletie.ru/kultura/azbuchnyje_globalizatory_925.htm. The number of states is increasing.
 This phenomenon continues with great intensity even today.
 We almost do not find Armenian letters or notes typical of the Armenian Apostolic Church on student desks, while there are many English or Latin expressions.
  In addition to English expressions, we find Latin versions of the word "Jesus".
  It is difficult to draw an accurate conclusion here whether these expressions (especially in English) were written by students who are members of global religious movements or are new ways of expressing the identity of the followers of the Armenian Apostolic Church under the influence of globalization.
  The first option is more probable, as such approaches are typical of members of religious organizations that have infiltrated from the outside, judging by the similarity of the materials posted on social networks.
Other global movements are presented on the tables.
  For example, the often depicted cross (the cross is confidently associated with Nazism in this case, as its other meanings are largely unknown to the general public) ված Hitler's name is written.
 On the one hand, Hitler եռ Kerkhach mainly appeals to nationalism, on the other hand, Armenian students express their nationalism "non-Armenian" through global means.
  The next movement can be called "distant echoes of hippieism" (in terms of distance հեռավոր distance time), which is expressed "in the form of the names of individual musicians in the music group," in excerpts from songs.
Davos culture is not reflected on the tables, as we are dealing with students here, moreover, students studying humanities.
 Instead, we can talk about the transnational economy, which is expressed on the tables mainly in the form of names or symbols of car manufacturing companies or companies producing electronic equipment from different parts of the world.
 Sometimes we meet the names of world-famous brands.
  In both cases we are dealing with global events, where the global identity, the fact of being part of the world is expressed.
 It is not excluded if they simply state that they are economically elite or want to be.
The verbal անշ symbolic messages on the tables can be called in one word the graffiti, which is the writing, the image or the sign made on the objects of private or public property.
 It serves to build the socio-psychological identity of the authors in a non-institutional way1.
  In addition to the fact that students write messages on the tables about events that are part of global culture, other students sitting at the same tables are somewhat influenced by the notes, sometimes making their notes according to the context of the table (of course there are exceptions), sometimes comes in the role of "passive receiver".
 In other words, a symbolic interaction takes place.
 According to the German sociologist Friedrich Tembruck, we are dealing with a macro-system of representative culture, where cultural experts (students making messages at the table) actively share ideas, thoughts, beliefs, ideas that are passively accepted by other students2.
In the context of cultural globalization, examining the writings and pictures of YSU history faculty tables, we notice that there is almost no traditional expression of the Armenian identity in terms of content.
 However, it is not ruled out that more conservative students simply do not write on the tables.
 However, our research includes writing students and their identities.
 In the conditions of formation and globalization of the information society, new sign systems stand out, such as new identities, where on the one hand they try to get acquainted or assimilate everything, there is universalization, disintegration of ethnic identity, on the other hand often opposite reactions take place.
  However, in our case, as we have seen, the opposite reactions are also mainly expressed by global (Western) means.
 Taking all this into account, we can conclude that Armenian culture is also attached to the unstoppable current of cultural globalization.
логия », № 2 (4), 2008, c. 102, http.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/psihosotsialnaya-identichnost-avtorov-graffiti.2 Ionin L., Sociology of culture.
 The Way to the New Thought, Moscow, 2000, http.
//www.gumer.info/bibliotek_Buks/Sociolog/Ionin/_01_1.php. CONTEXT OF GLOBALIZATION GRAFITINERE cyber HarutyunyanLSARANAYIN tables (tables GRAFITINERI EXAMINATION ATTEMPT faculty) Keywords: language and cultural factors driving globalization, the business elite,
club of intellectuals, social movements, mass culture
.
