In these countries, agrarian consulting services are considered as one of the main means of building a knowledge-based society and intensive agriculture in rural areas, the main link between the science and production chain.
Economically developedEducationAgricultural producersproductsScience Consulting ServicesChart 1. Information-consulting service relations29.
At present, in more than 200 countries of the world, various organizational models have been developed, the classification of which is based on a number of features, the most important of which are: 29 Runov B. A., Korolykov AF, Priemko VV- Agrarian policy abroad - M.
 2008, level of independence, services that (system, university services under the bodies of university systems, ownership, organizational and legal status, • sources of funding, • degree of coverage of consulting topics.
The organizational models of the listed consulting services are classified into certain groups. on a database), • consulting firms in the commercial department.
Each of these models has its advantages: the disadvantages of having different patterns of development in different countries.
 However, studies have shown that in this case the effectiveness of counseling is much higher.
The system was named "university" because in a number of countries around the world, educational and consulting services in institutions based on multifunctional agricultural universities or colleges.
The first such organizational consulting system was developed in the United Kingdom, but took its name from the American experience, where it was widely developed.
The author performed an analysis of the university system.
  Strengths and opportunities 30 Organization of consulting activities in the agro-complex.
textbook and practicum for baccalaureates and masters / under. V.M. Kosheleva. - M.
Publisher Юрайт, 2016.-375 p. - Series.
 Baccalaureate and Master. Academic course: designed to integrate a wide range of governance issues into a practical, practical way.
that is, the system, unlike the others, has more opportunities ընդ strengths.
  It has been mentioned by various researchers that in the case of this system it is possible to include consulting "maximum scientific training".
The system operates entirely on the basis of state educational institutions and is in close contact with the heads of the "state structural subdivisions" of various scientific research organizations.
  The product-producer trust in the consulting specialist is quite high, there is a close connection between the students' "specialists".
  The university system has a lot of independence compared to the previous systems.
At the same time, considering the other feature of the system, it turns out that its weak point is that it is inefficient. Local resources are limited, there are no appropriate computer resources.
The activity is hindered by the fact that sometimes he can decide from the university administration.
  However, the system has the ability to use powerful training methods.
Material-technical, Consulting services are staffed by highly qualified professors, the presence of laboratories different from the process.
Taking into account the advantages of the model in a number of countries of the world, the consulting services were formed.
"Agroscience" and "Agropress" banks established databases on the basis of the university model of agriculture.
 In Armenia, this consulting system was formed on the basis of this model, based on the experience of the United States.
 The "Agrogitaspyur" service was established in 1992, with its headquarters in Yerevan. It had agencies in 37 regions of Armenia.
Transformations took place in 1997-1999 գրAgrogitaspyur agencies were re-centralized under the auspices of 10 MASCs.
 And in 2002, the National Academy of Sciences was established, which united the functions of "Agromarketing" and "Agrogitaspyur" organizations.
With the support of this program, a series of innovative consulting and funding programs for these Global Structures, which have had a positive impact on production efficiency, studies show that the effectiveness of the consulting services provided by these institutions is relatively low staffing.
  Experience shows the university model of counseling.
Taking into account all this, the material-technical-consulting consulting center of ANAU is offered through the cooperation of the Republic of Armenia through Armenia.
There will be a central knowledge base of the society for the development of intensive agriculture in the settlements with the centralization of the innovational-geographical distribution, the consulting organization of the technology courses.
The structure will act as a subdivision of the university.
The government can act as a source of funding, the Ministry of Agriculture, gyughatntesutyanagrarayinvrahimnakangitatekhnikakan, teghekatvutyanusutsoghakangyughakandzevavormane yevbazayigortsuneutyanolortiuevnpastelnakhararutyanhamalsaranihimnelorakapahovumnpatakeore paymanavorvatsee, amenabardzrazgayin kamkaroghanantsragrerikgandepkumhamalsaranimijazgayin donors, gyughatntesakanaprank manufacturers, processing companies, funds allocated by the aylkazmakerputyunneri to allow holding of orensdrutyanechhakasogh aylaghbyurnere.
The center will have basic staff in the head office, և consultant personnel database, to engage in consulting activities.
 As consultants, the staff, the faculty, which will provide the opportunity to provide high-quality advice, which will lead to the transition to the provision of paid services.
In conclusion, we can say that the university model is one of the effective options for reform, which has comparative advantages compared to the current system.
It is a model for the university, as it will create an opportunity for the connection of the university lecturers with the production, which will definitely contribute to the increase of the efficiency of lectures and practical classes.
SHANEKANPANOSYAN ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS AND INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN IRAGRAPHIC CONSULTING SERVICES IN RA Keywords university model, agrarian consulting center, ETCAnalysis.
