Titled MEDIEVAL MONUMENTS AND PATMACHARTARAPETAKANKOTOGHNEREHayastani of Archeology and archaeological expedition of the Institute of Ethnology (head of the National Academy of Sciences, A. Bobokhyan), in collaboration with the Institute of Geology, Germany's Tubingen University, ancient and early history of the Institute, with Mannheim arkheometriayi Center and Halle interdisciplinary group of the Institute of Geological Sciences, Within the framework of the "Ushkiani" program, he has been continuing his interdisciplinary research in the Sotk region of the RA Gegharkunik region [1] since 2010 [2].
Within the framework of these researches, among the Bronze-Iron Age monuments, the medieval monuments of Sotk were studied, measured and excavated.
After the ground reconnaissance, the expedition expedited to excavate the fortress-settlements of the medieval "Sotk 1", which was inhabited from the early Bronze Age to the late Middle Ages under the conventional name "Sotk 2".
Excavations at Sotk 1 fortress revealed that the fortress was a stronghold on the medieval Dvin-Partav trade route և to control it1.
As a result of the excavations carried out by the expedition, newly discovered and medieval monuments were discovered, measured, described, documented, included in the state list of cultural and historical monuments of the Republic of Armenia.
As a result of research, a number of scientific articles have been published in recent years, and reports have been presented on the history of the Middle Ages, separate manifestations of material culture, masonry, trade relations, pottery, and tombstone iconography.
1 Based on the results of the detailed study of the pottery found during the excavations of the above-mentioned castles, we co-authored Ph.D. An article entitled "Medieval Sotk in the Light of Modern Archaeological Research" was prepared by Diana Mirijanyan for publication in "Echmiadzin" magazine, dedicated to the issues of the dating and functional significance of these monuments.
As a result of the examination of historical data և field exploration works, it was confirmed that in the 18th-20th centuries. The fact that the local Muslim population intensified the destruction of medieval monuments, historical and architectural monuments (secular buildings, Christian monuments, etc.), which is hinted at by Archbishop Mesrop Smbatyants, a high-ranking clergyman who visited the village in 1862 [4].
We compared what we saw with the publications on churches, khachkars, tombstones, lithographic inscriptions, which we "saw" as a result of the research of scholars who studied the medieval monuments of Sotk before our expedition. State list of immovable historical and cultural monuments of RA history approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia 2.
  It turned out that there were many discrepancies. The current situation, which was the result of the absence of the Armenian population in the village for more than two centuries [5],Due to religious and ethnic differences (the Turkic-speaking population of the Sotkitar region acquired Azerbaijani identity during the Soviet era; ambitions for the history and culture of the Sotk region) [6].
2 Government of the Republic of Armenia, 2002 According to the decision N 80-N of January 9, 2010, 39 monuments, historical-architectural monuments and 7 preservation units are registered in Sotk village of Gegharkunik region according to the state list of historical and cultural monuments of the Republic of Armenia.
3 However, since the first years of the establishment of Soviet rule in Armenia, although in small volumes, minor repairs have been made. The Committee for the Preservation of Antiquities of Armenia has carried out a technical inspection of the Surb Astvatsatsin Church in Sotk. Despite the limited financial means, it has made minor repairs.
 A local antiquities-museum was established, a collection of discarded debris was organized, saving cultural values ​​from loss.
 For more details on the activities of this committee during those years, see Kalantar A., ​​Committee for the Preservation of Antiquities of Armenia, Yerevan, 1931, 15 pages.
However, only a few years later, we learn from a letter sent to the committee that the church has been turned into a barn. The regional representative of the committee asks the center to take measures to save the monument. see details. Sargsyan A., Hovsepyan E., Martisroyan M., Inherited from centuries for centuries.
 Documents from the history of preservation of historical and cultural monuments in Soviet Armenia.
  1921-1941, Banber of the Archives of Armenia, 1982, 3 (64), pp. 89-112.
 1986-1991 With the help of the Armenian Society for the Preservation of Historical Monuments, restoration works were carried out in the Surb Astvatsatsin Church in Sotk, which, however, remained incomplete since the beginning of the war.
The Christian cemetery, which was built after the fall of Sotk 1 fortress, was fixed on the earthen ruins of the latter, as a result of excavations, but we did not find any tombstone standing on the spot.
  Meanwhile, back in the 1960s, lithographer Sedrak Barkhudaryan saw և photographed the last khachkar of the cemetery standing on a rocky pedestal, ատար published the latter's lithograph (the last standing khachkar of the Sotk 1 fortress turned into a cemetery was first published by an ethnographer]
Earlier, some khachkars and tombstones of the cemetery, which is now partially preserved, also suffered the same fate. The topographers who visited the village in the 19th century will publish three khachkar lithographs found here, which are no longer available.
 In the same cemetery are also the famous four-aisled cruciform sculptures, one of which was moved to Etchmiadzin in a dilapidated state, and the other two were earlier transferred to the Caucasus Museum in Tbilisi.
In conclusion, we can say that the expedition's research in the Sotk archeological sites sheds new light on the history and culture of the region, reveals new facts as a basis for future research.
LITERATURE [1] Manukyan M., Regions, cities and villages of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 436-453.
due to a sharp decrease in financial resources.
  See Harutyunyan V., The Sum of National Ends, Yerevan, 1999, pp. 25, 89.
.
 Grigoryan A., Newly discovered tombstones from Sotk, "Etchmiadzin", 2017. E., pp. 121-134.
 Grigoryan A., Ancient medieval monuments of Sotk region, Institute of Archeology and Ethnography, 2, Habitus, Anthropological-archaeological studies, 2, Yerevan, 2017, pp. 249-263.
.
[5] Korkotyan Z., The population of Soviet Armenia in the last century (1831-1931), Yerevan, 1932, table 110.
[6] Karapetyan S., The condition of Armenian historical monuments in the neighboring countries of Armenia, "For the sake of Armenians" weekly, April 23, 2002, pp. 9-12.
  Petrosyan H., Cultural ethnocide in Artsakh (mechanisms of extortion of cultural heritage), Kachar, 2010, 4 (47-58), pp. 137-149.
Kirakosyan L., Cultural Genocide (by the example of the architectural monuments of Artsakh), Issues of Armenology, Journal, 1, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 107-119.
[7] Lalayan E., Ethnographic Journal, p. XIX, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910, pp. 25-27.
[8] Barkhudaryan S., Divan of Armenian lithography, pr. IV, Yerevan, 1973, p. 328333.
[9] Harutyunyan A., Vagharshapat.
 Monasteries և inscriptions, S. Etchmiadzin, 2016, pp. 114-115.
 Saghumyan S., Lithograph relics, "Etchmiadzin", 1994, H., pp. 100-112.
  Karapetyan S., The Armenian Collection of the Caucasus Museum, Yerevan, 2004, pp. 78-80.
Grigoryan AvetisSOTK MEDIEVAL MONUMENTS AND HISTORICAL-ARCHITECTURAL Keywords: Sotk, excavations, medieval monuments, fortress, Christian cemetery, khachkar.
THE MONUMENTS.
