LECTURER-STUDENT RELATIONS 21-TURNOVER The higher a person's position, the tighter the limits that restrain his character's arbitrariness.
It should be noted that the necessary precondition for the implementation of the educational process is interpersonal communication, which contributes to the development of the person և determines the efficiency of the educational process.
 For this reason, we consider it necessary to study the possibilities of organizing interpersonal communication in the modern educational system from the point of view of teacher-student relations.
In our opinion, the management of the audience has an important role in the implementation and management of the educational process, the inseparable component of which is the effective organization of the teacher-student relationship.
  As we know, the ability to manage another person is formed on the basis of the ability to manage one's own person, that is, first it is necessary to "recognize" one's own abilities, opportunities, then only by establishing relationships, try to "manage" other people.
Although the foundation of the lecturer-student relationship is laid from the very first day of admission to the university, nevertheless, more complete "correct ideas about each other are formed during the creative cooperation."
  Harmonious relations with the lecturers regulate the cognitive activity, increase the interest in professional education, promote the formation of one's own pedagogical-professional model.
The relationship between the lecturer and the students is a graded system, the components of which are: 1. motivation - interest in each other մունք need for communication, which at present we can say is the basis for building this relationship. If during the first communication the lecturer fails to arouse interest in the students both in the subject and in himself, we can confidently say that their further joint activity will be considered simply as communication within the subject, when the students will directly reproduce what the lecturer has presented.
2. Emotional level - perception and appreciation of each other, 3. Emotional level - satisfaction with the built relationship, feeling of psychological protection, comfort or tension.
  This point can be considered as a logical continuation of the predecessors in the sense that the positive desirable relations բավարար the satisfaction of them are a strong stimulus for both the lecturer and the student to reconstruct, further develop և improve their knowledge and skills, aiming to make joint activities more interesting and meaningful.
  The latter, naturally, contribute to the continuous improvement and improvement of the quality of the educational process in accordance with the requirements of the time, 4. Behavioral level - is a type of relationship, pedagogical communication style, self-expression in a conflict situation, etc.
 Analyzing this point, we would like to present a few key factors that are currently a necessary basis for building a teacher-student relationship.
In contrast to the 20th century, which was symbolized by the unprecedented technical and technological development, in the 21st century there is a transition to the information society, where the creation and dissemination of knowledge becomes decisive1, which in our opinion is possible when there are lecturers-students "Healthy" relationships, which contributes to the formation of perfect professionals as much as possible.
  It is a demand of the time, because in the 21st century, the society needs an active, creative-minded, quick-witted, enterprising person, developed in all relations.
 Then, in the higher educational institution, the educational process of the student's professional, the whole formation of his personality 1 Aleksanyan A., The implementation of interpersonal communication in the educational process, Yerevan, 2015, p. 92.
There is a process that is carried out as a purposeful, planned program, a process of acquiring knowledge, abilities և skills, where the student acts as a subject, the lecturers have a great influence on him. The fact that the student will become a specialist largely depends on their interaction.
  However, it should not be denied that nowadays more than ever, not only the lecturers, but also the students themselves influence the educational process.
 It depends on them what the lecturer's approach will be to the study group in general and to each student in particular.
 The main task of the lecturer-student should be to find the optimal "golden mean", in which case the joint activity will be more successful and effective.
  The need to find an alternative, to communicate, to be proactive, to understand each other are the necessary preconditions that are needed to build the right relationship, to solve possible problems.
We would like to note that human relations, including in the educational process, should be built on a subject-subject basis, when both parties are equal as individuals - participants in communication, which contributes to the formation of a teacher-student relationship.
In the student-lecturer relationship, the priority is personal qualities, which can not be replaced by any method.
 The personal qualities on which a lecturer's reputation is built are the following: • professionalism խոր deep knowledge of the subject, • ability to express one's thoughts clearly, • quick thinking և responds, • student's psychology, ability to understand strengths and weaknesses, • attention to the speaker; goodwill և tolerance, • ability to orientate in problematic situations գտ find solutions և etc.
At the same time we can single out personal qualities that are unacceptable for the lecturer, in particular: • arrogance, rudeness, • shyness, • slow response, • tendency to put pressure on the student, • excessive emotion, • lack of pedagogical skills, etc.
Reputable lecturers have a pedagogical attitude, respect for students, stimulation of their intellectual activity, activity, satisfaction with their relationships with students, flexibility in making decisions, etc., which students notice and appreciate during the relationship.
  Otherwise, we can talk about rudeness, the existence of stereotypes in the teaching process, depending on the progress, the lack of respect for students, which, of course, is unacceptable.
  It can be said that at present such a lecturer not only does not enjoy respect և authority among students, but also they try not to build a relationship with such a lecturer or to minimize cooperation, which is undesirable, it can have "dangerous" consequences.
It is indisputable that in modern conditions teaching cannot be interpreted as the formation of a certain system of knowledge, abilities and skills in learners.
 Any curriculum is doomed to failure if the instructor uses psychological tools that will stimulate the student's interest in learning.
  Interest, as a motivation, plays an extremely important role in the learning process, which contributes to the formation of positive relationships.
Research in the field of pedagogy has shown that most of the pedagogical difficulties are due not so much to the lack of scientific and methodological training of the pedagogue, but to the distortions in the field of pedagogical-professional communication.
 Therefore, pedagogical communication is of special importance for the effective operation of the high school and the building of the teacher-student relationship.
Pedagogical communication is a set of methods and means, which ensures the "implementation of the tasks" of the goals of education, determines the nature of the pedagogue-learner interaction.
The pedagogical activity cannot be carried out without communication, which is based on the joint creative activity and active interaction of the teacher and the student.
  The latter is especially important for the lecturer's activity, because during the interaction the students propose, solve difficult problems, analyze the educational material, clarify the problematic situations.
  In this case, pedagogical communication allows the lecturer to coordinate the scientific information, to present his / her point of view, and the students are given the opportunity to critically approach the information, to realize and evaluate the possible arguments, to extract the secondary parts2.
 However, the essence of communication in this relationship is not just the transfer of information.
  In order to build relationships, to communicate, in addition to solving pedagogical goals, it is necessary to propose, solve communication problems, which will enable the effective implementation of the lecturer-student relationship.
  At the same time, experience is transferred, because not only the student but also the lecturer learns during the cooperation.
Therefore, communication can be considered as: • a means of solving educational problems, • a socio-psychological system for ensuring the educational process, • a means of organizing teacher-student relationships, exchanging experience, combining teaching and upbringing, • a process of personal upbringing.
It should be noted that the above-mentioned acquires a "demand of time", because in contrast to the previous relations, when only the lecturer was the subject of the current educational process, now the "lecturer" and the student are independent subjects of the process with their peculiarities and interests. which we can say that becomes the basis for building these relations on the principle of equality.
In establishing the teacher-student relationship, the choice of the lecturer's management style is used, on which not only the construction of the teacher-student relationship, but also the students' attitude towards the educational process depends.
Famous psychologist V. Մ. Kan-Kalik singled out the following styles of pedagogical communication: • communication based on the professional positions of the lecturer, the attitude towards the pedagogical process, 2 Grigorieva T. G., Линская Л. В., Усольцева Т. P., Основы конструктивного общения.
 Method. • Relationships based on friendship.
  It implies interest in joint activities.
 The lecturer assumes the role of mentor, senior friend, • communicates - distance, which is the most common snow.
  In this case, the relationship is built by maintaining a certain distance, taking into account authority, age, life experience, etc. • Communication - rebuke, this is a negative form of communication, which tries to hide the pedagogue's "failure", in other words, incompetence, • communication - a game that is typical especially for young educators who strive for "recognition".
  Such communication provides only false authority3.
It should be noted that most often the pedagogue combines several styles in his activity, because any style of management, individually, can not be effective, that is, a good pedagogue must master the various methods of student behavior, providing the necessary method at each time: be able to analyze the motivations of learners' behavior, creating the necessary conditions for them.
 At present, relations based on "friendly" attitudes are especially used, and the choice of the democratic style of the lecturer, when joint activity prevails.
Another possible factor is the reputation of the lecturer, which is reflected in his / her professional, pedagogical, personal role in the team, relations with colleagues, students, influences the educational process.
The reputation of the lecturer includes two components: role reputation և personal reputation.
 If a few years ago the role authority prevailed, now the main thing is the lecturer's personality, his bright, unique personality.
In the student-lecturer relationship, there may be a psychological factor, because each person has their own psychological characteristics that should not be ignored, and in this case the student identifies with the lecturer, which is very active in modern conditions, because many of us students with different lecturers. As a result of communication, we know clearly how it is, desirable, desirable to have a teacher-student relationship, what is right, what is desirable, what is inadmissible.
Naturally, we can not help but talk about the difference between the mentality, perceptions and approaches of the lecturer-student generation, which is a possible factor in the process of building these relations.
It can be said that it would be desirable for the lecturer to contribute to the development of the learner, and for that the learner needs to decide which is the positive and which is the negative, but not to force, but to guide, help without harming the learner's independence.
  Nowadays, the basis of the teacher-student relationship is the learner, his personality, whose establishment and development are purposefully assisted by educators, taking into account his aspirations, interests and abilities, that is, the lecturer tends to organize collaborative learning, the motto of which is: "Learn, work, create together" 4.
The phenomenon of cooperation is considered as the most complex form of human relations, which is characterized by mutual understanding, the ability to penetrate each other's inner worlds.
 Therefore, the teacher-student relationship can be characterized as mutually beneficial. For the former it is beneficial to receive quality knowledge սովոր to study with a "good" lecturer, for the latter the students' interest may be.
  And if they have positive relationships, communication becomes more effective, the learner can fully express himself.
Therefore, we can say that today, when we say teacher-student relationship, we must understand the purposeful interaction of the subjects of the pedagogical process, which from the point of view of personal-oriented upbringing is subject to It is characterized by general psychological mechanisms, as well as clearly defined social-role functions, peculiarities of pedagogical communication աչափ patterns.
4 Ashikyan A., Current issues of the profession, lecture materials.
some educational work.
 Learning. пособие для студентов высш. school records. - 3rd edition.— M..
 Publishing Center "Academy", 2005. S. 76. We emphasize the fact that in the 21st century, the lecturer has ceased to be merely a source of information, even a reproductor.
Today he is a unique guide.
  It is not enough for a 21st century lecturer to simply have an academic education և apply the teaching process վերահսկ control the teaching material և test.
He must keep pace with the times, while enriching ևimproving his professional abilities and skills.
The lecturer of the 21st century must have creative independence, be ready to apply innovative technologies, methods and techniques of organizing the educational process.
 Teachers should not be inferior to students in mastering innovative technologies.
The lecturer should be an example for the students, "infect" them with their cheerfulness, be interested not only in the successful conduct of the educational process, but also in the personal growth of each student, showing his own personal progress, which is noticeable in the work style of many lecturers.
 At the same time, it should be noted that in this case, "the process is two-way, as the lecturer must not only teach, but he can also learn from the students."
It is expected that the lecturer of the 21st century will be able to "surprise" students by stimulating their cognitive process, uniting students around him, arousing interest in them, becoming their organizer-coordinator of research, positive and effective relations with students not only in the educational process. out of nowhere.
We can say that at present the teacher-student subject-subject relations are mostly established, because mainly the lecturers are "open", ready to communicate, not only in the classroom, but also outside, which allows the student to get rid of unnecessary tension. becomes more courageous, independent և when communicating with the lecturer.
We also emphasize the fact that in modern conditions, many lecturers seem to mention during their relationship with the student: "We are partners (colleagues)", thus inspiring the student with self-confidence, belief in their own strength, which can be a stimulus for the learner to progress and succeed, which, in our opinion, is a solid foundation for building strong relationships and training specialists.
Thus, we can say that in the 21st century, in the system of higher professional education, relationships are viewed as a teacher-student interaction aimed at meeting their individual և public և needs.
 How do we emphasize the fact that today the higher education institution must "arm" the graduate not only with professional knowledge and skills, but also with the ability to communicate, work in a team, find solutions to problematic situations, and in this case we consider the lecturer-student irreplaceable "Healthy" relationships and communication based on mutual understanding and mutual assistance.
Kristine Safaryan LECTURER-STUDENT RELATIONS IN THE 21ST CENTURY Keywords: lecturer, student, relationships, motivation, authority, collaborative learning Summary.
