OVERVIEW OF HEAVENLY LIGHTING SYMBOLS IN KHACHKARS Images of celestial lights have been widely used since ancient times in the history of mankind.
 At first they were purely pictorial, but later they acquired a deep semantic character.
 Images of celestial luminaires occupy a special place in khachkar compositions.
 Celestial signs are usually placed at the top of the tabernacle or on the cornice.
 They are first of all connected with two themes, the second coming of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ.
 As a rule, the moon and the moon are depicted, in some cases even one star.
  Unique compositions represent the cross on the base of the sky surrounded by lights.
 Based on the 13th century Savior khachkars, where the sun and the moon are defined by the accompanying inscriptions, we can confirm that in the khachkar compositions up to the 15th century, as a rule, the moon was placed to the right of the cross and the moon to the left, which corresponds to the crucifixion. to the miniature tradition.
 We can see that the moon, as a rule, is more decorative than the moon and the stars.
 Note that the moon is sometimes depicted as a crescent.
  These other similar details make it possible to distinguish the rosettes and star ornaments at the top of the khachkar composition as the sun, the moon and the star with great accuracy.
 For example, in the composition of the 9th century khachkar of Makenis, the sun is depicted from the vertical top of the cross, which is a six-leafed rose, the moon and the star are placed on the left side. both in the form of a wheel composed of nine rays.
  In the composition of Gandzak Church, where the sun and the moon are depicted on both sides of the cross-shaped wings, the sun, on the contrary, is presented as a circle crowned with a large central ring, but the moon and the star are inscribed with six stars.
The further development of the khachkar composition led to the fact that the upper part of the khachkar stone on the border of the 10th-11th centuries began to stand out from the whole composition (և first of all from the cross altar), first pictorially, and a little later, also architecturally.
  Due to the latter, a wider և corrugated volume was formed, which in a number of cases was crowned with a forward front.
  There are many examples in the 13th century, when the cornice was made separately and then attached to the slab.
  In some cases, there have even been attempts to deepen the cornice, in this case emphasizing the volume solutions much more.
In some compositions, the cornice is decorated with two or three identical or different decorations (Haghartsin, Artavazik, Litchk, Gndevank, Angeghakot, etc.), which can also symbolize the sun, the moon and the star.
 Some khachkar compositions, in addition to these roses, are crowned with many small circles, knobs and nozzles (Lake, Caravan, Angeghakot), as if representing the cross on the base of a celestial arch decorated with planets and stars.
In some khachkars of Amenaprkich of the 13th century (Ashtarak, Urts, Marts) the face of the moon with the shape of a circle with a broken back and the sun are depicted on the backs of a bull and an eagle, respectively.
 Note that the eagle and the bull were considered companions and symbols of the moon in ancient mythological systems of the Middle East1.
 It is noteworthy that on some khachkars of the 15th-17th centuries, in a number of compositions, the eagle is separated from other representatives of the animal world, placed in the central part of the top of the composition, taking the whole set of other images under its wide open wings.
 It should be noted here that the master considered the perception of the eagle being in the highest center of the sky and taking the universe as his priority more than the pictorial rule.
Figure 1 Christ the Wreath in the form of a disk, khachkar, 16th century, in Karmir Gegharkunik, in a group of khachkars of the 15th-17th centuries, the sun and the moon move. The moon, which is sometimes depicted as a crescent, is placed to the right of the cross, and the moon, which looks like a round ornament, is placed to the left of the cross.
  In the khachkars of Julfa, the Ar ulus have a pronounced volumetric solution and are presented in the form of three-quarter spheres.
  We consider it necessary to pay attention to the fact that this was done as if to emphasize the differences between the moon and the moon, which are expressed by the differences between the ornaments decorated with spheres.
Starting from the most saving stones, the moon and the moon, based on the tradition of crucifixion miniatures, also become a human form, a form of iconography, which had its appearance in the 16th-17th centuries.
  As in the case of any vertical monument, so in the case of a khachkar, it is natural to accept that its top or top may receive special attention և to bear a certain sacred symbolism of heaven.
 In the early khachkars it was first expressed by giving an arch to the upper part, in rare cases by the installation of celestial lights.
 However, such decoration at the same time emphasized the upper part of the cross and the tabernacle enclosing it, that is, the whole stone structure was likened to a tabernacle, its upper part was emphasized only in the context of that tabernacle.
We consider it necessary to consider the location and significance of celestial lights with separate examples of khachkars.
Thus, in the 16th century khachkar of Karmir (see Fig. 1), the crown of Christ is depicted in the form of a golden disk.
  It is placed in the part of the stone cornice.
 On the latter, that is, in the highest sphere of the khachkar, the Christosulus crown depicted is presented as a disk.
 On both sides of Ar we see a cross, which are at the edges of the two corners of the khachkars.
Rectangular tombstones with a flat surface are widespread in the Middle Ages.
  These were semantic imitations of the life book, where the name of the deceased was written, and sometimes a picture of him was depicted.
 It should be noted that intermediate 2 Flat Tombstone, 1653, Vardenik Nadaryan, why not even in the system of the traditional Armenian worldview of the recent past, the name was not separated from the individual.
 He distinguished himself from the society by name, he was unique by that և due to that he had to be differentiated when he was saved.
 In the upper part of the khachkar found from Vardenik (picture 2) the outline of the deceased is depicted, which is surrounded by a two-layered crown of light in the head.
  And the outline of the upper part of the body ends with two arcs.
  The right side is in a bright and life-giving state. This is symbolized by the dots in the circle, and the one on the left already represents the sunset of the deceased's life, when the man is already leaning towards the horizon.
 It is also possible to give rise to controversy, because the example of the Amenaprkich khachkars suggests that the tombstone is depicted as a moon, but we exclude this view, because the inclined circle is surrounded by this one circle, which indicates its sun.
According to the canon of the 8th century Catholicos and theologian Hovhan Odznetsi 2, the cross made of any material, unless it is anointed with the appropriate ritual, cannot carry divine power in it.
 The same is confirmed by the 12th century Catholicos Nerses Shnorhali3.
 In such conditions, the appearance of evangelical images on khachkars, starting from the 12th century, can be considered as an initiative to give much greater importance to the khachkar of the Armenian Church.
 The culmination of this movement can be considered the emergence of the khachkars depicting the Crucifixion depicting the Crucifixion at the end of the 13th century, that is, at the most flourishing stage of khachkar art.
 The earliest example of the most saving khachkars that has reached us is erected in Haghpat (picture 3) ագր dated 1273.
These khachkars are distinguished by the crucified Christ depicted on them.
  Unlike the flowering crosses common in the Armenian reality, these do not contain any plant additives or ornaments. The crucifixion depicts Christ crucified.
  The cross is erected on a massive pedestal reminiscent of Golgotha ​​hill.
  Inside the latter, the floral pattern resembles a toast tree, inside which the ornaments of the starry sky and the moon are deeply composed.
 The central arch depicts Adam's head.
  The pattern that forms the ornaments is divided into three parts, which symbolizes the Holy Trinity.
 Referring to the plot, we must say that it unfolds in three spheres: heavenly, heavenly and earthly.
  Khachasal is covered with 2 Armenian Codex, by V. Hakobyan, h. 1, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 532-533.
3 Gandzaketsi Kirakos, History of Armenia, Yerevan, 1961, pp. 139-140.
with a woven network of palms, և all the characters are depicted on that basis.
  In the right center of the kiwi is the image of the God the Father, which is included in the oval outline, which is one of the main symbols of creation.
 On both sides, next to the cherubim, are the celestial lights.
 Just as the direction of the main celestial lights for the earth is canonically depicted on the parthenon, the sun rising from the left and the persecuting moon from the right.
 With the resurrection of the creature we see the cherubim again.
  It should be noted that, according to them, their figures are discounted here, because in case of their complete picture, the general appearance would be obtained in a kind of suppressed, inconsistent with the general structure.
  Let us add that in this case we distinguish the cherubs by the eight points of the existing circle shown in it.
  The khachkar is partially painted with red, orange and white-gray paints.
  The red worm is still well preserved.
 It is noteworthy that the cross, not Jesus, is painted in red.
It is connected with the most important distinctive orientation in the Armenian Apostolic Church.
  For us, the cross is not a thesis by which the Savior was killed, but symbolizes His victory over death.
  His blood carries the mystery of eternal heavenly life.
  That is why it is painted in the main color of life - red.
 In conclusion, let us mention that judging by the name of the Savior who was crucified on khachkars, it can be said that the monastic environment created by those khachkars was convinced that the cross bearing the Christ-bearing և Ascension scene was much more powerful.
 The Savior, 1279, has a more saving power than the usual ornate or flowery cross.
It is a khachkar similar to the khachkar of Haghpat, built in Urts in 1279 and now kept in Etchmiadzin ("Amenaprkich" (picture 4).
 We learn from the Kivarzanagora that it was erected by Prince Mamikon Mamikon in memory of his father, Grigor և Mamkan Mamikonyan.
  The pictorial composition is more simplified here.
  The moon and the moon are depicted on the backs of eagles and bulls, respectively.
  The khachkar is served by the ornaments and plant images typical of the lunar and stellar symbolic system.
 Again on a hill reminiscent of Golgotha, a cross rises, which passes through the line bordering the cornice and ends in the inscriptions at the top.
 Golgotha ​​is seven arches here, in the central part the head of Adam is depicted again, which is incomparable in size to other images in the echachkar.
  It can be assumed that this was done out of intent to emphasize Adam's sinfulness.
  The inscription on the horizontal cross is dedicated to Christ, and the vertical one is a prayer, which ends with the phrase "have mercy on Mr. Mamikon".
The presence of companions of celestial lights is especially interesting here.
 From ancient times the eagle has been a symbol of the sun in various religious systems.
  Often the gods turned into eagles, were his most visible eye, or the eagle served the gods faithfully.
 The same can be said for the bull.
 It is considered a sacred animal in mythological systems with a lunar influence.
  There was even a red-and-white bull worship in Egypt.
  Note that in the early religious beliefs, these animals were endowed with totemic properties, the harm of which is inadmissible և criminal.
From the similarities of the mentioned two khachkars it becomes obvious that they belong to the same master or at least to the same workshop.
Thus, with the example of several khachkars, we tried to define the meaning and significance of the sculptures in khachkars.
 Finally, we can state that the moon and the moon, from the earliest stage of human origin, have been man's companions in the celestial sphere. They have found their pictorial reflection in both applied and decorative art.
Nazeli Hayrapetyan GENERAL ANALYSIS OF THE SYMBOLIC DECORATIONS OF HEAVENLY LIGHTING IN KHACHKARS Keywords: khachkar, celestial lights, sun, moon, star, ornament
