"NORTH FLOW" BASE PROJECT IN THE CONTEXT OF RUSSIA-EUROPE ENERGY COOPERATION Due to the Ukrainian crisis, the escalation of Russia-West relations is not only the agenda of the responsible diplomatic staff. There is also the problem of presenting it in different paradigms of political science, where the consideration of some issues raised in the core of science will quite simplify the essence and logic of the problem.
  President of the Russian Federation V. By Putin in 2014 A number of statements made in the Turkish capital, Ankara, on December 1, 1945, sparked serious controversy over Russia's readiness to abandon the South Stream gas project and launch alternative gas projects, which raised a number of questions, especially in the Eastern European region.
 In this context, the following question was of primary importance: to be guided by the expected economic gain or to give in to the geopolitical factor and try to jointly prevent the increasingly materialistic aspirations of the monopolization of the Russian energy system in the region.
  The various interpretations of the problem are mainly presented in the field of geopolitics, where the economic factor is subordinated, turning it into propaganda material.
  Propaganda may be effective from the point of view of internal consumption, but for comprehensive coverage of the problem, internal consumption material needs serious editing from a qualitative point of view.
 In Ankara V. In the period following Putin's statement, the largely irrational debates over the next steps in the Eastern European region, with all their implications, have a profound problem: to be guided by economic or geopolitical factors.
Developments in Eastern Europe over the issue have given rise to various interpretations of Germany's economic benefits from the Nord Stream gas project.
  In the current controversial situation, Germany, which is more economically viable, pays cheaper for Russian gas than many Eastern European countries (Germany pays only $ 300 per cubic meter of gas, Poland, Bulgaria, Ukraine - $ 400-500).
  In the theoretical and practical spheres of political science, especially politics, justice has always been subordinated to the interests.
  Taking into account our state interest, in the current tense geopolitical region, it will be instructive to comprehensively study the problem in terms of expected impacts and counter-reactions.
The economic benefits of the Nord Stream gas project are confirmed by US political analysts as a serious challenge to the US diplomatic mission, which is responsible for preventing an increase in the Russian Federation's regional position1.
  In this case, however, the golden rule of realpolitik, preserved from ancient times, worked, which is possible for Caesar, not for others.
  The Russian-German tandem managed to clearly separate the rules of the current geopolitical game of economic pragmatism, ensuring the victory of the first by the second.
  The chronological sequence of events surrounding the North Stream gas pipeline provides an opportunity to draw comparative conclusions about the logic of the geopolitical processes taking place in parallel with the energy-driven changes in Russia's foreign policy.
Energy Politics in the Baltics, Poland and Ukraine.
 A new Stealth Imperialism, Washington DC, March 2010; Vatansever A .; Russian "North Stream" is a joint Russian-German energy project, through which the gas extracted from the gas fields in the northern part of Russia was to be delivered to Germany, and from there to the Western European energy market.
 The gas pipeline that was supposed to pass (as the historical course has shown, passes through) the bottom of the Baltic Sea is the longest underwater pipeline in the world, the construction of which, apart from Russia and Germany, also involved French and Dutch companies.
  2005 The North European Gaz Pipeline Company was established with the political consent of the four countries, 51% of the shares of which were to belong to the Russian company Gazprom.
  The German companies Wintershall and E.ON Ruhrgas received 15-5% each, 9% - the Dutch company "Gasunie", and the last 9% of the controlling stake went to the French company "GDF-Suez" 1.
The headquarters of the North Stream European Gas Pipeline Company was to be located in the Swiss town of Jug.
  The works on the gas pipeline started in 2005, and gained more momentum in 2010.
  Politically, the Nord Stream gas pipeline was a serious blow to Russian gas transit countries such as the Baltic states, Poland and the Czech Republic.
  By the way, we should not ignore the fact that anti-Russian sentiments have traditionally prevailed in the above-mentioned regions պայմանավորված due to the common historical past in the countries.
  The planning works of the above-mentioned energy project started in 1996, and in 2000. The European Union gave the Nord Stream gas project a TEN status, ie it was included in the list of the most important energy projects in Europe).
  The capacity of the gas project (according to 1996 data) should have been 55 billion annually. m3 of gas, which was equivalent to the energy produced by 14 nuclear power plants և 50 thermal power plants2.
  The above figures were already a serious impetus to ensure the further success of the project in Europe տարածքում could significantly reduce the cost and losses of Russian gas transit to Western Europe.
 Back in 2007, when the design works were underway, the total gas demand of the EU countries was 312 billion. m3.
 As we notice, the 55 billion defined by the project. m3 of gas was a significant number for Europe ․ It could provide about 17% of the EU gas demand for the given period3.
 Compared to the South Stream gas project, the land section of the North Stream gas pipeline is shorter.
  Due to this, the political reaction to this energy project was weaker.
  Continuing the documentary sequence, it should be noted that the North Stream gas pipeline (total length 1204 km) starts from the Baltic coastal part of the city of Vyborg in the Leningrad region of the Russian Federation, reaching the city of Graifswald 1 in the German state of Advanced Pameronia.
Picture 1 ․ Map of the North Stream gas project And in the case of South Stream, due to the uncertainty in the Caspian region, the full gas reserves in the Caspian fields were not completely clear (Russia planned to export Caspian gas to Europe, did not get the political consent of the region). .
 Hugh 3 Ibid., Pp. 4-5.
The economic and political issues within the framework of the "Sisak Stream" had a clearer emphasis, and the financial risks were predictable and therefore controllable, as the "North Stream" gas pipeline was intended to deliver gas to Europe from the so-called South Russian field and the Yamalonenets field. whose reserve capacity, 2006 According to the data, it was about 800 billion m3 of gas, which was quite a serious reserve և would ensure the uninterrupted operation of the gas pipeline for about 15 years.
  Later it was planned to use the gas of the Stockmanov field in the Barents Sea, which is the largest gas field excavated in the territory of the Russian Federation.
 2006 According to the same forecasts, Russian natural gas generators provided about 25% of the total gas demand of Western European consumers.
As we understand from the combination of the above figures, the Nord Stream gas pipeline made it possible to deliver most of the existing Western European demand by direct transportation to the region1.
  In contrast to the South Stream pipeline, the North Stream provides more tangible bilateral financial and economic revenues, so the political element has become rather weak.
  Under these conditions, the full Russian-German agreement on the "North Stream" gas pipeline was complete to keep it from political speculation.
However, due to geopolitical factors, the "North Stream" gas project also succumbed to the political element and was still met with serious opposition, especially from the United States and Canada.
  While the works were in the design stage, the North Stream gas project, with the direct sponsorship of the United States, met with opposition from the Baltic states and Poland.
  By the way, Poland, due to its geographical features, could only have political influence.
 That is why the Polish factor was easily bypassed, or rather, it was simply ignored by Germany and Russia.
  But in the case of the Baltic states, the reaction was more tangible due to the agreement on the common use of the Baltic basin (St. Petersburg, 1993).
 From a legal point of view, the Baltic states could simply freeze that gas project.
 In fact, in September 2007, Estonia, receiving the political consent of the United States, refused to participate in the construction of the North Stream gas pipeline, which later led to serious transformations.
 The Russian-German tandem started active negotiations with other northern countries, Finland and Sweden ․ As a result, these countries reached a political agreement to provide their land and water territories for the construction of a gas pipeline.
  It should be noted that both Germany and the Russian Federation in 2007 They intensified bilateral contacts with those countries.
 2009 In September of that year, another Scandinavian country, Denmark, agreed on the use of its waters within the framework of the project.
 The participation of Denmark has already completely neutralized the reaction of the Baltic Troika, especially Estonia. The construction of the underwater section of the gas pipeline has entered an active phase since 2009.
Because according to the Espoo Convention (UN Convention, signed in 1991 in the Finnish city of Espoo).
 According to it, before the construction of underwater projects, the country or countries must build a consultative agreement with the countries adjacent to the underwater basin, get at least the majority of their consent.) The Russian Federation reached a political agreement with most countries in the Baltic region. Denmark, Sweden, Finland expressed full political support. to maintain political neutrality towards the project2.
 This has already provided a green light for Russia, neutralizing the factor of Lithuania տակ Estonia under American influence.
 If we add to all this the fact that the damage to the environment from an ecological point of view was minimized, it was several times inferior to the EU-approved Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline and the Nabucco gas pipeline. .
  And from the point of view of geopolitical counteraction, the work of the USA and Canada was several times more difficult.
  The economic profit due to the obvious beast line և The countries of the Eastern European region that did not join the gas pipeline works only fell victim to the political element.
From a political point of view, the lobbying against the "North Stream" gas project was carried out by the responsible officials of the US State Department.
 From this point of view, 2008 is especially remarkable. Former US Ambassador to Sweden Mick Wood քաղաքական Matthew Bryza, former US Co-Chair of the Minsk Group, made political statements and articles in which Germany was blackmailed into participating in the North Stream gas pipeline project.
  Bryza's article was accepted by the German Foreign Ministry in the Finacial Times as a purely political analysis, but the statement of US Ambassador to Sweden Mick Wood was not ignored. Official notes were sent to the US and Sweden by the German Foreign Ministry urging Germany to remain politically and diplomatically. the process of building interstate relations 1.
  If in his article Bryza warned Germany and Sweden about the so-called pitfalls and dangers of cooperation with Russia, as he predicted environmental dangers due to the "North Stream" 2, then Wood, exceeding all acceptable diplomatic norms, former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, who " He was the executive director of "North European Gaz Pipeline Company", accused of Russian orientation.
 Drawing parallels with the South Stream gas pipeline project under way during this period, it should be noted that the qualitative positions of the US counteraction were rather weak, mainly limited to advisory statements by analysts, did not reflect the diplomatic turmoil of the South Stream. about 3.
The so-called Bryza analysts had no influence on the political circles of the countries in the region, but it is noteworthy that both Matthew Bryza and Mick Wood were then officials of the US State Department, not ordinary political analysts, they were called the US. The official point of view of "Armenpress", the evidence of the negative nuances of which was obvious.
 By the way, the reaction of the United States was dealt a serious blow by the person of the former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, who had an influence on the international perception of the "North Stream" gas project.
  Schroeder 2005 ․ After losing to his well-known successor Angela Merkel, he took over as CEO of the North European Gaz Pipeline Company.
  In backstage conversations, Schroeder was considered the ambassador of the "North Stream" gas project worldwide.
 By the way, the Schroeder-North Stream cooperation has deeper roots, as Schroeder himself, during his years as Chancellor, took part in the negotiations on the development of the gas project.
  According to Schroeder, "North Stream" is a key project in terms of energy security in Germany, which aims to provide additional energy security leverage in the Western European region5.
  The failure of the United States was evident in the collapse of the gas pipeline, as the expected economic gains of the parties were so visible that the countries of the region, Germany, were guided by the expected materiality.
  The Russian Federation also received additional leverage in the general process of energy transit, strengthening its position in the region.
  2011 ․ In July, when the first gas pipeline was put into operation, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and German Chancellor Angela Merkel met in Berlin to discuss the launch of the third pipeline, but then Chancellor Merkel was not ready to move to Ukraine. and the final expulsion of Belarus as a Russian gas transit country.
  Anyway, the Russian authorities approached the strategic ally's approaches with understanding, but the issue of the third pipeline is a different process. 1 See the official website of the German Foreign Ministry: http.
//www.auswaertiges-amt.de/.
2 See the official website of the Financial Times at http: // www.
//www.ft.com/home/uk.
received.
  2012 year. In October, Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller announced the launch of the third and fourth pipelines, which was a real victory in the Russia-West energy confrontation.
  The qualitative aspect of further changes in the gas pipeline was set at a rather high level, as in the event of a pause taken by the German side, negotiations on the design of a third pipeline began between Russia and Great Britain, according to the official website of Gazprom, the economic side of which has already been agreed. It is possible to secure the political agreement of the parties to join Great Britain's "North Stream" gas project.
 Of course, for the Russian authorities to get the US consent is not so real at the moment.
Nevertheless, having such a document at the negotiating table is an additional geopolitical lever for Russia in building relations with the West.
At present, the passions for the North Stream gas project have calmed down a bit, as opposed to the South Stream, the American reaction did not work, because Europe was able to calculate the losses and benefits of abandoning the program, and Germany managed to separate financial and economic revenues from geopolitical risks.
 Another interesting fact that the "North Stream" project had an advantage over the "South Stream" was that the land flow of the "North Stream" passed through the territories of Germany and the Scandinavian countries, therefore, it was free from political opposition and enjoyed the political support of the countries.
  2012 year. The North Stream gas pipeline, operating on a commercial basis since October 2007, has effectively demonstrated the political side of all counter-arguments, providing Russia with certain political dividends in its relations with the West and the United States.
  The operation of this pipeline was probably the first time in the post-Cold War period that the United States had to record its complete defeat in the Eastern European region.
However, the above does not rule out further regional realignments, especially in the context of the gradual increase of Russia's regional role in energy projects and certain geopolitical ambitions conditioned by it.
  Under the new rules of the game, the bankruptcy of Canadian analyst Alex Buttler's regional leadership analytical toolkit was already apparent (the Canadian-Azerbaijani analyst argued that a country with regional leadership ambitions should exceed the region by more than four times the GDP, and by geopolitical ambitions). Russia-West interregional relations require a new approach from a geopolitical point of view, and the search for the latest, most up-to-date tools for those in charge of the above-mentioned political-analytical framework and policy is essential.It is an unspeakable task, the proposed system structure of which will allow giving as much flexibility and predictability to interstate and interregional relations.
In the current tense relations between Russia and the West, against the background of increasing economic and political sanctions, the North Stream gas pipeline continues to be operated in accordance with the rules of the game, albeit as a unique example, to ensure the victory of the economic factor over geopolitical devastation.
 The above-mentioned observation answers the important question of whether cooperation between the West and Russia is possible within the framework of the current geopolitics.
  From a political point of view, the principles to be applied in politics are sometimes welcomed, but in the modern geopolitical system, the principal opponents and political scientists of the warming of Russia-West relations must consider cooperation exceptions, including the Nord Stream gas project.
Andranik Grigoryan "NORTH FLOW" BASE PROJECT IN THE CONTEXT OF RUSSIA-EUROPE ENERGY COOPERATION Keywords: Russia-West, geopolitical factor, economic factor,
Baltic
.
