YOUNG TURKISH TRIAL AS EVIDENCE OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE In the First World War, Turkey's defeat was recorded in 1918 between the allied powers and the defeated Ottoman Empire. By the peace treaty signed on October 30 in Mudrosum.
  This treaty was ratified by Turkey by the newly elected government of Ahmed Izzet Pasha, and ratified by British Admiral Caltrop on behalf of the Entente.
1918 On October 19, 1945, in a state of war, the program put forward by the newly elected Turkish government in the Ottoman Parliament did not give any assessment to the policy pursued by the "Union և Progress" party.
 Ahmed Izzetpasa not only did not launch an investigation against the Ittihadists, but also ordered the destruction of a number of indictments.
 However, the alarming situation in the country required a hasty review of the actions of the previous authorities.
 On the one hand, the desire to break away from the policies pursued by the previous government, on the other hand, the pressure of the European powers forced the ruling government to move towards bringing the Young Turks to legal responsibility.
  This demand was made by the whole international community in the person of many prominent cultural figures, such as J. de Morgan, Y. Marquardt, Yo. Lepsius, A. Mayen, Fr. Mekler և others.
In such a situation, the new government formed by Ahmed Tufik Pasha decided to hold the members of the Central Committee of the Young Turk "Ittihad ve Terak" party, the heads of the government of the Young Turk Parliament, as well as the Islamic leaders of the Ottoman Empire against the Sheikh.
Two main accusations were presented to the Young Turks during the trial. The first, without the knowledge of the highest legislative body of the Ottoman Empire, the Majlis, to drag the country into the First World War; the second, the deportation of Armenians, the violence and massacres committed against them.
The member states of the Entente, trying to remain faithful to the 1915 In their statement addressed to the Supreme Court on May 24, 1945, they made a wish to jointly investigate the case of the Young Turks.
  For that purpose in 1919. As a result of the conference held in Paris in January 1919, a body called "Subcommittee III" was established. After reading the final report on March 29, 1945, it was concluded that "all citizens of enemy countries who have violated human laws or traditions of war are subject to prosecution."
 Although not explicitly stated in the report, this commission also took into account the atrocities committed by the Ottoman Empire against its own Christian citizens2.
Initially, Great Britain wanted to conduct the Young Turks' case in its own courts.
 Thus, on January 7, 1919, during a meeting with the Foreign Minister of the Ottoman Empire, Mustafa Rashid Pasha, the British High Commissioner divided the war criminals into two groups: those who used violence against British captives during the war and those responsible for the massacres of Armenians3.
  1919 Mass arrests of Ittihadists were made on March 5, 2006 at the request of the British High Commission.
  A year later, however, 1 Hovhannisyan N., The Issue of Recognition of the Armenian Genocide in the Light of the Young Turks' Trial (19191920), Yerevan, 2006, p. 25.
2 Anumyan M., Recognition and condemnation. The trials of the Young Turks (1919-1921 և 1926), Yerevan, 2013, pp. 44-45.
3 Ibid., P.
In its final report to the government, the British arbitral tribunal, considering certain facts, considered it possible to prosecute the accused.
 It is appropriate here. Churchill's quote characterizing the Young Turk eccentric policy. "We deserve to be punished, but let our old friend England judge us."
 In this case, the flexible English diplomacy, on the one hand, opposing the Young Turks, on the other hand, subjecting them to its plans, outlined its characteristic mercenary orientation.
The trial of the Young Turks took place in three stages.
  The first stage was started in 1918. The states of the empire were divided into 10 judicial districts, for each of which prosecutors, interrogating judges and secretaries were appointed.
  The latter were subject to the study of accusatory code telegrams, orders, instructions and various other documents.
During the first stage of the trial, it was revealed that Dr. Nazim had stolen some important documents from the secret archives of the Union for Progress party.
  However, the abundance of various accusatory testimonies during the trial made it possible to fully substantiate the guilt of the Ittihadists.
The second stage of the trial began when "His Majesty the King in 1335. (1919) by the imperial order of March 8 "the first, second and third military emergency regiments were formed - the courts.
  By the Sultan's order, the trial of the leaders of the Young Turk government, members of the Central Committee of the "Union և Progress" party, took place in the First Military Emergency Court.
 It started in 1919. April 28, 1919 in Constantinople. The verdict was released on June 26, 2.
The verdict revealed that the central committee of the "Union և Progress" party consisted of two special organizations, one of which pursued an "open policy" based on the party's internal charter, and the other acted on secret instructions.
 The "Committee of Three" of the party, under the pretext of hostilities, deviated from the current path of government, forming a commission of lies and falsifications, guided only by its own decisions.
 The policy of the Young Turks bypassed the democratic solutions to the problem, which led to the emergence of a Soviet state in the country.
As a result of this trial, 11 party and state figures were charged in absentia, and 20 of those present.
  Talaat, Enver, Jemal and Dr. Nazim are sentenced to death in absentia, while defendants Javid, Mustafa Sheref, Sheikh ul-Islam, Musa Qazim are sentenced to 15 years in exile, and Rifat արդար just արդար Hashim Bey.
The regional executive secretaries and officials of the "Union և Progress" party stood before the second military emergency instance.
  It started in 1919. On June 21, it lasted about 7 months.
  At the beginning of the trial, the number of defendants was 7, later it reached 12.
This lawsuit proves the guilt of the responsible secretaries-officials in dragging Turkey into the war, organizing deportations, robberies, massacres, as well as making the country miserable through illegal trade and other types of transactions.
1920 According to the verdict issued on January 8, 2009, one of the accused, Hassan Fehmin, the executive secretary of Kastamonu իպ, and the executive secretary of Bolu, Midhadind, were sentenced to 10 years in exile, and the executive secretary of Manisa, Avni Bey, was sentenced to 9 months in prison.
In the Third Military Emergency, in 1919-1920, the cases of the perpetrators of Yozgat, Trabzon, Buyuk Dere և the organizers of the deportation and massacres of Harput 3 were examined3.
The trial in Yozgat was the first in a series of lawsuits filed on charges of massacring Armenians.
 It started in 1919. from February 5 to April 7.
 According to the verdict made on April 8, one of the defendants, Boghazlyan, was convicted. Kemal Sarukhanyan T., The Armenian Genocide in the Ottoman Empire և Great Britain (1915-1918), Yerevan, 2005, p. 87.
2 Hovhannisyan N., page 27.
3 Hovhannisyan N., page 27.
Tifik, the commander of the gendarmerie battalion, was sentenced to 15 years in prison.
The trial in Trabzon took place in 1919. from March 26 to May 20.
 According to the verdict made on May 22, Captain Tfik was sentenced to 10 years in exile.
 The trial against the other accused continued.
The trial of Buyuk Dere began in 1919. March 23 to May 24.
According to 1919 Abdul Kerim, Chief of Police in Buyuk Dere, was sentenced to 1 year in prison, and Refik Bey, a shopkeeper in Thessaloniki, was sentenced to 2 years in prison.
The other accused were acquitted.
The trial of Mamuret-ul Aziz or Harput began in 1919. On July 28, 1920. January 10.
 1920 Behaeddin Shakir, the founder of the anti-Armenian "Special Organization" ("Teshkilat Mahsuse"), was sentenced to death in absentia, while Resneli Nazim, also in absentia, was sentenced to 15 years in exile.
 The court acquitted the other defendants.
The third stage of the Young Turk trial includes the trial itself և the verdicts handed down by the three military tribunals2.
During the mentioned trials, details of many crimes were revealed, among which were the facts of deporting women, minors, the elderly, not providing the caravans with the necessary living conditions, as well as the facts excluding the slightest possibility of their resistance.
  The investigation reveals that armed criminals named "Teshkilat Mahsuse" and "Teshkilat Gedida" were formed from the criminals released from prisons, which were intended to destroy the Armenians during the deportation.
 According to Turkish sociologist Taner Akcam, the mechanisms and structures for carrying out the Armenian Genocide were established in 1914. On August 2, 1945, when a special meeting of the Central Committee of the Union և Progress Party decided to establish the Teshkilat Mahsuse (Special Organization), which would function within the Ministry of Defense, it would become the main destroying force for the extermination of Armenians.
In one of the secret documents of the Central Committee of the "Union և Progress" party, the governor of Erzurum Munir Bey reports. "The caravans of rich Armenians sent from Erzurum via Kighi were attacked by the Dersim gangs formed by Behaeddin Shakir, and were massacred, and their property was looted."
During the trial, referring to the robberies, the Turkish authorities claimed that the property of the evacuated population, being under the direct control of the state, would later be returned to their rightful owners.
 Examination of various documents, however, gives us grounds to confirm the absurdity of these allegations.
This is how former Ittihadist Mevlan ZadeRifat described his colleagues.
  "Their food is human bodies, their drink is blood and tears, their breath is gunpowder smoke," justice is hanging, brotherhood is deportation, equality is murder, freedom is prison.
 They demolished more than they built, they built buildings with the bones of the dead.
  What they read were only death sentences, what they wrote were war orders, and the plans were a conspiracy, a general massacre. ”5
According to French-Armenian sources, Mustafa Kemal was the accuser of the Ittihadists in court, and when the circumstances of the Young Turks' assassination attempt on him became known, he stated: "I will kill everyone և I must delete all the members of Ittihad.
  It is this party that, because of its sad politics, massacred and deported 1 million Christians. ”6
It should be emphasized, however, not only the severely negative attitude of some Turkish politicians և officials towards the Young Turks' genocidal plans, but also the refusal to carry out the leader 1 Anumyan M., p. 87.
2 Hovhannisyan N., page 27.
3 Sarukhanyan T., page 47.
4 Papazyan A., The Armenian Genocide according to the trial documents of the Young Turks, Yerevan, 1988, p. 177.
5 Kirakosyan J., The Young Turks before the Judgment of History, v. II, Yerevan, 1983, p. 225; 6 Ibid., P. 179.
The secret orders of the government, the central committee of the "Union և Progress" party, to deport and massacre the Armenian people.
  Thus, in 1919. Grand Vizier Damadpasha condemned the criminal plan adopted by the Ittihadists. "I aim to show the facts to the whole world, who is really responsible for these horrible crimes," he said.
The execution of death sentences against those convicted in Turkish courts, mostly remotely, was the reason for their legal decision-making by the Armenian avengers.
  1921-1922 Talaat, Jemal, Enver, Shakir, Saeed Halim and Azmi were terrorized within the framework of "Nemesis" operation.
The position of the modern Turkish government to bypass the problems, to deny the realities of historical facts means to avoid civilized responsibility, which is fraught with absolutely irreversible civilizational consequences.
Nelli Baghdasaryan YOUTH TURKISH TRIAL AS EVIDENCE OF ARMENIAN GENOCIDE Keywords: Istanbul courts, trial of Young Turks, Republic of Turkey, Armenian Genocide, recognition and condemnation.
