THE INSTITUTE OF PARLIAMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF A GOVERNANCE AND DEMOCRATIC MODEL
  The principle of separation of powers, which is the basis of a democratic model of government, is the leading function of the legislature, which is aimed not only at creating laws, but also at clarifying and regulating the activities of branches of government and bodies.
Although references to the functioning of the legislature date back to the earliest stages of state formation and political thought, the separation of parliaments as legislative representatives was outlined in the works of John Locke, Charles Lois Montesquieu, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Thomas Hobbes, and Thomas Hobbes.
Ջ. Locke introduced the idea of ​​legislative and executive branches in the system of state power, pointing out the supremacy of the former over the executive.
  Accordingly, the executive ին subject to the legislature և is subject to change or reconstruction in accordance with the decisions of the legislature1.
  Sh. Montesquieu, describing democratic political freedom within the law, came to the conclusion that the guarantee of political freedom is the three-part division of state power through retaliation2.
  J. Rousson and T. Hobbs developed the theory of public agreement, which is the basis for the formation of a common, public will, the condition for the emergence of a state organization.
 This will acquires the meaning of an egg of law, which is realized by the creation and functioning of the legislature3.
  The idea of ​​the supremacy of the legislature over the other two branches of government was put forward by the German philosopher I. Kant, substantiating the necessity of the legislator only with the possibility of expressing the united will of the people4.
The views of the classics of political science continue to remain in the modern world.
  The branching of state power on the principle of the priority of the legislative branch is now presented by many political scientists as a function of controlling the legislature.
 V. According to Orlando, this function is expressed by the Parliament by monitoring and criticizing the activities of the entire government infrastructure5.
 The conceptual questions of the theory of parliamentary control were referred to by NA. Kotlyarsky և K. Aranovsky 6.
 They classify parliamentary control in the category of democracy, expressing it through the notion of "parliamentary institution".
 K. Aranovsky, in particular, points out the diversity of forms of democracy.
  Democracy, whether it can have direct or mediated expressions, is nevertheless enshrined in the preamble of the Constitution, followed by the foundations of the state structure and the ends7.
 Thus, the principle of democracy is put in the basis of the institution of the parliament.
  The complex analysis of the institution of the Parliament reveals the essence of the legislative power և the unique forms of expression, so let us briefly present the structure of the parliamentary system առանձնահատ the peculiarities of its manifestation.
Parliament (English: parliament, French: parlement, parler - to speak) is the highest representative իշխանության legislature of state power8.
  Մ. Zelenkov defines the term "parliament" as an elective body with a multi-member body, which is independent of other bodies of government, whose members have equal status9.
The homeland of the parliamentary system is considered to be Great Britain, where the parliament appeared as a class representative body in the 17-18th centuries. at the border.
  "Along with the expansion of colonial policy, the parliamentary system also entered histories and philosophies." -Spb.
  Lany Publishing House, 2001, page 264; Aranovski KV, Gosudar9 Ibid., P. 61.
Colonies of England: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, Caribbean, etc.
 This was followed by a wave of bourgeois revolutions, which also contributed to the strengthening of the parliamentary system in a number of European countries.
 Although the parliamentary system is most widespread in Europe, some Asian countries are also lagging behind the parliamentary horse of state power.
  Meet countries where such an egg of state governance is accompanied by a constitutional monarchy, receiving the size of a parliamentary monarchy.
  As a representative institution, the parliamentary system is expressed in different countries in different countries: in the USA - in Latin America - a congress, in Sweden - a rigstag, in Finland - a sejm, in Russia - a federal assembly, etc.
  In the state structures, where the parliament acts as the legislative body of the given state, as a rule, the term "parliamentary institute" is used.
The institution of the parliament is a system of state-building, which is characterized by a clear distinction between legislative and executive functions, on the principle of priority of the legislature, represented by the parliament, over other state bodies10.
 In general, the institution of the parliament is represented by three basic principles: չական The central position of the representative body, the parliament, is reflected in the direction of the state ներքին foreign։ foreign policy.
 The government is formed through the ruling political party or coalition, which forms the majority in the parliament.
"The government is responsible for the parliament."
 In case of insufficient activity of the government, the parliament can express no confidence in the whole government or any minister, demanding his resignation11.
As mentioned above, in the case of a parliamentary institution, there is a clear separation of legislative and executive bodies.
The government is formed by the parliament "responsible to it".
The establishment of the Parliament in many countries took place in the 19th century.
  For example, in France it was finally established in the 70s of the 19th century.
  In the last quarter of the 19th century the same thing took place. 10 Public and appropriate political science.
 Учебное пособие / Under the order of V.I. Zhukova, B. И. Krasnova. - had in Germany, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Belgium.
 After the end of World War II, the institution of parliament needed to be reorganized and strengthened, so in some countries, such as Germany, a mechanism of government resignation was introduced, where in case of no confidence the government resigned only after the new staff was approved.
The emergence of a parliamentary institution in Russia in 1906-1907 was related to the functioning of the State Duma.
  This system was seen by the ruling Bolshevik Party as outside the "bourgeois democracy" and was soon pushed out of the system of government.
 It began to function only after the collapse of the Soviet Union, in the 1990s, վեց was seen not only as a parliamentary form of government, but also as an independent, legislative system.
 This stage of the creation of an independent post-Soviet state was followed by the presidency.
The post-Soviet state-building process of the Republic of Armenia also leads to the three-part separation of state power according to the interconnected and mutually balancing state structures "parliament-government-court".
The basic principles of the activity of the Parliament in the Republic of Armenia are fixed in 1995. adopted in the Constitution, which were subject to certain changes in 2005. as a result of constitutional reforms 12.
The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia enshrines the main powers of the Parliament, which form the basis of the constitutional status of the Parliament, promotes the establishment of parliamentary democracy, and strengthens the institution of the Parliament.
H. Hakobyan states the following points with the constitutional status of the RA Parliament.1. It has no advantage over other branches of government, the parliament is a part of the government, acts independently և carries out its constitutionally enshrined functions - legislative powers, can not discuss any issue related to the state, society և make a decision, 12 RA Constitution, 1995, 62-84 Articles.
3. Exercises control over the government. is a permanent, professional, body formed through elections13.
The author rightly mentions that the parliament becomes a functioning institution if the exclusive right to adopt laws belongs to the parliament, if it forms the government or participates in the appointment of the prime minister, if the government bears constitutional, political responsibility before the parliament.
 It, as a system, can fully function if the three branches of government function in proportion in the conditions of equilibrium and counterbalance structures based on the principle of separation of powers.
14 In order to carry out its functions, the Parliament is empowered with the necessary powers, the comprehensive set of which constitutes the competence of the Parliament.
 According to the scope of competence, the parliaments can be divided into three groups.1. Parliaments with absolute certain competence are typical for federal-decentralized unitary states.
  In those states, the central government is constitutionally limited by the rights of the subjects of the federation.
  Examples of such parliaments are the USA, France and Spain.
2. Parliaments with absolute uncertain competence, which have the right to adopt laws on any issue.
  The best example of this group is the British Parliament.
 As early as the 12th century, the principle of the supremacy of the Parliament of England as the highest legislative body was established.
 Parliament had the right to adopt or amend any law that no other body of government could repeal.
 This group of parliaments includes the parliaments of New Zealand, Japan, Italy and Ireland.
3. Parliaments with relatively certain competencies, whose powers are more flexible than those of the previous two groups.
 Thus, the Swiss Constitution does not contain a clear separation of powers between the parliament and the government.
  Different articles of the Constitution insignificant difference 13 Hakobyan H., Parliament և Parliamentarism in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, p. 48.
14 Ibid., P.
They delegate similar powers to both the Federal Assembly and the Federal Council15.
Let us now consider the basic powers of parliaments.
Legislative powers constitute the main part of the competence of parliaments.
  The exercise of these powers forms the basis of the activity of the parliaments.
 Legislative power is expressed through a representative body, the parliament.
  The existence of legislative power during the establishment of the Parliament was the main proof of the theory of separation of powers, but in today's societies the function of the legislature can not be unequivocally attributed to the parliament, as most countries show a picture of parliamentary activity.
 The adoption of legislative acts is considered an exclusive competence of the Parliament.
 It either operates due to the special powers of the parliament or is addressed to it by the legislature, so now it is difficult to talk about the absolute separation of powers.
In general, the legislative powers of the Parliament enshrined in the Constitution are: 1. the right of legislative initiative, 2. Adoption of bills, 3. budget approval and other financial powers16.
Parliamentary oversight is usually vested in the executive branch, but may extend to the judiciary or the armed forces17.
  The control of the executive power is of a political nature or is exercised through legal levers.
  In other words, the main control of the parliament is the political activity of the government.
Thus, the Constitution, laws and other legal acts enshrine the principles of the activity of state authorities, the means of organization, the relations.
 H. Hakobyan attaches special importance to the historical conditions of the country's development, the level of socio-economic development, cultural peculiarities, traditions, customs, and parliamentary activities during the scientific analysis of the principles and principles of organization of state authorities. 16 Ibid., Pp. 71-73.
18 Ibid., Pp. 111-112.
The study of the experience, the degree of development of democracy, the process of formation of the Parliamentary Institute.
19 Yu. Dmitri և E. When talking about the development of the parliament, Cherkashin also points out the importance of traditions.
  Historical traditions are part of political culture.
 They are, in particular, connected with the peculiarities of the development of parliamentarism.
  In other words, the specific conditions for the formation and development of the legislative body of the country are formed under the influence of historical determinations, are strengthened in the complex structure of political culture20.
H. According to Hakobyan, the institute of the parliament is only a representative body or a technologist of legislative work.
  It is a culture of social consensus; it presupposes the existence of a necessary և sufficient environment for parliamentary democracy.
 The institution of parliament represents a system of legal, democratic relations between political forces, when there is a parliament formed as a result of legitimate elections, where both the political majority and the political minority are an objective necessity, acting within the framework of clear constitutional powers.
Thus, the institution of parliament is defined as a state, political system of government in the conditions of separation of powers, democratic regime.
 It is part of a democratic, legal structure representing the interests of the people and the population, a multi-party political system guaranteed by constitutional norms, where the executive has constitutional "political responsibility" to the parliament, can control the government through the people's representatives, guarantees citizens, legal and physical the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of individuals22.
19 Hakobyan H., Parliament և Parliamentarism in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, p. 67.
21 Hakobyan H., Parliament և Parliamentarism in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 68-69.
22 Hakobyan H., On the Problems of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2005, p. 9.
Bagrat Bagratyan PARLIAMENT INSTITUTE IN THE CONTEXT OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE Keywords: Parliament, legislature, oversight function, representative body, constituent
