THE ROLE OF THE "SPECIAL ORGANIZATION" IN THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE RELATIONSHIP The materials related to the activities of the special organization are few, as most of them were destroyed by the leaders of the secret organization, in particular, Dr. Nazim.
 The bulk of the preserved material, about 40,000 documents, is in the Turkish military archives (ATASE - Archive of the Directorate General of Military History և Directorate of Tactical Studies) [1], under limited scrutiny.
 That is the reason why the information about Teshkilyat is incomplete.
 The main source of information about the organization is the memoirs of the heads of its various departments, such as Hüsamettin Ertürk, Eşref Küçchubaş, etc.
Even the date of establishment of the organization is not clear.
  Based on the memoirs of its co-leaders, some historians believe that Teshkilat was established during or shortly after the Balkan War on the eve of World War I. [2]
"Teşkilyat was created before the First World War by the hero of the revolution, the Minister of War, and later by the Commander-in-Chief Enver Pasha."
Other Researchers believe that the Special Organization arose earlier, in 1911, following a meeting of the Central Committee of the Union և Progress Party, when the party's secretary general, Behaeddin Shakir, made a call emphasizing the need for a secret structure within the party.
 Thus, within the Young Turk Party, a so-called "organization of fidayeen" was formed, which later became Teshkilyat's nucleus.
 The Turkish historian Suat Parlar also testifies to this, noting that the "Fida organization" was established in 1906 at the same time as the Ittihad Thessaloniki Center, and in 1911-12. During the Balkan Wars, Teshkilat was transformed into Mahsuse.
Finally, it may be argued that the main focus of this study is on the specific activities of the organization, which would point to the role played by Teshkilat in the implementation of the Armenian Genocide.
 However, clarifying the period of establishment of the Special Organization can be a basis for identifying its true significance և core functions.
Thus, having a clear program and appropriate resources, the Turkish authorities took practical steps in the early twentieth century.
 Despite the fact that the war situation was the most opportune moment for the implementation of the Armenian Genocide plan, nevertheless, in such a situation, the military potential of the Ottoman Empire was concentrated on various fronts, the government needed an acting, reliable force to carry out large-scale operations in a coordinated manner.
In order to discuss the future plans of the current authorities, a council convened at the Central Committee of the Union Progress Party, chaired by prominent party figures Behaeddin Shakir, Dr. Nazim and Minister of Education Ali Shukri (three executive committees).
 The further program manuals of the current authorities are discussed at the meeting.
 At that time, as we have already mentioned, the party secretary Behaeddin Shakir stressed the need for a centralized military force.
  He proposes to create a circle that would belong directly to the party, implementing the programs developed by the authorities.
  As the program of extermination of the Armenians required greater potential and resources, only the police, the army and the people were not able to meet the expectations of the authorities.
"… In the present case, we can neither benefit from the army, nor from the people.
  We need a special force, a force to defend the independence of our activities, an armed force.
  We will also have the right to deprive the party of this power. "[3]
Behaeddin Shakir Already having a good idea of ​​the status and functions of the circle, he introduces it to his party friends.
 As a result, Teshkilyat is formed within the Union-Progress Party.
Initially, the organization was established to support the Turkish army on both sides of the Russian-Turkish front.
  On the one hand, it should have hindered the advance of the Russian army, as well as organized the uprisings of the local Muslim population against the Russians, on the other hand, carried out the looting and massacres of non-Muslims, especially the Armenian population, behind the Turkish army.
  The initial system of Teshkilat did not justify itself, it soon transformed, becoming only a body carrying out the annihilation of the Armenians.
 It is widely believed that some of the Tedra detachments belonged to the Turkish Ministry of Defense and others to the Central Committee of the Ittihad Party.
 If we take into account that what unites all these forces was the same ideology, that is, to create one complete homeland, one nation in the Great Turan state, then we can confidently say that the main function of the Special Organization was to pave the way to achieve that goal. On the one hand, to unite all Muslims under one flag, to initiate pan-Islamism, on the other hand, to realize the dream of pan-Turkism by including the Turkish race in a political unity [1].
"… Why did we carry out this revolution? What was our goal?… I became your friend and brother in order to revive Turkey. I want the Turks, the only Turks in April, to be an independent ruler on this land."
 Non-Turkish nationals should be erased, regardless of their nationality or religion.
  This country must be cleansed of non-Turkish elements.
 Religion has no value for me, my religion is the turan. ”[3]
Dr. Nazim The ideology of pan-Turkism gained the status of a state policy in 1911. At the secret meeting of the Central Committee of the Young Turk Party held in Thessaloniki.
 This meeting became fatal for the non-Muslim peoples of the Ottoman Empire, especially the Armenians.
 Referring to the exclusion of such an undesirable Armenian element from the Ottoman Empire, the party's secretary Dr. Nazim explained that the precondition for the implementation of their political program was a radical solution to the Armenian question, as the Armenians were hindering Turkish interests, so their destruction was inevitable.
"The Armenian nation must be uprooted, an individual must not remain on our land at once, the Armenian name must be forgotten." [3]
Dr. Nazim Thus, having decided to exterminate the Armenians, the current authorities were just waiting for an opportunity to fulfill their dream, which had already taken the form of a clear plan, as quietly but effectively as possible.
 The Young Turks did not have to wait long for a convenient opportunity, as World War I soon broke out.
During this time, Teshkilat became more active.
 The main task of carrying out the mass exterminations of the Armenians was entrusted to him.
 In order to implement the program, there was a need to increase the number of members of the Special Organization.
 The ranks of the organization were replenished with criminals released from prisons for special purposes, who had to share their experience with other members of the organization.
  According to the verdicts, since the beginning of March 1915, a large number of criminals have been released from prisons, 249 in central Ankara and 65 in Yozgat prison, 51 of whom were murderers.
 The ranks of Teshkilat were replenished with Kurdish tribes, in particular, members of the Hamidiye regiments, which in 1894-96. They were the perpetrators of the massacres of Armenians, they had quite a lot of experience, like him from the Balkans, in particular, the Muhajirs who immigrated from the Caucasus to the territory of the Ottoman Empire, who were well acquainted with the place.
  As early as 1916, Teshkilat had 30-34,000 members.
"Շաբաթ A week ago, an order came to me from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to collect about 200 people from the Immerses, prisoners and other people to send to the Caucasus to commit atrocities.
  This work has already been initiated և We gather people.
 "We can recruit a few hundred (300-400) Circassians և who will be on the front lines of the army."
The special organization in Liva consisted of Musa • Balkesir's party inspector, a civilian who obeyed Talaat's orders էր was responsible for the deportations and massacres of Armenians in Western Armenia.
 This body was headed by Behaeddin Shakir.
• From the military, which carried out sabotage and reconnaissance operations behind the enemy.
  It belonged to the Ministry of Defense and was subject to Enver's orders.
Teshkiliat was the center of Mahsuse in Constantinople, but had four branches: Rumeli (Arif Bey), Caucasus (Riza Bey), Africa (Hussein Tosun), and Erzurum (Eastern Province).
          The orders of the special organization are mostly issued orally, and even if there were written orders, they were revoked immediately after the execution.
 However, some sources referring to the organization's activities show that Teşkilաթt had clear tasks, including the organization of the disarmament of the Armenian people, which, according to Turkish historian Suat Parlar, began before the war.
  Still after the events of Adana in 1909, and in 1910 in Mush it was forbidden to carry weapons, then an order was issued to hand over the existing weapons to the authorities.
  The process of disarmament became widespread in 1913, when the issue of carrying out reforms in Western Armenia was raised again.
  At the beginning of the First World War, in 1914. On July 21, 1945, the process of general disarmament of Armenians began in parallel with the general mobilization announced.
In the vilayets, disarmament was accompanied by violence and looting.
  Under the pretext of seeking weapons, Special Forces groups completely destroyed the villages, exterminating the local population.
"In the name of military service, they were caught in villages, workplaces, fields, everywhere, and sent to the army to massacre."
After the defeat of Sarighamish, by the order of Enver, the Armenian men were disarmed and then forced to work hard.
  Armenian recruits were sent to hard labor in distant places.
  When the men were exhausted, they were no longer fit for further exploitation, they handed them over to the bandits of Teshkiliat, who shot them.
Thus, the Turkish government deprived the Armenian people of the fighting power.
In this case, the Special Organization was greatly supported by the Turkish army.
 1915-16 Approximately 100,000 Armenian officers and soldiers enlisted in the Turkish army were eliminated during the 1930s.
The disarmament was followed by the process of organizing the deportation of the Armenian population.
 As already mentioned, the Special Organization included criminals released from prisons, Muslims who immigrated from the Balkans, Muhajirs, as well as Circassians who moved from the Caucasus to the territory of the Ottoman Empire.
 It was their groups or the so-called "accompanying detachments" that organized the deportation of the Armenian people to the Syrian desert.
 Caravans were formed from the inhabitants of several villages և rectified walls.
 The roads passed without rest, without bread water.
 Although all were condemned to the same fate, the death caravans did not reach their destination completely.
 Some of the deportees were left on the road from hunger and thirst, some died of violence, various diseases and infections, others were killed by members of the Teşkilat to try to escape, and the rest were killed in concentration camps.
 The population concentrated in Ras al-Ain և Der-el-Zor, ostensibly evacuated as a result of the martial law, was given final judgment by the forces of Teshkilat under the guise of ensuring the security of the innocent people.
Concentration camps were the last refuge of the Armenian people, where all the conditions were created for their destruction.
The massacre of Armenians deported to the Syrian deserts began in 1916.
At first, the massacre of the Armenians of Ras-ul-Ayn took place, which was carried out by the Chechen groups formed by Teshkiliat according to the order given from Aleppo.
 About 70,000 people were killed in the Rasul-Ain massacre.
 After successfully completing the extermination plan, one of the masterminds of the Ras al-Ain massacre, Salih Zek, a member of the Special Forces, was sent on a similar mission to the desert of Der Zor, where months of operations killed some 200,000 people.
 Later, the Mesquite massacre began, during which more than 100,000 people were killed.
 The massacre of Armenians deported to concentration camps was the last stage of the Genocide Plan.
In addition to taking immediate action, the Special Organization coordinated and oversaw the actions of local state authorities.
 As a rule, the governors of the states were mainly members of Teshkilat.
 This definitely facilitated the cooperation of the Special Organization's figures "between the local authorities".
 In this case, it was more effective to give the orders orally.
  However, taking into account the differences between the "Ministry of Defense" of the special organization, a special commission was set up within the secret organization, which coordinated the activities of the Special Organization in the implementation of the Armenian Genocide program.
  It was thanks to this structure that the actions of Teşkilyat-imahsuse were expressed in written protocols.
Later, during the trials of the Young Turks, despite the denials of the members of the Special Organization, however, it was these documents, as well as their correspondence between the memoranda of a number of leaders of the organization, that became the basis for proving the complicity of the Special Organization.
 The indictment alleges that the Special Organization certainly had close ties to the Central Committee of the Young Turk Union-Progress Party and was "responsible for the extermination of the Armenians."
Thus, we can mention that the Armenian Genocide was a pre-planned, organized, deliberate crime, in which the Special Organization had its complicity.
LITERATURE [2] Авакян А., Геноцид армян.
 Mechanisms of acceptance and fulfillment of solutions, Yerevan, [3] Rifat M. Z., The Dark Folds of the Ottoman Revolution and the Ittihad-Armenian Programs, Beirut, 1968, pp. 98-9, 113-4.
[4] Matosyan T., Armenian Genocide և Jewish Holocaust. Comparative experience, NAS RA, Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute, Yerevan, 2005, pp. 98, 106.
[5] Poghosyan S., Poghosyan K., The Armenian Question պատ History of the Armenian Genocide, volume 2, book 1, Yerevan, 2001, pp. 409, 454, 466.
[7] Papazyan A. H., The Armenian Genocide according to the Young Turks trial documents. Preface. translation և footnotes, Yerevan, 1988, pp. 99, 109-11.
[8] Antonyan A., The Great Crime.
 The Last Armenian Massacres և Talaat Pasha, Arik, Yerevan, 1990, p. 18.
Inesa Stepanyan The Role of "Special Organization" in the Armenian Genocide.
