SOME CONCEPTS OF FOREIGN ENTITIES MASNAKTSUTYAMBGORTSEROV OF COURT JURISDICTION (MIJAZGAYINENDDATUTYUN) VERABERYALKaghakatsiakan proceedings iratsmanarajnayin prerequisites for the right to bring an action one is that the case, which must be filed in the case, the jurisdiction of the court, who the suit is the hartsilutsume whether the court may is և obliged to examine the case ացնելու to make a decision (decision), otherwise does the court have jurisdiction over the case արդյոք is the case within that court.
 In international civil proceedings, when it comes to the examination of civil cases involving a foreign element, the jurisdiction of the trial court is determined by the so-called rules of international jurisdiction, otherwise whether the court of that state has jurisdiction to hear and resolve the case involving a foreigner. the element.
 In other words, by international jurisprudence we mean the jurisdiction of a state court with a foreign civil relationship [1].
 And the jurisdiction of the courts of the judiciary already operating within a specific state is determined by the so-called rules of local (territorial) jurisdiction [2].
As there is no single document, legal act (system of legal norms) on the basis of which it would be possible to determine the jurisdiction of the courts of this arbitrary state in any case, so each sovereign state defines its own jurisdiction to hear cases involving a foreign element - its limits, including the criteria and grounds for accepting these cases.
1 "International jurisdiction" is a conditional term (see Anufrieva L., Bekyshev K., Dmitrieva G. et al., International Partial Law.
 Textbook / Op. OK. Mr. Dmitrieva. —International civil procedural law.
 Textbook, per. с нем., М.
 Published by BEK, 2001, c. 63), it is applied only in the theoretical literature, and in the legislation of different countries the concepts of jurisdiction, jurisdiction, jurisdiction of courts with cases with the participation of foreign persons are mainly used.
There are no pre-determined rules of international jurisdiction for national legislation.
 That is, from the point of view of international jurisdiction, the state itself determines whether the court of that state has jurisdiction over a specific case. The answer to the question is given on the basis of the legislation of that state or the international treaties that form part of its legal system.
 Moreover, each state, based on its national rules defining international jurisdiction, undertakes such a framework of legal disputes as it deems expedient for itself; such freedom is not limited by any norm of international law [2].
When it comes to cases before the courts of the Republic of Armenia with the participation of foreign persons, one should refer to Article 244 of the RA Civil Procedure Code [4] (hereinafter referred to as the CCP), which defines the jurisdiction of the courts of the Republic of Armenia in cases involving foreigners.
Let's discuss some rules of international jurisdiction provided by Article 244 of the CCP.
First, Article 244 1 1 of the CCP provides that "the courts of the Republic of Armenia shall consider civil cases involving foreign persons if the defendant has a place of residence or is in the territory of the Republic of Armenia."
 This norm defines one of the types of international jurisdiction: general jurisdiction: the plaintiff applies to the court of the place of residence (location) of the defendant (Actor sequitur forum rei) [2].
  First of all, from the point of view of eliminating possible ambiguity and using the correct terminology, in part 1 of the above-mentioned article, we think it is necessary to clearly separate the concepts of "residence of the respondent natural person", "location of the respondent legal entity".
 Such a clear distinction is not an end in itself, otherwise a misconception can be created that if the respondent is "located" in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, he / she can also be sued in the courts of the Republic of Armenia on the basis of his / her actual presence in the territory of the Republic of Armenia. Whether he has a place of residence or not.
 The above-mentioned principle of jurisdiction is applicable in the Anglo-Saxon system (when filing a lawsuit, the defendant is actually present in that country 2), which is alien and unacceptable for our legal system. 2 For more see Haykyants A., Private International Law.
 Textbook.
 2nd edition (with additions and changes), Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2013, page 518, Anufrieva L. International partial law.
 В 3-х т. Volume 3. Transboundary Bankruptcies. (Even in American courts, the issue of the unconstitutionality of this principle has been raised. [5])
 To avoid such possible misunderstandings, it would be correct to state in Article 244, Part 1 of the CCP: "Courts of the Republic of Armenia consider civil cases involving foreign persons if the respondent has a place of residence in the Republic of Armenia or the location of the legal entity is in the Republic of Armenia." 3.
Some problems may arise in interpreting the concepts of "place of residence" and "place of residence" of the respondent.
 According to Article 23 of the RA Civil Code [6] (hereinafter the Civil Code), "Residence is the place where the citizen permanently lives voluntarily".
  The Civil Code does not specify the theories of the "always" and "mostly" categories.
 It is mentioned in the literature that permanent residence does not always mean long-term residence.
  The important thing is that in the created conditions the person is established, substantiated, so to speak, settled in the mentioned place [7].
 And the criterion of residence is essential in cases when the person's activity is not related to a specific place, the person has to move from one place to another all the time, to carry out activities.
 In such cases, the place of residence should be the place where the person lives the longest, that is, longer than in other places.
  The place of residence of the person must be different from the place of residence of the person.
 The latter is a temporary place of residence, which, depending on the specific circumstances, may vary, for example, a hotel, a hospital, in the case of convicts (foreigners serving sentences in another country), a place of imprisonment, accommodation for students from other countries with short-term study programs.
 In these cases, we believe, the mentioned places can not be considered as the places of residence of the latter, as a basis for determining the international jurisdiction in cases with their participation.
The place of residence of the mentioned category of persons should be considered the place where they have lived permanently before, and the above-mentioned places will be considered as temporary residence.
 This, of course, does not apply to foreigners, International Commercial Arbitration. International civil process.
 Учебник, 3 The above problem was corrected on 26.09.2017 ․ Article 386 of the new draft Code of Civil Procedure (http:
//moj.am/legal/drafts).
which, according to the RA Law on Foreigners [8], have received residency status, are registered in the state population register, and have a registered place of residence in the RA.
  We believe that, in general, the place of residence of an individual should be the center of his vital interests, the person should be connected with that place by strong personal and practical ties.
 In particular, if the foreigner is in the territory of the Republic of Armenia for a period of not more than one year4, has not received residency status, is not registered in the state population register, is, for example, in an expedition or research group, participates in treatment չի has not received residency status on that basis) or even in case of obtaining residency status, has not yet been registered in the state population register և does not have a place of residence, he / she cannot be involved in the courts of the Republic of Armenia as a respondent.
  Taking into account the above, we consider that in the sense of general international jurisdiction the notion of the defendant's place of residence should be interpreted in the introduction of the RA Law on Foreigners, the RA Law on State Population Register [9] and the State Population Register System in the Republic of Armenia. Based on the provisions of the RA Government Decision No. 1231-N of July 14, 2005 [10], in the light of the above-mentioned rules և interpretations.
  Referring to the concept of the location of a legal entity, it should be noted that, according to Article 59 of the Civil Code, "the location of a legal entity is the location of its permanent body."
The RA Court of Cassation, while addressing the issue of notifying legal entities of their whereabouts, referred to the notion of the legal entity's location.
 In particular, based on the analysis of Article 55, Clause 2, Article 56, Clause 1 of the RA Civil Code, the Court of Cassation came to the conclusion that the location of the legal entity is considered to be a mandatory registration for the state registration specified in the legal entity's charter. address [11].
 Therefore, in order to find out whether a legal entity has a location in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary to establish the address indicated by the charter of the given legal entity, which 4 According to Article 15 of the RA Law on Foreigners, one of the grounds for obtaining temporary status
is registered in the state registration body of the legal entity as the address of the permanent functioning body of the given legal entity.
One of the rules for determining international jurisdiction in cases involving foreign legal entities is the determination of jurisdiction by a branch or representative office of a foreign person located in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
  That is, if a foreign legal entity has a branch or representative office in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, then cases involving a legal entity can also be heard in the courts of the Republic of Armenia, moreover, the RA Law on State Registration of Legal Entities, Separate Subdivisions of Legal Entities, Private Entrepreneurs of Institutions. It follows that the branches and representative offices of foreign legal entities must be registered in accordance with the law.
 In addition, within the meaning of the mentioned law, separate subdivisions of legal entities are subject to registration, ie the law applies the general category of "separate subdivisions", not limited to the concepts of "branch" or "representation".
 In view of this fact, we find that Article 244 of the CCP can also define the separate subdivisions of foreign legal entities in the general category, including branches and representative offices, as foreign legal entities may have subdivisions under different names: office, department, agency. և etc., and in the case of a general category, all subdivisions, regardless of their name, will be included in it անան will be the basis for determining the jurisdiction of the courts of the Republic of Armenia on the basis of their location in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
 In addition, a foreign legal entity may operate in the territory of the Republic of Armenia not only through its separate subdivisions, but also through authorized representatives acting on the basis of agency, assignment and other transactions, authorizing this or that person or company to act on its behalf. և Responsibilities.
  It is a special kind of representation, if the logic of considering having a branch or representative office in the territory of the Republic of Armenia as a basis for determining the jurisdiction is that it determines the connection between the company and the Republic of Armenia, then in case of possible disputes in the future. If there is a circumstance of existence, it can be considered to have an authorized representative in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, to participate in legal relations through them, as a person would do through his branch or representative office.
  Therefore, it would be right to give the courts of the Republic of Armenia the opportunity to examine cases involving foreign persons arising from the legal relations in which the foreign legal entity has participated through agency, assignment or other transactions concluded with legal entities residing in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
  In other words, the second part of Article 244 of the CCP can be supplemented with the following point: "Courts of the Republic of Armenia have the right to consider civil cases involving foreigners if the claim stems from legal relations represented by a legal entity in the territory of the Republic of Armenia or in the territory of the Republic of Armenia." the person residing on the basis of agency, assignment agreements or other transactions. ”
The issue of determining the jurisdiction of cases involving foreign legal entities should also be considered in the context of a recent innovation in the Civil Code, the redomicization of legal entities.
 Redomiculation of a legal entity is a transfer of legal personality from one jurisdiction to another, which changes the personal law of the legal entity.
That is, as a result of redomiculation of a legal entity, its location is transferred from one country to another, in this case, the Republic of Armenia.
Article 59.2 of the Civil Code provides for a separate legal opportunity to be redomiculated in the Republic of Armenia.
  In order for a foreign legal entity to be redomiculated in the Republic of Armenia, that foreign legal entity submits an application for pre-registration to a government authorized person or authorized body, and the registration body carries out the preliminary registration of a redomicized legal entity.
Preliminary registration is followed by the registration of a foreign legal entity in the Republic of Armenia, redomiculation (if there are no grounds for refusal of registration), after which the final legalization of the legal entity takes place.
 That is, in the interim period from the initial registration to the registration of redomiculation, a foreign legal entity that is ready to accept the jurisdiction of the Republic of Armenia, including its courts, may become a participant in civil relations and civil disputes arising from them. We think it would be a justified step to include it.
 For example, if an unregistered legal entity appears in a civil dispute with a natural person residing in the Republic of Armenia or a legal entity residing in the Republic of Armenia after receiving a preliminary registration of redomicilization, that legal entity cannot be sued in a general court of the Republic of Armenia. The lawsuit will be filed in the court of the place of residence of that legal entity, and after redomiciliation that court will most likely continue the case with the latter, and the citizens living in the Republic of Armenia և legal entities would have to participate in the court of the former legal entity.
We are not talking about the cases when after the initial registration, before the final registration of the legal entity redomicization, the person is deregistered in a foreign state. In that case, foreign courts are unlikely to hear a case involving a legal entity at all on the grounds that it is adjudicable.
Therefore, in order to prevent such cases, it would be correct to state in the CCP that in case of redomiculation of foreign legal entities, in the intermediate period from pre-registration to final registration, the jurisdiction of the RA courts will be extended to such legal entities. examination by virtue of the third part of Article 244 of the CCP5.
Thus, Article 244 of the CCP can be supplemented with the following sub-clause: "Courts of the Republic of Armenia have the right to consider civil cases involving foreign persons, if the foreign legal entity renomiculated in the Republic of Armenia has received a preliminary registration in the Republic of Armenia."
Part 2 of Article 244 of the CCP stipulates that the courts of the Republic of Armenia have the right to consider civil cases involving foreign persons if the respondent has property in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
Under the above norm, the following possible cases may theoretically arise after determining the jurisdiction of the courts of the Republic of Armenia with the participation of foreign persons. ․5 The mentioned norm stipulates that "in compliance with the rules provided for in this Article, the court decides due to a change of circumstances or other circumstances, it has become a jury in another state court. ”
- Property disputes, when within the framework of that dispute the claim is related to the given property (the subject of the dispute is that property), - Property disputes, when the claim is not related to the given property, - Non-property disputes.
First of all, it sounds very absurd, when the RA court with non-property disputes can be competent in Armenia, based on the existence of the defendant's property [14].
 In this respect, for example, German law, when defining the jurisdiction determined by the place of residence of the defendant, mentions the possibility of determining such jurisdiction only through property disputes [2].
  That is, the fact that the respondent has property in the territory of any state can be a basis for extending the jurisdiction of that state in the case of a sole property dispute.
 The above-mentioned norm of the CPC is very general: "they have the right to examine cases if () the defendant has property in the territory of the Republic of Armenia."
  If the category "Cases" is not clearly defined, it can be widely interpreted to include non-property disputes, which in this case would be unacceptable.
 Defining this or that type of jurisdiction is not an end in itself. It is based on a certain connection between this type of jurisdiction and the "wild country of the court".
 And the fact that the defendant owns property can prove a close connection only in case of property disputes, the jurisdiction of the court examining the case with the location of the property should be related only to property disputes, as the logic here is that a claim will be applied to that property in the future. will be confiscated այլ other enforcement actions will be taken.
 That is, the essence of this type of jurisdiction is to show the defendant's connection with the given country at the same time to ensure the further execution of the decision made through property disputes.
 Therefore, regardless of the arbitrary circumstances of the plaintiff, the place of residence of the plaintiff, the law defines this type of jurisdiction.
The case law of the Republic of Armenia on this issue is interesting. Thus, in one case [16] the plaintiff applied to the court with a demand to prohibit the use of the trademark of the defendant (non-property claim).
  Defendant is located in the United States, և it is a foreign legal entity.
 According to Article 244, Part 2, Clause 2 of the RA Civil Code, the existence of a trademark of a foreign legal entity in the RA was mentioned as a justification for the plaintiff to examine the claim in the RA court. As a legal justification, reference was made to Articles 132-140 of the RA Civil Code.
The court returned the lawsuit on the grounds that the case was before the court, discussing and substantiating the issue that the trademark could not be considered property based on the analysis of the RA Civil Code, it should not be assumed that the defendant owns property in the RA.
The court, in fact, did not examine the issue at all, as a justification for examining the case with a non-property claim in the RA court, the plaintiff presents the fact that the defendant has property in the RA territory.
 In other words, it seems that if the defendant substantiated in the lawsuit that the plaintiff has property in the territory of the Republic of Armenia belonging to another property or right, and not a trademark, as in the present case, the court could accept the lawsuit (if other conditions exist).
Of course, the courts are guided by the literal interpretation of the law in this matter, as this is a loophole in the law which, in defining this type of jurisdiction, does not distinguish between property and non-property disputes, although, as mentioned above, there is every reason to argue that jurisdiction to be decided only by property disputes.
The next question that arises is whether the defendant's ownership of property in the territory of the Republic of Armenia is a basis for examining all property disputes, even if the claimant is not related to the property, or whether any property is the basis for determining this type of jurisdiction.
In American law, for example, the courts initially applied the quasi in-rem jurisdiction rule, which is considered a mixture of inpersonam jurisdiction և in rem jurisdiction ատ jurisdiction (jurisdiction determined by the location of property).
  U.S. courts (particularly state courts) used quasi in-rem jurisdiction to hear non-resident personal disputes over property in that state, even if those disputes were not related to that property.
 However, the US Supreme Court later ruled that the existence of sole property was not sufficient to hear disputes not related to that property, as the case, above all, should have minimal close ties to the place of the court hearing the case.
 Having a shareholding in a company registered in a particular state alone cannot be a ground for involving that person as a defendant in a case pending in that state court.
In German law, jurisdiction over the possession of property is quite absolute.
 The existence of any property can be a basis for determining the jurisdiction of the court where that property is located, "even a forgotten umbrella in a hotel in another country can bring the defendant before the court of that country" [2].
We think the American and German approaches to this issue are extremes. It would not be an effective solution to consider the defendant's possession of the property in the country as a basis only for determining the jurisdiction of the court in disputes relating to that property, when a judgment in favor of the plaintiff in other property disputes can be made on that property; to file a lawsuit against the defendant in a foreign court on the grounds of having property of the type and value, which, as mentioned, may be the basis of an absurd practice (in the form of rain).
Therefore, we believe that the correct solution to this question can be the "golden mean", that is, to limit this type of jurisdiction, to define a structure, so that the respondent's property must meet certain criteria to be the basis for this type of jurisdiction, for example, the defendant's property. The value should obviously not be less than the amount of the claim 6.
In this regard, Article 99 of the Austrian Civil Jurisdiction Law [19] provides that "the value of the property, however, may not be disproportionately less than the amount claimed."
 A value that does not exceed 20% of the claim is considered to be disproportionately low value [2].
 At the same time, the plaintiff can be obliged to substantiate the existence of the defendant's property in the lawsuit, its value, the fact that the decision can be made later on the account of confiscation of that property, ie the plaintiff shows the necessary "dispute" to determine the property.
 Of course, this rule should be used to delimit the cases when the plaintiff's claim is related to that particular property, in which case the type or value of the property can no longer matter.
Taking into account the above-mentioned, the 2nd sub-item of the 2nd part of the 244th article of the CCP can be formulated as follows: “(…) In property disputes, the disputed property is located in the territory of the Republic of Armenia or the respondent owns property in the territory of the Republic of Armenia. 6 For example, having 5000 AMD in a bank account or a low value silver chain left in a custody room in case of confiscation of 500,000 AMD.
In other words, the plaintiff substantiates in the lawsuit that the decision can be enforced in the future by distributing the confiscation of the property. ”
LITERATURE [1] Haykyants A., International Private Law, textbook, 2nd edition (with additions and changes), Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2013, p. 517.
[2] Shak H., International Civil Procedural Law.
 Textbook, per. с нем. [3] Lunz L., Marysheva N., Course in International Partial Rights.
  в 3 т., Москва, [4] RA Civil Procedure Code. It was adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999. (URL:
 www.arlis.am).
[5] Judgment of the US Supreme Court Burnham v. In the case of Superior Court, 495 US604 (1990) (URL.
 https:
//supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/495/604/case.html).
[6] RA Civil Code. It was adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999. (www.arlis.am).
[7] Suhanov E., Civil Law. В 4 т. T. 1.
 Общая часть.
 3rd edition, revised and supplemented, [8] RA Law on Foreigners. Adopted on 25.12.2006 մեջ entered into force on 03.02.2007 ․ (URL:
 www.arlis.am).
[9] RA Law on State Population Register. Adopted on 24.09.2002, entered into force on 31.10.2002 URL (URL:
 www.arlis.am).
[10] In the Government of the Republic of Armenia No. 1231-Norosh, July 14, 2005 "On Introduction of a State Population Register System in the Republic of Armenia". It was adopted on 14.07.2005, entered into force on 17.09.2005. (URL:
www.arlis.am).
[11] Decision of the Court of Cassation on October 1, 2010 in the civil case EACD / 1424/02/09 (URL:
 www.arlis.am).
[12] Adopted on 03.04.2001, entered into force on 18.08.2001 (URL:
 www.arlis.am).
[13] Article 59.1 of the Civil Code.
[14] Haykyants A., Some Issues of International Jurisdiction in Civil Matters under the Legislation of Armenia, Proceedings of the Conference of YSU Faculty of Law, YSU, ch. Editor: Ghazinyan G. S., Yerevan, YSU, 2016, page 142.
[16] In the civil case ESHD / 1281/02/13 on the return of the lawsuit to the Court of General Jurisdiction of Shengavit Administrative District of Yerevan 14.10.2013 decision (URL.
 www.armlaw.am).
[17] Symeonides S., American Private International Law, Austin.
 Kluwer, 2008, p. 29. [18] Judgment of the US Supreme Court Shaffer v. In the case of Heitner, 433 US 186 (1977) URL.
 https:
//supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/433/186/case.html.
[19] Austrian Law on the Jurisdiction of Courts of General Jurisdiction in Civil Cases, URL.
  http:
//www.wipo.int/wipolex/ru/details.jsp?id=9750 (2011 edition, amended by Federal Law (BGBl) No. 111/2010)).
Dadunts Tigran SOME ISSUES ABOUT THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA (INTERNATIONAL JUDGMENT) ON THE PARTICIPATION OF FOREIGN PERSONS Keywords: international private law, international citizenship, international citizenship.
