PERCEPTIONS OF EUROPEAN INTEGRATION IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS The involvement and participation of the Republic of Armenia in geopolitical and regional integration projects is inevitable. No country can be isolated from the region and the world.
 In addition to the state-official bodies, which are authorized to regulate the country's integration processes and define Armenia's place and role in them, in recent years the Armenian socio-political circles have been actively discussing and analyzing possible geopolitical orientations of our state, trying to find the most reasonable and useful ones.
  The domestic media are not only the focus of such public-political discussions, but also often put themselves on the agenda, forcing the country's government and opposition to adopt a certain political position, to substantiate it if the latter exists.
Concerning the topic of Armenia's geopolitical orientation and the choice of the integration path is not an end in itself in the domestic press.
  First, the discovery and comprehensive discussion of the issue in many media outlets is viewed not only in the context of our country's political and economic, but also geopolitical, civilizational and ideological level, and sometimes even national destiny and historical mission.
  The issue of self-identification of the Armenian society is intensively discussed in the context of approaching the European or Eurasian value system, while the hypothesis of self-sufficiency is almost not circulated.
 State order, social and economic security, legitimacy of the authorities, democracy, the state of human rights and freedom of speech are often attributed exclusively in our press exclusively to the integration orientation of the Republic of Armenia.
In its turn, the foreign (Russian-Western) media field is actively involved in the sphere of regional information-propaganda-psychological actions.
  Armenia, being in the sphere of interest of "European" and "Eurasian supranational formations", often appears in the issues of Western and Russian mass media.
  Of course, due to the occasional changes in the foreign policy line of official Yerevan, the European-Russian mass media are not backward for the time being in terms of shaping the image of Armenia in domestic audiences. Only Armenia's long-term loyalty to them becomes essential.
 In particular, many European media outlets did the same in 2013. In September, when the Armenian authorities announced their intention to join the Customs Union.
 Russia The Russian press, in their turn, is quite sensitive in case of any tendency to deepen the relations between Armenia and European structures.
The chronicle of the modern Armenian press dates back to 1988-89, to the independent republic in 1991, but European issues and relations with Europe did not occupy a prominent place in the Armenian media until the 1990s. The end was when the country was engaged in the Artsakh struggle for survival, the elimination of the consequences of the Spitak earthquake, the overcoming of the energy crisis, the catastrophic socio-economic situation, and the media, of course, covering all that.
  1990s At the beginning of the 19th century, journalists either limited themselves to providing official information about European structures, in the context of cooperation with the Armenian authorities, or they created a symbolic image of Europe, somewhat detached from reality.
During the years of the Artsakh war, the media references of European structures and countries were almost always conditioned by their role in resolving the conflict.
  Thus, Great Britain, which was not particularly active and interested in the region, appeared in the press exclusively in the image of Baroness Caroline Cox, a friend of the Armenian people, Vice-Speaker of the House of Lords.
 What is not worth for the Armenian reader of "Yerkir" newspaper, 1993 The most eloquent title of the January 6 issue was "Baroness Cox. "I am glad to spend Christmas in Karabakh" 1.
 In general, all European structures - the European Parliament, the OSCE (later the OSCE), the Council of Europe, as well as individual European countries, such as France or Italy, the media of newly independent Armenia represent mainly the concerns of the Armenians - war, earthquake. , in the context of their interest in the background of the socio-economic crisis.
 The Republican press widely covered the OSCE in 1994. Budapest և 1996 The Lisbon summits, in which there was a reference to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 1999 The wide coverage of the Istanbul summit was hindered by the distraction of the press and the public towards the October 27 terrorist attack on the National Assembly and its catastrophic consequences.
In general, the integration process in the 1990s. Not only was there no word in the media, but on the contrary, it seemed too unrealistic for the Armenian press to be involved in a supranational structure on the fragments of the newly collapsed union.
  1990s The second five-year period turned out to be much more controversial and dramatic in the domestic political life of Armenia, and the press mainly targeted the internal events and figures in Armenia.
 The European Commissioners were not opinion leaders for the mass audience, and from their remarks and suggestions to the Armenian authorities, the press focused more on the internal political processes and the views of the country's leading politicians on them.
  For example, in 1999 The Armenia-EU Partnership Agreement, which was, in fact, the first serious normative document of the country after the European Union, went almost unnoticed against the background of dramatic events inside Armenia.
1990s The Armenian press did not form a united, somewhat meaningful image of Europe.
 The news signals from the ancient world appeared on the pages of the media or on the air in sections, naturally, և the journalistic community was not particularly concerned with the image-making of European countries or institutions.
  The public debates were not overblown with pro-Russian and pro-Western issues, and there was no talk of a return to the Soviet past, but the steps taken towards Europe did not seem to be fixed in the press, as the image of Europe was vague, fluid and abstract.
2001 Armenia's accession to the Council of Europe in January 2010 and the speech of RA President Robert Kocharyan at the PACE were widely covered by all republican media.
During the days of Armenia's accession to the Council of Europe, the local press wrote with great enthusiasm that our country had successfully passed a unique "examination" of the reforms that had taken place for about five years. after the change of power.
  The country's leading media also covered the 2004 Launch of the European Neighborhood Policy in the three South Caucasus countries և 2006 The approval of the individual plan of the program with Armenia, whether it did not show special attention and consistency in the issue of the press, was limited to official, formal details2.
With the accession to the Council of Europe, the position of our country's European orientation gradually became dominant in the public-political discourse of Armenia, which was almost indisputably accepted by the authorities, the intelligentsia and the press.
The media almost always presented in a positive light both the values ​​of European civilization, political culture and economic infrastructure, as well as the aspiration for their loyalty to Armenia, the large-scale reforms implemented in our country and the encouraging statements of European partners.
  The CIS, the CSTO, and the EurAsEC, created on the initiative of Russia in the post-Soviet space, were not only not considered by the Russian press as an alternative to geopolitical orientation to Europe, but the effectiveness of those structures was questioned.
1 "Yerkir", January 6, 1993, 1 (343) (available at http: // www.
//ankakhutyun.am/archives/5143 link).
2 For details, see the report on the monitoring of SMI Armenia program "European Neighborhood Policy" and the Fund "Vyzy tsychecheleti", Yerevan, 2006.
For the Armenian media, a unique new starting point for the coverage of Armenia's relations with Europe can be considered 2008-2009, when the European Union adopted the policy of rapprochement with the Eastern European, South Caucasus post-Soviet countries, which inevitably led to a European renaissance.
  Naturally, the domestic press significantly reconsidered the image of Russia, thus actually opening the topic of geopolitical dilemma in the Armenian society.
2009 The constituent assembly of the Eastern Partnership in Prague in May 2007 was widely covered in the Armenian media, but the media focused not on adjusting the size of Armenia's relations with Europe, but, for example, on the Armenian-Turkish relations, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and the European Commission. on the position.
  President Serzh Sargsyan's meetings and speeches in Prague, later in Brussels and Strasbourg, the Armenian media field was more interested not in the issues of Armenia-EU Individual Action Plan, the supposed process of the "Eastern Partnership" or the interests of our position towards other participants of the program, but the country's security. ում In the context of European perceptions of social needs1.
In general, the Armenian coverage of the founding congress of the "Eastern Partnership" suggested that the media was dealing with a European event, if not an ordinary, regular, then at least insignificant one.
  Special media, on the contrary, exaggerated the significance of the launch program, considering it the common denominator of all previous initiatives, such as the organization of color revolutions, possible upheavals and conflicts, which would divide Russia and Western Europe2.
2010 In June, days or even weeks before the start of the Association Agreement negotiations, the Armenian media paid serious attention to the planned process, especially since the information signals coming from the EU were encouraging and optimistic.
  The media writes with undisguised enthusiasm that the negotiations have not yet started, Armenia offers 2010. to initiate the preparation of "Readmission Agreements" on visa facilitation with the EU3.
 It is interesting that a few days after the start of the talks, on July 1, the Customs Union of Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus is established, the developments around which are covered in the Armenian media only as news of international news.
 Later, the Eurasian Union, which included Armenia, was not perceived by the domestic press as a rival or alternative structure to the "Eastern Partnership", and our opportunity to become a full member of it was hardly considered by the press.
Naturally, the closed process of the negotiations, as well as the draft of the unpublished Association Agreement, should have forced the journalists to use open, accessible information.
 Such were, for example, the trade turnover indicators with the EU or the statistics of migration flows.
 Thus, "168 Hours" was one of the periodicals running the "European Window" series since 2009, in which the details of the cooperation between the European structures of Armenia and Armenia's benefits from it were regularly presented.
Even after the refusal to sign the Association Agreement, the press, this time with a ton of regret, missed opportunities, presented infographics, slides, diagrams, other visual aids, showing what we would gain if we signed the agreement.
In general, in 2013 The media coverage following September 3 can be described in one word - "disappointment".
 Earlier, in July, it was announced that the EU and Armenia had successfully concluded negotiations on three years of Association and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.
  The press predicted that a new framework for EU-Armenia trade relations would be formed soon, the signing of an agreement 1 "President Sargsyan had meetings with Barroso-Solana" (available at http: // www.
//www.azatutyun.am/content/article/1624507.html link).
2 "Eastern Partnership. program տր intrigue "(available at http.
//www.lragir.am/index/arm/0/comments/view/26936 link).
"Negotiations with the EU on the Association Agreement start on July 19" (available at http: // www.
//www.nidea.am/arm/news/4293/hoilisi-19-in-meknarkum-en-asocacman-hamadzaynagri-shurj-em-i-het-banakcutyunnery.html).
It will allow strengthening Armenia's economic integration into the EU, bringing its domestic economy in line with European standards.
  The Armenian press even translated some of the Russian media outlets, which expressed bewilderment over Yerjan's decision to terminate the Association Agreement.
During the "Eastern Partnership" operation, the diplomats of the EU countries accredited in Armenia were an invaluable source of information for the press, who could deviate from the traditional style of diplomatic language in Brussels and Strasbourg and make sharp and critical statements to some of official Yerjan's actions.
  Poland, one of the countries that initiated the program, in the person of the Polish Ambassador to Armenia Zdzislaw Raczynski, paid special attention to Armenia-EU developments, and the ambassador's opinion on the successes of Yerevan was as important for journalists as Raul D. Lutzenberger, then Traian Hristea.
 Almost any interview with a Polish diplomat begins with a discussion of Armenia's success in participating in the Eastern Partnership, and only then with a reference to Armenian-Polish relations1.
Along with the first steps of the Customs Union formed by Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus, already in 2011 There is concern in the Armenian press that Armenia will back down from closer relations with the EU and choose the Eurasian path of development.
  Almost throughout the negotiations, until 2013. September, the domestic media field exaggerates as much as possible, colors the topic of the inevitability of the RA geopolitical election, in fact proposing the "either or" resolution to the authorities.
  A narrower media outlet, in turn, viewed the expediency of the Armenia-EU talks with reservations, giving preference to Armenia's involvement in the Customs Union.
 It is interesting that this was talked about even before Armenia's refusal to sign the Association Agreement.
  Thus, the pro-Russian Soyuzinfo website, citing anonymous representatives of the European Commission, states that the concept of Associate Membership is artificial, as there are potential candidates in the EU, and the Deep and Comprehensive Free Zone Agreement for the Republic of Armenia. It does not promise great prospects, because in order to enter the European market, it is necessary to launch a product that is competitive by European standards, which we do not have2.
During the course of the project, some domestic media outlets also published extensive coverage of the successes of the other participating countries, naturally comparing them with Yerevan.
  In this respect, the coverage of Azerbaijan's cooperation with the European Union as a country in conflict with Armenia is quite interesting.
  For example, in Yerevan, with the help of the British embassies in Baku, Hetq Armenia and Novoye Vremya in Armenia publish 40 interviews each with independent experts and officials on cooperation with the European Union3.
  The Armenian media was as attentive as possible to the occasional criticism of Azerbaijan by the European Commissioners on various occasions.
  For example, in 2014 In July 2007, the Azeri press stormed the statement of one of the initiators of the program, Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, in which he questioned Azerbaijan's sincere desire to participate in the "Eastern Partnership", conditioning it with the dictatorial regime in the country4.
2014 In the first months of the year, the Armenian media was confronted with the internal political crisis in Ukraine, the change of power and the war raging in the south-east of the country.
  If not in the daily media, then at least at the expert-analytical level, it was understandable that all this "1 Ambassador of Poland. "The Eastern Partnership is an invitation to reform."
//www.mediamax.am/am/news/interviews/2640/ link).
2 "Armenia before the new initiatives of the Russian Federation ընտր Choice of the EU" Eastern Partnership "" (available at http: // www.
//www.soyuzinfo.am/arm/analitics/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=564 link).
3 "The Eastern Partnership program is not a one-sided use of the European space" (available at http: // www.
//hetq.am/arm/news/3273/arevelyan-gortsynkerutyan-tsragiry-evropakan-taratsutyan-miakoxmani-ogtagortsman-mijoc-che.html).
"The Swedish Foreign Minister has questioned Azerbaijan's sincere desire to participate in the EU's Eastern Partnership program," available at http: // www.
//yerkirmedia.am/index.php?act=news&lan=hy&id=21262 link).
It is the result of irrational bargaining over the choice of the integration path of that member of the "Eastern Partnership" and the short-sightedness of the country's authorities.
 In this context, Armenian journalists and columnists, who were generally not impressed with the prospect of Armenia's membership in the Customs Union, but cited the Ukrainian script as an example, approached the priority of the security factor, mainly conditioned by the radical deviation of the RA integration path towards Russia.
2014 From the second half of the year, the regressive moods in the issue of European integration in the analytical publications of the media are gradually transformed into new opportunities քննարկում discussions of programs.
 Besides, the reputation of the European Union in the domestic press was no longer as indisputable and unconditional as at the beginning of the program in 2009.
 Apart from Armenia, the refusal of Belarus and Azerbaijan to sign the Association Agreement and the deep instability in Ukraine make the Armenian expert doubt the sincerity of the goals of the EU and the political will in Europe to reform these countries2.
  Some media outlets even make generalizations that after the implementation of the program, the European Union has a much more unfavorable and inexpedient situation near its borders than at the moment of its launch3.
  There are also European analysts who criticize the "Eastern Partnership" in the pages of the Armenian press, calling for its reform4.
The domestic press, whether briefly, covers the aftermath of the failure of the "Eastern Partnership" in 2014. In February, a new program developed by the EU called the "European package" or "20 points after Vilnius".
 According to it, the EU was to show a new, differentiated approach to cooperation with Armenia, to prepare a new agreement5.
 The predominant topics in the interviews with the European Commissioners, officials and ambassadors of the EU countries were the restoration of the lost faith of the European Union towards official Yerevan6, the replenishment of Armenia-EU relations և the new start 7, the expediency of concluding a new agreement8.
  2015 Armenia's fourth place in the European integration index of the six ArSelian Partnership countries, published in March 2012, was predictable after Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine, before Azerbaijan and Belarus, on the basis of which the Armenian press has been intensively engaged for two months. With the developments expected around the EU "Eastern Partnership" Riga summit to be held in May 9.
Davit Sargsyan PERCEPTIONS OF EUROPEAN INTEGRATION IN THE ARMENIAN PRESS Keywords: European integration, "Eastern Partnership", image of Europe, public-political discourse, geopolitical dilemma, integration path, Association Agreement.
