WAYS TO STRENGTHEN LEGISLATIVE BASIS INVOLVED BY COMMUNITIES Although community solvency is not always related to size, however, investors usually prefer large communities with limited revenue.
  It is customary to separate the three main groups of local self-government units according to the potential for attracting borrowed funds: Local self-government units, which already enter the capital market due to their size, financial, administrative resources, political situation.
 This group includes large communities with strong economic and political bases.
Local governments that do not have access to the capital market yet, but collect enough revenue to exercise their own powers.
 This group includes communities that have the opportunity to attract investment without central government intervention; և communities that are too small or have no managerial potential, which can enter the capital market with some support.
 One way to converge the communities in this group is to consolidate the needs and resources of several communities.
Local self-government units that do not have sufficient potential or appropriate infrastructure to raise the necessary funds to provide services within the scope of their authority.
 These communities are usually highly dependent on the central government and do not have access to the capital market.
From the stage of ensuring the development efficiency of large cities, when the main task of the local self-government is to ensure the effective management of the existing infrastructure, the transition to the stage of providing new financial tools requires legislative bases, which will attract borrowed funds.
 The revenue potential of urban communities and program priorities prove that communities are in the process of being provided with new financial tools.
 The defined scope of powers of local self-government bodies also contributes to the identification of different ways of attracting financial resources by local self-government bodies.
  One of the priorities for the development of community infrastructure is projects that require large investments, which are impossible to implement only at the expense of own revenues, which leads to the need to attract borrowed funds.
 Different stakeholders have different views on raising borrowed funds.
 Local self-government bodies try to attract as much financial means as possible to fulfill the pre-election promises, to ensure the development of infrastructure.
 On the other hand, for the residents of the community, no matter how attractive the large investment programs are, they realize that in the end, they will bear the obligations of the community through various taxes, duties and other payments.
 It should be noted that the attraction of long-term borrowed funds provides compensation for the costs incurred on the existing infrastructure not only by the current taxpayer, but also by future users of the infrastructure.
  Of course, the more attractive the borrower is from the point of view of creating opportunities to implement programs, the more risky it is from the point of view of debt management.
 The RA legislation clearly stipulates that local self-government bodies independently manage the resources of the community within the framework of the law, however, certain restraint mechanisms are needed to prevent the possibility of ignoring the economic significance of the political decisions of the elected local self-government bodies.
 The problem is the combination of decentralization and decentralization, which will ensure the infrastructural development of the city, while keeping the financial and economic risks in a manageable range.
According to the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia, there are several restrictions on attracting borrowed funds to invest in the development of social infrastructure of the community.
 Article 30 of the RA Law on the RA Budget System defines: 1. The amount envisaged by the loan repayment program in each budget year, which includes the principal amount and interest payments, shall not exceed 20% of the fund income of the community budget; 2. The loan agreement can be pledged by the guarantees of the Government of the Republic of Armenia և the budget revenues of the community, 3. The local self-government bodies can conclude a loan agreement with the consent of the relevant state authorized body [2].
Although the legal basis for the borrowing of funds by the communities was created at the same time as the introduction of the system of local self-government, however, the culture of implementing programs with borrowed funds is still lacking in the communities of Armenia.
  A review of the World Bank և ծախս ծախս ծախս ծախս ծախս և և ուսումնասիր ուսումնասիր ուսումնասիր ուսումնասիր արդյունքում։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 We think that it is conditioned by the fact that the implementation of the defined restrictions and requirements is unrealistic.
 Let's look at the restrictions separately, looking at the countries that have experience in borrowing funds.
Approaches to obtaining government approval for borrowing funds from local governments vary around the world.
 T. Ter-Minasyan singles out 4 main approaches of the countries: Trust in market discipline, Cooperation between different levels in developing control systems, Rule-based control, Administrative control [4].
In Moldova, Bulgaria and Turkey, no agreement is required from the state authorized body to attract borrowed funds.
 The legislation regulating Moldovan financial relations stipulates that local self-government bodies can attract loans and issue securities at their own discretion.
 In Bulgaria, despite the lack of the need for consent by the state authorized body, the Ministry of Finance registers local debts in a special register, thus exercising control over the debt repayment process.
 In the Balkans, local governments must have the consent of a state authorized body to attract credit, issue securities, and issue letters of recommendation.
  Bosnia and Herzegovina's legislation stipulates that local governments must obtain the consent of the state if the annual debt service fee exceeds 10% of current revenues.
  In different countries, the above-mentioned control horses can be found in different combinations.
 We believe that in the case of local self-government bodies, which are highly dependent on state funding, the management of borrowed funds, controlling and regulating them only based on market mechanisms can be very risky.
 At the same time, strict state control, which would require agreement with local governments to enter into a loan agreement, issue securities, borrow, register, and report, can significantly prolong the process and restrict the freedom of local governments.
 Thus, it is necessary to find the golden mean that will enable local self-government bodies to solve their problems without at the same time undermining the stable economic foundations.
Not only countries' preferences for different forms of control differ, but also the positions of different public administration bodies, depending on their areas of regulation and functions.
  Financial institutions, such as the central bank, the stock exchange, and other representatives of the securities market, are in favor of issuing community bonds and attracting other borrowed funds, as this will stimulate the development of the securities market, it will be possible to use new tools in monetary policy.
 At the same time, the consideration of attracting borrowed funds is problematic from the point of view of the Government, the main player in providing the financial bases of the communities, as the guarantor of the liabilities involved in the community is ultimately the Government, therefore the debt of the community is the debt of the state.
 It turns out that the Government, if necessary for the development of infrastructure, will prefer to attract borrowed funds, ensuring high control over the organization of the process և asset management.
 The essence of the problem may change when the composition of the community's debt is not limited to guarantees provided by the Government.
Thus, we believe that one of the ways to make community borrowing opportunities more realistic is to expand community borrowing tools, such as collateral for borrowed property, as well as guarantees from internationally rated credit organizations, and community borrowing procedures. the transfer of the power of definition, which may be agreed in advance with the state authorized body.
Referring to the limitation of 20% of fund revenues defined by the RA legislation, we think that it needs to be detailed first of all in terms of calculating the index.
 In recent years, a significant share of stock revenues in community budgets has been revenues from the alienation of non-financial assets, which have been declining in the long run, as ultimately community-owned land and real estate are not unlimited.
 Examining the composition of community fund revenues over the years, we come to the conclusion that official capital subsidies have a large share in them, which are targeted allocations, are not sustainable, therefore, it is not expedient to consider this source of budget formation as a factor of community credit rating.
At the same time, international experience comes to prove that the separation of administrative and fund parts in the community budget does not contribute to budget efficiency, often leads to administrative problems, hindering operational management.
  Consequently, setting a starting point in a decision to assess a community's credit risk ներգր to include borrowed funds is not far-sighted և may ultimately lead to the insolvency of the community.
  The most internationally recognized and most applicable indicator of the development of restrictions is the share of recoverable income in the community.
  This indicator is used both to set the debt threshold and to assess creditworthiness.
  The World Bank presents the Credit Debt Assessment Ratio հարաբեր Renewable Income Ratio.
The amount of the annual debt service is the amount envisaged by the debt repayment plan in each budget year, the sum of the principal և interest payment.
  Recoverable revenues are stable official grants calculated from the "clear formula" of own revenues to the community budget.
 Under the RA legislation, the community's renewable income will be the sum of own income և financial equalization subsidies.
 The indicator can take values ​​in the range 0-1, և the maximum acceptable level of risk is 0.15.
With the help of the table, let's consider the limits of debt service amount and debt volume.
Country Debt Service:
Debt limit
LithuaniaPolandBrazilBoliviaColombia 1 Gross Revenue Limit ոչNot more than 30% of target grants to approved budget revenues.
15% of the difference.
15% of gross income.
If the debt exceeds 55% of the income, the amount of debt service should not exceed 12%.
Debt service amount
may not exceed 11.5% of net income.
The amount of debt service should not exceed 20% of the previous year's current income.
60% of the approved budget revenues.
The debt-to-net income ratio should not exceed 200%.
Current value of debt ներկա previous
The current annual income ratio should not exceed 200 [7].
Debt to current income
In case of exceeding 80%.
Macedonia 30% of current income
Current income:
Table 1. Debt և annual service limits in different countries can not exceed 100%.
We believe that setting the annual debt service 15 0.15 renewable income ratio threshold will provide a sufficient basis for the community to launch large infrastructure development projects while ensuring the normal course of community life in the event of various risks.
1 In Colombia, there is a debt light system that regulates the borrowing of local government funds.
LITERATURE [2] RA Law on the Budget System of the Republic of Armenia, Article 30.
[3] City of Yerevan, Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Performance Survey, World Bank, October 2013, p. 25.
Avetyan ARRANGEMENTS FOR STRENGTHENING LEGISLATIVE FOUNDATIONS BORROWING FROM COMMUNITIES Keywords: local government, infrastructure financing, community debt, legislative restrictions.
