VERBAL VOCABULARS SUPPLEMENTED WITH A STRONG SUBJECT IN PARUYR SEVAK'S POETRY Noun nouns can be divided into three groups of words with homogenous components.
A group of phrases with homogeneous components includes those phrases, both components of which are expressed by a noun.
 The complement can be expressed in direct, sexual-tragic, exclusive, practical և verbs.
Noun phrases with direct addition M. Abeghyan divides into three groups.
 The first group includes the connections in which the supplement with a direct syllable is qualitative, in the second group - revealing, in the third group - in terms of size and quantity1.
  The component that complements the connections of the first group is M. It was not presented in detail by Abeghyan.
 But oriented by the classification feature of the word combination, that is, in the qualitative sense, it is not difficult to conclude that M. Abeghyan considers it typical of such conjunctions to be endowed with a special meaning, noting that in these conjunctions the noun overlay can be replaced by an adjective, such as gold cup-gold cup, winter time-winter time, angel girl-angel girl, etc.
Characteristic of the second group is that the direct complement as a species name comes with the name of the genus (deer, herring, wolf beast), the direct complement of the noun comes with the words expressing the title, position, occupation (Tigran King, Yeraskh River, Rev. Harutyun), or vice versa, the words expressing type, title, decision, position, training come with a special name (King Tigran, Mr. Smbat, Ani Fortress, etc.).
The peculiarity of the connections of the third group is conditioned by the fact that the superlative is a word indicating size and quantity (two distances, a drop, a bunch of flowers, a group of people, etc.).
Although Abeghyan did not make this grouping on the occasion of the examination of word combinations, nevertheless the mentioned grouping must be taken into account when studying the grammatical word combinations.
  The material classified in Abeghyan's separate groups is characterized from the point of view of phraseology, although the latter did not make phraseology a separate subject of study.
The nature of the relationship between objects and concepts expressed by the components of word combinations should be taken into account when studying word combinations with a direct suffix.
  In this respect, one important circumstance must be taken into account.
  The components of literal expressions can express a metaphorical meaning, having individual, verbal uses, which were brought to life in the works of Paruyr Siak, as well as in the works of translators.
 Let us consider an example. And think that at that very moment, when the Turkish sultan was celebrating his birth and not dying on such a majestic occasion, Jubilee Death IV (IV, 79) 1 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian Language, Yerevan 1965, pp. 408-409.
The components of the jubilee death connection contradict each other in meaning, but the poet combined two words with incompatible meanings into one connection, giving the event a new and original definition.
It is much easier to discover the relation of objects expressed by the components of phrases that appear in the literal sense, and consequently, the grouping of such phrases is much easier than those that appear in a figurative sense.
 Consider examples: "Do not cross the asphalt road, prefer to travel" (I, 172), "I glorify the fruit of the garden, the pollination of the field with passion, The wheat bread kneaded with noble yeast on our table" (I, 355).
 Asphalt road, wheat bread և In such relations, "the subordinate member directly expresses the relation of what material it consists of" 1.
 But we can not classify such words as marble chest, steel will, or other similar expressions in the expressions expressing "the relation of being of what material" for the obvious reason that in them the meaning of the material, the object is neutralized, the characteristic feature of that object has become primary. marble, that is, polished like marble, white breast, steel will, that is, the will to break steel.
Both in fictional language in general and in Sևak's works, noun phrases with a direct complement in a qualitative sense are widely used.
 And this is not accidental, as the complement of the word combinations in that group is more endowed with the ability to act figuratively, being mostly used as a suffix.
 Let us consider examples. And from the prong of Gndasar the silver moon rises under the cover of Fog.
 (III, 54) And from the drowning heat, already breathless, For a moment, deprived of the abyss-shame, Carelessly opens the button of the emerald bushes… (IV, 49) The rain-water makes you smile IV (IV, 201) Ast, in the old walls of the Cathedral, Sacredly sings a Turkish song IV (IV, 19) And the wedges of the woods are made of iron, The stone teeth of the predatory owl Not wanting to confuse medicine with the trembling of wheat… (IV, 48) What is characteristic of these phrases is that the objective meaning of the noun that is a complement, being manifested as a feature, is somewhat neutralized.
 Naturally, the predominant feature must be present in the words which are endowed with the adjective և noun խոս և of the noun և in a particular usage act decisively.
Noun phrases with a direct complement in the revealing sense are quite practical. In this work.
  These are phrases that express the relation of the type, position, person and subject of a type and sex's who or what they will be.
 In contrast to the previous group of phrases, the relation expressed by their components has a more objective content, that is, it relates to the content of the complement regardless of the speaker's will, such as: "His father-in-law, shoemaker, took off his apron, put on a hat, a bottle with vodka, they entered His house in the twinkling of an eye ”(IV, 8),“ Here is even a potter Avo.
 Wherever he sits and gets up, he is dead, the potter Avon will always say the same thing… "(III, 51)," - You are right, after all, Godfather… Darbin Gegham came in, then addressed the president "(III, 52), "And now there: Hin 1 Abrahamyan S., Parnasyan N., Ohanyan H., Badikyan Kh., Modern Armenian language, h. 3, Yerevan, 1976, page 41.
In the footsteps left by the iron trek of David Lamb on the stones of Tsovasar, Like in a small toy hut, the Water-water smiles… »(IV, 201) և etc.
Specific names (King Tigran, Araks River, etc.) often appear in phrases with revealing direct addition. The same reality is noticeable in the works of PSG.
  Both personal names and geographical names are quite useful here, moreover, the expressive value of the former is greater.
 Consider examples. Clearly sees the student now. Uncle Danel is lying, To get rid of him… (III, 90)… That we do not have an ordinary Winter House kolkhoz, And he is building a palace in our village Sovetashen.
 (III, 103) Direct addition of size and quantity in word combinations The following words mainly appear as inferior members: (a) handful, sea, drop, piece / piece և etc.
Most of these uses are expressions typical of popular language and are widely used in the works of the poet.
 For example, for the expression of the idea of ​​the plural, the nouns sea are used, and for the expression of the few, the nouns bur, put, pshur, section are used.
  Such uses are noticeable manifestations of the poet's personality, such as: "Then it was the turn of women. With a bowl of rye or omelet, they sat around the Nativity, wishing the Son's prosperity… (IV, 8), "I can obtain a grain of mine in a word" (I, 2 01), "Who will look at the tent or who? Who will give him a piece of a smile, a piece of caress? ”(IV, 12),“ A piece of mineral spirit is needed, A piece of magic, A piece of magic, An opening bracket, A solution of the unknown… ”(I, 319), summer And a part of sweet spring… "(IV, 109)," If you struck a knife in the heart, Miput blood would not flow out "(IV, 18) և etc.
 As we have noticed, the direct addition often has a superlative expressed by the word emi, և in this case the noun that has received a significant value is mainly endowed with a stylistic value.
Noun phrases with a direct suffix are mostly long, because in the role of complement are mainly nouns that can independently express a clear meaning, enter into a relationship with the complement.
  There are nouns that often appear in direct speech as an adverb, for example: light, fire, miracle, silver, gem, marble, flower, dream 1.
P. What is remarkable about the language of the sky is the use not so much of the literal conjugation of such words, which is considered so poetic, in a new sense, but of the unexpected combinations of ordinary words, through which "word-related innovations" are created.
 Consider examples: There is no harvest in the sea fields either, It is stored in warehouses And it overflows from there, It fills every hut and house.
 (III, 96) But it is not they who take to the garden, Not these floating women, The girls this fire, Nor the stranger… (III, 124) They want the name of the flower anonymously, The flower of the famous they want to hear their name again From the lips of girls IV (IV, 80) It is not difficult to notice that in the given examples all the noun additions are used figuratively, contributing to the vivid and accurate reflection of feelings, thoughts.
 Such 1 Kosyan V., Modern Armenian word combinations, Yerevan, 1975, page 47.
The appearance of connections in the artistic speech is stylistically justified, as it gives freshness and originality to the poetic speech.
 In the above-mentioned applications, the expressiveness of the words is expressed in the word combination, և the other words used in the sentence take on a secondary meaning.
 The addition of a direct syllable from Batidran is related to other words in the sentence by its phonetic composition, ensuring the eloquence of the word, contributing to the rhyme of the verses.
Stylistically, the use of the words fire, float, sea is possible, as the expressiveness of the word is ensured by the relation of the word to the other words in the sentence.
 In some cases, even the phrase alone may not be as expressive.
 Due to its semantic relation to the other words in the sentence, the expressiveness of the word is expressed; the choice of the components of the word, in particular, the overlap, is conditioned by the sound of the word.
The frequency of the word refers to the variety of words.
  The study of word combinations with direct conjugation in ևak's's art shows that the words Armenian, mother, sea, virgin mostly play the role of direct conjugation.
Lusine Hovhannisyan NOUN VERBAL CONFERENCES IN SUPPLEMENT IN PARUYR SEVAK'S POETRY Keywords: Sjak, word combination, noun, direct syllable, addition, part of speech.
