ALEXANDER SANJAK ISSUE IN TURKISH-SYRIAN RELATIONS 1936-1939 In the First World War (1914-1918) after the defeat of the Ottoman Empire, the Ottoman Empire was signed in 1918. Mudros ceasefire 1.
 According to this ceasefire, Syria and Lebanon came under the mandate of France 2, but, as the events around the sanjak of Alexandret, which is considered the territory of Syria, showed, Turkey, in the same way, continued to express ambitions by occupying the territories of neighboring countries.
1936-1939 Due to the separatist policy of France and Britain towards Syria, the sanjak of Alexandret, which is part of Syria, was annexed to Turkey.
  The question of Alexandret Sanjak was in the center of attention of international diplomacy in the years following the First World War.
 1921 can be used as a basis for that question. Ankara Agreement, 1923 Treaty of Lausanne3, but this issue became more active in 1936. Most recently, when the Franco-Syrian treaty was signed and the issue of Alexandret was referred to the League of Nations.
The sanjak of Alexandret is located west of Aleppo, in the northern part of Latakia.
 It occupied an area of ​​4805 square kilometers and had a multinational population, the total number of which was 1937. by that time it had reached 240,0004.
 Arabs, Turks, Armenians, Turkmen lived here 1 Mudros Agreement.
 Armistice with Turkey (October 30, 1918), Volume 6. Weimar Germany, 1918 / 19–1933http.
//germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/pdf/eng/armistice_turk_eng.pdf (available on 10.03.2016).
2 French Mandate of Syria and Lebanon, http.
//www.saylor.org/site/wpcontent/uploads/2011/06/French-Mandate-of-Syria-and-Lebanon.pdf (available on 15.03.2016).
Peace 1919-1923, Vol. II (New York.
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1924.) http.
//wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/Treaty_of_Lausanne (available on 10.03.2016).
4 Bayramyan A., The Question of Alexandret և International Diplomacy (1936-1939), Yerevan, 1998, p. 18.
Kurds, Circassians and other minorities.
 The region of Alexandret, like all of Syria, remained under Ottoman rule from 1516 until the end of World War I.
 As a result of the First World War, Alexandret Sanjak was besieged by the British, and after the Mudrosizinada ceasefire, together with Cilicia, it fell into the hands of the French.
1921 On October 20, 1945, a French-Turkish agreement was signed in Ankara5, which left Alexandret Sanjak under French rule but established a "special administrative regime."
 1922 The "Federation of Syrian States" was formed. ր Alexandretisanjak, as a part of the state of Aleppo, joined the federation with the latter6.
  It is noteworthy that the great Turkized Arab feudal lord Subhi Bey Barakat was appointed president of the federation.
1924 In December 1945, by the order of the High Commissioner, the "Syrian Federation" was abolished, and the "State of Syria" was created, with the unification of Aleppo and Damascus.
  The sanjak of Alexandret, joining the "Syrian state", maintained its "special regime" 7.
 The "special regime" never gave the sanjak the status of an independent state-political unit outside the borders of the Syrian state, but only in the latter, privileges of administrative-financial autonomy.
  According to the provisions of the National Liberation Charter և mandate, the mandate state should only act as a "guardian", trying to give direction to the heads of state subject to the mandate, until which they will be able to govern themselves.
  However, this "guardianship" was actually perceived differently in the sanjak itself.
 Here, the representative of the mandate power, the deputy envoy of the French High Commissioner in Syria and Lebanon, personally exercised all the functions of state-government power through his subordinate inspectors, although there were only a handful of Sanjak governing bodies.
 The powers of the Deputy Delegate were defined by the High Commissioner in 1924. December 12, 1930 by the decrees of May 14 8.
The mutual delegate had the right to supervise the affairs of all the state departments of the sanjak և internal and state security bodies 5 Franco-Turkish 1921 Agreement, http.
//www.hri.org/docs/FT1921/Franco-Turkish_Pact_1921.pdf (available on 10.03.2016).
6 Agadzhanyan M., Alexandretsk Sandzak.
 потерянная родина армян, http:
//www.noravank.am/rus/issues/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=3056 (available on 10.03.2016).
7 Bayramyan A., note work., page 21.
8 Ibid., P.
birth.
  1924-1937 Pierre Dourion, who had been France's consul in Turkey for many years, served as deputy ambassador.
As for the local authorities in Sanjak, it should be noted that Mutasarif, the ruler of Sanjak, was appointed by the head of the Syrian state.
 Mutasarif's responsibilities include overseeing the proper functioning of laws, charters, and the conduct of sanjak finances.
 All decisions of Mutasarif were subject to the written approval of the Deputy Delegate.
During the reign of Alexandret, the French pursued a separatist policy towards Syria, mainly cooperating with the Turkish representatives on various issues.
  They tried in every way to keep the Arabs-Armenians, who make up the majority of the population, away from power.
  The pro-Turkish policy of the mandated government was evidenced by the fact that the leading positions in the local government bodies were mostly in the hands of the Turks, territorial changes and concessions were often made in Sanjak to the detriment of the Arabs. In the educational and cultural spheres, the Turkish minority of Sanjak always received special attention.
 The fact that education in Turkish schools, which was held at the expense of the state, was conducted in Turkish and the teaching of Arabic was banned speaks in the field of education of the French pro-Turkish policy.
A vivid reflection of the pro-Turkish policy of the French was the preservation of the legal status of the national-religious communities inherited from the Ottoman rule, the "millets", which created the ground for the artificial increase of the number and weight of Turks in the sanjak.
The political situation in Alexandret Sanjak was always tense.
 The reasons for this were, on the one hand, the limited power of the Syrian central government, on the other hand, the border violations committed by Ankara, the armed 9 Millets were self-governing religious communities in the Ottoman Empire, which had their own laws, ruled by a religious minority leader. It was a system, but it had ecclesiastical-educational autonomy without political rights; The system was created by Mehmed II Fatih Sultan K. After the conquest of Constantinople.
  3 millets were created: Armenians, Greeks and Jews.
  In fact, it was preserved in the Republic of Turkey, as in 1923. According to the Treaty of Lausanne, Turkey recognizes only the religious and educational rights of Armenians, Greeks and Jews.
bandit attacks, open territorial-political demands.
 In this regard, in 1923. Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, in his public speech in Adana on March 15, referring to the Alexandret-Antioch region, stated: "A Turkish territory of forty centuries can never remain a slave" 10.
The political situation remained calm until 1934, when the separatist activities of the Turks gained new momentum as a result of the visit of the Ayntap governor to Sanjak.
  The governor of Ayntap had come to Aleppo to negotiate on border issues.
  Ignoring the opinion of high-ranking state security officials, Deputy Delegate Durion invited the governor to the sanjak.
 Such a situation led to the tension of Turkish-Arab relations.
 1934 On May 5, 1945, popular protests condemning the separatists' actions took place in Arab-populated towns and villages, which continued in the following days, and eventually a wave of protests spread throughout the country.
 The Syrian press and public opinion demanded that France clarify its intentions related to the sanjak.
 Soon the Turkish press launched a fierce anti-Syrian and anti-French campaign.
 They accused France of "oppressing" or "persecuting" the Turks of the sanjak, continuing that the sanjak was occupied by force.
  1936 On September 9, 1945, when the Franco-Syrian treaty was signed, the Turkish government found that it was time to put the "Alexandret issue" on the table of international diplomacy.
1936 According to the Franco-Syrian pact, the gradual abolition of the mandate և recognition of Syria's full independence is envisaged12.
  Regarding this pact, Turkish Foreign Minister T. R. Aras stated that the Turkish government is very satisfied with the signing of that pact.
 However, as for the issue of Alexandret Sanjak, the Turks were sure that they would be able to settle it through negotiations with the Syrian delegation.
  The then Prime Minister of Turkey մsmet ոնnոնnü expressed a wish that the Syrian delegation 10 Gülseren Akalın, Adana'nın Gazi'li Günleri, http.
//turkoloji.cu.edu.tr/CUKUROVA/makaleler/2.php (available on 15.03.2016).
11 Franco-Syrian treaty, 9 September, 1936, http.
//www.britannica.com/topic/NationalBloc#ref1079716 (available on 15.03.2016).
12 Agadzhanyan M., Alexandretsk Sandzak.
 потерянная родина армян, http:
//www.noravank.am/rus/issues/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=3056 (available on 15.03.2016).
Arrive in Turkey for meetings.
  The Syrian delegation returning from Paris, passing through Turkey, decided in 1936. to stay in Istanbul on September 22-23 to discuss the issue of Alexandret with Aras.
The Turks, who hoped to resolve the sanjak issue through negotiations with the Syrian delegation, failed.
 In fact, the delegation could not do anything else, as it was not authorized to negotiate with Turkey; besides, Syria was still under the French mandate, so Syria's foreign relations were under the mandate of the state, that is, France.
  It is assumed that Turkey deliberately raised the issue of the sanjak just when Syria had not been completely liberated from the French colony, because in that case Syria would not be able to pursue an independent policy to resolve this issue.
1936 The fierce anti-Syrian and anti-French campaign of the Turkish press started on September 24, 2010, and the Syrian-Arab press, in its turn, began to spread protests against the provocative anti-Syrian speeches and baseless allegations of the Turkish press.
  The Turkish press campaign was immediately followed by diplomatic actions.
 Turkish Foreign Minister Aras in 1936 On September 26, at the 93rd session of the League of Nations, he raised the "issue of Alexandret Sanjak" for the first time, expressing hope that the population of the Sanjak would decide his own fate.
  Negotiations between Turkey and France began in 1936. On October 10, 1945, Turkish Ambassador to Paris Suad Davaz presented a memorandum to the French government on the issue of the sanjak, demanding that Alexandret և be given independence from the Antioch region, and that an alliance be formed with it, like the Franco-Syrian alliance.
Before the French government studied the Turkish memorandum, 1936 November 1, President of Turkey M. Q. Ataturk (1923-1938), in his speech at the opening of the second session of the Turkish Grand National Assembly of the fifth convocation, speaking on a number of issues, especially emphasized the issue of Alexandret Sanjak, saying: "These days, the main issue that worries our nation day and night is the issue of the fate of Iskenderun-Antakya and the surrounding area, the real owner of which is the Turks.
 We are forced to take the solution of this issue in our hands ”13.
The French Foreign Minister stated in a reply memorandum that it is impossible to sign a pact like the Franco-Syrian pact with the Sanjak, as it contradicts the mandate և France's international obligations.
It was decided to convene an extraordinary session of the League of Nations to discuss the Sanjak issue.
 1936 The 95th session of the League of Nations opened on December 14, 1945. The agenda included "The issue of Alessandra և Antioch" put forward by Turkey.
 The Turkish representative Aras, stating the Turkish government's position on this issue, insisted on the idea of ​​giving Sanjak independence and concluding a pact with him similar to the Franco-Syrian pact, noting that the Turkish population living in Sanjak was in a "deplorable state."
The representative of France, Paul Vieno, first rejected the view of the Turkish government that the sanjak had been conditionally ceded, noting that Turkey had officially accepted that. The country south of the established border is really Syria.
 Paul Vieno, denying the Turkish representative's baseless allegations that "extra-military measures" had been taken in recent months to suppress the Sanjak population, suggested that the League send observers to the Sanjak to gather accurate information on the situation and submit it to the League of Nations.
  On December 31, 1936, the League of Neutral Observers of the League of Nations arrived in Alexandret's Sanjak and visited various parts of the Sanjak.
 As a result of the visits, it became clear that the majority of the population wanted to remain in the Syrian homeland.
International diplomacy ագիտական ​​diplomatic relations in the mentioned period were favorable for speaking from "positions of power" դիմ to take "drastic and decisive" steps.
  From the mid-1930s, on the eve of World War II (1939-1945), there was a struggle between the Anglo-French and German-Italian alliances to include Turkey in their alliance or at least to maintain its neutrality.
 At that time, Nazi Italy was striving for a great http.
//www.tbmm.gov.tr/tarihce/ataturk_konusma/5d2yy.htm (available on 15.03.2016).
His influence in the Mediterranean Sea, which forced France to get closer to Turkey and make concessions to it.
In the tense international conditions, the French government, on the initiative of Prime Minister Leon Bloom, has developed a compromise plan for resolving the Sanjak conflict14, which included both Turkish and French views on the Sanjak settlement.
  According to this program, it was envisaged that the sanjak would become a political independent unit.
The regular session of the League of Nations opened in 1937. on January 21. The issue of sanjak remained on the agenda.
 The French presented their demands and proposals for the solution of the problem, but in order to bring the theses of these two sides closer, it was necessary to turn to the mediation of the head of the British delegation Anton Eden.
  In the face of the dangerous advance of the Axis powers (Germany, Italy), Britain was interested in preventing the dispute between its ally France and Turkey from escalating so much that the latter would oppose the Axis side15.
  Thus, under Turkish pressure and threats from Turkey's Axis intrigues, France ceded Alexandret Sanjak to Turkey.
  թ. The draft law on the new status of the Sanjak was submitted to the Council of Nations for discussion and approval on May 29, 2010, but it was not even discussed by the members of the council, as the representatives of Turkey and France announced that their governments approved the drafts.
  As a result, Alexandret Sanjak became an independent political entity that enjoyed complete independence in its internal affairs.
 The sanjak was to have a legislative power independent of Syria, the sanjak assembly-parliament, an independent executive power headed by a head of state, as well as the judiciary.
 Sanjak was nominally connected with Syria in the fields of foreign relations, customs and currency systems.
 The Turkish-French governments had the right to interfere in the internal affairs of the sanjak.
  Sanjak to Turkey և Syrian cara 14 Bayramyan A., note work., page 70.
15 Bayramyan A., note work., page 73.
The authorities were given equal rights to use the port of Alexandret 16.
On May 29, 1937, when the Geneva Accords were signed, the people around Antioch, the Arabs, Armenians, and pro-Syrian Turks, announced their decision to reject the Geneva Accords, as it would, against their will, separate them from their Syrian homeland.
  The Syrian government refused to recognize the use of the new regime in Sanjak, while Turkey, in turn, concentrated its troops on the Syrian border.
 The situation in Europe remained tense; in such a situation, France realized the possibility of reaching an agreement with Turkey, so on July 5, 1938, with the consent of the French authorities, the Turkish troops entered the sanjak17.
1938 Elections to the local legislature were held in Sanjak on July 22.
  As a result, the Turkish community received 63% of the total votes, but these elections were clearly rigged, as the Turkish community actually made up only 23% of the population.
 The Turkish representatives took 22 out of 40 seats in the Legislative Assembly 18.
 Arabs, Armenians, who make up about 75 percent of the Sanjak population, were given only 18 seats in 19 groups (Arab-Alawite community - 9, Arab-Sunni - 2, Greek-Orthodox - 2, Armenian - 5).
 1938 During the first session on September 2, 1945, the Sanjak of the Assembly of Alexandria was renamed the "State of Hatay".
It should be noted that according to one version, the name Hatay was created by Ataturk from the merging of the words "hitit eti" և "ata", and according to another version, from the so-called "Hittite Turks" (Hitay turkleri) 20.
 It should be noted that the Turks actively circulated the opinion that 16 Sarah D. Shields, Fezzes in the River named after Hatay.
 Identity Politics and European Diplomacy in the Middle Easthttps.
//books.google.am/books?id=9UcoWVKG3GoC&pg=PA235&lpg=PA235&dq=Fundamental+
29% 2C% 201937 & f = false (available on 15.03.2016).
17 R. Safrastyan, R. Melkonyan, Turkish history textbook, Yerevan, 2014, page 97.
18 Agadzhanyan M., Alexandretsk Sandzak.
 потерянная родина армян, http:
//www.noravank.am/rus/issues/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=3056 (available on 15.03.2016).
19 Bayramyan A., note work., p. 114.
20 Ay (cid.
31) e Hür, Atatürk diplomasisinin ba (cid.
31) arı ։yküsü.
 Hatay'ın ilhakı, http:
//www.radikal.com.tr/yazarlar/ayse-hur/ataturk-diplomasisinin-basari-oykusu-hatayin-ilhaki1103985/ (available on 15.03.2016).
One is related to the Hittites 21.
 Turkey uses such statements to substantiate the unfounded views that ancient peoples of the Middle East, such as the Hittites and Sumerians, are the ancestors of the Turkish people.
  Syria, however, never accepted this name for the sanjak, until the 2000s, a number of maps showed the sanjak of Alexandret as a Syrian territory.
The proclamation of the state of Hatay was unconstitutional; it was considered a violation of public law because the proclamation of the state was not representative, was not elected by the Sanjak population through free democratic elections, but was appointed by representatives of foreign states.
 The Syrian government has never recognized the new status given to the sanjak by the League, nor the proclamation and existence of the state of Hatay.
In the conditions of difficult international relations and internal political situation, the government of Hatay carried out the Turkification of the sanjak of Alexandret.
 The annexation of the region to Turkey was already well prepared, the only question left was to legalize it through diplomatic acts.
After four months of negotiations between Ankara and Paris in 1939. The French-Turkish "Joint Declaration of Mutual Assistance" was signed in Paris on June 23, 2006.
 On the same day, an agreement was signed in Ankara on the final settlement of Turkey's "Syria" territorial dispute.
 By these acts, France was handing over Alexandret Sanjak to Turkey, and the latter was going to ensure its participation in the Anglo-French military group22.
  However, Turkey did not adhere to this agreement: instead of showing its promised assistance to Britain and France, it hurried to provide assistance to Hitler's Germany in order for the latter to achieve its ambitious goals.
Thousands of locals, including 40,000 Armenians, fled to Sanjak after the Turkish occupation of Turkey and settled in other parts of Syria and Lebanon.
  There is only one Armenian village left in the territory of Turkey, Vakֆfl,, which is the only Armenian Hatay Province in Turkey, http
//encyclopedia.thefreedictionary.com/Hatay+Province (available on 15.03.2016).
22 Bayramyan A., op. Cit., P. 146.
It is a village with 150 inhabitants.
  The Armenians of Kessab did not agree with the seizure of the sanjak; they wrote many letters of protest to the French government, even clashes took place, a large number of Kessabians migrated to Beirut or took refuge in the mountains.
 During this period Armenian-French figures visited Kessab, including the pontifical archbishop Remy Lefretr23.
  The latter, seeing the plight of the Armenians, appealed to the Pope and the French government, asking that the Kessab region be returned to Syria.
  The Catholicos of the Armenian Catholic Church, Patriarch, Cardinal Grigor-Petros XVI Aghajanyan made a great effort to keep these territories in Syria, mediating on behalf of the Vatican to the French government.
The latter was awarded the highest order of the country - "Shukri Quatli" by the Syrian President.
 Thus, the struggle for Kessab ended successfully, about 2/3 of the Kessab region seceded from Hatay and returned to Syria24.
The Syrian people and government, the whole Arab world, with deep revolt and anger, accepted the annexation of the Syrian sanjak to Turkey.
 A memorandum of protest was sent to Paris.
 The memorandum stated that Syria does not recognize և can never recognize this illegal agreement without its consent և participation.
Syrian President Atas, in turn, sent letters of protest to the French President and Prime Minister, in which he stated that France had violated its obligations as a mandate state.
 As for the people's protests, they were mainly expressed through mass demonstrations, strikes and large-scale emigration.
Despite these protests, in 1939 The French flag was lowered from the French barracks in Antioch on July 23, 1945, and the French soldiers and General Molay came out of the sanjak.
  Thus, after about three years of struggle, Turkey, taking advantage of the favorable international situation of the period, was able to resolve the issue of Alexandret Sanjak in its favor.
As a result of the complicated and long diplomatic struggle over the issue of Alexandret Sanjak in Turkey "Syria", the issue was found to be unjustly resolved and a compromise was settled. 23 History of the Republic of Turkey, University Textbook, Yerevan, 2014, p. 98.
24 Yengibaryan H. K., From the history of the Armenian Catholic community of Kessab, http.
//lraber.asjoa.am/6125/1/2012-4_%2851%29.pdf (available on 15.03.2016).
with.
  France and Great Britain played a great role in the unjust settlement, which, proceeding from the common interests of the Anglo-French diplomacy, moved the conflict from a solid legal basis to a political one.
 France, as a mandated state that promised independence to Syria, resolved the issue in its own interests, but at the expense of the country under its "guardianship", Syria, without taking into account the latter's opinion.
Sona Sukiasyan ALEXANDRET SANJAK ISSUE IN TURKISH-SYRIAN RELATIONS 1936-1939 Keywords: Turkish-Syrian relations, Turkey, Syria, Alexandretsanjak, Kemal Ataturk, Greater Hatay, France
