THE VALUE AND MODERNITY OF CERVANTES INTERMEDIES The outstanding representative of the Spanish Renaissance Miguel de Cervantes Savedra brought his masterpiece, the famous novel "Don Quixote", to world fame.
  The genius Spaniard is known to a wide range of readers for this novel.
  Of course, Cervantes' genius was best displayed here, making "Don Quixote" one of the most widely read monuments in world literature.
  Nevertheless, Cervantes played no less important role in the history of Spanish theater, the European realist novel.
  It can be said that Cervantes-playwright is not inferior to Cervantes-novelist.
  "Don Quixote" simply sounded louder in different parts of the world, as if masking Cervantes' dramatic works and instructive novels.
  Goethe even thought that Cervantes' novels were higher than "Don Quixote".
  This, of course, is an exaggeration, but through this exaggeration of Goethe he wanted to emphasize that Cervantes had created other works besides "Don Quixote", the merits of which are very high.
  It is true that contemporaries could not properly appreciate Cervantes' dramas and intermediaries, but this does not mean his role in the formation of the Spanish theater of the Renaissance.
 In this sense, the name of Cervantes should be associated with the name of Lope de Vega, because they were the ones who started the realist theater.
 Lope de Vega laid the foundations of the Spanish National Theater, after which his successors continued to develop the theater.
Cervantes is one of those writers whose work, in order to understand it correctly, must first be studied or at least be acquainted with the given period and the conditions of their life.
 The Renaissance took shape in Italy in the 14th century.
 It is one of the Spanish countries where the Renaissance began later, in the 15th century.
 It was conditioned by a number of historical circumstances. In the 8th century, Spain was invaded by the Arabs, who conquered almost the whole country.
 The struggle against them was called Reconquista.
 He lived there until the 15th century.
 Before that, the country was in a state of disarray, so there were no necessary preconditions for the Renaissance.
 One of the reasons is 1492. It was the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Columbus, after which a large flow of gold penetrated into Spain.
At first the country became rich, but soon it found itself in a deep economic crisis, which was due to the decline in the consumption of national goods.
 If we add to this the pressures of the monarchical system, the Catholic Church, the miserable condition of the Spanish people will be fully understood.
 This very state of the people has found its expression and response in the dramas, intermediaries and educational novels of the great writer.
 We see the same picture in Don Quixote, whose many intermittent novels reflect the period.
1615 Cervantes' booklet 8 Comedy և 8 Intermedia was published, which, unlike the other works of the writer, was not successful among the readers.
  This does not mean that these comedies and intermediaries were not valuable, because later the society երservantologists were able to evaluate them correctly.
  In the preface to the reader, Cervantes mentions that out of idleness he starts writing again, thinking that the times when he was praised continue, but there are no people who want to publish his works.
 Years later, re-reading his comedies and intermediaries, he found them worthy of publication, so he submitted them for publication2.
1 Mamikonyan H., Cervantes's life և works, Yerevan, 1940, page 8.
It should be noted that the intermediaries were small-scale performances of about 5-10 minutes typical of Spanish theater, mainly with religious and everyday themes, which were staged during the breaks of the main plays.
  Initially, their purpose was to promote the role of the church in society.
 At Cervantes we already encounter domestic intermediaries, which address various everyday problems.
Cervantes is one of those writers who are able to study in depth, to study aspects of life that are overlooked by others, but which are worth mentioning and discussing.
The writer satirizes the stupidity, the polite behavior, the religious prejudices, in a word, everything that hinders the development of the people.
 In the media we see the whole of Spain, a country in misery, under constant pressure from the Monarchy Church, but which from time to time tries to find a way out of that situation.
In addition to the national issue, Cervantes' intermediaries also address universal issues, such as, for example, the issues of freedom, freedom of expression, and the control of one's own feelings.
  The "Jealous Old Man" Intermedia և The instructive novel "The Jealous Extremadur" raises the same topic.
 In both cases, the couple, who are much older than their husbands, are locked up out of jealousy, which forces them to try to betray them with the help of cunning women around them.
 Cervantes defends these women 's right to have their own happiness, to enjoy life.
  In order to carry it out, they resort to cunning և being able to emerge victorious from a hopeless situation.
  True, they were unfaithful, but that was justified.
 Cervantes' sharp and critical satire is not avoided by those sections of the society who defame people's lives. They are the clergy who have forgotten their mission.
  He exposes the harassment of the "holy fathers".
  The "Salamanca Cave" intermedia is the best example of what has been said.
  Here we meet two representatives of the church, for whom personal pleasures come first.
 Sacristan Reponsen և her hairdresser throws himself into the arms of their mistresses, taking advantage of her husband's absence.
  They drink, sing, dance, have fun.
 In the same interlude, Cervantes told the horrible stories that were spread among the people about the magical and mysterious caves of Salamanca and Toledo.
  The most famous of these was the Salamanca Cave, where magical sciences were taught.
  Intermedia depicts a mythical student who allegedly mastered these magical and magical tricks.
 Using his ingenuity and Pancrasio's naivety, the student manages to introduce Sacristan as his hairdresser, thus saving the latter և Pancracio's wife, Leonia.
Intermediaries presented with humor and cheerfulness actually mock the Spanish society of unfaithful women, holy fathers, hungry students, liars and thieves.
A number of married couples come to the judge dealing with divorce cases, presenting absurd reasons for divorce to the judge. Mariana wants to get rid of her old husband, Mrs. Giomar, her military husband, who is not capable of anything.
The judge rejects everyone's claim due to insufficient evidence.
 According to the media ("Divorce Judge"), the Spanish judicial system is criticized for the fact that judges have not made decisions for a long time.
 After not being used for a long time, the codes were covered with a thick layer of dust.
Cervantes condemns և mocks gossip.
 In order to eliminate the wife's gossip in the "Two Chatterboxes" interlude, the husband takes an unemployed wanderer who meets him on the street, who is more talkative than that one.
 The latter simply faints, seeing that it is not his turn to speak.
 Seeing that successful experience, the mayor also decides to give the same lesson to his wife.
 In fact, Cervantes especially emphasizes the gossip of women.
The "Theater of Wonders" intermedia depicts the nobility's arrogance, their fear that they might be laughed at in front of others և their stupidity at the same time, which seems to have no limits.
 The two liars of the traveling theater manage to deceive them very easily and earn money, because for the sake of their honor they all pretend that they see a play that does not really exist. After all, it can be seen only by those who are the children of their parents.
  Everyone is so confident in their origin that they even wish for a fictional performance.
 Only the bewildered mayor looks this way and that և, not seeing anything, he starts shouting for honor.
 The only person who puts an end to this joke and declares that there is nothing is considered illegal by everyone.
 Of course, he alone is powerless against them, but unlike everyone else, he does not prefer to be deceived for honor.
The interlude "Biskaetsi's self-proclaimed" thematically coincides with the instructive novel "Deceptive Marriage".
  In the first case, the man cheats on the woman, in the second case, the woman cheats on the man.
  Both make themselves rich.
  Deception and picarism are also expressed in Cervantes' other instructive novels, such as "Rinconete և Cortadillo", "The Presumed Aunt".
  Picarism was a feature of Spanish society at this time.
  The difficult living conditions բաց the lack of means forced the lower classes of the society to resort to deception, theft, robbery in order to survive.
As we see, Cervantes in his intermediaries remains faithful to the ideology of realism, presenting life as it is.
 He takes the theme of his works not from the heroic or religious past, but from the everyday life of Spain, he strives to make his dramas a mirror of real life, to give the correct description of events and manners, not to change the historical truth.
 In instructional novels all this is presented in a large text.
 And the great value of intermediaries is that they can express in a small volume the big problems and situations that are current at all times.
 Cervantes' sharp mind and the comic characters he created have no equal.
 As mentioned by A. Ostrovsky. "These small works are real pearls of art with unparalleled humor, strength and brightness of depicting everyday life" 1.
Intermedia is rich in popular folk sayings, sayings that make the writer's words alive and familiar to the average reader.
 All intermediates end with the performance of musicians.
 The latter, who are the children of the people, the representatives of the relatively lower class, seem to sum up the intermedia with their songs.
 In other words, everything ends with a happy note, which is a hope for the future.
The themes voiced by the great Spaniard four centuries ago are still relevant today and in our day.
  We encounter the characters we meet in the media every day in our lives.
  Some of them, unfortunately, are us, we just do not realize or do not want to confess or accept.
According to Derzhavin, Cervantes' interludes can not be considered merely as intriguing prose farces aimed at occupying the society in the midst of long plays.
 They are connected with his main works by compound և organic links2.
Armine Markosyan THE VALUE AND MODERNITY OF CERVANTES INTERMEDIES Keywords: Renaissance, Cervantes, Don Quixote, Lope de Vega, Spanish theater, intermedia, everyday themes, Armenian issues, national issues,
