RECREATIONAL POTENTIAL OF SHIRAK MARZ - A PRECONDITION FOR TOURISM DEVELOPMENT The diverse natural conditions of the Republic of Armenia Cultural, historical and architectural monuments create favorable preconditions for the development of tourism.
  Taking into account that, the Government of the Republic of Armenia has declared tourism and recreational activity a priority branch of economic development.
  In this respect, the dynamic development of the regions of the Republic of Armenia is very important, which will contribute to the creation of a complete, balanced tourism market throughout the country, the development of communities and the decentralization of tourists.
Shirak region is located in the north-western part of Armenia, borders with Turkey in the west and Georgia in the north.
 The regional center is the city of Gyumri.
Shirak region is one of the relatively little known regions in the Republic of Armenia in terms of tourism.
  If 600-700 thousand people visit the RA annually. tourists, then very few of them visit Shirak.
  Shirak region stands out with its unique nature, rich culture, traditions and customs, natural and architectural monuments, which give an opportunity to develop different branches of tourism.
  Sometimes, not knowing about the possibilities of the area, tourists do not visit the given region, which stops the development of the region.
  In this regard, it is necessary to study the recreational resources of Shirak region for the development of tourism, which will allow to present the opportunities for organizing recreation in the region to the consumer - the tourist.
Recreational activity has now become a potential socio-economic factor; its organization is complex.
 As an object of recreational activity, to include natural conditions for the Shirak region և historical and cultural monuments, which together create complex preconditions for the organization of recreation.
 The work was done in the classification of recreational resources with the following groups: Natural recreational monuments ․ The geological, geomorphological, hydrological, as well as climatic features of the territory of Shirak region have contributed to the formation of numerous natural monuments, which, according to their recreational significance, have been divided into landscape-scenic-scientific-geological objects.
Landscape-resource resources serve to show surface horses, unique landscapes and rare scenes.
 Such resources stand out especially the peak region of Aragats, Akhuryan valley, Jajur mountain pass, Ashotsk concave, etc.
The Aragats volcanic massif located in the south of Shirak region is a unique natural monument, on the top of which the glacial circus has been preserved.
 It is possible that the lowlands of the massif are already used to this extent as a recreation area.
 As the natural landscapes of the massif above 2000 m are little changed by man, they have a diverse and interesting landscape.
  Summer-winter recreational opportunities in this part of the Aragats highlands are great, especially for the development of hiking, alpine skiing and eco-tourism, as a stable cover is formed from 2000 m և up to 3000 m altitude. .
Recreational objects of Aragats are highland lakes, the most famous of which is the largest Lake Kari, at an altitude of 3190 m, which is surrounded by beautiful mountain meadows.
A unique natural monument in the Shirak region is the Akhuryan Valley, which borders the Shirak plateau from the west.
 In terms of scientific-cognitive tourism, here are interesting endemic հազ rare plants registered in the RA Red Book: Akhuryan currant, Tigranitantrvenin, Siberian iris, etc. [3, p. 73].
In the middle stream of Akhuryan the river valley is wide, it is more expedient to use it as a landscape-scenic object.
From the left bank of Akhuryan a beautiful view opens on the river valley, the latter became more interesting after the construction of Akhuryan reservoir.
In the background, the scene completes the Tignis fortress on Akhuryan's river.
It is also very spectacular - the area of ​​the middle stream of Akhuryan, where the beautiful panorama of Ani facing the opposite shore is of great value.
The mineral springs near the Akhuryan River have a certain recreational potential.
  There are 2 mineral water springs here: Ashotsk խ Akhuryan.
  These waters are well-studied, have therapeutic value, and can therefore be used for balneological purposes [2, p. 331].
The Jajur mountain pass is a recreational natural area, 1952 m.
 It stands out with its great diversity of climatic and organic world, which can contribute to the development of perspective recreational tourism in Shirak region.
 There are artificial forests in the Jajur mountain pass, with an area of ​​1100 hectares, where the dominant species is the Crimean ordinary pine [3, p. 73].
Ashotsk concave stands out with great recreational potential in Shirak region.
 The Gorshaberd gorge is unique here, where there are beautiful landscapes with fragmented slopes and unique vegetation.
 This area is the unit of natural forest in Shirak region, where the trembling aspen forest is preserved.
Lake Arpi is located on the Ashotsk plateau.
 Lake Arpi is the largest pool in the country after Lake Sanaa.
  It is located at an altitude of 2020.
  Its mirror occupies an area of ​​more than 20 km2, the volume of water is 90 million m3.
 The Akhuryan River starts from the lake.
 Water is used for irrigation and energy purposes.
Around Lake Arpi in 2009 A national park was created, which includes the eastern slopes of the Yeghnakhagh mountain range and the south-western slopes of the Javakhk mountain range և Verin Akhuryan concave.
 The national park occupies an area of ​​about 25,000 hectares.
 The national park is home to 670 species of plants (orchids, lilies, irises, poppies, lilies), 25 of which are included in the RA Red Book, as well as 255 species of vertebrates, including more than 10 registered in the IUCN Red List. for species (otter, mink, Darsky snake, steppe hawk, etc.).
  The largest Armenian colony in the world lives in the area, it is the only habitat of curly-haired peacock in Armenia, the only habitat of Darsky snake in the world [5, p. 10].
More than 140 bird species have been registered in the national park, of which 80-85 are nesting there.
 Seven of these species are of global conservation concern, including the peacock, the pearl, and the gray crane.
The Ashotsk plateau has all the opportunities for the development of winter recreation.
 Sufficient precipitation (600 mm) falls here, կայուն in winter a stable snow cover is formed, which lasts up to four months.
 In other words, the snow cover, which is a possible factor in the development of alpine skiing, is guaranteed in case of any possible development.
  Besides, there are no strong winds in Amasia in winter, which in turn contributes to the organization of winter recreation.
Shirak region is rich in scientific-geological monuments.
  The list of geological-geomorphological monuments includes the objects that reflect the geological structure of Shirak պատմ the history of development.
  This group includes geological excavations, various mines, caves.
On the left side of the Yerevan-Gyumri highway, between the Lanjik and Maralik settlements, there is a giant "turtle" (picture 1).
 The "turtle" is about 3 meters long, is located on a hill and is well off the highway.
 The monument is the result of a "selective" wind blow of two large fragments of basalt of different densities [1, p. 15].
In the Shirak region, near the Harichavank complex, there is a unique hand-made natural human monument, the "Rocking Tower" (picture 2).
A small chapel was built on a solid tuff rock separated from the mother monolith.
 The rock left a few meters from the monolith, leaning at an angle of 100.
  The chapel survived the earthquakes and is considered one of the unique natural monuments of the Republic of Armenia.
Figure 1. "Turtle" geological monumentPicture 2. "Rocking Tower" The beautiful Trchkanijrvezh has a great potential to attract tourists, although it is located on the border of Shirak and Lori marzes, on the left tributary of the Pambak river, on the Chichkhan river.
  The Chichkhan River originates at an altitude of 2250 m above the northeastern slopes of the Shirak mountain range.
 In the middle stream, before entering the deep, narrow gorge, Trchkan waterfall is formed, which is also known as Chichkhan waterfall or Trchkan water.
 The locals call the waterfall "Chran".
 It is located about 10 km north-west of Shirakamut village of Lori region.
 It is the highest և most waterfall waterfall in Armenia with its 23.5 m height and an average water consumption of about 1.5 tons per second.
 The road to this recreational-hydrological monument passes through Torosgyugh, Bashgyugh, Pokr Sariar villages of Shirak region; interesting tourist routes can be organized from Shirak region.
Anthropogenic recreational monuments ․ In the modern era, it is possible to raise the level of human care, education and cognition, which is facilitated by the important components of the recreational potential of the area - historical, cultural, archeological, architectural monuments.
 In this respect, Shirak is very important, as about 2000 historical-architectural-archeological monuments are preserved here.
Many of them are located in favorable landscape areas, which is conducive to the organization of historical reserves in these areas.
Archaeological and archeological monuments include those areas where fossil remains have been found.
 Among them we can single out the settlement near Horom, the areas near Benjamin, Mets Sepasar, on the west side of Gyumri, near the Akhuryan river, the basin of the Jajur river, where fossils of fossil animals (elephant, deer, rhinoceros) and trees were excavated.
The primitive settlement of Horom is located between the "Vardakar villages" of Horom.
 This was a fortress with a cyclopean structure, from where the archeological materials are attributed to BC. 3rd millennium, 12-11th centuries.
Among the famous historical and cultural monuments of Shirak region are Marmashen monastery complex (10th century), Harichavank (7th century), Yereruyk temple (end of 5th century), Lmbatavank (6th-7th centuries), etc., which are eye-catching. fall with their beauty և architectural style.
One of the interesting tourist places of the region can be considered "Tsakkar" located in Hatsik village, which is a big rock and has a hole.
  Pagan people still believed that those who passed through that stone would receive eternal happiness.
 The village of Sarnaghbyur is also known, which, in addition to a number of churches, attracts more with the place of pilgrimage "St. Gregory the Illuminator".
  It is a large cave, inside which there is an abundant natural spring, which the people consider healing.
Urban and architectural monuments form a complete complex of recreational resources in the second city of the republic, Gyumri.
 It includes both old (200 և older) and new buildings.
 Some of them are more prominent in some districts of Gyumri (for example, "Slabodka" or Gyumri, which stands out with its unique architectural structures, completing the "Kumayri" reserve-museum), "Astvatsatsin" or "Yotverk", "Amenaprkich", "St. Nshan "և other churches, Av. Isahakyan, Hovh. The house-museums of Shiraz, the Dzitoghtsyans, etc., as well as the newly built building of the municipality, the numerous statues, which are beautiful architectural monuments.
  All this creates serious preconditions to make Gyumri one of the places of international tourism, where the new develops day by day with the old, never losing the image of the city օրինակ the originality.
The above-mentioned recreational natural-man-made monuments are a powerful precondition for the development of cognitive forms of international tourism in Shirak region.
 Cultural cognitive tourism in the region is aimed at combining with sports, and more specifically with pedestrian tourism, as most of the spectacular cultural monuments are located in inaccessible or mountainous places, where it is more interesting to walk.
Literature 1. Avanesyan A., Malkhasyan E., Nazaretyan S., The monuments of the geological language of Armenia, Yerevan, 2000.
2. Grigoryan A., Recreation ը The recreational potential of Shirak region, Materials of the Republican Scientific Session, volume 2, Gyumri, 2009, pp. 330-332.
3. Martirosyan L., Recreational geography, Vanadzor, 2014.
4. Martirosyan L., Recreational resources of Aragats massif և their assessment, GSPI Scientific Bulletin, № 1, volume A, Gyumri, 2013, pp.125-132.
5. Specially Protected Areas and Forests of Armenia, WFF Armenia, Yerevan, 2012.
6. Official website of Shirak Marzpetaran ․ www.shirak.gov.am.
7. "Creation of" Lake Arpi "National Park", official website of WFF-Armenia ․ http.
//wwf.panda.org/en/about_wwf/our_work/projects_armenia/lake_arpi_national_park
_armenia /.
Do AvetisyanSHIRAKI POTENTIAL OF recreational, tourism NAKHADRYALBanali words, leisure and recreational resource, cognitive walk, panoramic landscape, monument, walk-geghagitakanzbosashrjutyun, alpine skiing, endemic and rare plants ukendaniner, natural monuments, archaeological monuments, pilgrimage.
