CHARACTERISTICS OF YOUNG CHILDREN'S CHOICE OF LIFE STRATEGY AND GENDER POSITIONS TRANSFORMATION.
  Recently, issues related to the psychological characteristics of the sexes have become the subject of active discussion by the public.
  The study of the psychology of women and men is of great importance for the society in general, as it allows to understand the patterns of society զարգացման individual development.
 Due to the dynamic changes taking place in the society, the social perceptions about men and women have changed, and one of the reasons is the transformation of the roles they have taken on.
 The modern world, on the one hand, gives great opportunities for self-realization, on the other hand, forces us to reproduce the roles of man and woman defined by culture during socialization.
The Armenian society is not free from certain value changes either.
  They, of course, also affect the gender views, re-imagining and re-expression of young people, so there is a need to understand how these changes affect the planning of young people's future.
 They are especially interested in their ideas about work, family, general planning for the future, which will allow them to understand what role and significance they give them, what prospects they have in the future, what attitudes they are guided by, what strategy they choose to achieve.
 All this allows us to predict what the economic and cultural development of our country depends on in the future, which is one of the current issues.
Although many theorists have addressed the strategy of life, the concepts of gender, their differentiation, there are very few studies on the relationship between these two areas, both abroad and in our country.
 So I wonder if there is such a connection, if so, how are they manifested, what are the differences in the life orientation of boys and girls, in the choice of lifestyle?
  It is assumed that gender perceptions about the role of a man and a woman determine the peculiarities of choosing a life strategy.
Gender is a sociobiological characteristic in psychology, with the help of which people define the concepts of woman and man, the roles expected from them, expectations, behavior1.
  I think the Armenian society is characterized by a pseudo-standard perception of gender differences.
 We realize ourselves as men and women according to cultural descriptions.
 "Cultural stereotype is a standardized, collective experience inspired by the individual in the process of learning and communication, which helps him to orient himself in life, regulates behavior by appropriate norms and rules.
 Later, the individual, spontaneously, reproduces the positions characteristic of the given social group ”2.
In modern social theory, along with the concept of gender, the concept of gender identity has taken root, which is defined as one's own self-awareness in connection with the cultural definitions and descriptions of masculinity and femininity.
 This notion includes subjective experience, as it implies the incarnation of masculine-feminine traits during interpersonal interactions.
 Gende 1 See Bern Sh., Gender Psychology. Laws of male and female conduct, St. Petersburg, 2008, p. 21.
2 Kon I., Мужчина в меняющемся мире, Москва, 2009, (available at psyfactor.org/lib/male-female.htm).
Racial identity is one of the basic components of social identity.
  Social identity is a part of the concept, it is formed from the consciousness of membership in the social group, from the value-emotional meaning given to it.
By gender identity we always mean self-determination.
 The subjective aspect of gender identity is conditioned by the position of the individual, classifying him / her as a gender group.
 In this case, we are talking about personal gender identity, which presupposes a stable image that is subjectively perceived by an individual.
  The objective aspect of gender identity is due to the public perception of us as a representative of a given group, with codes acceptable in the respective culture.
This is the gender identity attributed to 1.
Ս. Stage by gender identity means behavior that is reinforced or encouraged for that gender in one culture or another, depending on the child's schemes2.
  He develops the theory of gender lenses.
  He considers gender lenses to be the basic tenets of gender that exist in cultural discourse, in social institutions, in people's consciousness.
  According to Bem, these lenses not only give direction to the perception of the world, to the meaning of reality, but also to the formation of the social reality3.
Sh. Bern distinguishes three types of human gender norms: concession, introspection, identification.
  Compromise is a way of obeying social norms when a person does not accept them, but adapts his behavior to avoid punishment.
  In case of introspection, the person fully accepts the gender norms.
  In case of identification, the person repeats the actions of the role models4.
Byrne outlines the four stages of gender identity formation: • Gender identification, when a child ascribes himself or herself to this or that gender; • Gender stability, when a child realizes that gender is permanent; it is impossible to change; • Differentiated imitation - the best girl desire or boy, • Gender self-regulation, when a child is able to regulate his or her own behavior in accordance with gender norms.
Some authors single out the stage of gender intensification when gender differences intensify.
  According to Groter, one of the reasons for sexual intisification is the behavior of the parents. The mother communicates more with the girl, the father with the boy.
 The influence of peers is stronger.
  For example, adolescents begin to express themselves in accordance with gender norms in order to gain the approval of the opposite sex.
  Boys begin to emphasize their masculine features, and girls - feminine.
 Freudians use the role of imitation of emotions in the process of gender identification.
 Proponents of this approach assume that the child is unconsciously imitating the behavior of members of the opposite sex, primarily the parent of the opposite sex, who wants to take his place.
According to social theory, modeling ումը reinforcement in the child depends on the behavioral models of the parents, identification with the images of women և men.
  In general, it is not the gender of the person being imitated that becomes relevant to the child, but the information that the person's behavior corresponds to that gender.
  According to sexual typology, parents encourage masculine behavior in boys and feminine behavior in girls.
According to the theory of cognitive development, the child receives information from the parent about sexual behavior, then begins to understand his gender սեռ irreversibility of sex.
 At first he understands what it means to be a woman, then he decides who he is, and then he adapts his behavior to his ideas.
  Gender identification is considered here as a key aspect of a child's development.
  According to Kohlberg's cognitive theory of gender identity, the development of gender roles depends on cog 1 See Khachatryan N., Gender Social Psychology. textbook, Yerevan, 2007, p. 124.
2 See Ilyin E., Paul and Gender, St. Petersburg, 2010, p. 111.
3 See Khachatryan N., 2007, p. 111.
4 See Ilyin E., 2010, p. 116.
From a developmental point of view, children come to sexual identification before gaining social experience, after which they undergo active socialization1.
The theory of gender schemes is a combination of theories of social learning and cognitive development.
  According to this theory, gender schemes are a set of expectations և beliefs that are attributed to both sexes, affecting the processing and storage of information they perceive.
Ն. Chodorou believes that a child's attitude towards his world is conditioned by the experience of early relationships.
  On the one hand, the child wants to maintain unity with the mother, on the other hand, he feels the possibility of his development by separating from that connection.
  Maternal care at an early age in boys և girls causes certain conscious և unconscious attitudes towards women։ men.
 Sacrifice and care are expected of a woman, just as fear of helplessness is associated with a woman.
 In children's perceptions, the man is associated with the possibilities of idealized characters և personal growth2.
E. In the eight stages of his psychosexual development, Erickson considers the acquisition of identity to be a major problem of adolescence.
 The girl maintains her identity in uncertainty until the next stage of the feeling of intimacy emerges, because a woman's self-knowledge is closely related to the establishment of a close relationship.
 The feeling of intimacy with boys follows the acquisition of identity3.
Ջ. Miller's approach is called a centralized model of relationships, where he develops the following key themes: cultural environment, relationships, ways of personal growth.
 The cultural environment limits women's activity.
 The cultural environment, instead of promoting personal growth, creates fear of establishing relationships.
  Meanwhile, understanding the differences between people is one of the most significant ways of developing a person ուղ interpersonal relationship.
  The main driving force of a woman's life is the desire for communication, reciprocity, which is the basis of her inner Self.
  The core of human relationships is empathy and trust.
 Miller points out that the concept of dependence should be reconsidered.
  Being dependent on others is interpreted as a form of infantile behavior, as addiction is attributed to more women.
  Meanwhile, it should be considered a necessary quality for the development of psychological health and personal growth.
 Considering all this will help to understand more deeply the psychology of a woman4.
Gender role is one of the mechanisms of gender socialization of a person.
  By gender role we mean a certain form of behavior - corresponding to social norms, expectations, attributions, which are accepted and assimilated by the sexes.
  Gender roles are associated with gender stereotypes, which are standardized notions of feminine's masculine behavior և character traits, which in turn can be generalized և wrong.
  Many social psychologists believe that traditional gender roles limit a person's development and lead to social inequality.
 The traditional roles of men և women complement each other և are related to their biological differences.
  Many believe that women are not equal to men in status, pay, social status, or power.
  In this way, the roles of women are limited, they are more often subjected to sexual violence.
The fact that women are valued in society only for their youth, good looks, charm, causes many women to feel inferior, low self-esteem.
Gender stereotypes are found in the roles played by women and men in various fields of activity.
  The first are the roles that appear in the family.
  A woman is important in the role of a housewife իսկ mother, and a man in the role of providing the family financially, achieving professional success.
  The second is the roles that appear in professional activities.
 Women are assigned executive-service activities (education, healthcare, trade, social), and men 1 See Ильин Е., 2010, pp. 127-128.
2 See Chodorou N., Material Production. Psychoanalysis and sociology of gender (available at www.koob.ru/chodorow/motherhood).
3 See Kraig G., Bokum D., Psychology of Development (available at www.koob.ru/kraig_bokum_1/kraig_bokum_psihologia_razvitija).
4 See Фрейдже ,р Р., Фэйдимен Д., Личность.
 Theories, Management, Experiments, 2004.
Activities of instrumental sphere, technique, creative-organizational, management, physical work.
  Third, political activity, where, according to the majority, women have nothing to do.
According to F. James's reinforcement of gender stereotypes contributes to male dominance and women to discrimination.
  In addition, there are new views that traditional gender roles limit not only women but also men.
 They are a source of mental tension.
 Women and men who do not back down, do not accept stereotypes, are subject to public criticism.
  However, it must be admitted that they often distort the image of reality1.
Gender notions are views conditioned by social context, explanations on the status of men աշխ distribution of roles և women և in society.
  Gender perceptions are knowledge of what roles women և men should play in specific social contexts, what their significance is, and what role models they should use in the environment.
 Such knowledge is acquired in the process of communication and interaction with people.
  Gender perceptions are the result of gender ideology in the society2.
 Gender ideology is an agreed system of views կանանց views և on the social status of women սոցիալական men և role content որին to be pursued as members of society3.
 Gender ideology is the maintenance of established models of relationships between the sexes, it is also a mechanism of social organization.
 They consider the ideas according to the types of gender ideology.
  Traditional Tsegalitar notions stand out.
According to egalitarian notions, men and women, as representatives of a given social group, are similar to each other.
 This resemblance also refers to their psychological characteristics, personal characteristics, which are necessary when assuming social roles.
 Therefore, there is no reason to differentiate between women and men, because they are similar and interchangeable.
 Gender differences և existing in society are not biologically justified, but are the result of social construction4.
According to traditional notions, there are differences between men և women որոշ personal characteristics և social roles.. they contradict each other.
 Biological gender differences are transferred to the social sphere.
  Based on this, special roles of men and women are distinguished.
 According to egalitarian gender notions, the statuses and positions of men and women should not be arranged in a hierarchical manner, but should be established in the field of equal rights and opportunities.
  According to traditional notions, men should gain the status of leaders, be dominant in various social organizations, non-governmental organizations.
 Men should occupy high positions, because they, compared to women, are perfect in personal terms.
 According to egalitarian gender notions, the biological characteristics of each sex cannot be the cause of gender inequality.
  In the gender approach, socio-cultural assessments can be made - comments such as changes in the main system.
 According to traditional notions, biological differences between women and men are fundamental, so male dominance is a natural, natural phenomenon5.
Gender bias is a negative attitude towards members of the opposite sex.
  They are attributed to those who violate the traditional role behavior of men and women6.
Based on our goals and objectives, a survey was conducted in February-March 2013.
 The sample was based on several criteria: gender, da 1 See Ильин Е., 2010, page 79.
2 See Gender Psychology, Practicum, 2nd ed. (edited by I. Klecina), St. Petersburg, 2009, p. 318.
3 See ibid., P. 318.
4 See ibid., P. 319.
5 See ibid., Pp. 320-322.
6 See ibid., P. 324.
family status, education, employment.
  100 respondents were included: 50 females, 50 males in the age range of 2035.
Carrying out a research analysis, we came to the conclusion that there are differences between girls' "boys", similarities in gender positions, in the choice of life planning strategy.
The majority of girls have a non-traditional gender position, moreover, unmarried girls, and the majority of boys have a traditional gender position.
Girls and boys use flexible life planning strategies to always be ready for sudden changes.
 Sharp social and economic changes force modern youth not to plan for the future in a clear, regular way, as if there is no confidence in the future, clear prospects for the future, it is better to plan for the coming years or avoid planning altogether, always be ready for sudden changes that cause tension among young people.
  Girls use strategies to live a dignified life, while boys develop strategies for self-improvement, communication with people who share their interests and ideas.
 Girls և boys give value to the family, seeing the family as a means of perpetuating the traditions and preserving the traditions.
  Moreover, it seems that the conscious approach to the family is not so expressed.
 Girls, having a non-traditional gender position, choose the traditional family strategy.
  Such contradictions cause internal conflicts among girls.
Considering the interdependence of gender strategies in life strategy, it was concluded that people with egalitarian gender perceptions are more likely to have a strategy of being ready for sudden life changes.
  People with non-traditional և traditional gender biases have strategies for having a clear life plan and leisure strategies at work.
  People with egalitarian gender prejudices are dominated by strategies for flexible planning of the future, communication at work, self-improvement.
Angela Afyan YOUNG CHOICE OF LIFE STRATEGY CHANGE AND GENDER POSITIONS CHARACTERISTICS: keywords
