THE CONCEPTS OF "MOTHER" AND "GRANDMOTHER" IN FETHIYE CHETIN'S CREATION "GREAT MOTHER" The words expressing emotional connections are the main components of the basic concepts, which are stable և stand out in the verbal environment with the variety of connectivity.
In this article, we have explored the possibilities of motherhood and lexical-semantic peculiarities in Fethiye Cetin's "My Grandmother", finding out the peculiarities of the linguistic thinking of the people who lived through the genocide, which is one of the key issues in the theory of linguistic relativity.
Գ. In "Philosophy և Language" Brutyan mentions that it is not the features of language, language models that determine the behavior of people, but those who use those linguistic units, who consciously influence the behavior of others through them, control that behavior1.
Etymologically, the word mother is a native Armenian word that comes from the Indo-European proto-language mևtē'r dz, corresponds to the Sanskrit mātar, Persian mādar, Latin māter dz.
It consists of mother, mother, motherhood, aunt, capital, godmother, stepmother, child mother, stepmother, godmother, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law
  From a semantic point of view, it is a multifaceted word: 1. The parent woman for the children.
 2. A woman who has or has a child.
 3. An animal that brought a baby.
 4. The only female Persian bee that lays eggs.
 5. What causes something?
 6. A woman who cares for others.
 7. Main, basic.
 8. Native, patriotic.
 9. Homeland.
 10. General և etc. 3.
Etymologically, the word grandmother is a natural word that is specific to both Indo-European and non-Indo-European language groups.
  Corresponds to Sanskrit tatá, Albanian tat, Serbian tata.
 From this arose the words grandmother (grandmother, mother), grandmother, grandmother, which are mostly typical of children's language, the words grandmother (uncle's wife), grandmothers (midwife).
It has a multifaceted word: 1. Father or mother, grandmother.
 2. An old woman, an old woman.
 3. Tatmer, midwife 4.
In Fethiye Cetin's "My Grandmother", the linguistic and cultural analysis of the notions of motherhood reveals the child-like features of the people who survived the genocide, which appear in certain nuances5.
The word mother comes with a wide range of connections. 1. connects to the passive verb-subject / subject, acquiring unique, national features: "My grandmother died", "My mother was a widow at the age of twenty-four", "Was it necessary to get married", "After my father's death my mother և "That night we stayed at my grandparents' house. "My mother, me, my sister and brother," "My mother was Iskuhi."
"My mother ս my aunt Zehra almost threw them down the stairs."
  In the sentence "My mother was trying to force me to feed", the connection between "dziparaga + nodogeli" appeared to have a non-participatory value: to force-feed, in which the Armenian mortal control over the child is observed.
 Let us bring other examples: "Twice a year my mother-in-law emptied the chest", "My mother, who in her heart wanted to do it very much, wore it 1 See Brutyan G., Philosophy և Language, Yerevan, 1972, p. 100.
2 See H. Acharyan, Armenian Radical Dictionary, Yerevan, 1926.
3 See Aghayan E., Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1976.
4 See H. Acharyan, Armenian Radical Dictionary, Yerevan, 1926.
5 See Chetine F., My Grandmother, Yerevan, 2013 (henceforth all original citations will be made from this source).
"They used to look in the mirror, brush their hair, and sometimes throw their hair around their necks like foreign filmmakers." "They made my mother go a little faster," "My father and mother, who were eagerly waiting for me to see your uncle instead." They were disappointed, "" My mother left us at the age of fifty-nine, a young man like my uncle. "
Verb-footnotes related to the mother concept can express a number of circumstances. Armenian woman's respect for the head of the house - "My mother, except for my grandfather, smoked for everyone", b. 1915 The fact of deportation - "My mother could have left us and gone", "Among the deportees were Heranush, her mother and two brothers", c. Memories of the genocide years - "Mothers, grandmothers, children, trembling, trembling", "My mother, aunts, brother, sister, we all loved to sing", "My mother, father, brother are in America".
  As we can see, the result of the migration of the people subjected to the genocide is seen, d. The desire of the people who lived through the horrors of the genocide to live - "My mother did not want us to fall behind in exile", e. Forced to forget one's own roots, but never to erase it from memory - "My mother-in-law was also a converted Armenian", "It became clear that our mother is Armenian".
The verb-footnotes attributed to the mother concept are mainly expressed in the prepositional present-imperfect past tense forms, the first of which expresses an action performed before the present tense, completed, and the second - an action in progress in the past tense1.
  The exception is the sentence "My mother also danced a lot, but after those events she never danced again", where the verb-footnote was used in the past tense in the sense of the present tense. The language, mentality and behavior of the people who lived through the Genocide have completely changed.
The concept of mother was used as a subordinate function, complementing the verb to shout, such as "Lunch time ended with my mother shouting, muttering, rubbing her hand on the floor."
The connection of the word Tat to the verb / subjunctive / subjunctive is also characterized by unique, national features. "My grandmother avoided questions from the beginning", "My grandmother had problems with her eyes", "My grandmother had a very bright memory", "One day her grandmother told her" The Sister "while putting her to sleep", "My grandmother taught her grandchildren lessons", "My grandmother made their mistakes" "My grandmother was very old," and my grandmother shook her head, saying: "We were ridiculed by the puppies," "My grandmother was very serious," "My grandmother is in the coffin," "My grandmother could have been so motionless and helpless lying in the coffin."
The footnotes attributed to the concept of grandmother express the following circumstances: a. The close connection between the grandmother's anger and a certain address to her husband, in which there are aspirations to insult and rebuke. The concept of grandfather is described in the third, by measuring the environment2, such as: "When my grandmother was angry with my grandfather, this is how he used to say: "Muslim!"
  It is noticed here that the word Muslim describing the Turks is used as an insult. Such cries are repeated many times in the work, such as "He was in Tatsas, O Muslim", b. The tragedy of the genocide - "After the death of Captain Hussein, my grandmother lived even harder days", c. Emphasized elements of national discrimination, which were largely manifested in the Turkish reality - "Your grandmother was very angry at that word (" the addition of the converts "is on our side), d. To Armenian grandmothers, typical cleanliness, tolerance, patience, great love for grandchildren - "My grandmother, who loved to entertain, walk, eat, feed, refused invitations to houses that were not clean," "My grandmother was always a guardian angel." "My grandmother patiently prepared the only food I wanted at sea"
2 See Santoyan M., Measurements of Epic Image Creation, Vanadzor, 1994, p. 40.
e. Grandmothers' vigilance in Armenian homes - "My grandparents were prayer-loving, ardent, religious-people", "But my grandmothers did not give in to religious fanaticism and illogicality", f. The purity and kindness attributed to the concept of grandmother as an inseparable part of the Armenian reality - "My grandmother used to cook our favorite four with eggs, sausage, honey", "My grandmother loved cleanliness", "My grandmother, even if she stayed asleep until morning, reached out to those in need », Է. The language culture of the Armenians who fled the genocide - "My grandmother sang in Turkish".
The notion of a grandmother, characterized in the first instance by the verb-footnotes attributed to her, in the second instance is characterized by the measurement of her native environment1, such as "My mother, to describe my grandmother's agility and diligence, nicknamed her" storm khoja ".
 In the expressions "My grandmother used to play with eighteen in those games" very much, "In the moments of hunger my grandmother tried to satisfy my grandfather" on the one hand, the word "grandmother" appears in the sense of a grandmother, which is a reality typical of the Armenian reality.
The word "grandmother" also appears as a signifier, descriptive. "That woman was my grandmother," "Aunt Seher was also our grandmother."
The notions of mother-in-law in both "My Grandmother" are characterized by self-determination, just as in the sentence "She encouraged my mother-in-law in the atmosphere of a conservative, oppressive village" mother was described as a widow-determiner.
2. The words "mother", used in speech as a function of secondary members, appear as ի.a. "Despite the intolerance of my working mother, three's children born to each other, the gentleness of my aunt Zehra, my grandparents, and the patience made this house attractive to me," "My father's mother's married life" "The Kataryans liked Hovhannes, the eldest daughter of their neighbor Arzumanyans, Iskuhi, who was his mother's namesake," "My mother, my aunts' votes were quite good," "My grandmother closed the road to the morgue," . The use of the word muhtad in such a verbal environment substantiates the fact of the forcible conversion of Armenians.
"Morse jumped up in the name of Hurricane Khoja", "We hid Morsmah from my grandmother", "We went to New Jersey to visit the graves of my grandmother's father".
 In the sentence "Heranush, who clung to her mother's skirt, was frightened on the one hand", the notion of mother appeared as part of the phrase unit.
The concept of mother is, as a rule, the bearer of abstract concepts, except for the sentence "There were more items of my mother's dowry".
The word natat has the same connection. "Making fun of my grandparents and grandparents, he used to present these arguments with a funny and witty egg", "We also had a glass of grandma 's patience", "Grandma' s comment was short and clear", He had something, "" Let him go and kiss Grandpa, Grandma's hands, "" My grandmother wanted to know more about the truth than finding her family. "
 "It is the fairy tale of the great-grandmother", "My grandmother's insult was not over yet", "Several months have passed since my grandmother's death", "One day after my grandmother's death, I met Hasan's shop again".
In this line, too, the expression "silk embroiderer, lace headscarf" was used as a relic of the girl's dowry: "Grandmother's silk embroiderer, lace headscarf, the hand-woven bath of Aunt Marge" was used.
The word "grandma" in the gender syllable also expresses the meaning of an action, which in grammar is called a transformed subject, such as "Seeing my grandmother clapping, this time she did not wait for anyone's request", " I found his relatives in America. "
  This grammatical meaning continues as well: prepared verb.
1 Santoyan M., page 40.
The concept of grandmother was especially characterized by the paternal determinant, which characterizes one of the national features of the Armenians of Armenia. Are Armenians more often use the mother determiner? "What the paternal grandmother said came true", "The paternal grandmother told the others", "The paternal grandmother continued", etc.
 In both "Grandmother" the phrase "maternal grandmother" was used in the sentence "Heranush's maternal grandmother who said" we will all die "," my aunt could not survive on the way to death ".
b. A revealing unit that allegedly reveals the essence of the revelation, such as "Iskuhi's mother, Taguhi, was the village healer", "Within the family, her mother was called Iskuhi".
"Heranush's mother, Iskuhi, who lived through the plague of exile told by her mother-in-law at the age of nine, should have predicted it based on her childhood experience," "The rest, grandmothers, grandchildren, daughters, daughters-in-law, had died."
c. Problem: as a person directly or indirectly involved in the action.
Thus, the mother word directly referred to the direct task of carrying the action: "I cast my vote saying I want my mother," "The policeman will kill his mother and older sister," "We asked my mother to wear the ring," "If she smoked, she would give her time to put out her cigarette, to lose track of it," "They told their mother in front of all the guests," "I talked to my mother later." "Some people fell in love with my mother", "He was not satisfied with helping his mother with household chores", "He did not think about his mother at all", "Heranush's moment of being taken away from his mother".the latter is characteristic of genocide.
The word "grandmother" is a function of the problem, as if a person is directly or indirectly involved in the action. The word "grandmother" was used directly to describe the action directly: . "Seher Chavush", where the environment uses the word Chavush to describe the word "grandmother".
 "They were going to bathe my grandmother here, they were going to put on a blanket," "According to these documents, my grandfather's aunt's children, one of whom was married at the age of fifteen, the other at the age of sixteen," "The maid's word offended my grandmother very much." to "give to my grandmother", "After watering the handkerchief, he hugged his grandmother", "Everyone in the funeral respected my grandmother very much", "The solution to this problem fell directly on my grandmother", with the function of the exception problem, " with the function of the problem: "I had such a deep feeling of gratitude towards my grandmother", with the function of the comparison, in the sentences "My mother-in-law was like your grandmother".
 Communication problems are a function of the communication problem. "We never talked to my grandmother again", "It took time to get a chance to talk to my grandmother again", with the function of the problem of unity. "When I was alone with my grandmother, I was playing with my soul", "I could not be alone at home with my grandmother", "They were locked in the room with my grandmother, they were talking".
d. The notions of mother-in-law have the function of an exclamation point, especially in direct words, in conjunction with other members of the sentence. "Mom, look where she came from," "Sister Pisa, Grandma," "Grandma, tell us about Sister Pisa," "Sister Pisa, tell me, dear. "Grandma," "Isn't lying a sin, Grandma?" I kissed her and said, "Grandma," "What do you say, Grandma?", "Okay, Grandma, why?" "Did you go to America?" "Grandma, did you have coffee?" "Why didn't you go, Grandma?"
In fact, the points attributed to the notions of motherhood express a number of circumstances that are directly related to the genocide.
Karine Diloyan THE CONCEPTS OF "MOTHER" AND "GRANDMOTHER" IN FETHIYE CHETIN'S CREATION "GREAT MOTHER" Keywords: concept, mother, grandmother, linguistic-cultural, lexical-semantic, genocide, connectivity.
