Matter the origin of the problem Aristotelian "nothing" idea as a material REALITY GOYABANAKANMEKNAKET the existing ontological feasibility problem was for philosophy and continue to be fundamental and fundamentally unsolvable as long as is arising and disappearing has not been mekmiasnakan reason for all beings, which would explain the reality and the dialectic of the mutual passage of the existence and destruction of the things in question.
 The basis of the controversy over the problem of the beginning of the world lies in the early past, when man first attempted to uncover the possible ontological foundations in the depths of the emergence of the surrounding world, the Tree of Life.
 Opinions about the beginning of the material world have always been different and contradictory.
  They have been enriched by the active and fruitful activities of a number of thinkers during the course of historical development, but have been able to withstand the fierce challenge of domination to the maximum two main points of view [1].
According to the first view, which is conventionally called "cosmogonism" in the philosophy of science, the material world did not exist forever, but arose at a specific moment in the universe.
It can be said that the moment of origin is a zero point of time, a moment before which there was neither the material world, nor space, nor time.
Contrary to this view, following "anti-cosmogonism", a number of other thinkers believed that objective reality existed forever, did not arise in reality in a specific period of time.
  Having fully understood the vast amount of information contained in the scope of such an ontological problem, the issue of the origin of matter will be discussed in the following essay from the position of cosmogony, in particular, the Greek philosopher Aristotle, who accepted the emerging nature of the world.
The problem receives a rather in-depth and extensive interpretation thanks to Aristotle, who, trying to overcome the dualistic approach to the Platonic ideal ևmaterial reality, after long deliberations on the starting point of material geography, singled out two main reasons for this process: the emergence of faucet change.
  In general, by saying "emergence" Aristotle had a fundamentally new subject or quality.
 In this sense, the emergence of an object or a whole new quality arose in one case from absolutely "nothing" 1, when the emerging spatial-temporal state was preceded by a pre-existing state of non-existence from which things and objects arise directly, in the other case it considered a "certain" emergence of qualitative change. in the context where we are dealing with the emergence in a certain narrow sense, which is based on the attributive property of the object to be formed from a material basis, as well as to obtain a new quality from that same basis.
  In the first case we are talking about a simple origin, and in the second case we are talking about the so-called "certain" origin և qualitative change, which are often identified with Aristotle as two private manifestations of the same process.
The problem of the origin of matter առաջ In order to make the Aristotelian idea of ​​"nothing" more comprehensible, it is acceptable to begin the contemplation of the problem by discussing "possible origin" or "qualitative change" from the possible ways of origin.
Aristotle is used in the context of explaining the existence of a certain origin as a possible way to actualize the origin of the origin, as an independent method ուր next to the qualitative change, but with a significant difference ․. In the case of a simple occurrence, the originator simply appears from "nothing", and in the case of a certain occurrence, the originator becomes or turns into "something".
 Such an assertion was probably based on Parmenides' statement that "there are two kinds of matter, substance and non-substance."
 Here we are talking about the dialectic of the subject becoming its own opposition, where the material not only changes qualitatively, becomes a new material, but also becomes the basis for the destruction of the material that makes new quality possible.
  Here, for example, the process of turning some substance into fire can serve, where not only fire "appears", but also "destroys" the substance that was turned into fire.
  By "certain origin", Aristotle meant the emergence of a new material materially based on a qualitatively different basis, which is often accompanied by the destruction of the material that serves as the basis for a certain origin. (Greek ὐ: οὐσία) by the negative form of the notion, as a possible way անալու the beginning մատ of material reality, of the absolute non-existence և arising from the basis of emptiness։.
 (See Aristotle. Metaphysics, Composition in Four Volumes, Volume 3, Moscow, 1981, p. 389).
as the paper burns անում when it turns into fire.
 However, in the midst of a certain "qualitative change" there are definitely no clear boundaries, which allow us to speak of them as two separate processes, because, as it will become clear in the following narration, they are often identified, appear as similar processes that make the same process possible.
According to the Aristotelian definition of qualitative change, it occurs with the appearance of a new object or a new quality of an already existing object.
  To clarify this process, Aristotle introduces the notion of "pre-origin", "pre-foundation" or, more often, "substance", with which he tries to define the idea of ​​a precondition, a direct precondition for changes following material reality.
  In contrast to emergence, where we are dealing with a non-materialized premise, in which the origin can in principle be realized on an empty basis, in the case of a qualitative change, the process that makes possible the occurrence takes place at the materialized beginning. There are many (two or more) primordial manifestations or substances. because by "qualitative change" Aristotle meant, first of all, the arrangement of possible combinations of a number of substances, resulting in the formation of either a fundamentally new object or a new quality, which differs significantly from the previous qualitative description of the object.
 In this sense, the Aristotelian-quality change has certain similarities in the context of comparison with the "certain" origin, as in both cases it is about obtaining a new qualitative description of the subject.
In the problem of the emergence of material reality, the Aristotelian idea of ​​"nothingness" finds its unique manifestation especially in the problem of actualization of simple origin, where, in contrast to the possible ways of qualitative change of matter - a certain emergence, the idea of ​​"absolute non-existence" underlies the emergence of material reality.
 In general, the concept of "simple" Aristotle uses two main meanings for its origin. 2 The concept of "substance" in Aristotle's "Metaphysics" simultaneously appears in two senses as "essence" (Latin: "essentia", Greek: "ο հունσία")) "beginning" (Latin: "substantia", Greek: ὑπόστᾰσις)), see Zalta NE, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, April 2016 edition, Aristotle's Metaphysics).
as the original, the original in each category of existence և as a general, unifying sense.
  In the first case, the ontological basis of the existing being is "nothing", because the initial state of all existing beings, according to the simple origin, is nothingness.
  By "simple" in the second sense, we must mean what is common to all that exists.
 In this case, the existence of objects is common to the possibilities that necessarily precede the emergence, because the object must first exist in the possibility, then be realized only in objective reality.
There is a need to ask a few questions related to the problem. Does what exists in the possibility, to which nothing coincides in reality, endow it with any property, does it have a location or a qualitative characteristic?
  From the point of view of clarifying the problem, the above-mentioned questions are essential, because if in the case of a simple occurrence the object is based on "nothing", և at the same time the object spatially precedes the existence of possibility, then a number of incompatible factors can be seen.
 According to the simple origin, the existing is preceded in terms of space-time by "nothingness", which is a unique state of absolute non-existence, from which things and objects derive directly.
 But the existing, as we have already found out, at the same time exists in the pre-possibility, from which only then it can emerge in reality as an independent element.
Consequently, it turns out that what exists in reality in spatio-temporal terms is simultaneously preceded by "what exists in opportunity" and "absolute nothingness".
To clarify the problem, let's do the following experiment.
 If we accept that the existing exists in the possibility, then it is separate from the existing, which itself exists in reality.
In this sense, it turns out that what exists in opportunity, which does not exist in self-reality, in turn arose from nothing, because what has existence must necessarily arise, whether it exists in reality or in possibility 3.
  And if we exclude the possibility, the inevitability of the emergence of the Existent from nothing 3 is a starting premise for every author of cosmogony, since the latter, according to the key idea of ​​cosmogony, accepts the possibility of the world emerging at a particular moment of domination.
  In this sense, Aristotle does not discuss the primordial nature of the existing, whether it exists as a possibility or as a fact, as a basis for further reflection.
  (See Barseghyan A., Lessons in Philosophy. Ontological Problems, Yerevan, 2008, p. 240).
the primordial nature, then the two above-mentioned phenomena are identical, because otherwise we fall into a vicious and infinite circle, where before the existing in the realm there is also the one existing in the possibility, which in turn is preceded by another existence in the possibility, which makes possible the next possibility. To the one that exists in it.
It turns out that the only possible solution to avoid contradiction is to accept the possibility of being identical in the possibility of Aristotelian "nothing"։.
 The same problem can be found even in modern theories on the problem of the formation of matter, many of which try to offer final, more rational solutions to this or that problem of the ontological problems of modern physics.
It is worth mentioning the theory of Trayon, one of the quantum mechanics of modern physics, according to which the universe can have originated from "Nothing" without violating one of the basic principles of the first nature of thermodynamics - the law of conservation of energy.
 It should be noted that by saying "Nothing" Trayon meant the origin of the quantum oscillation of the vacuum.
 According to quantum field theory, the vacuum between interacting particles is not just empty space.
  Quantum vacuum fluctuations in quantum mechanics are temporary fluctuations in the amount of energy at any point in space, resulting in a permanent vacuum that destroys virtual particles.
  However, the generated particles survive for a very short time within the principle of Heisenbergianism, without violating the law of conservation of energy.
  The higher the oscillation energy, the shorter the particle formation time.
  Therefore, if the total energy of the entire universe is exactly zero, the resulting particle can survive much longer without violating Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Taking into account the fact that the positive energy of matter is compensated by the negative energy of gravity, as a result the total energy of the universe becomes zero.
  From this we can conclude that the universe with zero total energy can occur without violating the law of conservation of energy from "Nothing".
 The major problem with this theory is that quantum variations of the vacuum suggest that a vacuum space preceded the universe, where all the known laws of physics were at work.
 If we go back to that assumption, we must prove that the state before the universe is no longer "nothing" but "something", which in turn contradicts the "standard model of the Big Bang", according to which did not exist before the Big Bang. no space, no energy, no matter, no time. [6]
The analogy made by the example of Trayon's theory allows us to see quite clearly the idea of ​​"Nothing" in the context of ancient-modern theories that address the problem of the formation of matter.
  Even the example of modern ontological theory of physics makes it clear that the construction of an ontological picture of the material world on an absolutely empty basis necessarily raises a number of obstacles, among which it is noteworthy to violate the particular case of Aristotle's logical "Rule of Identity".
 According to the rule of logical Identity, each concept must be applied in a specific sense, [7] but Aristotle's "Nothing", being identical with the potential of existence, ceases to be "nothing" in the absolute sense, as a result of which the new understanding of the concept begins to differ from the previous meaning.
  In fact, as a result of the qualitative change of the totality of the properties fixed in the scope of the notion of "nothing", Aristotle loses the possibility of deriving material reality from an absolutely empty base, which, in a sense, served the capitalist thinker. They could be blamed for an unsuccessful attempt to construct a material reality on an absolutely "idealistic" basis.
Thus, in general, it should be noted that the Aristotelian idea of ​​"nothing" as an ontological starting point for the formation of matter cannot be unequivocally conceived in its absolute sense, because in the second sense of the possibility of "simple origin" existence is identical to the original state of existence. It turns out that Aristotle ascribes to "nothing" the potential of existence, by which the emergence of an object from nothing or, in other words, the simple emergence.
  Discussing the idea of ​​"nothing" in the context of the problem of the formation of matter, it becomes clear that Aristotle committed a particular case of violation of the rule of logic in the form of the concept of "nothing", which was not applied in a specific sense. .
LITERATURE [2] Delius C., Gatzmeier M., Sertcan D., The Story of Philosophy.
 From Antiquity to theof Elea, Parmenides' Poem, Reality, URL.
 http:
//www.iep.utm.edu/parmenid/ (Accessed.
URL.
 https:
//plato.stanford.edu/ (Accessed.
 08.06.2017). [7] Chase BW, The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002, Aristotle.
Logic, Laws of thought, URL.
 http:
//www.iep.utm.edu/aris-log/#H6 (Accessed.
 16.07.2017) .Akelyan IN THE PROBLEM OF THE PROMOTION OF MATTER ARISTOTLE'S IDEAS OF "NOTHING" AS MATERIAL OF MATERIAL REALITY Keywords: nothing, quality, matter
