THE PROBLEM OF LOVE - EROS AND GENERATION OF OLDINGTON "THE DEATH OF THE HERO" IN EVERYTHING's novels on the theme of the "lost generation" Love-eros has found its expression in different ways.
 This article addresses this issue with the example of the novel The Death of a Hero, in particular the George-Elizabeth couple.
 The latter become a means of depicting the 1910s. Sexual and psychological problems rooted in English society.
The author repeatedly points out the problem of sexuality specific to the generation of George իզ Elizabeth, the dissatisfaction of the youth of that generation with the old moral principles, the individual aspirations not to transform them, but to completely eliminate them and create new perceptions of love, freedom and morality.
  Hence, there is a demand-program to make a "sexual revolution" 2 against the Victorian era.
It is obvious that their plan to carry out a sexual revolution directly rejected the whole system of prohibitions put forward by the society, which had a religious and legal basis.
  The "free love" formula, as an alternative, became, in fact, one of the urgent problems of the time, the solution of which was to be practically given by the generation of George և Elizabeth3.
The study of the sexual problem of a man (in this case, George) or a woman shows the role of the patriarchal views of the society. "Thousands of decent people despise a woman if they suspect or are convinced that she enjoys intimacy with a man, even to a minimal extent.
 "Then they still wonder why women are quarrelsome, forever dissatisfied with everything," says the narrator.
 It turns out that this circumstance is one of the reasons for a woman's eternal dissatisfaction and dissatisfaction5.
As we see, the fateful choice of the past, "burn with passion or get married", has already exhausted itself during the war generation. Now both a woman and a man could live a full life without getting married and without having children, but emancipation also raises another circumstance, that is, everyone could choose a lover or mistress. "If I want to have more lovers, then I will, և if he wants to connect with another woman, please" 6.
 In other words, this is a modern measure of resettlement, which is more preferable than "deception, domestic violence, covert corruption and immorality", which, according to the narrator, were a series of premature problems.
 It is another question to what extent George բան Elizabeth's "intelligence" keeps them from immorality.
Of course, there is a problem in this dimension - the issue of infidelity, which, in fact, shows the artificiality and unpromisingness of the proposed dimension.
  "If you love a man," Elizabeth proves, "it does not mean that you are not attracted to others. 2 In fact, the so-called 'sexual revolution' implies some radical changes in society's sexual life, resulting in sexual values, accepted norms, sexual relations, etc. They will undergo transformations.
3 During and after the war, Freud used the method of psychoanalysis to influence Havlock Ellis' plan for a "sexual revolution."
 George, Elizabeth, why not him և The unrestrained, instinctive sexual instinct that discouraged Fanny "was shrouded in Freudianism, in the theory of Havlock Ellis."
 See Aldington R., Death of a hero, page 13.
4 See Aldington R., Death of a hero, p.
5 In this respect, Elizabeth and Georgina find themselves in two different burdens, ignoring the stereotype of Elizabeth and obeying Georgina.
6 See Aldington R., Death of a hero, p. 154.
can… If the woman is free, կան have no children, who needs artificial fidelity, forced fidelity?
 As soon as you are forced to make a promise of fidelity, as soon as you have to make an effort to maintain that fidelity, the relationship immediately becomes false. ”1
  Interestingly, the physical disloyalty of these new perceptions is not terrible, it is more terrible when people cheat, deceive, deceive.
In fact, no matter how reasonable this resolution may seem to George or Elizabeth, it will soon cross the line of timelessness. It is based on the illusion of self-deception, the internal adaptation to that psychological mechanism does not take place. "He could not help but admit that he would not like Elizabeth to 'connect' with anyone, by the way, 'Elizabeth would not be so happy if George dared to' connect 'with anyone else."
 Experience shows that this kind of freedom Elizabeth defined only for herself, never for George.
  When the time comes and George calmly reconciles with the existence of the Redgie-Elizabeth romance, even if he is not in the past for the latter, then the program is successful, but when it is his turn to accept the George-Fann relationship, the picture changes completely.
It is obvious that there is a problem of not communicating with the art of love, which creates imperfection between a woman and a man. "Love is an art, not a primitive art, which almost everyone, and especially the" polite "English, to their own detriment, completely despises."
The fact is that ignoring the real feeling and the Victorian family model, which the writer describes as "the embodiment of cruelty and suffering", and striving for "free love", they "establish a new dictatorship, the dictatorship of free love", which becomes a reason for a new escape. (an escape from the ignorance and cult of the family, from innumerable children, which, in their understanding, deeply makes a person unhappy) and a reason to seek a new relationship.
 In essence, they shy away from relationship responsibility, fidelity, permanent attachment (such as the George-Elizabeth relationship) and move on to temporary enjoyment (George to Fanny, Elizabeth to Radge and others), which is beyond the formula of cohabitation to a new relationship at the same time. It is the precursor (the George-Fanny connection was not formed even temporarily), because this new beginning is the result of a new escape.
 Evidence of this is the following thought of the narrator. "Do not keep a mistress out of fear of falling behind."
 This is how George behaves, turning to "comfort" Fanny.
From the moment of formation, the "main program of perfect relations between the sexes" (formed and adopted by the characters) is incomplete, containing many elements of lies, dishonesty and sincerity, which sooner or later lead to a psychological rupture.
As we notice, "innovation" and "revolution" lead to the following problem. "George և Elizabeth's generation solved sexual issues in a very straightforward, very general and indisputable way, it was their mistake.
  Indeed, they allowed themselves to be misled by social-reformist nonsense. ”5
  In other words, the heroes, possessing the "delusion of a false revolution", faced the "dangerous" side. They advocated the destruction of instinctual diversity, but with the intention of contributing to the development of the human species and the elimination of war.
The fact is that the war generation simply separated the sexual life from the instinct of the generation to continue.
 Generation is the result of sexual intercourse, so, being separated from the latter, it is viewed in the context of pure pleasure.
Evidence of this is the recklessness of George's "abstract ideas." "He loved ideas to the point of obscenity!"
 It was enough to give him some new idea և he flew away, catching it skillfully and happily, like a sea urchin in a zoo, a fish thrown by a guard ”6.
1 See Aldington R., Death of a hero, p. 154.
2 In the same place.
3 Ibid., Pp. 143-144.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., P.
6 See Aldington R., Death of a hero, p. 142.
In our understanding, the violation of love-eros leads to the prevention of generational continuity, the rejection of the continuity of the gene, which is presented in three aspects of expression: physiological, psychological and social.
Using social-reformist values, George does not substantiate his ideology of saving the human species, protecting women's rights, avoiding war by preventing births by analyzing any issue, evaluating it from the point of view of "us" or humanity.
 This is what prevents the realization that illegal marriage, illegal childbirth first of all becomes a basis for the psychology of that generation (after all, this problem was first of all the problems of their two selves, their selves).
  In fact, the psychological side is aggravated by the heroes themselves, with wrong behavior and lack of independent judgments.
  In this respect, it is not accidental that the author thinks that "having a thoughtless և having a child too early means poisoning your joy caused by sensual pleasure" 1.
  This fully reflects the psychology of George և Elizabeth. Both are reluctant to leave the realm of sensual pleasure, to enter the realm of the family model, or to combine, so the rejection of adoption leads to the elimination of the family image.
In addition to psychological instability in preventing generational instability, there is also the factor of social instability.
 In this regard, both George and Elizabeth showed a clear approach to the problem. They are both not in a good financial position, therefore, "they should not have children" 2, of course, this fact did not bother them much, taking into account the same desire to not have children, nevertheless, they became one of the first to break the accepted stereotype. "" Marriage "means" beloved child "exactly nine months after the wedding" 3, the model of marriage automatically changes. Why get married, if there will be no children, as such a full family will not be formed.
  It is noteworthy that in the case of George և Elizabeth, thought overcomes emotion. "They discussed everything in detail before going to bed together."
 That is, first the thought, then only the physical intimacy.
 With this type of thinking, the new generation is completely different from the previous one.
  For one thing, this generation tries to live thoughtfully, not giving in to its own instincts, social laws and customs, which have many flaws.
  A vivid example of this is George's parents. Isabella, following the expression she heard as a child that it is the duty of every girl to use a man's passion as a means of enrichment, is driven to marriage with a mercenary expectation.
  Augustine is driven by a carnal desire to marry, but "he did not want to have children, Isabella did not want to either", as a result of which both "lose", disrupting not only themselves, but also their continuing generational destiny.
 In this regard, it is appropriate to mention the following thought of the narrator. "Sex life is distorted, the man is disappointed, the woman is disgusted, in addition, you have given birth to a child, whom you can not take care of properly" 5.
In addition to social and psychological problems, the physiological problem is definitely interesting, when both sexes move with the taboo of destroying continuity with an inner motivation.
  During the examination of Aldington's novels we encounter this problem more than once, the manifestation of which varies in different parts of time (we mean the period preceding the World - MS).
 In this case, the taboo set by the heroes, in our opinion, has no serious and reasonable grounds to turn it into a taboo. Elizabeth does not want to "use her body for childbearing", which is undesirable for her 1 See ibid., P. 143.
 The above-mentioned thought has a personal motive. We encounter this idea in the author և's correspondence. See Aldinton R., An Autobiography in Letters, Edited by Norman T. Gates, The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1992, available at https.
//goo.gl/qaTUiT, available on 22.02.2015.
2 In this sense, the author makes an interesting observation. "Since the population of England is about three times the size of the English population, I tend to think that George's Elizabeth should be considered national heroes in this case" [Aldington R., Death of a hero, p. 143].
 The basis of the author's concern, of course, is understandable, connected with subjective facts, with the impossibility of one's own existence in the same country, which is also presented in the novel in many ways.
 As for the encouragement of the heroes' desire not to continue, it is more an expression of irony, which is based on pain and bitterness connected with the "loss" of one's own country.
4 In the same place.
5 In the same place.
George is opposed to adoption, driven by insurmountable psychological feelings, which kills even the slightest desire to continue physiologically.
 Freudnes connects the circumstance with homosexuality, noting that homosexuals, whose sexual life has deviated from the normal course, refuse to have a generation; ական their sexual desire arises only towards a member of the same sex2.
  In the case of heroes, however, in our understanding, there is a factor of rejection of the ideology and principles of imperialism (on another occasion we talked about the heroes not to become slaves of imperialism from childhood).
 According to Wilhelm Reich, the aggressive imperialists categorically demanded that the role of women be limited to the role of a childbirth machine.
This meant that sexual pleasure should not prevent procreation.
 This contradiction between sexual "adoption" was applicable only in an authoritarian society3.
 Reich himself believes that "a woman should not only give birth, but also a sexual opponent" 4.
It is undeniable that the sequence of love and suffering in the corridor of love creates an endless chain in the eczema of a person "Such is the nature of man" and as the writer rightly states: "The sexual question will be solved only in the golden age, when humanity reaches perfection."
George և Elizabeth's plan to create a more humane, thoughtful relationship between the sexes is certainly logical, but the path they have chosen could not be successful simply because their level of knowledge is not mature enough to provide the practical part in addition to the theory.
 George's knowledge of books alone, or his own assumptions, would rarely notice a number of omissions.
  The reason for not noticing their own mistakes, however, was not so much the lack of life experience, the youth, but the unspeakable arrogance, which was characteristic of both of them (throughout the novel, this feature of the characters is clearly reflected in their behavior).
Summing up the article and examining the above-mentioned problems, we see that in the 1910s. There were a number of gender-psychological problems in English society, and the current generation tended to solve them by breaking Victorian stereotypes, proposing a "sexual revolution", new perceptions of sexuality overcoming, but with a solid foundation and sustainable development. new problems, including generational prevention, physiological, social-psychological.
Mariam Sirunyan LOVE - THE PROBLEM OF EROS AND GENERATION CONTINUATION OLDINGTON'S "DEATH OF HERO" Keywords: love-eros, "lost generation", sexuality problem, Victorian era, generational
