THE IDEA OF THE UNITY OF CONTRADICTIONS WILLIAM BLAKE'S POEM WITH THE MARRIAGE OF PARADISE AND HELL "William Blake began writing the" Prophetic Poems "series in the late 18th century.
 Probably one of the earliest known poems was The Marriage of Paradise.
 According to the author, he started writing the poem at the age of thirty-three and worked for about three years.
  The work was originally intended to ridicule the work of the religious philosopher Emanuel Svedenborg on the Paradise of Hell and, in general, the latter's beliefs about them.
  William Blake and his wife, Catherine, began attending the Church of New Jerusalem or the Church of Sweden, but Blake soon became suspicious of a number of ideas which, according to Blake, led to his deception. 2].
  Along with this mockery, it is impossible not to notice Blake's own ideas.
  Within eleven pages, the poet combines the extremes that were previously considered separately.
 The secession was led by the Church of England, and Blake's basic principles were directed against that church.
 In Blake's works he discusses the theme of unity, which can be divided into three main groups: soul (intelligence), unity of body (energy), trinity: Father, Son, Holy Spirit, և universal unity in the form of Divine humanity.
 He refuses to separate Hell and Heaven, as well as soul and body, and demands their union every day.
 Developing his mind about the Upper and Lower Worlds, Blake concludes their marriage.
  Blake's mind works with regular logic. for him there are no different absolute domains, there are no separate phenomena.
 Blake writes: "The Bible and other scriptures have been the source of many errors."
 What catches Blake's attention the most is the series of facts: 1. Man is divided into two parts: Spirit։ Body.
2. Bio juice is separate from 1 body and is called Evil.
  The intellect is separate from the soul է it is called Barik.
3. God will subject man to eternal torment for pursuing his desires.
At the same time the following contradictions are true: 1. Man has no separate Body from the Spirit, for what is called the Body is a part of the Spirit, which is perceived by the five Senses, which are the chief means of the Spirit these days.
2. Bio juice is the only existence և It is from the body, and Intelligence is the boundary or outer circle of Bio juice3. Bio juice is an Eternal Delight.
The body is the bearer of the same energy that is vital for human existence. without it the intellect becomes the only guide to man, which leads to restraint.
 Blake believed that by suppressing desires through the intellect, the body is the same, dictates its demands, and in the end they are satisfied by undesirable means.
 Religious people, as Blake claims, have drawn precise lines between Good and Evil, but they too have become victims of dissatisfied, incomplete lives. "It is better to kill a newborn in the crib than to satisfy restrained desires."
In "Marriage of Hell։ Paradise" Blake has different companions.
Among them is the Angel, and later, D.
 The angel is the bearer of the Divine intellect, the doer of God, whose mission is to teach man to follow the Divine laws.
 Blake D., on the other hand, is the bearer of the universal energy of disobedience, which condemned systemic religion.
Meeting each other, the intellect and the living juice try to explain their beliefs, and the Angel dogmatically expresses the following thought. "You, idolater, is not God One?"
 And is he not portrayed in Jesus Christ, did he not approve of the law of the Ten Commandments? ”[4]
But Jesus, about whom the Angel speaks with such conviction, is closer to D.
 They both refused to obey the written laws and the rules of the Old Testament.
 He wants his freedom, so he is liberated from God.
 Jesus breaks the commandments and trusts in his own energy. "I tell you, virtue cannot exist without breaking those ten commandments.
 "Jesus was completely virtuous, acting according to his motives, not his rules."
1 Original: Energy.
 Blake means sexual energy.
Eventually the Angel is ignited, absorbing and giving in to the energy he lacked, rising again.
  Through the synthesis of energy and intelligence, the Angel becomes humanized, which makes him complete and self-sufficient.
  Blake mentions one of his favorite writers, Milton, while writing about the mission.
  He considered Milton a prophet who could be seen far more than any other poet.
Referring to Milton's "Paradise Lost", he expresses the following thought: "But in Milton's case the Father is Destiny, the Son is the ratio of the five senses, and the Holy Spirit is Emptiness."
In Blake's works, every opposition moves towards unity through inner gravity.
  He, especially using the function of the Holy Spirit for a poet, calls it a Poetic Genius.
 This is the only source of inspiration and creative energy.
 Nach agrees with Milton, the model of God, who is only the representative of reason, like Jesus, who is limited in action.
  The five senses do not help the person who is equal to Jesus in Blake's eyes, but only prevent him from seeing the eternity that can be accessible to man at any moment.
 Blake leads us to overcome those five senses.
 That's the way Jesus և enters into union with everyone and everything.
 He continues. "Keep in mind. The reason why Milton was constrained to write freely about the Angels և God, free when he wrote about D և Hell was that he was a real Poet and a Satanist without knowing it. ”[4]
The active part, which according to Blake is an integral part of Milton's work, is entirely devoted to Satan and his followers, full of excitement and energy, while the actions of entering the image of the Father no longer receive that dynamic.
 It turns out that Miltonnaras took the side of Satanic energy without understanding, confused who should have become the main character of his work.
 Blake addresses this topic in the prophetic poem "Milton", where Milton leads to heavenly life through repentance and forgiveness.
  This salvation is due to the union of emanations, about which he does not yet write in "Marriage of Hell և Paradise".
  Here he gives the theme of expansion, when the opposites unite and become a whole in one person.
  The next step is a united humanity. People must unite, only after that it will be possible to join the Divine energy and become a complete divine image.
 God is in unity with man, man's imagination nourishes that worship and helps to build the inner spiritual temple. "People have forgotten that all deities live in the human breast."
Blake believes that all people unite and merge into one Human.
  Because of human feelings, he separates from the whole and becomes separate, and when he joins, he becomes One Man in the Universal Family, to whom he corresponds - Jesus Blake.
 He is in people, people in Him. In this case, people live in harmony in Eden, where forgiveness, mercy and love reign. "Is not God one? Is he not incarnate in Jesus Christ?"
The potential of man to become a god, according to Blake, in the form of the ability to create embedded in him.
  The creative man enjoys the divine creation, which is an imaginary creation for Blake.
Unity is possible only through the overcoming of organic senses. only then will the door open to wholeness. "Do you know that perhaps every Bird that crawls through the air is a vast world of joy, confined to us by our five senses?"
Blake once wrote in his letter, "Jesus is God, as you are, as you are."
  What he meant did not correspond to the traditional beliefs of the church.
  He thought that each of us has our God, և our God is us, his image is our image.
Each of us, bearing our God in us, can see that energy in the person next to us, thus communicating with the divine, which creates a connection between two "more people".
  In one of their conversations, Satan reminds Blake that God wants people to love him, and that humans have no better way to give him that love than by loving the person next to them.
He writes among the sayings of Hell: "The highest step is to put someone else ahead of you."
Blake D. becomes his closest friend, and they often read the Bible together.
 The contradictions continue here as well. Blake gives us the idea of ​​the Bible, which is the Bible obtained through his subjective ideas and analyzes.
The Bible provides the greatest platform for playing one's imagination, on which Blake's entire creative life is based.
Using that game, Blake gives us the idea of ​​Hell, which is also not material։ objective.
  It, like everything else, is subject to our existence, and we create our own hell and paradise.
During the imaginary journeys, the Angel decides to show Blake his hell, which was full of horrible scenes, spiders and mountains, where the image of Liathan finally appears.
 It is not an area where people serve their sentences.
  For Blake, hell is not spatial, it is an accumulation of energy and feelings, closely linked to personal and caring development and creativity.
 But as soon as the angel left, Blake appeared in a valley, listening to the harpist. "Everything we saw was the result of cometophysics, because when you ran away, I found myself on the shore, listening to the harpoon, in the moonlight."
Blake's idea of ​​Divine Humanity actually stems from the belief that people participate in the design of the Word through its imagination, in its choices. "Imagination has the power to change the world, to place both hell and paradise in the rift that has arisen through separation."
Blake Jesus is thus the supreme representative of human-god synthesis, whom Harold Bloom calls the center of the universe, the truth that exists on its own.
  Describing man as the ark of God, Blake states in one of his letters that we all exist in union with God, we are members of the body of God.
 Accordingly, we are partakers of the divine nature.
  According to Blake, this process is two-sided. It is not only humans who participate in the divine, but also God who participates in human life.
Thus, William Blake creates his own model of unity, the reunion of multiple antagonisms.
  He shows that to oppose does not mean to exclude the existence of the other, and to unite does not mean to lose the subjective qualities.
 By marrying hell and heaven, Blake provides the balance that each person needs to overcome earthly boundaries.
LITERATURE URL.
 http:
//www.bartleby.com/200/sw13.html (Accessed.
 07.05.2018). [3] Henderson J., Böhme & Blake.
 The Marriage (and Realization) of Heaven and Hell, [5] Suter D., Of the Devil's Party.
 The Marriage of Heaven and Hell in Satanic Verses, URL.
https:
//www.academia.edu/15880386/Of_the_Devil_s_Party_The_Marriage_of_Heav
en_and_Hell_in_Satanic_Verses- (Accessed:
 08.05.2018) .Heaven and Hell, URL.
https:
//www.academia.edu/21410510/The_Visual_and_the_Verbal_in_Blakes_The_Marriag
e_of_Heaven_and_Hell (Accessed:
 04.05.2018) .URL.
 https:
//m.grin.com/doc (Accessed.
 02.05.2018). [8] Searle J, The Divine-Human Imagination.
 William Blake's Vision of Theosis and the Sahakyan Anahit THE IDEA OF UNITY OF OPPOSITIONS WILLIAM BLACK'S POEM OF "MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN AND HELL" POEM Keywords: opposition, unity, hell, bodily
