THE INFLUENCE OF THE PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS OF THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL ON THE MOTIVATION OF THE TEACHING STAFF
  An educated and developed society can be achieved through a quality education system.
In order for organizations to work effectively, they need responsible and proactive employees who will make every effort to develop the organization.
 Material incentives or strict control are not enough to have such employees.
 Employee commitment and high efficiency can be achieved through management and motivation.
The management of education is first of all not the management of the institution հաստատ people, but the management of the development of education at all levels.
  One of the development trends of the modern school is the transition from traditional school management to people-centered management.
  School management is radically different from business management, firstly, with educational goals and various processes, which are mostly determined և based on psychological-pedagogical science, secondly, with participants in the educational process (students, teachers, parents, etc.), thirdly, with the management cycle [1].
In order to ensure the effective functioning of the general education system, it is necessary to pay attention to the peculiarities of school management, in particular the motivation of the most important driving force of the field, the professional activity of the teacher, which is influenced by a number of internal and external factors.
 Various circles take part in the management of the secondary school: government, local self-government bodies, etc., which in one way or another play a role in motivating the teacher.
 The most important part of school management is the school administration, and the success of a general education institution depends on the principal's management skills. The personal-professional qualities of the director determine the working atmosphere in the given institution, what value system the employees have adopted, what attitude they have towards their work, what motivation they have developed.
Among the many functions of the school, the principal carries out the management of human resources, which should include the filling of jobs, the professional development of the employees, their motivation, due to which it will be possible to increase the efficiency of the employees' activities.
  "One of the most important challenges for organizations, particularly HR, is to create and maintain a motivating workplace.
  After all, the country's economy depends on maintaining employees' motivation for work, commitment, and growth in the performance of the latter. "[2]
  Some specialists criticize the role of the director more. "The quality of education at the school level is largely determined by the professionalism of the pedagogical staff, which is most important by the professional qualification of the school principal."
 Very often the principal's professionalism and public recognition are evaluated by the successful activity of the educational institution.
 Eventually, a change of principal sometimes leads to a positive or negative change in the institution's rating.
 Today the school principal needs not only certain personal qualities - pedagogical experience, but also knowledge in the fields of management, psychology, economics, law, as well as the ability to apply them.
A. Haim, considering employee motivation as a leadership skill, suggests starting with "yourself" [4], that is, identifying management errors that lead to a decrease in staff motivation.
 According to him, if in 99.99% of cases the employees have low motivation, it is the manager's fault, and not the employees'.
  The key characteristics of a manager that employees use are justice, a sense of responsibility, respect and trust.
Motivation is an activity that aims to activate the people working in the organization և to motivate them to work effectively to achieve the goals [5].
 Motivation is the process of developing a system of motives for the behavior of objects that are controlled by the entity, which will ensure the achievement of the defined goals of management [6].
Motivation can be seen as a continuous process of influencing an individual or a team to achieve organizational goals through meeting the needs of employees.
  The main role of employee motivation is played by the head of the organization.
  Planning, control և The manager's sensible behavior should be the main builders of the motivational process [7].
Some experts associate the effectiveness of managerial management with professional qualities.
 The authors note that the managerial professional skills can be divided into three groups [8]: knowledge և skills that help to carry out professional management work, the ability to work with people, • personal qualities և the ability to self-manage.
It can be noted that in the above list the authors include a professional group (knowledge և skills that help to carry out professional management work) և a group that includes personal qualities (ability to work with people, personal characteristics կարող ability to self-govern).
  In the literature there is also the following division with the personal qualities of the school principal: First group. Personal characteristics that contribute to the implementation of governance functions: democracy, purposefulness, speed of decision-making, awareness, organization, responsibility, demandingness, communication, activism, foresight.
The second group. Personal qualities that contribute to the implementation of the pedagogical function: correctness, tolerance, upbringing, attention to the interlocutor և his problems, honesty, humanity, tact, justice, kindness, intellectuality և.
The third group. Personal qualities that allow you to perform the communicative function: charm, vivacity, modesty, fluency, neatness, ability to manage emotions, ability to listen to the interlocutor, etc. [9].
The school principal acts in several roles at once: leader, educator, teacher, innovator, orator, speaker, etc.
 However, the most important function of all of them is to create a desire to work for the staff, to provide high motivation, which will increase the efficiency of the organization and the quality of services provided.
  The manager should organize the work with the staff in such a way as to develop the motivation of everyone, as the motivated staff is the main guarantee for the progress and development of the organization.
Examining the existing approaches in the literature on the personal-professional qualities of the principal, as well as taking into account the work peculiarities of the school principal, it is suggested to separate the following groups for the activity of the principal of the school: personal qualities-professional qualities.
 Taking into account the peculiarities of the work of the school principal, it is expedient to separate the professional qualities into professional-pedagogical-administrative qualities.
 Below are the three main groups that contribute to the effectiveness of the school principal's work որ the quality included in them: 1. Personal qualities needed to communicate with students, teachers, parents, and other stakeholders in general education.
 These include kindness, a sense of responsibility, the ability to persuade, save time, take risks, high efficiency, self-control skills, activity, will, tolerance, humanity, comprehensive development, the right value system.
2. Professional pedagogical qualities, which will enable the school principal to carry out mainly pedagogical activities, to understand, comprehend the psychological peculiarities of students և teachers, to effectively implement the school human resources management.
 These include pedagogical tact, psychological knowledge, creativity, the ability to innovate, apply, express one's thoughts clearly, awareness of developments in the field, rigor, demandingness, dedication to the work, the ability to listen patiently, perseverance, impartiality, professionalism, initiative.
3. Managerial qualities that will enable the school principal to carry out the increasing duties and responsibilities of the school, considering the school as an organization.
 These include the ability to solve problems, influence the environment, master modern management approaches, form and develop effective working groups, ability to work with a team, principle, ability to make decisions in different situations, manage material resources, use modern information technologies, law enforcement, democracy, organization , respect for the parties involved in the educational process, the ability to apply fair rewards and punishments.
It should be noted that the above groups and divisions are not clearly demarcated; they can cause controversy, as the mentioned qualities, skills and abilities can be considered in both the first and second or third groups.
 However, this division will allow us to identify the potential of this or that quality of teachers for this or that group during the surveys.
 The list can be continued, but in this paper, the important qualities that can have the greatest impact on the motivation of the pedagogical staff have been identified.
Within the framework of this work, research works were carried out among the teachers of the RA schools to find out the personal, managerial, professional-pedagogical qualities of the school principal for them.
96 teachers took part in the poll.
 83.3% (80 teachers) of the respondents are female և 16.6% (16 teachers) are male.
37.5% of the surveyed pedagogues are 20-30 years old, 29.1% are 31-40, 14.5% are 41-50, and 18.7% are 51-65 years old.
 Almost half of the pedagogues surveyed, 48%, are young professionals with up to 10 years of pedagogical experience, 14.5% - 11-20 years, 20.8% - 21-30 և 8.3% - 31 years. experience.
The survey was attended by primary, secondary and high school teachers (45.8% of primary, 43.7% of secondary և 10.4% of high school teachers).
To the next question, "Assess your principal's ability / influence in your work", 60.5% of teachers said "very important", 37.5% "important" և 2% - "not important" »The answers.
are shown in Figure 1.
The Personal Qualifications section includes 13 attributes that are probably the right value system
comprehensive development
Humanitarianism
tolerance
will
activity
self-control skill
high efficiency
ability to take risks
time saving…
ability to persuade
sense of responsibility
kindness
Personal qualities:
Figure 1. Personal qualities by capacity.
The results of the survey show that teachers place a greater sense of responsibility on their supervisor (82 teachers), followed by humanity (62 teachers), and the third most important personality traits are three at once: the right value system (58 teachers), self-control skills (58 teachers) և High efficiency (58 teachers).
  Teachers are less concerned with the principal's risk-taking ability (14 teachers), persuasion ability (18 teachers), and kindness (30 teachers).
The capacity is shown in Figure 2.
The 7th question includes 14 professional pedagogical qualities, of which professional pedagogical qualities
initiative
professionalism
Impartiality
Consistency
Ability to listen patiently to the other person
dedication to work
Demand
severity
Awareness of industry developments…
to express one's thoughts clearly…
to innovate և apply և
creativity
pedagogical tact
psychological knowledge
Figure 2. Professional pedagogical qualities by capacity.
Of the pedagogical qualities, teachers use pedagogical tact (71 teachers) the most, followed by dedication to work (70 teachers) and the ability to express one's own thoughts (68 teachers).
is presented in Figure 3.
The 8th question included 14 managerial qualities, the importance of which was respected by the participants in the educational process.
Management qualities:
organizational skills
democracy
law enforcement
fair rewards և punishments…
modern information…
to manage material resources…
decisions in different situations…
ability to solve problems
principle
Ability to work with a team
effective working groups…
modern management…
to have an impact on the environment…
Figure 3. Management qualities by capacity.
Respondents used the ability to work with a team more than managerial qualities (68 teachers), followed by problem-solving ability (66 teachers) and respect for the parties involved in the educational process (64 teachers).
 Less used were the ability to use modern information technologies (34 teachers) and mastery of modern management approaches (36 teachers).
The teachers were also asked which of the mentioned qualities they used the most.
  The results show that 39.5% of pedagogues consider the personal qualities of the principal to be more important, followed by managerial qualities (31.2%) and professional pedagogical qualities (29%).
Teachers were also asked what effect the personal, professional, pedagogical and managerial qualities have on the motivation of their pedagogical activity.
 The results are presented in Figure 4.
small
average:
great
very large
The impact of principal qualities on teacher pedagogy
on the motivation of the activity
Figure 4. Influence of the principal's personal, professional-pedagogical և managerial skills on the motivation of teachers' pedagogical activities.
Summarizing the studied approaches in the modern literature, as well as the results of the research work carried out within the framework of this work, a number of conclusions can be drawn: • The principal must have a high sense of responsibility; Perceived in a unique but effective way of managing the staff, increasing the work motivation of pedagogues and educating generations, it is also one of the key ones. that the school principal should be a good teacher,then only a good manager, who is characterized by a high "commitment to work", the third most important of the professional qualities is the "ability to express their own ideas", which indicates that educators use their principal to be able to clearly express their own thoughts, opinions and views, ie Have high communication and language skills, regardless of profession.
Teachers interviewed for managerial qualities emphasize the "ability to work with the team", which is closely related to the third important quality of management - "respect for the parties involved in the educational process".
 It can be said that it is this ability that motivates teachers to fulfill their pedagogical responsibilities, becoming a stimulus for dedication and pleasure work.
Based on the analysis of the research results, it can be said that if we consider the pedagogical-managerial qualities as a whole, professional qualities, and the personal ones separately, the participants of the survey think that the school principal should be a good manager, a good pedagogue, displaying high personal qualities.
In order to carry out their work effectively, school principals are encouraged to supplement and improve their pedagogical and psychological knowledge in order to make it easier for participants in the educational process to better understand the educational process, to articulate points and observations more clearly: to improve communication skills. and the methods used: • to maximize respect for the parties to the educational process, regardless of their position or role in the school;
It can be said that in the modern management system, for the effective management of the school principal, it is necessary to develop his personal qualities, on the one hand, and his professional qualities, on the other hand.
 All these qualities have an impact on the motivation of the pedagogical staff, as they shape the internal organizational atmosphere and attitude towards the work of the educational institution։.
LITERATURE educational education.
 essence and peculiarities, Philosophy of education, № [5] Porshnev A., Rumyantseva Z., Solomatin N., Management of organizations.
 textbook, [6] Proshkin B., Motivation of labor.
 Management aspect. Novosibirsk, 2008, c. 39. Ohanyan Lilit Պ PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS OF THE PRINCIPAL OF THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL MOTIVATION OF THE TEACHER STAFF
