THE CONSTITUTIONAL STATUS OF RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the de facto religious organizations gained legal status, and various foreign religious currents penetrated the territory of the Republic.
  Given the socio-economic situation in the country, these new organizations were able to have a large number of followers in a short period of time.
  According to official data, 98% of the population of the Republic of Armenia are descendants of the Armenian Apostolic Church, and the rest of the population belong to other religious organizations1, however, the latter claim that these numbers do not correspond to reality.
  In addition, it should be noted that a significant part of the population, whether they do not belong to other religions, would still be wrong to consider them followers of the Armenian Apostolic Church, as they not only do not follow the rules established by it, but are not baptized properly.
Point 9 of the Declaration on the Independence of the Republic of Armenia states: "The Republic of Armenia ensures ... freedom of conscience in its territory ..."
 Freedom of conscience means the ability to act rationally according to one's own will ություն freedom 2.
 Based on this right, the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia in 1991 adopted the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Freedom of Conscience - Religious Organizations" (hereinafter referred to as the Law).
  This right was also enshrined in the RA Constitution.
  The right to freedom of religion is closely connected with the constitutional law.
 As stipulated in Article 41 of the RA Constitution. "Everyone has the right to ... religion or belief ... either alone or in association with others, in public or in private, in public or in private.
//armstat.am/file/doc/99478603.pdf.
2 See Human Rights / V. Ն. Ayvazyan.
 Editor: N. A. Ayvazyan.
 - Third revised edition.
 -S..
 YSU Publishing House, 2014, page 137.
Freedom of expression, worship, worship, or other forms of worship. ”
 It can be deduced from this article of the Constitution that everyone has any religion to believe in personally or with other people or not to believe in any religion.
  A similar regulation is provided by the RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations.
 However, in our opinion, there is a certain contradiction between the "Law" of the Constitution.
  If, according to the Constitution, the state ensures the right to freedom of religion and belief for everyone, then according to Article 1 of the Law, "The Republic of Armenia ensures the freedom of religion and conscience of citizens ...".
  We think that there is a legislative gap here, as the Legislature has unnecessarily narrowed the circle of persons whose rights the Republic of Armenia is obliged to protect by the Constitution.
  In this case, the right to freedom of religion should be defined from the right to join religious organizations.
The most common way to exercise the above constitutional right is to create and join religious organizations.
  According to Article 4 of the Law. "A religious organization is a union of citizens established for the common denomination of faith, as well as for the satisfaction of other religious needs."
The norms of the RA Civil Code apply to them, as non-governmental organizations.
 The order of their formation, activity և liquidation is defined in the RA Civil Code. by law ովBy law.
 According to the latter, Article 3, part 1, point "d", "religious organizations are free from materialism, they are directed to the deeper spheres."
  However, each organization needs certain resources.
  According to Article 12 of the law. "Religious organizations can apply to believers for voluntary monetary and other donations, to receive and manage them."
  However, Article 13 prohibits organizations whose centers are located outside the Republic of Armenia from being funded by those centers.
 We think this approach is not justified, as there are religious organizations in Armenia, the members of which are exclusively national minorities, the centers of those organizations are located outside Armenia.
  In this way, they lose touch with their centers of thought, so we think it would be expedient to make an exception to this norm for religious organizations of transnational minorities.
In addition, their status as religious organizations has nothing to do with state policy, so the ban on foreign funding is meaningless in this case.
An important condition for the status of religious organizations is the state-church connection.
  On the basis of the relations between the state and the church, it is customary to classify states into secular and non-secular states.
 For this classification, it is expedient to take into account the following criteria: 1) the nature of the state's influence on the behavior of believers, 2) the ways of cooperation between state and religious organizations, 3) the degree of convergence of state and religious ideologies, 4) the relationship between state and religious legal systems; 5) the degree of unification of state-religious institutions.
Although the Constitution does not directly state that the Republic of Armenia is a secular state, nevertheless Article 17 of the Constitution states: "Religious organizations should be separated from the state."
  The above principles are reflected in Article 17 of the Law, according to which the state: "a) has no right to compel a citizen to believe in this or that religion; b) does not interfere in the lawful activities of the church-religious organizations, internal life, prohibits churches-religious organizations c) prohibits the participation of the church in the state administration, does not impose any state function on the church-religious organizations.
The Armenian Apostolic Church is, by far, an exception to the principle of equality of religious organizations.
 According to Article 18 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia. "The Republic of Armenia recognizes the exclusive mission of the Armenian Apostolic Holy Church as a national church in the spiritual life of the Armenian people, in the development of its national culture, in the preservation of its national identity."
  Based on this article, the Armenian Apostolic Church, unlike other religious organizations, has, of course, certain privileges.
  The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia և The Law Recognizes the Holy Apostolic Church in Armenia as a national church, Article 17 of the Law defines the spheres where it has a status monopoly over other organizations.
  These spheres are mentioned in more detail in the RA Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Relations with the Armenian Apostolic Church". Other religious buildings as national values ​​are under the care of the state.
  According to Article 4 of the RA Law on Education, the educational system of the Republic of Armenia is aimed at strengthening the spiritual and intellectual potential of the Armenian people, preserving and developing national and universal values.
  The Armenian Church contributes to that work. ”
 One of the ways to express the latter is the "History of the Armenian Church" course included in the curricula of 5-12 grades of public schools.
  To this model of a secular state I. Ponkin calls it an identification model 3.
 The peculiarities of this model are: 1) the state cooperates with traditional religious organizations on various issues, 2) the separation of church and state is constitutionally enshrined, however, the peculiarity of any religious organization is fixed at the same or lower level, taking into account the historical role of the organization. 3) no religious or non-religious (including atheism) ideology is declared state by the state, 4) the state guarantees freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and their restriction is provided by law for state security, public order, health, morality or others. for the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms,5) the state guarantees the equality of persons before the law, regardless of their religious affiliation or attitude towards religion; 6) the state guarantees the freedom of religious rites and ceremonies; 3 See ibid., P. 244.
7) the state does not interfere in the formation of religious norms, rituals, internal structures and charters of organizations.
However, the privileges granted to the Armenian Apostolic Church in public circles sometimes become the subject of heated discussions.
 There are opinions that the scope of these privileges is exaggerated, it contradicts the principle of equality of religious organizations.
 These opinions are partially justified, as the benefits of which have an impact on public opinion.
 Or, the law establishes the equality of persons before the law, regardless of their religious affiliation or their attitude towards religion, nevertheless, in the society there is internal discrimination against those who do not belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church.
  Such people are called sectarians, reserving the word in a negative sense.
  However, under the term "sect", according to I. According to Vorobyova, there is no need to look for a negative meaning. It unites individuals united around a doctrine that is separate from religious teachings or that is based on individual ideas and experience.
 In our society today, the term "sect" is closely associated with hunting.
 According to Article 8 of the Law, hunting in the territory of the Republic of Armenia is prohibited.
 Currently, there are numerous reports of law enforcement agencies engaging in spiritual hunting by various religious organizations, but these bodies are unable to process these reports properly because there is no clear legal definition of the term "hunting" and no administrative or criminal liability.
  In our opinion, it would be expedient to add the word "illegal" to the term "hunting" in the law, to give the following definition. "Illegal hunting for the purpose of converting another person with a different religious or denomination is a religious act, which is manifested by committing an illegal act of a religious nature against that person or his neighbor."
  In this case, the term "illegal" should mean deception or abuse of trust, physical or psychological violence.
4 See Воробьёва И. B., The term "sect" and its use in dissertations // Вестник Саратовской государственной академии право.
 scientific journal. - 2010, N 3 (73), page 163.
Different opinions are voiced on the issue of teaching the subject "History of the Armenian Church" in public schools.
 It is mentioned that it contradicts Article 3 of the Law, according to which: "... a citizen is not allowed any coercion or violence ... in determining his / her attitude towards participating in or not participating in the teaching of religion", կետ Clause 6 of Article 5 of the RA Law on Education, according to which education in educational institutions is secular in nature.
  Proponents of the subject point out that the fact that 98% of the population of the Republic are descendants of the Armenian Apostolic Church should be taken into account.
  According to Article 51, Part 2, Clause 2 of the RA Family Code. "Parents, taking into account the opinion of their children, have the right to choose the educational institution of their children ..."
 It includes religious education and upbringing.
 And if it is taken into account that the vast majority of children in public schools are followers of the Armenian Apostolic Church from such families, then in this case, in their opinion, talking about the violation of rights is not justified.
  In addition, they note that most of the citizens who do not belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church belong to different national minorities, who are mainly concentrated in different regions, have their own national schools, where they teach according to the curriculum approved by the Ministry of Education and Science, and other religious organizations. They have their own Sunday schools, where the children of their members attend և receive a religious upbringing in accordance with the religion.
 However, this substantiation has its drawback.
 We should not forget that some of the ethnic minorities live in other places և do not have the opportunity to attend national schools.
 They are citizens of the Republic of Armenia, they are equal before the law like other citizens.
  Therefore, it would be expedient to include topics about other religious organizations operating in the Republic of Armenia in the subject program "History of the Armenian Church".
The French experience is especially instructive for teaching religious subjects in public schools.
  At the beginning of the century, the French government attempted to introduce religious subjects in public school curricula.
 This raised a wave of protests in a large part of the society.
  They mentioned that it violates the principle of secularism of those schools.
  In response to these complaints, the French Ministry of Education published a report entitled "Teaching Religious Studies in Secular Schools," also known as the Debray Report5.
 It was a cultural-philosophical analysis of this problem, in which the author provided data according to which children attending religiously inclined schools are more easily integrated into society than students of secular schools;
 The author points out that the reason is that children who have studied religious subjects begin to interact with the humanitarian ideas that exist in different religions while developing their selves.
 The report states that the teaching of these subjects is not aimed at preaching to the child in one way or another that it is a doctrine, but is aimed at instilling in the child the values ​​of good, kindness, beauty, and the best conditions for living in society.
 At the end of the report, the author writes: "The time has come to move from immature worldliness (" religion does not concern us ") to conscious worldliness (" our task is to understand it ")" 6.
It should be noted that no separate subject on religion was created in public schools, however, the "History" subject program underwent significant changes, including topics related to the culture of the Old World, the history of modern religions, and ideas.
Representatives of some religious organizations mention that the state care of the Armenian Apostolic Church and other buildings by the state is also discriminatory.
 Contrary to this opinion, it should be noted that most of these structures are of cultural value, included in the UNESCO World Heritage List, are considered tourist centers, their care is a key condition for the development of tourism in the country.
 Besides, after the independence of Armenia, the treasures of the Armenian Apostolic Church were not returned - the means that were illegally confiscated from it to the Soviets և were placed in museums.
  Therefore, it can be said that these privileges are dictated not only by the fact that the Armenian Apostolic Church is a national church, but also by a unique compensation for those values.
5 See Ponkin I. В., Правовые основы светскости государства и услуги. - M.
 Pro-Press, 2003, p. 421.
6 See ibid., P. 431.
Thus, summarizing the work, we can reach the following conclusions: 1. It is expedient to enshrine in the law a constitutional norm, according to which not only the citizens of the Republic of Armenia, but also foreign citizens, stateless persons have the right to freedom of conscience and religion.
  The right to freedom of conscience and religion should be restricted from the right to join religious organizations.2. The law can clearly regulate the sources of funding for religious organizations, pointing out the exceptions.3. It is expedient to define the term "hunting" more clearly, based on that definition, the Criminal Code, the Code on Administrative Offenses to define the appropriate sanction for it.4. It is necessary to clarify the role of the Armenian Apostolic Apostolic Church in the field of education, to review the program of the subject "History of the Armenian Church".
CONSTITUTIONAL LEGISLATION OF RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONSMihran Bulghadaryan Keywords: freedom of religion's conscience, religious organizations, secular state, sect, foray, secular education STATUS Summary.
