SEVAN PENINSULA WATER AND ENGAGEMENTS Shorzha HARAKITSTARATSKNERITS NMUSHNERIGENATUNAYIN HATKUTYUNNERIUSUMNASIRUTYUNE "James" MIJOTSOVZHamanakakits world test environment aghtotvatsutyunetarber compounds serious problem for humanity as mutagenic and carcinogenic azdetsutyunkendani aydnyutere can be displayed on organisms.
  From this point of view, the study of the genetic properties of the waters of the Shaniavazan is very relevant.
The aim of this study was to investigate the genotoxic properties of water samples taken from different regions of the Xiang Basin using the Ames test.
Materials և methods.
  Two strains of Salmonella typhimurium LT-2 were used: TA98 (hisD3052, rfa, uvrB, pKM101), which registers mutations in the reading range և TA100 (hisD3052, rfa, uvrB, pKM101) instead of the bases.
  The test is based on the extent of feedback mutations in indicator strains as a result of exposure to the test substance, causing them to become prototrophic.
 The cells were grown in appropriate media.
 Distilled water was used as a negative control.
  Hydroxylamine (100 μg / cup) և 2-nitrofluorine (50 μg / cup) solutions were used as positive controls.
  The water samples used for testing were concentrated 10 times by freezing.
Results և discussion.
  Substances that are usually mutagenic affect the viability of cells.
 For this reason, the impact of water samples on the Shan Peninsula և Shorzha has been studied. on the viability of TA98 և T TA100 շտ strains of typhimurium LT-2 has been shown to reduce the viability of both bacterial cells.
  The obtained results are presented in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Decreased viability of S. typhimurium LT-2 strains due to the impact of water samples taken from the vicinity of Shorzha village on the Shan Peninsula.
The picture clearly shows that the Shorzha water sample reduces the viability of the cells of 2 strains by 3.4 times more than the water tank sample.
The genetic properties of the samples were studied on the same strains using the Ames test [4], [5].
  Multiplicity is an indicator of the effect of mutagen, which shows the ratio of the number of reactants formed under the influence of the studied substance to the number of spontaneous reagents.
  The results are summarized in the following tables.
Table 1. Genotoxic Properties of Shorzha Water Sample Table 2. Genotoxic Properties of Shan Peninsula Water Sample The data from the tables show that both water samples have genotoxic properties, with the multiplication indices indicating that the average water content of the 2 regions is moderate. , 15 times more than the Sևn Peninsula.
 In conclusion, water samples taken from the Lake Sanaa Basin have potential genotoxic properties; it is necessary to prevent further contamination of the basin with waste.
GrakanutyunRazmik Papikyan Nora L. Simonyan AzaryanSEVANI Peninsula and adjacent areas VERTSVATSJRAYIN Shorzha James SAMPLES GENATUNAYIN HATKUTYUNNERIUSUMNASIRUTYUNE tests MIJOTSOVBanali words, James test genatunayin properties rivertantner, bazmapatikutyunAmpopum.
