CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIVIDUAL PERCEPTION IN THE PROCESS OF ADAPTATION OF STAFF Interpersonal perception, being a problem of modern social psychology, has its manifestations in work activity.
  In the work collective, as in other small social groups, phenomena are revealed that are subject to the patterns of interpersonal perception.
  However, as a consequence, the manifestations of interpersonal perception in the staff condition the process of employee adaptation, which is directly related to professional development and work efficiency.
The adjustment process allows you to avoid a number of problems that arise when a new employee enters the organization.
 Most of the problems arise due to the lack or insufficiency of the necessary information about the organization.
 Information about the organization includes the specifics of the internal regulations, working conditions, policies of the organization, the provision of information about which allows you to reduce the likelihood of new employees making mistakes.
  Among the possible obstacles are the insufficient level of professional qualities, skills, lack of knowledge of corporate culture.
 This adaptation process allows the new employee to strengthen the interest in the work, to accumulate work experience, to establish business-personal relations with the staff1.
Staff adaptation implies a process of intensive acquaintance of the new employees with the activities of the organization փոփոխ change of one's own behavior in accordance with the conditions of the organization2.
 Thus, the job adaptation is the exchange of the values, norms and rules of the new employee's organization and agree 1 See Petrosyan M., Javadyan A., Amiryan D., Person և Position, Yerevan, State Service Publishing House, 2013, p. 344.
2 See “Personnel Management” Sub. OK. T. Ю. Базарова, Б. Л. Jeremiah. - 2-е изд., Перераб. idop. - М.
 Janiti, 2002, 560 p. is the show.
 However, a number of authors describe this process as an interaction between a person and an organization, which implies that during the adaptation there is also an adaptation of the social environment to the person3.
  This fact is evidenced by the fact that each new employee enters the organization with an already established system of values, norms, goals, with the intention to implement it.
There are the following types of adaptation: 4. • Professional, which assumes the process of activating the necessary knowledge, skills, nuances of the given profession; Assimilation of information about his / her employee role, functions, position in the management system.
In addition, there is a primary adaptation for young professionals who have no work experience, and a secondary adaptation for employees with certain professional experience3.
5 In the process of adaptation, several stages are conditionally separated.
  Determining the level of readiness of a newcomer allows you to develop a personalized adaptation plan that will match the knowledge and skills of the employee, as it will take into account the previous experience of working in such a structure.
 The next stage is the process of adaptation, the so-called orientation.
  There are two types of orientation process: general և specific 6.
  The general orientation includes the following information: • Organization structure, regulations, production organization, personnel policy, • Remuneration for work, • Working conditions, 3 See Дейнека А. V., Management Personnel Organizations - M.
 Publishing and Corporation 4 See Vesni V. R., Practical management staff.
  Special skills in staffing, M., 5 See Vesnin V. R., note work.
• Existence of privileges, • Security, • Hierarchical management system.
Specific orientation, in turn, includes information on the function of the data division, the organization of work, the responsibilities յուրաքանչյուր functions of each employee.
At this stage, the values ​​of the team, corporate culture, organization are introduced.
The final stage is characterized as a stage of operation, during which the new employee adapts to the working conditions, performs the work responsibilities assigned to him, establishes interpersonal relations with the staff7.
  At this stage, the new employee's "staff perceptions" positions on a number of aspects of interpersonal relationships are possible.
  Agreements or disagreements play a decisive role in the formation of their relationship.
  Conflicts between individuals and groups can be a source of tension, while consistent perceptions contribute to a psychologically healthy environment.
  On the contrary, the unhealthy atmosphere in the staff creates favorable conditions for the development of conflicts.
According to a number of authors, the existence of a conflict is evidenced by the contradictory actions of the two sides against each other.
  Contrary to this view, the conflict in organizations can be overt or covert.
 This circumstance is conditioned by the dynamics of the conflict, the initial stage of which is the latent phase, when a problematic situation arises8.
  The further development of the conflict depends on the conflict-causing actions, which contribute to the origin and development of the conflict.
 Thus, a conflict of goals and interests between individuals is sufficient for the existence of a conflict, which can become a condition for the development of the conflict if it is not managed in time or preventive work is not done.
  Each conflict leads to certain social consequences, according to which conflicts are classified as constructive and destructive.
 Constructive conflicts are based on objective contradictions և contribute to the improvement of the organization's activities.
 On the contrary, destructive conflicts arise, see 7 See “Personnel Management” Sub. OK. T. Ю. Базарова, Б. Л. Jeremiah. - 2-е изд., Перераб. и8 See Анцупов А. Я., Шипилов А. I., Conflictology.
 Textbook for vuzov. M.
 ЮНИТИ-ДАНА, due to subjective reasons, also contribute to the increase of tension in the team թ to the deterioration of organizational activities9.
The constructive or destructive nature of conflicts is conditioned by the fact that the conflict situation will be resolved, what behavioral strategies will be chosen by the participants.
  Thus, conflict management presupposes the implementation of measures that will either lead to the complete elimination of the conflict situation or will contribute to the development of constructive conflict.
Taking into account the fact that destructive conflicts are caused mostly by subjective factors, that is, the mechanisms of interpersonal perception formation, let us refer to their peculiarities, particularly in the process of adaptation.
The social environment in which the process of interpersonal perception takes place has a significant impact on the construction of interpersonal relationships between employees.
  Appearing in a new situation, adapting to the presented conditions, norms of the organization - proper requires a person to change his / her own norms - adapt to the requirements.
  Factors of interpersonal perception, such as stereotypes, attitudes, expectations, role expectations, and other mechanisms that are manifested in both the new employee and the members of the staff are of great importance in this process.
 Positions mainly refer to differences in age և work experience.
 Thus, staff members may be skeptical of a new employee's work methods or previous work experience.
 In its turn, the new employee is not ready to apply the methods, rules, norms accepted in the organization.
It should be noted about the ևsmek indicator of the existence of a conflict situation, that is, the perception of the social situation as conflict.
  Being in a certain social situation, the person compares it with the examples of conflict situations formed during his / her social experience, as he / she compares the internal behavior with the examples of conflicting behavior, defines the given situation as conflict or non-conflict 10.
 In other words, in the process of perceiving and recognizing a conflict situation, a classification mechanism operates, which allows to define ելinterpret a given social situation as a conflict.
  In addition, in the conflict management it is necessary to take into account the conflict 9 See Шейнов В. P., Management of Conflicts, SPb., Peter, 2014, 576 p.10 See Grishina I. V., Psychology of Conflict, SPb., Peter, 2007, 464 p. Perceptions of individuals in a conflict situation, as they play a decisive role in the constructive or destructive nature of the conflict.
It is known that in a conflict situation there is a narrowing of perception, which contributes to the escalation of the existing conflict.
  Narrowing of perception occurs due to a number of factors expressed in conflict situations.
  These are the emotional factors, namely, feelings of anger, mistrust, frustration, contempt, envy, suspicion of others, as well as cognitive processes, which include the mechanism of stereotyping, assessments, attitudes, and other mechanisms of interpersonal perception 11.
The stereotyping mechanism is one of the priority factors contributing to the development of the conflict.
 It is based on the ideas, views, and assessments of the people around them.
Most people tend to reject information that does not conform to their standards and stereotypes.
 Thus, the new employee in the organization has to face the stereotypes formed among the staff members, which can include ideas about both the working methods and the behavior of the new employee.
  In their turn, the new employee's ideas may not coincide with them, the behavior of the newcomer will not correspond to the expectations of the staff.
However, stereotypes are present in the new employee և may refer in particular to the use of work methods, the establishment of interpersonal relationships in the workplace, etc.
 Dissatisfaction with the new employee may arise in the team, which will be a precondition for conflicts.
Due to the types of adaptation և in stages, the nature of the conflicts arising during the adaptation և causes.
However, the fact remains that the organizational conflicts have objective-subjective reasons.
 The key causes of organizational conflicts are at the heart of adaptation conflicts.
 The following factors contribute to the emergence of conflicts during the adjustment.
• Imperfection of the management system and structure of the organization.
 The disproportionate distribution of employees' rights և responsibilities կարող can lead to tensions in the relationship between the new employee and the staff.
  This subset of objective factors includes: 11 See Mitchell CR, The structure of international conflicts. - New York.
 St Martin's Press, 1989. Non-compliance with the requirements գործ functions included in the employment contract, which may lead to vertical conflict.
Inadequate work organization, ie violation of the work regime, clarification of work problems, assignments, unfavorable working conditions are obstacles to the normal process of psychological and physiological adaptation of the employee.
  This in turn leads to the dissatisfaction of the new employee with working conditions, creates a favorable environment for the creation of a conflict situation.
  Organizational factors include the lack of remuneration for the work, the lack of a reward system.
• Professional factors, in particular the different professional levels of the new staff և Existing staff members, lead to incomplete solution of work problems և reduce work efficiency.
 This group of factors includes the process of recruitment and distribution of personnel, the implementation of which creates tension among employees, which worsens the performance of work responsibilities.
 Insufficient information on professional development can also be a precondition for the emergence of vertical conflicts.
• Subjective factors contributing to the origin of conflicts include the peculiarities of interpersonal perception, the contradictions between goals, values, opinions և ideas, behaviors, interests և needs և needs և.
 It is obvious that the perceptions of the new employee, the members of the staff, can differ significantly due to various factors.
  One of the subjective factors is the existence of professional experience, the patience of both the new employee and the members of the team.
According to a number of authors, the effective organization of adaptation involves the use of certain tools to reduce new employee stress.
 One of them is the work instruction, which assumes a description of the methods of performing the job functions, the application of which allows the new employee to perform his / her job responsibilities without disturbing the activities of other employees12.
  The most important tool in the adaptation process is the attachment of the teacher to the new employee, the main function of which is to transfer his / her knowledge to the new employee, given the position 12 See Management of preservation of enterprises.
 http:
//upravlenie-zapasami.ru/.
It provides the necessary information on job functions, the nuances of work.
 The teacher guides the new employee in the process of accurate performance of his / her functions, exchange of norms and rules adopted in the organization, adaptation to working conditions.
As a result of the study, we have come to the conclusion that the adaptation of a new employee in the organization is subject to the patterns of manifestation of interpersonal perception mechanisms.
  Taking into account the above-mentioned factors when organizing the adaptation process և Carrying out appropriate works aims to make the mentioned process more effective.
  The management of the adaptation process, the use of the necessary tools contributes to the formation of constructive relations between the new employee and the members of the team, which in turn contributes to the increase of work efficiency.
  This allows you to avoid a number of problems arising during the adjustment process, including destructive conflicts.
  Encouraging constructive conflicts, which can be diagnosed by finding out the root causes of conflict situations, is effective in organizing the adjustment process.
Anush Stepanyan FEATURES OF INDIVIDUAL PERCEPTION OF STAFF Keywords: interpersonal perception, adaptation, organizational conflict, ADAPTATION PROCESS Shortcuts Summary.
