MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MILITARY IN THE GRAPHITES IMAGING THE FREEDOM FIGHTERS OF THE APRIL FOUR-DAY WAR The military system cannot function; it does not make sense without a civil system.
 As a result of the cooperation of these two systems, a number of military values ​​penetrate into the civil system, and vice versa.
  The national, patriotic spirit, the sense of duty and obligation to the homeland are powerful characteristics that every state wants to instill in its citizen.
  In the case of Armenia, this is a very important issue, as the state is in a state of "relative peace" equivalent to the "threat of war."
 Moreover, similar ideological figures can penetrate even such a sphere of civic life as street art.
  Recently, graffiti containing military symbols and ideological elements has become more common.
 A number of similar graffiti appeared after the April Four-Day War, although they caused a stir in the society, but they have not been studied as a social phenomenon yet.
Thus, it is important to understand how militarism is manifested in these graffiti, how the meanings that create ideologies are constructed, and exemplary models of behavior.
Saint-Simon considered the army to be the most influential obstacle to development.
 Representatives of social-Darwinism, to whom violent conflict plays a significant role in the sociological system, have also tended to attribute its significance to the past.
 H. Spencer insisted that the replacement of violent struggle with industrial competition is inevitable, moreover, the latter is more effective.
 And the Sumerians believed that one of the most powerful consequences of war was territorial expansion, where peace and order reigned.
  Even the extremists of the conflict school agree with this view.
 According to Gumplovich, the deadly hatred between the races, which at one time led to slaughter, was transformed into slavery and economic exploitation.
It is possible to distinguish four interrelated subjects, which are studied in military sociology: military organizations, military system, military-civil relations - sociology of war [1].
 These areas reveal the key components of the military.
To identify the characteristics of military organizations, scientists rely on one of two existing approaches, considering military forces as "supreme forces".
Typical aspects of the military can be identified through several approaches.
 Representatives of the cultural approach, Philip Smith, John Hutchinson, Anthony Smith, and others, focused on the role of symbols, rituals, and collective memory as experimental components of war.
  E. Smith և Hutchinson emphasizes the role of memorials (memorials (for example, military parades, memorials, sculptures of war heroes նշում commemorations).
The main argument of the socio-biological approach is that people mainly fight against each other for limited resources, space and other material artifacts.
 War does not have only a cultural border ․ it is first and foremost about material losses և destruction [3].
 The economic approach states that people are interested և guided by their own interests, and all steps are based on rationality (maximum interests at the lowest cost) [3].
 Mann, one of the representatives of the organizational-materialist approach, defines the conflict as a decisive social mechanism for state-building.
  He explained the historical changes in the "war" of the state by using four sources of social power, somewhat independent but interrelated: political, economic, ideological-military [4].
It should be noted that the military is not effective by nature when it is deprived of support.
  The military system depends on the provision of a non-military system, other human resources, and other support, which are distributed between the two systems.
  Thus, one can consider another, larger system in which the armed forces operate.
  Such a sociological perspective draws attention to the impact of public resources on the acquisition of manpower in the army, stratification, career mobility, distribution of military-civilian functions, and public resources.
 Feld noted that the military system is based on sovereignty if there is no basis for the unity of military-civilian systems.
In this context, after the four-day war in April 2016, graffiti with images of fallen freedom fighters appeared on the walls of Yerevan State University.
 This was a special event, as the act of vandalism of the stage - the depiction of graffiti appeared on the walls of the university - still exists.
 Graffiti, like any similar text, is a discursive subject coded by an illustrator represented by a symbolic system.
 They are ideological in modern times, as they are based on visual communication in various forms of mass communication in public life.
 Moreover, the provided information can be presented with some symbolic connections, which create narrative structures, expressing the given period in a specific social space.
The sources of information needed for the research are the graffiti of the freedom fighters killed after the April 2016 war on the walls of YSU.
 A general sample was taken for the research.
  Only 3 similar graffiti are depicted in YSU territory.
 All of them have been analyzed.
 In order to reveal the peculiarities of the expression of militarism in the graffiti, it is expedient to make a narrative semiotic analysis.
 Semiotics is a formal model of analysis, which is guided by the rules of identification of signs that govern the social system and convey certain meanings.
The narrative can be understood as a story with a beginning, middle and end, which carries the experience of the narrator.
 Graymas singled out the following narrative elements (actants): subject և object, destinator (sender) և receiver, շարք a set of forces that either help or hinder (help or obstruct actants).
 The narrative develops towards the decision through the developed, developed relations between the subject և Other narrative forces.
These relationships are differentiated on the basis of what is called tonality և modality in semiotics.
 These are narrative components that characterize the relations of narrative forces.
 The tone of the narrative represents the positive or negative direction of the event (the same as the aiding and abetting circumstances), while the modality, the subject's judgments about the event, can be pragmatic or cognitive.
Pragmatic mode confirms the subject's power connection or ability to function.
  The pragmatic relations of the subject այլ other relative forces develop through actions in the sequence of history.
  The cognitive mode confirms the subject's knowledge connection or the acquired knowledge.
  Cognitive relationships extend beyond the sequence of actions.
 This allows us to reveal the narrative-deep structures of graffiti, considering it as a special feature of the text, through which it is possible to study in depth their ideological-cultural components, to present the scheme of correlation.
The graffiti analysis was performed as follows: To construct the narratives, the narrative block was first defined, which is one of the components of this study, based on local և isotopes.
 This block is divided into three blocks.
  Each contains one graphite.
  Then the actant structure, modalities and tonality were taken out, after which an attempt was made to create a general monotone from the three sub-blocks.
Subblock 1. The image of Robert Abajyan. Transition wall to the left of YSU main building (Appendices 1.1, 2).
"He did not leave the position until the last moment.
 Do not leave your homeland. "
This graffiti shows that not leaving the position is the protection of the external borders, and not leaving the homeland is the protection of the internal borders.
 In addition, graffiti tries to evoke a sense of ownership in the reader.
  This is done due to the received "d" article in the word "your homeland".
 The main emphasis is that the given country is yours.
 The main idea of ​​graffiti is to point out certain obligations towards the homeland, that is, everyone, being a representative of the given state, has obligations and must fulfill them.
 Therefore, here the object of our narrative is "a certain obligation of a person towards the homeland."
 Now let's take out the system of actants. The sender (destination) is patriotism, because graffiti is aimed at spreading patriotic ideas (obligation - responsibility to the homeland).
  Recipient youth, particularly student youth, as isotopes of space և lead to this emphasis.
 Subject: University.
At first glance, it may seem that the subject is a soldier.
  However, in reality, the soldier is not considered a subject of this narrative, but a helping factor.
 This graffiti is considered a program implemented in cooperation with the author աջակց with the support of YSU Student Council.
 Moreover, here the author is not considered subjectively for the simple reason that his initiative was only to portray the heroes as a "monument".
 As for the main message of graffiti, it was developed by the student staff representing the university.
 Object: commitment to the homeland.
 Auxiliary means - a soldier, a circumstance of not leaving the border, having already fulfilled his duty.
 Disruptive measures: the idea of ​​leaving the homeland [7].
Graffiti presents two roles: citizen-military, that is, citizenship-military relations.
 Let's understand the modality of these opposition relations.
 The normative system of the military image includes devotion, courage, conscientiousness, patriotism, heroism, a sense of responsibility.
 This represents the cognitive level, expressed in a positive modality.
 The pragmatic level of the military image corresponds to the cognitive level.
  It assumes that in graffiti the imaginary-operational systems of the military coincide.
The normative system of the image of a citizen includes devotion, courage, sense of responsibility, patriotism, conscientiousness.
  This represents the cognitive level about him.
 Thus, there is a cognitively positive modality of the military here, which equates to the role of the military.
 And the operating system of the image of a citizen is presented in a negative modality.
 Thus, the systems of thought and action of citizenship do not coincide in graffiti.
The semiotic square structure of the given sub-block. None of the military-citizenship relations in this graffiti predominate.
 Indicators such as death, war, struggle, military operation, foreign defense are used for the presentation of the military, the indicators of peace, reconciliation, internal action are used for the presentation of citizenship.
Subblock 2. The image of Armenak Urfanyan. Building of YSU Faculty of Philology (Appendices 1.2, 2).
"It was his mission to defend.
 "Your mission is to learn."
Here it is shown that և´ the citizen և´ the soldier have a mission, that is, it is again about the obligation towards the homeland.
 However, this graffiti differs in that it emphasizes the obligation.
 In the case of a soldier, it is to defend, and in the case of a citizen, it is to learn, which carries the idea of ​​the procedure of acquiring knowledge.
 Here "learning" is viewed in the contextual relationship with "defending", due to which "learning" becomes outside of "defense".
Thus, the graffiti emphasizes that the soldier, as the bearer of the given role, has an obligation for external, and the citizen - for internal defense.
Since we have already found out that the main recipient (audience) for graffiti is the youth, and the sender is the university, it is natural that the internal defense moves towards fulfilling the obligation through learning.
 It is quite interesting to express the idea of ​​death-life through auxiliary verbs: "mission was", "mission is".
  Thus the text calls to learn ("life" indicator) և to defend ("death" indicator).
In the context of these graffiti, external defense ևheroism is directly related to death ․ Heroes are dead heroes, and protection is identified with death.
 At the same time, Graffiti tries to break this idea by showing that one does not have to die to be a hero.
 You can learn to be a defender, a hero within your borders.
In the system of graffiti agents, three actors (actors) change: the object - the nature of the debt to the homeland, the aids - a soldier, the defense mission, the obstacles - the lack of desire to learn.
This graffiti, as before, expresses pragmatic-cognitive levels of the military with a positive modality, և cognitive-positive-citizenship levels with a pragmatic negative modality.
The semiotic square structure of the given sub-block. None of the military-citizenship relations in this graffiti predominate.
 Indicators such as death, war, struggle, military action, external defense are used to represent the military, and life, peace, reconciliation, civil action, civil defense indicators are used to represent the military.
Subblock 3. The image of Benjamin Yeghoyan. On the wall of YSU Faculty of Physics (Appendices 1.3, 2).
"He was the weapon of the tank, your weapon is knowledge…."
The main meaning of this graffiti is the practical meaning of the knowledge և tank, and the opposition is created when we try to observe the relations in the struggle.
 When the tank և knowledge is considered as a means of struggle, the soldier has no other way to fight, except for weapons.
  And the citizen must fight with knowledge, to ensure internal protection.
 The tank is a symbol of external defense obligations, and knowledge is a symbol of internal defense.
The main message is as follows ․ If a soldier defends with a weapon, then you owe it to yourself to have knowledge, with which you can also be useful to your homeland.
 In other words, the idea of ​​serving the homeland as a soldier and a citizen is being discussed again.
 If the exemplary image of a soldier should be used by the tank as a weapon, then the exemplary image of a citizen should be used as knowledge.
 Thus, the main idea of ​​graffiti is to emphasize that each of us has an obligation to the homeland ․ If the means of a soldier is armament, then the means of a citizen is knowledge.
 Three actors change in the system of graffiti actants ․ Object - means of fulfilling an obligation, aids - a soldier, weapons, disruptive means - lack of knowledge.
This graffiti, as in the previous two, expresses pragmatic-cognitive levels of the military with a positive modality, "cognitively positive" with a pragmatic negative modality of citizenship.
The semiotic square structure of the given sub-block. In this graphite-military-citizenship relationship, the military prevails.
 Indicators such as death, war, struggle, armaments, external defense are used to represent the military, and indicators of peace, reconciliation, civil attribute, and internal defense are used to represent citizenship.
In fact, these three graffiti do not represent three separate narratives, but are part of one idea, one text, one narrative.
There is one story-message here, which is divided into 3 parts և presented in different points of the same spatial plane.
 R. Abajyan is the beginning of the story, A. Urfanyan is the middle, and B. Yeghoyan is the end.
  These graffiti have 3 levels: ideological (duty), action (defense mission) and instrumental (weapon).
 These are correspondingly equivalent to the relations of knowledge, intention and power of the narrative structure.
  Abajyan graffiti presents the knowledge connection, the indicator of the ideological level, emphasizes the ideology of everyone's obligation to the homeland, becoming a driving force of the general narrative.
 Urfanyan's graffiti presents the connection of intent, the indicator of the level of action, the ideology of which reduces from the meta-level to the level of a concrete action, showing its manifestation - protection.
 Yeghoyan's graffiti presents the connection of power.
 It is an instrumental level indicator that should enable the implementation of the action level, or barrier.
  This demonstrates the responsibility of each actor - an exemplary means of defense.
  In addition, narrative militarism is manifested in a մատ pragmatic և´ cognitive level in a positive mode, and citizenship in a cognitive level in a positive modality, and in a pragmatic level in a negative modality.
 This means that there are exemplary behavioral models of citizenship that do not correspond to the actions of citizens, while the military is in line with expectations.
  Through this he tries to direct the graffiti to the citizens in order to show the expected behavior.
 Thus, the general narrative can be derived. After the end of the four-day war in April, these three graffiti created with the support of YSU Student Council, initiated by the author, are aimed at spreading patriotic ideology among young people.
  The narrative constructed through these graffiti states that every person has an obligation to the homeland, regardless of the fact that they change depending on the role of the person (citizen or soldier).
Urging the citizen not to leave the homeland, the narrative shows that this action is not exemplary, it is equal to betrayal.
  The obligations towards the homeland must be fulfilled, but since the roles are different, the responsibilities are different, so the obligation attributed to each role must be clarified.
  At this stage, the narrative emphasizes defense, noting that the soldier is responsible for external and the citizen for internal defense.
  Implementing internal defense is identified with learning.
  The narrative then focuses on the use of the actual mechanisms for fulfilling the obligation.
 In the case of a soldier, it is armament (the tank was used for expression), and for a citizen, it is knowledge.
 Through knowledge, the citizen, particularly the young, must be able to defend the internal borders of the homeland.
  In each graffiti, in addition to the word and the image, the name of the hero is presented, which performs the function of reinforcing the given person և event in the memory and forming the collective memory.
  In the superficial structure of the text, it is aimed at preserving the vivid memory of the soldiers, but at a deeper level, it should also contribute to internal consolidation.
This narrative shows that in order to be a hero of the homeland, one does not have to die.
  The citizen can also fulfill his duty - to learn during his life, to acquire knowledge, thus serving the homeland.
It is interesting that at all levels of the narrative there are equal relations between the citizenship and the military.
  In other words, the military is presented as a role that is dutifully performed, in contrast to the role of citizenship.
 However, these two roles are shown in equality, emphasizing that the two roles are equally important for the homeland.
  This increases the capacity of citizenship and contributes to increasing the responsibility of the citizen.
 The goal is one: to give citizenship a proper role specific to the military.
LITERATURE [2] Hutchinson J., 'Warfare, remembrance and national identity. In.
 A. Leoussi and S.Grosby (eds). Nationalism and Ethnosymbolism.
  History, Culture and Ethnicity in the Formation of Nations', Edinburgh.
 Edinburgh University Press, 2007, pp. 42-54. [3] Malesevic S., 'Sociological Theory and Warfare', 2011, pp. 10-2, 13-4, URL.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/272678504_Sociological_Theory_and_Warfare (Accessed.
 11.05.2018). [4] Mann M., 'The Sources of Social Power I:
 A History of Power from the Beginning toA.D. 1760 '. Cambridge.
 Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 112-4. [5] Snyder G., 'Graffiti Lives.
 Beyond the Tag in New York's Urban Underground ', NYU [7] Греймас А. G., "Structural semiotics".
  Поиск Метода ", Academic project St. MICHIKIAN MILITARY MANIFESTATIONS GRAPHITES IN THE APRIL FOUR-DAY FREEDOM FIGHTER GRAFFITS
