THE WITNESS OF THE WITNESSES AND THE CONVERSATION OF THEIR PERSECUTORS AS AN EARLY MEASUREMENT FOR THE FORMATION OF A CHRISTIAN SOCIETY THROUGH THE WAY OF THE ARMENIAN This image is dedicated to the last part of the Christian ideology.
 Within the framework of the article, we aim to understand the characteristic scenarios with which the idea of ​​conversion was agreed.
 We have also tried to understand the deep contradictions between the witnesses, their persecutors, as opposing burdens, the extreme difference, as a key factor in their conversion.
  The work attempts to approach the characteristics of the mentioned opposites in a new way, the motives for the actions, the symbolism of the miracles that take place.
  It is noteworthy that in such a way it is possible to form a certain idea about the ideas of good, moral, social good in the medieval Armenian reality.
  It is very interesting to understand with these examples the substitutions of the qualifications "good" և "bad", "right" և "wrong", "good" և "evil" and the non-equal essence, in particular, from the point of view of the accepted moral principles of the distant past.
 To address these Genesis questions requires knowledge of the conditions and circumstances under which those values ​​were born, changed, rooted, or forgotten.
There are many stories about Christian conversion in the medieval Armenian reality, in which Christian witnesses, angels, and government officials have a special place.
 In these stories, two opposing poles are clearly visible, the characteristics of which stand out in different sources with their exaggeration and extreme manifestation of features.
  This principle of extremism is preserved in all the stories of our conversion.
At the heart of the article are the two most famous stories of conversion: "The Martyrdom of the Hripsime Virgins and the Conversion of King Trdat" իպ "The Conversion of Cyprian".
Agatangeghos gives the following descriptions of one of the most famous witnesses in the Armenian reality, Hripsimeankuys, in his work "History of Armenia". "..... were isolated in the mountains, vegetarian, temperate, decent, sacred women, full of Christian faith, who, night and day, always with glory and blessing, prayed with dignity to God.
 Their chief name was Gayane, who had a son, one of the daughters of a pious man, from the royal family, whose name was Hripsime. [1]
  Contrary to all these positive and noble descriptions, King Trdat presents himself to Agatangeghos as an arrogant, pagan, arrogant monarchist who wants to satisfy his desires in every possible way.
 Seeing Hripsime, Trdat is enchanted by her beauty, wants to take her by force, but refuses.
  The king then ordered Gayane to be threatened with death in order to persuade his son to obey the king's order.
 However, the mother reprimanded Hripsime, ordering her not to be afraid and not to obey the pagan king.
 To oppose those words, the king's men severely beat him, struck him in the mouth with stones, broke his teeth, and then dragged him away from the room.
 Hripsime is left alone with the king, but the king, proclaimed with great power and bravery, loses to the virgin, strengthened by the Holy Spirit, after almost seven hours.
 The narrator testifies that leaving the palace, Hripsime prayed in a high place, where he was found, and the palace princes tortured him indescribably.
  Upon hearing of Hripsime's martyrdom, the king was deeply saddened, and then ordered revenge on Mother Gayane.
 The plague of the lord came upon the king and his entourage, and the king took the form of a wild boar.
 All his relatives were in mourning.
 At that time, God saw the old king's sister, Khosrovidukht, and said that Gregory the Illuminator, who had been kept in Khor Virap for 15 years, could only save the king.
The Enlightener first laid the bodies of the virgins on the ground (although their bodies were outside for 9 days and nights, but were preserved by the power of God), then he ordered the king to repent.
  After 70 days of repentance, with the prayer of St. Gregory the Illuminator, God restored Trdat to the human form.
It is noteworthy that the second story semantically appeals to the martyrdom of the Hripsime virgins, King Trdat.
  It tells the story of Patriarch Cyprian ույ Virgin Hustian.
 First a pagan, then a holy bishop of Christ, who is considered to be the pride of Christianity, Kyprianos 1 [9], originally from Antioch, all Christian churches 1 The testimonies about Cyprian և Justiane were compiled by P. Franchide Cavalier.
 There are some inconsistencies in the preserved memories about them.
  We are talking about Cyprian, who was active in Antioch, and in the other case, Cyprian of Carthage.
  The bishop of Carthage is mentioned in 379, while he has his place in the celebrations of the Antioch people from the earliest period, he is well acquainted with the literary materials he left.
 The pagan philosopher who lived in the third century, who was known as "brave orator", "magician", "priest's", was nicknamed Tasikos Kekilios.
 His contemporaries were so famous that they were even afraid of his shadow. According to legend, he was so skilled in magic that he bravely gave orders to the heroes, who did not hesitate to do his will. [4]
It so happened that a young man named Aglaidas wanted to marry a beautiful virgin named Justia ․ He sent a lot of expensive gifts, beautiful clothes, gold and silver, but the virgin, undisturbed wealth, returned it all.
  The young man turns to Cyprian, who uses all his magic skills.
  Cyprian remained blind and deaf to the power of the sign of the Lord's cross. He repeatedly sent for "fierce prostitution" to seduce Justin, who in his imagination portrayed the young Aglavidus (in foreign literature, Aglaidas) trying to seduce him, but with a fervent lustful temptation. By weakening the body through fasting and fasting, he overcomes the desire that arises in him, and the shameful and defeated characters return to Cyprianosimot.
 When the roles appeared to tempt Justinian, he was immediately crucified, relying on the cross of Christ, and then he turned to the Heavenly Bridegroom with his heart, and at the same time they disappeared immensely. [2]
 At that moment, Cyprian realized that only those who were defeated by the sign of the cross in the name of Christ were powerless.
 He thought that if the crucifix had such power, how much the Crucified One would have, then, turning around, he renounced the art of evil, relying on the Savior.
The following two conversions can be traced back to the hidden aspects of the story.
The first consequence is that first there is a conflict between two opposing parties, where on one side there are people with high positions in the society. King Trdat, on the one hand, and Cyprian, on the other, seek the temptation of the virgins, Hripsime և Justiane, who have sworn allegiance to Christianity.
  Resisting all temptation, Cyprian in the Confession texts dates back to 350-370.
  In addition, the list of bishops of Antioch did not include a bishop named Cyprian.
 This issue was discussed at a conference held in 1959 at Oxford University.
  Eventually, due to the lack of historical truth of the legends, Cyprian and Justinian were removed from the list of saints of the Vatican in 1968 (they were canonized in the 4th century).
In this case, the virgins provoke the wrath of the obvious anti-heroes, which is inevitably followed by inhuman torture.
 Surprisingly, it is the numbered witnesses of the Christian faith who become the key to the salvation of their persecutors.
The purposeful direction of these two loads is especially remarkable here.
 Virgos try their best to spread the good, to enlighten society, to establish equality and justice, relying on God.
Their every action is based on faith, it is aimed at spreading that faith.
 In the case of King Trdat իպ Cyprian, we see the following.
The pagan king believed in pagan gods and considered himself the viceroy of the earth.
  Awareness of one's personal position, interest, and appreciation, as well as such cruelty to the Christian faith, is mostly presented as the result of the king's darkness, while conversion is the way of his enlightenment and salvation.
In the case of Cyprian, we see the same aspirations as in the case of King Trdat.
 Here Cyprian uses all his skills to seduce Justinian, to whom he's instinctively aspires but is doomed to failure.
The second consequence is that the principle of impersonality prevailed among the witnesses.
 From this point of view, an interesting comparison can be made between a virgin's "candle".
 Just as a candle is lit or "sacrificed" around the glittering one, so the virgin is tortured and martyred for a noble value.
 Their love for God և His word was spread out of self-interest.
 Their main aspiration was to restore the element that stood above them, the victory of that element (if we look at it from the point of view of the struggle of two opposite poles).
 Only as a result of such a victory would the society become kinder, more virtuous, more moral.
  If we try to analyze the actions of the opposite load from this point of view, we will see that in the case of both Cyprian and King Trdat, the overestimation of one's self is paramount, the absoluteness of a person's voluntary identity.
 The individual standing at the head of the pyramid, who acts for his own benefit, ignoring the interests of the society, who imagines the preservation of his authority only in that way.
Of course, the main reason for the above-mentioned actions and the consequences arising from them is ignorance, which makes a person blind, guided by instincts, weak, in this case, in need of self-affirmation.
 As Yeghishe says: "... և all evils enter the human mind through ignorance.
 The blind are deprived of the rays of the sun, and ignorance deprives them of a perfect life.
 It is better to be blind in eyes than to be blind in mind.
 Just as the soul is larger than the body, so the sight of the mind is greater than the sight of the body. ”[3]
The other possible implication is that it is an ongoing and irreversible process of Cyprian, King Trdat.
 In the above-mentioned stories, there is a reversible process: the dedication of witnesses to the Christian faith.
  In history, such a case when virgins deny Christianity and turn to pagan religion.
The virgins also had a number of characteristics, the most important of which, perhaps, was the gift of healing.
 One of the bright examples is St. Nune, who preached Christianity in Georgia.
  St. Nune manages to heal the Georgian Queen Nana, her son and the king, thus bringing the whole court to faith.
 He renounces all precious gifts and preaches the Gospel of the Lord.
 She is known for her healing, the Virgin Hermione, who founded a clinic where she healed all the needy by preaching the word of the Lord.
 There are many examples from this point of view.
An integral part of the stories of conversion, the stories of the behavior of the witnesses, are the visions, the angels, who guided or saved the virgins when necessary.
 For example, the virgin St. Euphemia, who was stoned to death for adhering to the Christian faith, was tortured "trying to squeeze under the wheels, but at the same time angels came down from heaven to free the virgin from torture."
In conclusion, the many real or unreal stories surrounding the early Christian witnesses were intended to highlight the sinful, cruel, dark nature of the pagan world by presenting obvious contradictions, showing the way to God's enlightenment, purification, and salvation.
LITERATURE [1] Agatangeghos, History of Armenia, Yerevan, 1977, pp. 67-99.
[2] Babajanyan M., Kiprianos, Yerevan, 2014, URL.
 http:
//www.irates.am/en/1396943729 (the link was made on 07.06.2018).
[3] Yeghishe, On Vartan և on the Armenian War, Yerevan, 1994, p. 59.
[4] Ghazaryan D., Patriarch Cyprian և Virgin Hustiane 15th-16th centuries ․ ribbon in the artistic decoration of charms, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 244-8.
[5] Pure Blessed Witnesses, Yerevan, 2013, URL.
 http:
//www.holytrinity.am/posts/view/941 (the link was made on 06.06.2018).
[6] Sugiasyan K., St. Nune և St. Mane virgins, Yerevan, 2014, URL.
 http:
//www.surbzoravor.am/post/view/surb-nune-ev-surb-mane-kuyserihishatakutyan-or (link made on 04.06.2018).
[7] Saint Hermone և The Nectarine Virgins, Yerevan, 2018, URL.
 http:
//www.qahana.am/am/holidays/2018-10-02/1 (the link was made on 05.06.2018).
[8] Behavior of Saints, Volume B, S. Etchmiadzin, 2010, URL.
 http:
//www.surbzoravor.am/post/view/vkayabanutyun-surb-epimia-kuysi-ev-qristosiqarasuniny-vkaneri (link made on 04.06.2018).
Harutyunyan THE MARTYRITY OF THE INGAU WOMEN AND THE CONVERSATION OF THEIR PERSECUTORS AS AN EARLY CHRISTIAN MEANS: Continuing the Form
