VERGILIOS, AS A FACT OF DANTA'S SELF-RECOGNITION "THE DIVINE COMEDY" Dante Alighieri's "Divine Comedy", like all the ancient monuments of world literature, has had unconditional admirers over the centuries.
 Some praised the "Comedy" for its philosophical and theological content, some for the motives of the Independence of National Liberation (Hugo Faclo, Giacomo Leopardi, Mazzini, etc.), many praised his high poetic art, and some called him "Dante" just a poet. 1.
 Numerous studies have been done on scientific works, but Dante's "Comedy" continues to be in the center of attention of literary critics.
  In this large-scale "divine poem", the theme of personal and universal tragedy is, unfortunately, the main one.
 These two topics, of course, do not appear separately, they have a strong mixture - the problem of lighting.
Dante had his counselor, teacher և companion in Hell and Atonement.
  And so he becomes the companion of all mankind, takes his hand, shows cruel contents and gloomy idiots.
 And this non-self-serving Dante wanted to give humanity a powerful weapon, wisdom, with which he could fight against the most powerful enemy, the self-sinner "I".
 He did not even have this weapon before he appeared in the dark forest.
 Here the poem opens before us. Halfway through his life, Dante finds himself in a dark forest, where Mount Lushen can be seen, but it was not so easy to reach. You have to overcome the three beasts (leopard, lion, female wolf), which allegorically represent the three human sins.
Help is not late. He meets Virgil, in Dante's words, "the glory and beauty of all poets."
 The famous Roman poet Virgil is presented here as a symbol of intelligence, as well as imperial power.
  It is the duty of the intellect to guide people to earthly happiness.
  Virgil saves Dante from the "dark forest" և leads him to Hell through Heaven and Pentecost.
  Virgil sang the empire in his Aeneid, describing Aeneas' visit to the afterlife, and in The Pastor, according to a medieval commentary, prophesying the coming of the Messiah.
  However, this is not the end of Virgil's supremacy. The pagan Virgil is given a role in Dante's poem, which was usually played by an angel in the medieval "vision genre".
 This bold move is explained by the fact that Virgil was considered a Christian in the Middle Ages before Christ.
 Dante praised Virgil higher than all the fiction of the Middle Ages.
 Virgil was for him a philosopher, a beloved poet, but most importantly, he was an enlightener, a great enlightener, through whom Dante gets the answers to all his questions, and we, ours.
 Behold, the Dantean Hell opens before us. It contains the very first, in Limbos, where the souls remain who either did not sin but were not saved because they either died before being baptized or lived before Christianity, including Virgil himself. We see in him a compassionate man, whose pain is caused by the sufferings of all the people within.
2 Dante Alighieri, Divine Comedy, Yerevan, 1983, pp. 6-7.
 The torment of the people below has spread sorrow on my face. He answered, "It seems to you from fear."
This is how the Great Teacher accompanies Dante, contains, tells, explains, "establishes a connection between" Dante "and those who suffer there.
  The great master was Dante the Defender. In the fifth, where the angry were tormented, in the swamp they met a gloomy man, the knight Filippo Daily Adimar, a rich, arrogant, angry man, who was called Argenti, meaning "silver", because he used to wrap his horse in silver.
  The latter, angry with Dante for calling himself a cursed bastard, wants to harm him, but again it is not too late for Virgil to help his "son". At that hour he angrily extended his hand to me. But my leader pushed him, saying: "Get rid of it quickly, get lost with the other dogs" 2.
 Here we see the great love of Virgil for Dante, the latter embraces him, kisses him and says: "Angry soul, may the one who conceives you be blessed forever."
 As we have already noticed, Virgil was not just a companion, he was not just a representative. He was angry and disgusted, sometimes experiencing their pain with sinners and sometimes smiling at the face of justice.
 Here we can say that if we consider Hell (he's Kavaran և Paradise) a stagnant place where there is no movement, no change, և the only one moving is Dante, then Virgil is not inferior to Dante.
  In the fourteenth song 3, where the blasphemers were lying under a torrent of fire and flames, Dante and Virgil meet Capan, one of the seven besieged kings who fought against Thebes.
 Here we see the passionate "angry Virgil. This was new even to Dante.
 My master then spoke with passion openly, As I had never heard from him. "O Kapan, you are always deserving of being punished for your arrogance. That punishment is right for you and suitable for Your wicked behavior and manners. ”4
 Dante's intellectual companion does not always express his concerns and opinions.
 The Thirty-Third Song, in which we see the following, is especially noteworthy. The ninth contains a sentence punishing those who betray or betray those with a particular reason of trust.
 Ugolino was the count of Donoratico.
 Or he was from the Ghibelline dynasty, but in 1275 He came to an agreement with his son-in-law, Giovanni Visconti, to make the guelphs the ruler of his native Pisa.
 He was exiled for conspiracy, but returned to Pisa the following year and eventually became mayor of the Republic of Pisa.
 1288 In the summer of 1918, the Archbishop of the Ghibelline Party, Roger Daley Ubaldini ու Gualand, led a revolt against the Sismond dynasty.
 Ugolino was arrested along with his two sons and two grandchildren and thrown into a fortress.
 And after a few months of imprisonment, all five died of starvation in 1289. on February 5.
And here, Ugolino tells Dante և Virgilio his terrifying story, which would shock even the most indifferent heart.
 Raising his mouth (not his head), he tells how Roger betrayed him and locked himself in the castle.
 Through the narrow aisle of the castle, he saw the birth of many moons և deaths until the day he dreamed of Roger being chased by a wolf and his dogs with his dogs those wolves and cubs become human վերած sons in human words).
 In the morning, at the hour when the jailer usually brings food, he suddenly hears that the door of the fortress is being nailed.
 One day and one night passes, Ugolino gnaws his hands sadly, the children, thinking that his father is suffering from hunger, offer him to be satisfied with their body.
  On the fourth day, the children begin to die, one after the other.
 He weeps bitterly for two days, touches their corpses in the dark, then his hunger overcomes his deep sorrow.
1 Dante Alighieri, page 21.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., Pp. 67-72.
4 Ibid., P. 69.
5 Ibid., P. 527.
 Of course, the question of whether such a thing happened or not is one side of the problem.
  We are more interested in Dante's opinion on this horrible incident և Virgil's attitude.
  Did Dante know more about this story than he reports? Probably not.
Jorge Luis Borges in his work "Nine essays about Dante" gives an etymological and interesting solution to all this. In real life, man, appearing among a variety of options, chooses one and forgets the others.
  But in the ambiguous world of art, which seems "reliable" and "suspicious", everything is different.
 In the castle of hunger, Ugolino "eats his children" and does not eat.
  It is this torturous uncertainty, this distrust that creates that strange song.
 Dante saw Ugolino in two possible pre-mortal tortures, this is how generations see him1.
 This is Dante. What about Virgil?
 Virgil's silence is strange. He who presents, speaks, admires or humiliates is not seen in this song at all.
  This is where we find the image of Virgil. Who was Virgil, just one of the great poets of the ancient world, who is presented as a wise companion of Dante? no
  We see Hell (he's Kavaran և Paradise) through Dante's eyes, and Dante as presented by Virgil, that is, logically we see it as Virgil.
 Virgil is silent because Dante's inner voice is silent, or we can say that these two are the same.
  Virgil says what Dante already knew, he leads the light of Dante through self-knowledge and self-purification.
  Virgil was not just a companion, he was Dante's conscience, Dante's inner voice, he's Dante himself on his way out of his dark hell.
Astghik OhanyanVERGILIOS - AS A FACTOR OF DANTA'S SELF-RECOGNITION "POINT COMEDY" POEM Keywords: Dante, Virgil, enlightenment, self-knowledge, hell.
