SYNTHESIS OF SOME PLACES POLYANYLINES RESEARCH One of the most important directions in the development of the chemistry and physics of modern high molecular compounds is the study of the synthesis and properties of polymers endowed with certain applied properties.
  For this reason, the synthesis and study of new organically active polymers is developing very fast.
  Electroactive polymers, in combination with վեր various super-oxides, by salting, by interactions (called doping) increase the electrical conductivity by up to 10-12 degrees.
 It should be noted that in the unbonded state, polymers of this class have very low electrical conductivity.
Organically active polymers are coupled systems whose chain may consist of only carbon atoms (may contain at least one atom).
 These are of great scientific and practical importance due to their physical and mechanical properties.
  They differ from inorganic semiconductors in that they are cheap and easy to process, due to which they occupy a special place in various technical fields.
Of these polymers in particular, polyanylin (PANI), due to its easy synthesis, low monomer cost, manageable properties, environmental stability, is used as an anti-corrosion coating, antistatic agent, bio and chemosensor component, as a printing ink, etc. [1].
 However, the main disadvantage of PANI is that it is almost insoluble, which makes it difficult to develop and use in some areas.
  Fiber-optic PANIs have been available for commercial sale since late 1990.
It has been found that PANI, depending on the degree of oxidation, can exist in three different forms.
Leukoemeraldine (y = 1) - is a fully restored PANI egg.
  It is a colorless substance that slowly oxidizes in air.
Pernigroaniline base (y = 0) - is a completely oxidized egg of PANI.
their violet salts are unstable, Pernigroaniline are compounds.
Emeraldine base (y = 0․5) - is the medium oxidized egg of PANI.
  It is a dark-purple substance, which, by doping with strong acids, produces a green salt with a higher electrical conductivity of about 10-1 C / cm։.
The degree of oxidation of polyaniline is determined by the value of y.
  If y = 0 corresponds to a fully oxidized pernigraniline horse, y = 0.5 corresponds to an emeraldine horse, and y = 1 corresponds to a fully restored PANI leukoemaraldine horse.
  Pernigranlin և emeraldine may have a salt or base.
Leukoemaraldine is a colorless substance.
  This polymer contains monophenylene։ amine groups, which oxidize slowly in air, making it difficult to obtain and use.
Pernigroaniline consists of phenylene և quinine diimin units.
  The quinodiimine group is highly reactive to unstable nucleophiles, especially water.
  Penigranilin և its salts are easily decomposed in air.
Emeraldine egg is the most stable egg of PANI, it consists of phenylenemine և chinonodymium units.
  The transmitter is PANI emeraldine horse salt, which is obtained by protonation of emeraldine base with organic-inorganic acids.
 Due to the latter, Emeraldine's electrical conductivity increases up to 10 degrees.
For the further development of the field of conductive polymers, new polymers can be obtained, which will have high electrical conductivity and easy workability.
In recent decades, there has been a great deal of interest in substituted polyanilines, as the presence of a substituent in the chain can give the polymer new properties.
 It is known that the presence of sulf groups in the chain increases the solubility of polyaniline և almost does not affect the electrical conductivity of the polymer.
 Due to sulfo groups, polyaniline can be self-contained ոպ to obtain its own specific conductivity up to -1 10-1 C / cm [3].
Interaction of polymer 1 with Na2S2O3 x 5H2O1.
In 2 molar ratio of formic acid. 0.576 g (2.32 mmol) Na2S2O3 x 5H2O was added to ի 15 ml of formic acid mixture of 0․0208 g (1․155 mmol) of polymer 1 and mixed at 150 ° C for 66 h for 14 days.
  The reaction mixture was then basified with aqueous NaHCO3 solution to a pH of 9: 0-50 C.
 Mix for 8 hours, filter, wash the residue with distilled water to a neutral medium և S2O3
Absence of 2- ions.
  The material (polymer 2) was vacuum dried over P2O5 to constant weight.
 The output is 0.224 g.
Interaction of Polymer 2 with HCl. 0.053 ml (0.6 mmol) x HCl was added to the 0.0707 g (0.2 mmol) polymer 2 և 0.9 mL mixture of DMSO.
 Mixed for 3 hours at 80-850 C.
 The reaction mixture was then basified with Na2CO3 to pH 9.
  Mix at 4 h at room temperature, then filter, wash the residue with distilled water to a neutral medium և Cl-, SO4
The absence of ions.
 The precipitate (polymer 3) was vacuum dried over P2O5 to constant weight.
Interaction of polymer 3 with 43% H2O2. To 0.036 g (0.17 mmol) of polymer 3 was added 0.121 ml (1.53 mmol) of 43% H2O2 and mixed for 4 h at room temperature.
 Then 5 ml of distilled water was added to the reaction mixture.
  Filtered, the precipitate was washed with distilled water to the absence of H2O2.
  The material (polymer 4) was vacuum dried over P2O5 to constant weight.
 The output is 0.032 g.
Interaction of polymer 2 with 43% H2O2. To 0.06355 g (0.18 mmol) of polymer 2 was added 1.16 mL (14.6 mmol) of 43% H2O2 and mixed for 12 h at room temperature.
 The processing was done with the above-mentioned egg.
 The output is 0.042 g.
Touching. To the well-crushed polymer was added a calculated quantity of 0.178 N iodine solution, then the mixture was left in the dark for 5 days.
  The residue was filtered off, washed with CCL4 until the iodine disappeared.
 The material was dried by water-oil vacuums.
 Depth of soil to a pan, which impedes rooting, is calculated as Y = iodine moles / moles of the repetitive structural unit of the polymer.
Discussion of the received data. In order to obtain the substituted polyanilines, a fully oxidized PANI-like pernigraniline-like polymer (polymer 1) was selected as the starting material.
 This polymer is obtained in a cheap, single-step manner by polycondensation by oxidation of p-phenylenediamine (PFDA) in an organic medium, which is the synthetic single-step method of a polymer with such a structure.
 Because the quinonodiimin groups in polymer 1 are highly reactive և can self-condense with the terminal amino groups [5], a polymer containing the terminal amide groups was taken to avoid side reactions (Figure 1).
Scheme 1 Figure 1 Then, based on the polymer 1 base, the aim is to obtain substituted PANIs with better solubility in organic solvents.
 To this end, polymer 1 interacts with sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate in an acid medium.
 Obtained up to 100% conversion of thiosulfate groups (polymer 2).
Figure 2 The solubility of the resulting polymer 2 in organic solvents և is small, so the aim is to convert thiosulfate groups into sulpho groups through conversions, as the sulfo groups have been reported in the literature to increase the solubility of polyanilin [6].
The conversion of the thiosulfate group to the sulfuric group [7] was first performed by SS-bond acid hydrolysis (x HCl) to give a compound containing thiol groups, and then the resulting compound was oxidized1.
9 43% H2O2.
 However, the resulting compound was also poorly soluble in organic solvents - DMFA, DMSO, which could lead to the formation of sulfur bridges.
Then, an attempt was made to immediately oxidize polymer 2 with a higher molar ratio of 43% H2O2, under the same conditions, as a result of which a soluble polymer in NMP, DMFA, DMSO solvents was obtained (polymer 5).
 It is possible that large amounts of the oxidant may lead to the oxidation of the phenylene amine groups to form quinonodiimin groups again.
Figure 3 Doping of the obtained polymers with iodine was studied (Table 1).
Depth of material:
Specific Table 1 Electrical Conductivity, Electron Absorption Spectroscopy is a convenient way to study the interaction of S / cmPolymer 1 և thiosulfate group.
 Since polymer 1 has characteristic absorptions in the region of 270-290 nm, which is typical for phenylenamine groups և 410-420 nm, see In the region, it is characteristic of quinododiimin groups [5], then the disappearance of the latter as a result of the reaction or the decrease of its intensity indicates that the reaction took place up to 100%.
  Figure 4 shows the change in UV-spectra of the resulting polymers.
 According to preliminary data, the IC spectra of polymer 5 are similar to those of the previously synthesized sulfate group containing the polyaniline group.
 The fact that UV is seen in Polymer 5 is evidenced by the formation of quinone-diimin groups. In the spectrum 410-420 nm region appeared in the region.
Figure 4. UV spectrum of polymers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thus, a new, single-step method has been developed to obtain polyaniline containing sulfo groups from thiosulphate groups substituted in some organic solvents.
LITERATURE [1] Boeva ​​Zh ․, Sergeyev V․, Polyaniline.
 Synthesis, Properties, and Application, PolymerScience Series C, 56 (1), 2014, DOI.
 10.1134 / S1811238214010032 ․ Mariam Baghdasaryan, Mirakyan Naghash SYNTHESIS OF SOME POLYANYLINS INSTRUCTIONS RESEARCH Keywords: polyaniline, electrical conductivity, sodium thiosulfate, self-adhesion, sulfochm.
