WAYS TO OVERCOME FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION PROBLEMS IN ARMENIA The existence of a modern, modern financial market is of paramount importance for any country that seeks to integrate into the world economy by gaining a favorable position.
 Having a strong financial system is crucial to meeting global challenges.
  The entities that form the core of the financial system are financial intermediaries.
  According to the classical notion, the main function of financial intermediaries is to transfer funds from institutions with surplus financial resources to institutions in need of them1.
 However, in the modern world, the scope of functions of financial intermediaries has greatly expanded, from the daily service of consumers to the implementation of large-scale investment projects.
The promotion of financial intermediation is an issue on the agenda for Armenia today, as in case of having an advanced financial market, qualitatively new preconditions for development will be created in the country.
  The urgency of promoting financial intermediation becomes especially apparent when we look at it in terms of increasing business activity, economic growth, and access to investment resources.
  The problem of involving the masses of the population in the financial market is mainly connected with the adoption of an appropriate strategy and the implementation of systemic reforms.
 Reforms should be accompanied by the study of foreign experience through the introduction of successful mechanisms that have found their practical application in this field.
The paper presents the key issues in the financial intermediation system of the Republic of Armenia, points out examples of foreign policies aimed at increasing financial inclusion, as well as reveals the possibility of introducing foreign experience in the Armenian economy.
The culture of using the services of financial intermediaries in Armenia has shown a development tendency in recent years, contributing to the growth of the range of financial services.
  It should be noted, however, that the existing problems in the financial sphere of Armenia greatly hinder the pace of progress of the financial sector.
  The mentioned problems are not only interconnected in a chain, but, according to their origin, they are radically different. they start with public perceptions and stereotypes and end with problems "born" of the collapse of the world economy.
  Thus, the process of finding the source of the problem becomes more complicated, creating a need for Armenia to concentrate additional efforts and resources.
 Therefore, it is necessary to first define the most obvious problems, then look for the best solution to their complex solution.
One of the most pressing issues in the system of financial intermediation is the need to increase the financial literacy of the society.
  By financial literacy is meant not only the ability to plan and manage personal finances, but also the ability to recognize, differentiate, and use financial services.
  2012 year. The World Bank conducted a "Survey of Financial Capabilities" of Armenian households, the results of which showed the need to implement large-scale financial literacy programs in the Republic of Armenia. mediation, OGU №13 Newspaper (119), 2010.
Armenian consumers, like consumers in other countries, plan, save, borrow, repay, but often do not manage their personal finances effectively, do not take advantage of the diverse opportunities offered by the market, lack culture և existing Lack of knowledge, skills և awareness 1.
The problem of getting involved in the financial system exists all over the world.
  Today, 50% of the world's adult population has a bank account, and the rest is not involved in the financial market at all, with 2.5 billion people in need of financial intermediation, but there are barriers such as space, high interest rates and documentation requirements2.
 Increasing the level of financial involvement through financial education is a widespread trend all over the world.
  In particular, increasing financial involvement in Mexico has been one of the goals of the Mexican National Development Program since 2006, and in 2011. The Financial Education Council was established in May 2006 and is headed by the Minister of Finance3.
  Different principles of selection of target groups of the population are used in the strategy of financial education in different countries.
  For example, in the US National Financial Literacy Strategy, the target group is people who do not use financial intermediary services at all4, and in the Australian program of the same name, the target group is not singled out as such, but the emphasis is on increasing overall financial literacy5.
The first steps to increase financial literacy in Armenia were taken by the Central Bank of Armenia, which in 2013 Since October 2010 it has been announced as "My Finance Month", for two years now, numerous events have been held during the month: seminars, meetings, games-competitions aimed at increasing the interest of the population in financial management.
 Only recently, on November 13, 2014, the Government of the Republic of Armenia approved the National Strategy for Financial Education of the Republic of Armenia, which targets pupils, students, villagers, women, and those in need of financial education in this situation6.
 Many elements of international experience are included in the mentioned strategy, so Armenia has no choice but to post-implement the measures envisaged by the program, thus contributing to the increase of the number of people interested in financial services.
  At the same time, it is necessary to encourage the implementation of advertising and information campaigns by financial institutions, which will bring them one step closer to consumers.
 Promotion of banks through virtual social networks is widespread in Europe.
  One of the leaders in this field, the German Fideor Bank, has managed to ensure the access of customers' bank accounts through the FaceBook Connect system, at the same time facilitating the dissemination of information about its services on this large information platform 7.
Of course, it is not only through the implementation of educational projects that the level of mediation can be maximized.
  In fact, the existence of a weak financial market is conditioned by deeper problems.
  One of those problems is the availability of financial services.
 Accessibility can be interpreted from at least 3 perspectives: 1) Physical or spatial accessibility.
  In Armenia, especially in rural "border areas", the lack of financial institutions is a big problem.
  Banks mainly concentrate their branches in the regional centers, and for many villagers to go to the regional center և Financial service 1 For details, see “National Strategy for Financial Education of the Republic of Armenia”, Government of the Republic of Armenia, 2014. Annex N 1 to the protocol decision N 47 of the November 13 sitting.
2 See World Bank, Global Financial Development Report 2014.
 Financial Inclusion. Washington, DC.
3 See Atkinson A., Messy F., Promoting Financial Inclusion through Financial Education.
  OECD / INFE Evidence, Policies and (available at http: // www.
//dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k3xz6m88smp-en link).
4 See http for more details.
//www.treasury.gov/resourcecenter/financialeducation/Documents/NationalStrategyBook_12310%20(2).pdf.
5 See http for more details.
//www.financialliteracy.gov.au/media/218312/national-financial-literacy-strategy.pdf.
6 For details, see "National Strategy for Financial Education of the Republic of Armenia", RA Government 2014 Annex N 1 to the protocol decision N 47 of the November 13 sitting.
7 See http for more details.
with the link //economia.icaew.com/business/july-2013/fidor-banking-with-friends.
Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 34, 2013, p. 22, using them causes great difficulties.
 Spatial accessibility of financial services can be ensured by applying international experience by introducing the institute of alternative financial services in this field.
 This primarily refers to "Agent Banking" (or "Branchless Banking") և "Mobile Banking" systems.
  The essence of "Agent Banking" is to open branches in post offices or retail outlets that provide financial services.
  Russian Post receives 46% of its revenue from the 42,000 post offices of its network, located in 29,500 rural areas և 12,000 suburbs, where the population does not exceed 500 people1.
 It is estimated that only 25% of the adult population in Mexico has access to financial services, so bank agents have opened around 3,000 branches in retail outlets, which has reduced transaction and transportation costs and increased financial involvement2.
Branchless Banking has two strengths. First, it provides wider access to financial information և services to financially inclined individuals; on the other hand, it facilitates the inclusion of the under-served segment of consumers in the financial services sector3.
Today there are about 1 billion people in developing countries who do not have access to financial services, but have a mobile phone.
  Therefore, in the modern world today, the "Mobile Banking" service 4 is widely used, which significantly increases the availability of financial services, especially in rural areas.
 In particular, the "WING" system, which allows mobile phone deposit deposits between companies at affordable rates, was introduced in Cambodia in January 2009, and a few months later captured 16 of the country's 24 regions.
  In the Philippines, the leading companies in the field of telecommunications "Smart Communications" Gl "Globe Telecom" introduced "Smart Money" և "G-Cash" systems, which today have 8 million users.
  The "Mobile Money for the Unbanked" program, which serves 20 million customers in Asia, Africa and Latin America5, is world-famous.
Thus, the problem of physical inaccessibility of financial services in Armenia can be solved by introducing the above-mentioned systems.
2) Unavailability due to high interest rates և documentary requirements.
This mainly refers to credit services, which is one of the most popular services in Armenia (loans provided by commercial banks increased by 11.2% in 2013, amounting to 1 trillion 709 billion drams6).
  The international comparative analysis showed that the real interest rate in Armenia is higher than in most comparable countries, և 1% behind only Georgia, and the analysis of the lending interest rate structure indicates the existence of a certain potential for interest rate reduction7.
  The problem is that the spread is high in Armenia, although recently it shows a decreasing tendency.
The high spread may be due to the large amount of funding provided by international financial organizations, which does not stimulate competition among banks8.
  Therefore, it is proposed to encourage the increase of interbank competition using international experience.
  In the UK, where the banking system is considered one of the most concentrated in the world, the recent introduction of the Current Account Switch Service greatly stimulated interbank competition, contributing to the decline in interest rates9.
 In 2008-2009, lending conditions by commercial banks have been tightened in Armenia, which 1 See Promoting Financial Inclusion through Innovative Policies, 31 March - 3 April 2009, Tokyo, p. 3 (available at http: // www.
//www.adbi.org/files/finance.innovative.policies.executive.summary.pdf).
2 Ibid., P.
3 See Mroueh M., Branchless Banking.
 Africa, the Middle East & Pakistan, US, 2013, page 1, (available at http: // www.
//www.tsys.com/Downloads/upload/Branchless-Banking-WP-012913-print.pdf link).
4 Do not confuse with "Online Banking".
5 See State of the Industry 2013.
 Mobile Financial Services for the Unbanked, London, 2014.
6 See Central Bank of Armenia, "Armenia's Financial System 2013", Yerevan, 2014.
7 See 2013-2014. National Competitiveness Report of Armenia, EV Consulting, "Economy և Values" Research Center, page 65.
8 See Republic of Armenia.
 Accumulation, competition և connectivity.
 World Bank, 2013, page 23.
9 See Barty J., Ricketts T., Promoting competition in the UK banking industry, 2014, available at https.
//www.bba.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/BBA_Competition_Report_23.06_WEB_2.0.pdf).
Important factors are the expectations of economic development, the uncertainty of customers' credit, the risk of collateral (in case of car loans).
  The tightening of mortgage lending conditions was mainly due to the high risk of mortgage lending, as the population incomes are declining, especially during the crisis years1.
3) Inaccessibility due to limited financial potential.
  The development of financial intermediation has a certain negative impact on the limited capital of financial intermediaries, and consequently, the limitation of the potential to provide financial support and implement large-scale investment projects.
  Therefore, the cooperative cooperation of various intermediaries for the implementation of large projects is encouraged, which can greatly contribute to the development and further expansion of the business.
  In this context, it should be noted that 89.5% of the gross assets of Armenian financial institutions belong to commercial banks2.
 This is evidence of the fact that the Armenian financial market has a low level of diversification.
Therefore, it is necessary to increase the role of financial institutions in the economy, such as investment funds, insurance companies, which in developed countries are the best managers of free money, customer capacity.
In order to ensure the stable operation of the financial market, investment flows to this sector are of primary importance, which can be both national and foreign in origin, with the amount of domestic investment directly dependent on the level of domestic savings, and foreign investment such factors as the size of the national economy և stability, opportunities առաջ progress և integration, legislative regulation և etc.
The level of domestic savings in Armenia is quite low, mainly short-term 3.
 Factors influencing the low level of savings include low incomes as well as high consumer spending, the existence of household debt obligations, and the lack of a habit of saving.
Experts offer interesting solutions to the latter problem, for example, increase savings through reminders.
  Researchers have worked with banks in Bolivia, the Philippines and Peru to find out how much savings reminders have affected deposit levels.
 Reminders increased deposits by an average of 6%, and messages that indicated a specific purpose had a positive impact on the level of deposits by 16 %4.
  That is, it is proposed to increase savings through motivation and the use of psychological stimuli.
Foreign investments have a great opportunity to influence the financial intermediation of the financial system of the Republic of Armenia, especially if they are made in the financial spheres.
  The implemented investments will contribute to the economic growth and development of our country, will increase the level of employment, as well as through them foreign mechanisms of management and cooperation will be introduced in Armenia, all of which will eventually be summarized in the financial market.
In general, there is a need for financial innovations in Armenia.
 Although the financial intermediaries of our country provide a large number of financial services, the process of introducing new services is rather slow.
 In this context, in particular, the reorganization of the management structure of banks is being created, creating a section on banking innovations5.
  The small use of new financial instruments is also related to legislative gaps.
For example, Armenia does not have separate laws for using such powerful tools. 1 See Financial Markets և Services / SS. Sukiasyan, AB Salnazaryan, GG Chatinyan, A.V. Nersisyan, A.O. Mheryan, A.V. Vardanyan /, Yerevan, 2014.
2 See Central Bank of Armenia, "Armenia's Financial System 2013", Yerevan, 2014.
3 See 2013-2014. National Competitiveness Report of Armenia, EV Consulting, "Economy և Values" Research Center, page 61.
4 See Goldberg J., Products and policies to promote saving in developing countries, IZA World of Labor, October, 2014, (available at http: // www.
//wol.iza.org/articles/products-and-policies-to-promote-saving-in-developing-countries-1.pdf).
5 See A. Mkhitaryan, Current Trends in Banking Innovation Development, Finance and Economics, # 7-8 (169170), 2014.
such as leasing, factoring, letter of credit, etc.
 Therefore, it is necessary to regulate these legislative gaps, creating a more stable basis for financial intermediation.
One of the indicators of the existence of a financial system developed in the modern world is the existence of a securities market that meets international standards.
  It provides alternative ways of mobilizing savings and allocating resources.
 The Armenian stock market is still developing.
 In order to increase the turnover of fixed assets (stocks, bonds), first of all, it is necessary to develop a culture of corporate governance in the Republic of Armenia, which will contribute to the emergence of a transparent field of activity and the use of competent professionals to achieve more significant success.
 The main problem with the bond market, unfortunately, is the high yield of government bonds, due to which the turnover of private bonds decreases.
  As for derivatives, the need for financial literacy already arises here at the organizational level.
In general, in Armenia at the state level there is a mismatch of reforms, chaos, lack of a complex approach1, so the reform programs should be complex in nature, targeting several areas of development.
The research showed that there are a large number of sufficient preconditions in Armenia today for the development of financial intermediation and having an advanced financial market.
 Summing up, let us present the steps that are proposed to be taken in the field of financial mediation promotion in Armenia: 1. Consistently implement financial education of the population by implementing the measures envisaged by the National Financial Education Strategy of the Republic of Armenia, as well as encourage advertising, educational or information campaigns aimed at increasing the interest in financial management among the population; 2. Ensure access to financial services in both traditional and alternative ways by introducing similar systems "Branchless Banking", "Mobile Banking", "Mobile Money for the Unbanked", 3. to promote competition between financial intermediaries by promoting access to credit resources; reduction of spread և reduction of documentary requirements, 4. Encourage cooperative cooperation of financial intermediaries, unification around large-scale investment projects, as well as contribute to the increase of the role of investment funds and insurance companies, 5. to contribute to the increase of domestic savings, as well as to create a favorable investment environment for attracting foreign investments; 6. Introduce the practice of identifying the real needs of consumers ացնելու implementing financial innovations, as well as correcting legislative gaps to ensure the free circulation of innovative tools; 7. Increase the capacity of corporate governance culture, develop close international cooperation in the field of securities market development, To reduce the yield on government bonds in order to develop the private bond market, to increase the turnover of derivatives, 8. Implement reforms in the financial sector in a systematic, comprehensive approach, in any case studying international experience, encouraging the use of internationally successful mechanisms.
1 See Sargsyan T., Problems of financial intermediation, XVI International Banking Congress, Days and Credit, 7/2007.
Tatjik Hovhannisyan WAYS OF OVERCOMING FINANCIAL MEDIATION PROBLEMS IN ARMENIA Keywords: financial intermediation, financial literacy, financial
access to services, diversification of the financial market, international
Cooperation, corporate governance, financial innovations.
