THE RUSSIAN POLITICS OF EASTERN ARMENIA XIX CENTURY IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE CENTURY (EXAMPLE OF THE PROVINCE OF ALEXANDRAPOL) XIX c. At the beginning of the 19th century, a favorable military-political situation was created for the conquest of Transcaucasia, and the tsarist authorities did not hesitate to seize the opportunity1.
  After occupying the Transcaucasian territory, the Russian authorities began to Russify the latter.
 By the way, by "Russification" we mean: a. Russian laws "administration", b. Resettlement of the Russian element in the region.
In order to populate the region with loyal people, to make the newly conquered regions attractive from a financial and economic point of view, the tsarist authorities in 1819 They tried to resettle 500 German-German families in the territories of present-day Georgia and Azerbaijan2.
  But the resettlement of the Germans did not bring the expected benefit, as the latter either quickly improved their economic situation, but led an isolated life, did not contribute to the overall development of the region.
 After the failure of the German plan, the authorities tried to solve the problem of newly conquered territory and fortify the Russian-Persian border by resettling 80,000 Malorussian (Ukrainian) Cossacks in the border regions of Eastern Armenia, creating "military settlements" there3.
Proponents of the Araks Cossack creation program Commander of the Caucasus Corps I. Paskich, գլխավոր General Staff of the Russian Army 1 For more details, see Diloyan V., Eastern Armenia in the First Thirty Years of the XIX Century և Armenian-Russian Relations, Yerevan, 1989.
2 Hayrapetyan A., Russian Immigrants in the Province of Alexandropol, The Historical and Cultural Heritage of Shirak (hereinafter referred to as the AMS), 8th International Conference, Gyumri, 2010, p. 90.
3 Hayrapetyan A., Arևelyan Shirak in the first half of the 19th century, Gyumri, 2005, p. 68.
They were Dibich 4.
 According to the latter, these military settlements were to grow and develop at the expense of regular supplies from Russia.
 These movements would first give an opportunity to liberate Mallorussia from the unnecessary population, at the same time would ensure the security of the Persian border, the obedience of the local peoples.
  After adapting to the new climate, the Cossacks would replace the Russian soldiers sent to the Transcaucasia from the Russian interior, which would prevent the high mortality rates in the troops5.
 In order to implement the program in 1827. Count P. A special committee headed by Tolstoy was set up to receive and resettle the Cossacks, as well as to set up 10 Cossack districts (each district was to be given 200,000 desiatins of 8,000 inhabitants) 6.
  However, the implementation of the above-mentioned program was not implemented in that period for a very long time due to the high cost.
Instead, Tsarism organized the immigration of 8,249 families of Persian-Armenians to settle some of its border areas with a reliable ethnic element.
  I. to resettle Malruskazaks in Eastern Armenia Paskich's second and third plans were not implemented for the same reasons.
  Disagreeing with the failure, in 1829 I. Paskich presented a new program to the court, this time proposing to settle 20,000 Cossack families in Eastern Armenia.
  "This court did not support this program, instead, as we know, only 95000 r. with gold և 380000 r. 12357 families organized the resettlement of Western Armenians with silver.
I. to establish Russian colonies in the region. Paskichich's third unsuccessful attempt dates back to 1830.
 This time the Prime Minister proposed to immediately hold an administrative division in the Transcaucasia "to establish a Russian government".
  "It is a necessary feature of an authoritarian state," he wrote, "to create it. Russian 4 Grigoryan Z. , page 17.
5 Hayrapetyan A., The ethno-demographic-religious situation in the province of Alexandropol (1840-1850), "Scientific works" of the Center of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia, vol. 6, Gyumri, 2003, page 74.
6 Barsamyan V., Griboyedov և Armenian-Russian relations, Yerevan, 1947, p. 104.
to establish colonies, military settlements, as well as settlements of Russian peasants ”7.
Although I. Despite Paskich's efforts, this program was not implemented due to its cost.
  The tsarist court seriously embarked on the Russification of Transcaucasia only in the 19th century. From the mid-1940s, when he began to pursue a policy of resettlement of Russian sectarians in order to consolidate his rule in the region and in Eastern Armenia.
In recent years, due to new demographic processes and the scientific-political importance of the issue, the interest in demographic issues has significantly increased.
 The study of the resettlement policy of Tsarism in the Transcaucasia is relevant insofar as the strategic-economic significance of the region for Russia can be understood, both in the XIX century, in the beginning of the XX century, and today.
  The Transcaucasia was the geographical gateway through which Russia penetrated Asia Minor.
The last program ևs I. It was Easter's "brilliant" idea.
 Still in 1830. In April 1945, he wrote a letter to the tsar, in which he described the resettlement of Russian sectarians in the Russian interior as a "troublemaker" in the Caucasus.
  Moreover, this program was proposed to be implemented through conscription. It was planned to conscript not only the healthy, but also the disabled, refugees and even vagrants8.
The authors of the first two resettlement plans for Eastern Armenia նախագահ The chairman of the Transcaucasian Temporary Resettlement Committee, Faden, was a member of the board of the General Board of the Transcaucasian Territory (last 7 Hayrapetyan A., The ethno-demographic-religious situation in the province of Alexandropol (1840-1850), p. 74.
8 Ibid., P.
The resettlement of the province of Alexandropol was carried out by his efforts).
In carrying out this policy, Tsarism first of all chose places close to Russia's climate, such as Lori, Gokchan, Dilijan and Zangezur.
  However, the first task of the colonizers was to reap economic benefits from these territories, because Tsarist concern was that agricultural products should be produced locally and not imported.
 To make this more illustrative, we present the view of the Russian author Shavrov on the economic necessity of the Caspian Basin. "Our economic interests in the Caspian Basin are so obvious that they are eye-popping.
 Why buy rice, cotton, in Egypt, in India, in America, when we can grow all that in our Transcaucasian lands? ”10
An ad hoc resettlement committee was set up to implement the authorities' grandiose plans, chaired by Fade, a member of the Transcaucasian General Board.
 A few years later, in 1849. On December 21, 1850, the State Property Department of the Transcaucasian Territory was established in its place. "In connection with the approval of the new charter of the State Property Department of the Transcaucasian Territory, the case of placement of Russian settlers, which was the responsibility of the former temporary committee for placement of Russian settlers, is now under the responsibility of the local state-provincial administration within the State Property Department.
  In this connection, I submit to the deputy for approval a project for resettlement, accommodation and general management of the resettlers ”11.
1850 On March 13, Fade wrote to the substitute: "The years 1848-1849 were spent choosing lands to accommodate Russian settlers from the Russian interior."
  Fade was the deputy adviser, which enabled him to achieve his long-term goals.
 1849 On May 13, 1945, he wrote to the governor of Yerevan on the occasion of the resettlement of the Alexandropol province: "Two lands are provided for Russian resettlement here. 11 Haytyan A., The Russian settlers of Armenia (1830-1920), Yerevan, 1989, p. 40.
12 Ibid., P.
One of them is the site called Shoragyal of Elidar, which has been measured and a special plan has been drawn up for it.
 It has a land area of ​​6928 deciats, therefore, providing for 30 deciats for each family, up to 230 families can be accommodated there.
  There are all the opportunities for the welfare of Russian families in that area, it is located near the Alexandropol-Akhaltsikhe road, not far from the existing Russian villages of both Dukhobors and Molokans.
 In my opinion, as needed by the governor, there is no obstacle to occupying that precinct with Russian settlers.
The other precinct is the city of Alexandropol for that purpose, to house 20 families there only for craftsmen. ”13
Fade had planned to resettle the Alexandropol plain, the left bank areas of the middle course of the Akhuryan River, the Lori plain.
 "It is more useful to establish Russian villages with 100 families (Yerevan ‒ Alexandropol) Tbilissi) along the Tsar's road until the deep autumn. The vehicles transporting salt from the Koghb salt mine constantly pass that way, because now it is watery, the coachmen are striving for that point.
 If there is a Russian village here, the villagers will get a significant income by selling various food products.
 In addition, they can transport salt from Koghb to Alexandropol.
  "They will keep transport links between Alexandropol and Yerevan, and when the postal route is opened, the villagers will have the opportunity to keep a post office."
 Thus, Fade's main goal was to surround all the roads in the province of Alexandropol with Russian villages.
As a result of the persistent efforts of the Russian authorities in 1844. Tbilissi (Georgia) The first Russian settlement in the province of Alexandropol, Vorontsovka, was established on the Alexandropol military route near the village of Mets Gharakilisa, after which the Russian villages of Privolnoye, Pakrovka, Gyar-gyar (Russian) and Nikolaka were established one after another.
 As for the left bank areas of the middle stream of Akhuryan, no Russian settlements were made here, as 13 Avdalbegyan Kh., The Land Issue in Eastern Armenia (1801-1917), Yerevan, 1959, pp. 219-220.
The restoration works of the canal starting from the foot of Aragats were.
The resettlement case was put on a new level when in 1850 On March 28, 1945, the governor of Yerevan received permission from the deputy to implement Fade և Blavatsky's plans.
  As a result, 6,574 desyats of land were moved to Eastern Armenia (including 6,074 desiats in the province of Alexandropol, 6,928 desyats in the Elidar district, 60 desiats near the city of Alexandropol, 190 Russian settlers in Darachichag, Alexandropol).
 In this connection, General Behbutov, Head of the Civil Department of the Caucasus Viceroy, wrote to the Governor of Yerevan. "The expedition of state property, considering your brilliant opinion, that the multiplication of Russian settlements in Yerevan province. No difficulty is expected… instead of giving his consent to all the plans of the State Property Expedition և he allowed to carry it out ”14.
Thus, at this stage of colonization, Tsarism managed to carry out the pre-planned work in the province of Alexandropol.
 Russian Novo-Mikhailovka, Vorontsovka (Tashir), Privolnoye, Nikolajka, Gyargyar, Pokrovka, Nikitinovka (Fioletov) village (Fioletov)
In general, despite all the efforts of tsarism, the policy of colonization in Eastern Armenia, particularly in the province of Alexandropol, failed.
 First, the Russians did not manage to resettle the left bank areas of Akhuryan.
The plans to establish Russian settlements on the Alexandropol-Gharakilisa-Jalalogli-Dilijan road were not implemented.
The last two villages founded in the province of Alexandropol by the Fadey plan were the Orthodox-populated Nikolaka and Novo-Alexandrovka.
 The first was founded in 1858. From the villages of Tsikhistdvari (26 families) and Bakuriani (16 families) of Borjomi province, and Novo-Alek 14 Haytyan A., mentioned. op. cit., pp. 49-50.
Sandrovka, according to the governor of Yerevan in 1862. Report No. 481 submitted to the Caucasus on March 4, 2006 by the IDPs (10 families) from the village of Kormovskoy in the Chernoyar province of Astrakhan province (10 families) 15.
In our opinion, the policy of resettlement or Russification was a և´ positive, և´ negative process.
 The resettlement can be considered positive, because due to this policy implemented by Tsarism in the Transcaucasia, the region got a new breath and experienced economic growth in a short time.
  On this occasion, Fade writes: "Russian returnees in the Transcaucasian region are especially useful in that they are an example of creating well-established settlements. They use flour mills.
 They have many craftsmen, who are lacking in this region; in general, they are more entrepreneurial and active than the local peasants; the natives are beginning to imitate a number of economic and household reforms from them ”16.
Settling in the Caucasus, particularly in Eastern Armenia, the Russian settlers adapted to the local conditions in a short period of time, in contrast to the Germans, giving a boost to the local economy.
  The latter were skilled carpenters, tanners, cattle breeders, beekeepers and farmers17.
 Eventually, a number of Armenian settlements were improved or new Russian settlements were established: Vortsovka, Semyonovka, Yelenovka, etc.
  As already mentioned above, the existence of such villages (the appearance of the villages, the exterior decoration of the apartments, the efforts of the settlers to improve the mentioned settlements) could only serve as an example to the locals.
In addition, based on V. Diloyan, Leo, A. According to Haytyan and others, we find that the policy of Russianization of Tsarism in the Transcaucasia, particularly in Eastern Armenia, was partially justified.
 According to V. After Diloyan said that Eastern Armenia came under the subordination of Russia, incomparably favorable development prospects were created for a part of the Armenian people. Avoidance of avant-garde rule, Eastern dictatorships, stable guarantees of life and property were given to the locals, and the growth of productive power was stimulated18.
Leo's point of view is remarkable. "… The Armenian people spontaneously, by the instinct of their own instinct, solved the mystery of the preservation of their physical existence,… it was a guarantee of Gonek ոն property under Russian rule" 19
According to A. According to Haytyan, the resettlement of the Russians became a concrete expression of the small part of the Russian people - to live together, to work together, to strengthen friendship20.
The resettlement process also had negative sides. Suffice it to say that East Armenia's lack of resources, the non-friendly attitude of the locals towards the settlers, not to mention the many privileges granted to the Russians.
 As for the failure of the policy of Russification, we think that both the Russian Empire and the current Russian Federation have a problem to reconsider their own colonial policy, that is, the Caucasus is Russia's colonial attaché.
Because of this short-sighted policy, Russia has from time to time "continued to deserve the distrust and disorientation of its allies, especially the Armenians."
Melkonyan Varduhi THE POLITICS OF RUSSIANIZATION OF EASTERN ARMENIA XIX CENTURY IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CENTURY (EXAMPLE OF ALEXANDRAPOL PROVINCE) Keywords: Demographic processes, Alexandropol province, Alexandropol city, Elidar district, tsarist authorities, Russification, resettlement Summary.
