THE REFLECTION OF THE ATTEMPT OF SULTAN ABDUL HAMID II IN SIAMANTO'S CREATION OF "TERRORISTS".
  It was a unique period of heavy nightmare and alarm for the Armenians of Armenia, when the promises of the reforms of Armenia were broken in the conditions of indifferent behavior of the powers.
Such a historical situation could not but affect the more sensitive genre of poetry, as literature.
  It is during these years that a noticeable breakthrough occurs in Armenian poetry.
Literature related to the liberation struggle of the Armenian people, poetry and art living with the pain of the people are being created.
  The formation of a new Armenian school becomes obvious, which is characterized by the philosophy of national destiny.
  Siamanto, Varuzhan, Metsarents and others come to the Armenian-Armenian literary arena, who are stormed with popular thoughts and emotions.
 According to Zohrap, blood-colored literature is created1.
One of the great representatives of Armenian literature of the early 20th century is Siamanto (Atom Yarchanyan, 1878-1915), a high figure of the new Armenian period, which, according to Isahakyan, "is unique in world poetry" 2.
  As a teenager, Siamanto witnessed the blood and corpses of his own people.
 Among the multicolored colors of nature, the radiant stands out in his eyes, և, naturally, the popular tragedy predetermines the future of the poet.
 Ignoring human weakness for his own pleasures, daily interests, Siamanto is carried away by an upper inspiration, focusing on the homeland, the issues of the day, the cause of the people's freedom.
 It is no coincidence that in French criticism he was considered one of the poets who belonged to the tribe of lions3.
 And, indeed, a powerful voice suddenly sounded in the world of carefree and mental sleep, non-combatant life. Siamanto's war anthem was heard.
  His fiery talent shone in the gloomy days of history, when Sultan Hamid's policy of persecution of Armenians was raging in Western Armenia, which left its mark on the Armenian literary life of the time, conditioning its content and nature.
In 1902-1905 the first series of Siamanto's poems "Children" were formed, in 1906 - the second, in 1908 - the third.
  The most famous poems are "Revenge of Centuries", "Andranik", "Terrorists" 4, "Source Serob Vardanyan", "Caucasus", "Khrimyan Hayrik", "Hate Call".
  The heroes of the series of poems, the Armenians, sometimes act as powerful terrorists, sometimes as heroic children of the Caucasus, sometimes with a fiery passion for the revenge of war, sometimes wandering starving in the native fields.
  The theme of the liberation struggle develops from the beginning to the end in "Hayordiner".
  The author glorifies the struggle, the sword, the heroism, the Armenians hanged for the homeland.
  The children are the children of the people who have become victims of cruelty, but they are people ready to be hanged.
  And so is the whole poetry of Siamanto.
  Once in "Literary press conferences" one of the speakers described him as follows: "Can he sing the beautiful feet of a virgin, when blood flows around him, when the tribe trembles under the sword of annihilation?"
  Oh, he 1 Juharyan T., Methodology of Armenian Literature, Yerevan, 1988, p. 310.
2 Rshtuni H., Siamanto, Yerevan, 1970, page 4.
3 Ibid., P.
4 "Droshak" newspaper, 1905 It was published on August 8, 2008 under the title "Glory to the terrorists".
  But we will use the "Terrorists" egg used in professional literature.
He is fiercely patriotic. "
 We see the vivid proof of the above-mentioned lines in each poem of the series.
  This is most vividly reflected in the poem "Terrorists" reflecting the assassination attempt of Sultan Hamid.
 The latter has its real historical basis.
After the massacres of Western Armenians in 1895-1896, Armenian politicians wanted to intimidate their main organizer, Sultan Abdul Hamid.
  For many years it was the dream of not only Armenian but also foreign revolutionary organizations.
 Years ago, ARF member Artashes Dyan (Egyptian) had made a plan to intimidate Hamid, which, however, was banned by the ARF Istanbul Central Committee in order not to create new massacres.
1904 At the end of May, the members of the ARF General Assembly elected by the ARF General Assembly, Kristapor Mikayelyan, Honan Davtyan, Ashot Yeghikyan and Martiros Margaryan, convened a meeting in Athens, which was soon joined by several auxiliary figures2.
  After long discussions, the responsible body chose the "Case of Nzhuyg" from several possible initiatives, that is, the intimidation of Sultan Hamid.
  Although many in those days considered it impossible, considering the inaccessibility of the sultan as the main reason, nevertheless, the party leadership welcomed the decision without hesitation, expressing confidence that if the initiative succeeds, it will inspire respect and reverence for the Armenian cause.
  The operation was to take place in three stages: bomb-making, testing, safe access of friends to Constantinople, and the overthrow of Hamid.
Going through many trials, initially suffering certain failures, in 1904. In October-December, however, everyone was already in Istanbul.
 The Avengers faced one major task: how to intimidate the sultan.
In the end, the "Friday program" born as a result of difficult discussions was implemented.
 Traditionally, every Friday the sultan would leave the palace of Yeldiz and go to the Hamidiye Mosque to attend the religious ceremony of Selamlik.
  Usually, in addition to the large number of guards, a limited number of foreign guests took part in this ceremony, and the participation of Armenians in that ceremony was prohibited3.
After long discussions, it was decided to carry out the sultan's death by means of a carriage turned into a Jrumbe, which was to be taken to Eldiz Square.
  However, the effectiveness of the use of hand grenades during flooding raises serious doubts. they needed improvement, new experiments.
  That is why at the end of 1904, the founder of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun, the leader of the ARF, Kristapor Mikaelyan, left for Bulgaria, who was to make the last bomb attempts in Sofia.
 However, everything was arranged differently.
1905 On March 4 (17), the experimental group went to the foot of Mount Vitosh near Sofia.
  As soon as they got there, at Christopher's urging, the others climbed the nearby hill to watch the bomb explode.
 Vramshapuh Kendiryan, a member of the demonstration body from Constantinople, stayed with Kristapor.
 The latter took the bomb in his hand to move it.
 Suddenly a terrible rumble was heard. The bomb was thrown by Kendiryan quite far from where he was standing, a little further on Christapor was dying.
"Lamentation letter to H.Y. In the letter "Dashnaktsutyun", Siamanto mourns Christopher's death with deep sorrow: "Christopher died որը The one who fed us with his wonderful and deep spirit.
  Christopher is an enlightener of freedom and salvation, a monk, today he is completely dead. What will the best part of the Armenians do? What will his thousands of ideological students do? How will they be comforted? Can others be comforted?
 Let them tell me, let them tell me ... ”4.
Nevertheless, Siamanto concludes his writing with inspiring and compelling lines: “… His sacrifice will make us even more encouraged.
  Our jealousy will boil, our arms will strike with more force.
  His grave is our tabernacle, his name is a book opened before us, his memory is a pioneer for all of us. ”5
1 Rshtuni H., page 235.
2 Simonyan Hr., In the ways of the liberation struggle, book 1, Yerevan, 2003, p. 562.
3 Ibid., Pp. 569-570.
4 Ibid., Pp. 573-576.
5 Droshak ", born in 1905, №4, page 54.
Kristapor Mikayelyan's death had a severe impact on the responsible organs, nevertheless it did not depress them.
  In order to continue the work left unfinished, the ARF council decided to "pursue the defeat of" Nzhuyg "until the end, even if only one person remains."
The implementation of the program was led by a member of the responsible body Safon, Martiros Margaryan, who with great enthusiasm continued the work he had left unfinished.
  After a series of meetings in Sofia, consulting with bomb experts, preparing a chariot in Vienna, and sending him to Constantinople when everything was ready, Sappho himself set out for Constantinople.
  Due to security reasons, it was decided that the other friends besides the people needed for the job should leave the city.
  Thus, Safon, Rubina Areshyan, Zareh from Samatya, Torgom, Chris Fanarjyan, Aram, Ashot Yeghikyan, Marie Zayts remained in Constantinople as auxiliary figures.
 It was decided that the carriage should take Zareh և Rubina to Eldiz Palace.
1905 On Friday morning, July 21, Zareh և Rubina drove to Eldizihrak Square, where they arrived at the appointed time.
 According to estimates, when the time came for the sultan to leave the mosque, Zareh pressed the spring of the explosive.
 According to the stopwatch, the explosion would take place in one minute and forty-eight seconds.
  Rubina and Zareh got out of the carriage and left.
  Suddenly, after five short breaks, a terrible roar was heard.
  Although about 15 carriages were smashed, killing or injuring about 80 people, Hamid survived 2.
The members of the demonstration body were very surprised when they learned about the success as soon as they arrived in Sofia.
 Although Abdul Hamid had survived, the unknown heroes had created a sense of pride in the souls of Armenians; no one should regret anything.
  Immediately after the incident, the ARF Dashnaktsutyun official newspaper, in order to dispel suspicions about Armenians, is unaware in its editorial, but it is also its assessment of what happened. A brave expression of courageous desires.
  The monster once crawled out of the clutches of death, the crime once again triumphed over the terrorist terror terror.
  The attempted murder against human life may be painful, but can one feel pain for a creature that commits thousands of abominations day and night? ”3
The author of the manual was not yet known, but Siamanto considered him a "God-fearing, invincible Stranger."
In the poem "Terrorists" written immediately under the fresh impression of the events, Siamanto praises the self-sacrifice of the Armenian nemesis, considering them just judges of the genocidal dictators: "You are sovereign, supreme judges of all bloodthirsty dictators".
The flame of the terrorists' swords ashes the murderous enemy, their bombs explode like the suns shining in the moon.
Siamanto praises the invincible images of the Armenian avengers, praising the just revenge erupting from their breasts.
  He goes beyond national tragedy, sultanism, "genocidal evil", condemning not only the individual fact, but also the policy of oppression of peoples in general: "Your Self is the supreme man of all power, your verdict is the death sentence of every verdict ruthless, ան to those who will be stigmatized by your red and deadly seal… ».
Siamanto also spices the whole poem with juicy folk sayings: "He killed all the traitors, buried all the Vasaks, and petrified the cannibal crowds."
1 Simonyan Hr., P. 579.
2 Ibid., Pp. 581, 583.
3 Flag, ևnև, 1905, №5, pages 1, 7.
4 Simonyan Hr., P. 592.
 Here the word "to bury" comes from the popular phrases "bury him", "bury his head" 1.
 It is interesting that the author in "Terrorists", as in the whole poetry, does not mention the words "Turk" or "sultan" in any place, does not expose the characters, but instead exposes their barbarity from the beginning to the end.
 Although the demonic dictators are terrified, the struggle is still going on, because the suffering of the Armenians is still going on: "But we still have to thunder death, we have to spread death, we have to kill death, It is an abuse of hatred and wickedness on the palaces, Under whose masses the thought of our tribe as a cornerstone և the body է is the soul, the կ և The walls of which are mixed with our blood կառուց built with our bones… The fountains of our useless tears are abundant, And the cups of wine and genocide are taken "We must spread death where the kneeling pleas of our slave did not reach."
It seems that the logical continuation of the "terrorists" is Siamanto's "Red Letter" addressed to Sultan Abdul Hamid.
 It was published in the same issue of "Droshak" newspaper, where his above-mentioned poem was published2.
 Here, too, Siamanto justifies the avengers, exposing the image of the sultan, "you also saw the righteous in the days."
  The author of the letter tries in every way to keep Hamid in fear and horror: "They will come again, they will arise again.
 Do not be happy at all, who will not be encouraged by the old bloodbath, wait… ".
At the same time, Siamanto offers him a unique "solution": "If you want to create your own destruction with your own hands, put it on your satap table, put your golden pistol in your hand, put it in your dead mouth, or just pull the genocidal ears."
The poet concludes the letter with the words "your subject, your bloodthirsty thirsty Siamanto."
Thus, we see that despite all the literary influences, Siamanto remained independent, because the desire to express his own pain was much stronger in him, any temptation of Kangaroo.
  Siamanto tried to prove that the struggle of the Armenian people against the Turkish dictatorship was just, and he became the just singer of that struggle.
And whether the attempt to assassinate Hamid failed, nevertheless, it had a "restraining effect" and raised the national spirit even more.
Siamanto once said that his pen has no right to sing themes different from the national tragedy3.
  Indeed, we saw the proof of the above lines when talking about Siamanto, we will see it every time we read Siamanto.
 This poet is with us today, because the best contributions of his work are alive.
 Generations cannot forget the poet who has sculpted the image of national suffering for centuries.
Gegham Asatryan REFLECTION OF THE ATTEMPT OF SULTAN ABDUL HAMID II IN SIAMANTO'S CREATURE CREATIVE
