TOURISM DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES Expanding the time frame in Armenia, the changes taking place in the free modern world, the existence of people's interests, the income, the improvement of the means of transport "information systems",
  Tourism in the Republic of Armenia is considered a priority of the economy, creating opportunities for a number of socio-economic problems, ensuring economic growth, and integrating into the international tourism market.
  The tourism sector of the Republic of Armenia is regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Tourism", the "Civil Code", the "Labor Code" and other legal acts [1].
  The state regulation of the tourism sphere is carried out by the authorized governing body of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, which can develop կայ submit proposals to the Government of the Republic of Armenia on the directions of tourism development prospects, as well as implement tourist [information, advertising and publishing] activities.
The tourists who visited Armenia spoke with admiration about the unique historical and architectural and natural riches of the country.
Famous American artist Rockwell Kent wrote: "If I were asked, dioceses on the planet where one can meet more miracles, I would first give the name of Armenia.
  Involuntarily in that small corner you can meet such monuments, such people who can become the ornament and pride of the whole world.
  Long live you three times, Armenian land, the cradle of talents, the cradle of miracle workers. ”
According to Lebanese Ambassador to Armenia Gibral Bhutto Jaar, "Armenia is an attractive, unique country for tourism, especially with its security and stability" (Jibrail Butros Jaar 2005).
According to the Austrian "Armenia is the cradle of civilization, one of the leading և developed countries of the Old World" (Franz Viktor Werfel 1933).
Humanist Franz Werfel, writer, The work studied the tourism resources of the Republic of Armenia, their features and directions of use, suggested the necessary steps that should be taken for the effective organization and further development of tourism by the state.
There are necessary preconditions for the development of different directions of tourism in the regions of the Republic of Armenia, conditioned by natural, historical-cultural, socio-economic resources.
  Armenia has a unique culture: architecture, literature, music, dance.
 There are more than 24,000 historical and cultural monuments that provide an opportunity to develop cognitive tourism [1, 5].
  Landscape diversity typical of Armenia.
 Taking into account this fact, we can develop eco-tourism in Armenia, adventure tourism according to the season.
For example, in winter the snow-capped peaks of the Geghama Mountains are conducive to winter recreation and skiing, and in summer the high mountain landscape allows hiking, mountaineering, mountaineering, and more.
  There are 3 state reserves in Armenia (Khosrov, Shikahogh, Erebuni), 26 sanctuaries, 4 national parks: San, Ar-ik, Arpa, Dilijan.
 At the same time, to establish state control over the protection of natural resources, to carry out the discovery of natural monuments and the creation of new specially protected areas [4].
The geomorphological conditions of Vayots Dzor region and the diversity of climatic conditions make it possible to develop sports tourism.
  For example, in winter you can set up sports bases, short-term leisure facilities, և organize skiing, sledding, aviation competitions, and in summer - hiking, hiking in the forest, mountaineering to Gandzak, as well as water-sailing yachts. .
  And the construction of reservoirs will give an opportunity to organize "navigation" and "fishing".
  The culture of cave tourism can be established in the region. For example, Mozrov Cave is one of the natural wonders of Armenia with various geological formations, but due to geological and climatic influences, the entrance to the cave has become very dangerous.
Instead of blocking accidents որոշակի closing the entrance, some investments can be made,։ restoring the cave and the road to the cave.
  Jermuk, one of the resort centers of Vayots Dzor, is known for its high quality mineral water, but recent mining operations in Amulsar may lead to chemical pollution of Jermuk waters.
  Besides, being a important tourist destination, Jermuk city establishes the connection with other regions only by road.
 In order to increase the international prestige and ensure the active movement of the population, the implementation of state investments is a priority, from Zod to the Vardenis mountain range to Jermuk, to create a railway to restore the Jermuk Airport.
  The development of tourism in the city can be ensured in several directions: the former city has been transformed into a health-winter tourism center meeting international standards.
To create youth camps for young people in the city.
The center can become a place for organizing and conducting national and international competitions, which, in turn, contributes not only to the outbound, but also to the growth of domestic tourist flows.
Tat կենտրոն tourist center, with its climatic conditions, historical and cultural richness and traditions, has a perspective role in the development of tourism in Armenia.
  For the development of tourism in Tat, the restoration of the Tatvan complex is a priority, the creation of a new school in the Tatvan complex, in particular, the restoration of the Tat University, which will enable the community to become a scientific-educational center, where both RA citizens and foreigners can do their research.
  The restoration of the Scientific-Educational Center will contribute to the formation and development of the educational direction of tourism in Tat.
  To provide high quality internet connection in the center և to create a system of banking services.
  At present, the Tat tourist center is connected to the outside world by road, that is why it becomes a priority for the promotion of the center զարգացման's tourism activities.
The restoration of Goris airport and the improvement of the ropeway over Halidzor to access the monastery complex can contribute to the transport tourism աշրջ dynamic tourist movement.
  Taking into account the recent large influx of tourists in Tat, the creation of overnight facilities will become a priority, which will have experienced staff, will provide a high level of service.
Tourists are especially interested in the ethnic culture of the country, which can be presented through the external "interior design" of the guest houses, as well as organizing events that will present the life, rituals and holidays of the Armenian people, dance, music, crafts, carpet weaving, miniature painting. carpentry, kitchen.
With its heritage, color, historical and cultural Shirak region, particularly the city of Gyumri, has always stood out with its famous people, beautiful and clean nature, unique cuisine.
  Regional opportunities ները The prospects for tourism development are enormous.
  The most popular branch of tourism in the region is cognitive tourism, but there are preconditions to develop ecological, rural, adventure, sports and cuisine tourism.
  The correct presentation of information on the components of buildings, museums (houses-museums), cultural centers, workshops, workshops, workshops, cities and regions that are of interest from the point of view of tourism will become one of the most important components of tourism development.
  The existence of "Kumayri" reserve and its complete restoration will contribute to the development of urban tourism, and the organization of traditional food-festivals will stimulate great opportunities for organizing kitchen-cuisine campaigns.
  Excursions can be organized to "Trchkan" waterfall, which is one of the most beautiful natural wonders of northern Armenia, in the direction of Lake Arpi, excursions to Akhuryan gorge-Dzor-Ani caves and other cave settlements.
  For the development of tourism in the region, it is necessary to inform tourists, make tour packages, use various tools for advertising: mobile applications, social sites, booklets, etc.
development.
  Regional Tourism Taking into account the growing number of tourists traveling to Armenia from year to year, the improvement and restoration of infrastructure, the use of technological innovations to ensure a high level of service become a priority.
  In order to increase the accessibility of transport routes, it is possible to have foreign language guides in tourist places.
In order to overcome the above-mentioned obstacles, to ensure the proportional development of tourism in Armenia, the state policy can be aimed at the destination of Armenia. • In the international arena, Armenia, as an attractive tourist visitor, the positive image of the country և's tourism sector contributes to its foreign investment. has an impact on other sectors of the economy (industry, urban development, education).
presentation.
• In addition to traditional destinations (historical, cultural, sanatorium), to promote the development of new tourism destinations (ecotourism, agritourism, extreme tourism, business visits), which will make Armenia a more attractive country in terms of both tourism and investment.
• Ensuring access to the transport system.
  In particular, it is necessary to expand the air road network, to sign contracts with well-known airlines in the field.
• Licensing of tourism service providers, tour guides, escorts, tour operators and agents, as well as consumer protection.
• Close cooperation with arts and culture organizations, as it is necessary to help them to preserve ևexpand art, music, handicrafts, cuisine.
LITERATURE [1] RA "Tourism Development Concept" 13.02.2008, URL.
http:
//mineconomy.am/media/2017/03/1454.pdf (Link made: 02.05.2019).
[2] RA Law on Tourism և Tourism, Yerevan 2003, URL.
 https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=64659 (Link made: 02.05.2019).
[3] RA Law on Specially Protected Areas, Yerevan 2006, URL.
https:
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=29624 (The link was made on 05.04.2019).
[4] RA Law on Environmental Control, Yerevan 1998, URL.
https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docID=73116 (The link was made on 05.04.2019).
[5] Law of the Republic of Armenia "On the Use of Immovable Monuments of History and Culture and Preservation of Historical Environment", Yerevan 1998, available at: URL.
https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=38019 (Link made on 22.04.2019).
[5] Sh. Harutyunyan, "Tourism Industry և Geography", Yerevan, 2004, p. 130.
Ofelia Galstyan TOURISM DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS IN ARMENIA Keywords: tourism resource, sustainable development, tourism potential,
governance, state policy.
