THE CHOICE OF SOUL AND SPIRIT IN THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND MECHANICAL PROGRAMS OF ARMENIAN IDENTITY The consideration of the dilemma of the soul in the context of national identity is of fundamental importance.
  The formation of a national temperament, as well as the existence of a nation in a certain horse, is based on the relationship between the soul and the spirit.
 The discussion of the above-mentioned concepts from the nineteenth century is possible in the sense that when converting paradigms in identity, the question becomes urgent on what basis these changes are made, soul or spirit.
 From the discussion of the question it can become clear how effective the transformations in the national identity are both from the point of view of the national spirit and the soul, to what extent the new identity is formed in accordance with the national-Armenian mentality.
  In addition, the effectiveness of the transition from one egg of survival to another can be discussed both from a nationalist and a spiritual point of view.
 Mechanism, in its turn, being a one-sided approach to the existence of the nation, "worships the expression of the Armenian spirit" 1.
  Therefore, it is noteworthy that through these programs, the struggle of the soul and spirit in the national identity is revealed, reinterpreted from the point of view of the efficiency of the existence of the nation-national.
 After all, what is important is to preserve the national spirit as it is or to "renovate" them.
The definitions of spirit in the professional literature are various, which creates difficulties in terms of clarifying concepts.
  The spirit of ancient philosophy is meant in Greek. Pneuma և translates as "moving air", "breath".
 In philosophy, the spirit comes in three forms: the spirit of the individual (subjective spirit), the general spirit (objective spirit), and the objectified spirit.
 Ն. Gartman considers the language, technique, traditions, worldview prevailing in each field - religion, myth, philosophy - to be an objective spirit.
  The soul (Greek: psyche) means the immaterial beginning of existence (Plato), the first entelechy of the vital body (Aristotle).
  Caring fathers interpret the soul differently.
  According to Tertullian, the soul is material, and according to Augustus the Blessed, it is an immaterial, non-spatial substance.
 In the Bible կաց these concepts are clearly defined, often using one as a result of translation.
Modern psychologists consider the soul to be the bearer of the unconscious2.
  Steiner defines the soul as "the means by which he connects things with his own being, by which he feels dislike, pleasure and displeasure, joy and pain from them."
  The spirit is supposed to be what is manifested in man when, in Goethe's words, you look at things "as if you were a divine being."
 E. Harutyunyan defines the spirit as a rational feature, and the soul as irrational. "The spirit is the intellectual-innovative characteristic of the nation" 4.
 According to him, the qualities of the Armenian spirit are initiative, ingenuity, restraint.
 The soul, in turn, is considered the antithesis of the spirit from the point of view of national bio-philosophy.
  "The soul is the bearer of direct emotional feelings of the past history of the people, the existing realities, expresses the peculiarities of the national character and temperament" 5.
Based on E. Harutyunyan's definitions of spirit and soul, the relationship between the latter will be discussed through the enlightenment-engineering programs of the national identity.
1 The Mehenian current in the Armenian-Armenian reality originated in 1910.
  It sought to increase the role of literature, to promote the deep unity of the divided sections of the people, to reject the notions of "Russian-Armenian", "Turkish-Armenian", "Caucasian-Armenian".
 He raised the issue of re-evaluation of literary values ​​through critical articles.
 "Mehian" magazine was staffed by D. Varuzhan, V. Tekeyan, H. Siruni, R. Shishmanyan.
  (See Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, vol. 7, Yerevan, 1981).
2 See Philosophical Encyclopedic Dictionary, Moscow, 1983, pp. 146-149.
3 Steiner R., Theosophy, Yerevan, 2003, p. 24.
4 Harutyunyan E., National Identity մշակ Culture of Life, Yerevan, 2004, p. 88.
5 Ibid., P.
The Enlightenment was a new call to advance the national spirit.
 The enlightened, being educated and educated in Europe, try to give a European breath to the national identity.
 Europe of that period lived as a new rebirth to add value to man.
A type of individual was formed who had free choice, worldview and civic consciousness.
 Feuerbach notes in this regard. "Consciousness is self-activity, self-affirmation, love for oneself, enjoyment of one's own perfection.
  Consciousness is the distinguishing feature of a perfect being. ”1
  These characteristics of Feuerbach are the basic characteristics that a person with civic self-consciousness should have.
Armenian enlighteners, based on this rationalist movement spreading in Europe, try to form individuals with civic self-consciousness, passing from the identity of the soul to the identity of the spirit.
  In other words, if the history of the previous centuries of the Armenian people created a portrait of an obedient, religious, self-defeating Armenian, which was the Armenian national identity, mentality, then the figures of the nineteenth century try to get rid of that image of the past.
  The church with its ministers, the Old Armenian, the school և upbringing had to be transformed, as a result of which the church had to limit its social role, the Old Armenian had to cease to be a written language, education had to be universal: both women and men had to be educated equally. The upbringing model of a free individual, a citizen should prevail in education.
 One of the steps taken in this direction was to break the intellectual, social immobility, to take steps in some direction.
 "Idle, immobile, ignorant, bigoted, lagging behind modern science, truth" 2 Armenian clergy had to be educated in order to pass on his knowledge to the Armenian youth.
  Thus, the liberation movements, the programs of autonomy were a new attempt to reinterpret the history, the psyche of the Armenians.
Of course, education was the only real way to implement all the other programs.
 A spirit-renewing movement was beginning, which necessarily implied the inclusion of new elements in the national identity.
 In particular, the transition from one language to another, marriage with foreigners.
 At present, the Armenian nation is considered an aging nation, as intermarriages were few then and now, with a slight difference.
"In order to give a new life, a new force to the Armenian spirit, the Armenian character, the Armenian element, it would be necessary for Armenians to mix with other nationalities, of course without losing their Iranianness, their mother tongue," says Gr. Artsruni 3.
 The newly rebuilt spirit presupposed that which had been tried and failed in Europe.
  That is to say, the Enlightenment, which became widespread in Europe, gave its results in the nineteenth century.
 Marx considered the problem that as a result of the processes taking place (strengthening the role of technology, which was the result of the progress of science), man becomes a stranger to even the most beautiful.
Attempts to create a civil society and to rebuild an individual's self-consciousness continue to this day, undermining national identity.
  As E. rightly notes. Atayan. "The course of our national life has left us with a dilemma."
  We are compelled to choose between the organic (our own) and the non-organic (of another), possibly one that does not belong to anyone, the living (concrete, effectively contradictory) of the cosmopolitan, the dead (abstract, inanimately one-sided).
 Not only the restored national spirit, but also the forgotten national soul found itself in such a situation.
 The change of language, the transition from Old Armenian to the world, caused a certain rift between the past, the present և the future (our days) և.
 It should be noted that for that period, the transition from the Old Armenian to the secular solved the problem of making the book's literature available to the wider masses, but it endangered the past, the Armenian history left in that past.
1 Feuerbach L., The Essence of Christianity, Yerevan, 1968, p. 46.
2 Mshak, No. 19, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1873.
3 Artsruni Gr., Selected Public Speaking, Yerevan, 2010, p. 76.
4 Atayan e., Spirit և freedom, Yerevan, 2002, p. 189.
Referring to upbringing, it should be noted that, by adopting the European model of upbringing, many other traditions were transformed into national identity, which left a certain mark in the formation of the national soul.
  For example, equality between women and men.
  Educating women and giving them social activism was to some extent contrary to the traditional church ideology formed during this period.
 Supporting the Russian method in upbringing, Minas Cheraz mentions that the teacher should: "As the pure language of their language inspires them, the love of our religion inspires them, tells them the great events of our history, speaks to virtuous and wonderful people, draws their interest to the pre-scholarly branch, and to the pre-academic branch." and in college.
  Tehavanik suggests that only national education has an anchor, that our dormitories should be really prosperous… »1.
 This proposal of Minas Cheraz was both patriotic and an attempt to preserve the soul and psyche of the nation, but a century later it became clear that it was not implemented because it did not solve the urgent problems of the time. that is, solving state problems through the transformation of self-consciousness, living relatively without exploitation.
 That is why in our case it was too early to think և to talk about everything that in the case of European enlighteners could be an ideal model for upbringing.
 Consequently, the European-Armenian Enlightenment solved various problems by the same means, which in one case was active, in the other case not.
  As Gr. Oteyan seeks a speech in Armenia, England gives a speech.
The people of Mehenak, by founding "Mehean" and then "Bardzravank" magazines, start a new movement, which offers a completely new way to preserve the national identity and live a national awakening.
 These magazines refer to art and literature, which were published by Kostan Zaryan, Daniel Varuzhan, Gegham Barseghyan and others.
 The Mehenakans offered. "Worship and expression in the form of the Armenian spirit, independence and personality, development with a life-saving vaccine to keep the Armenian language and literature away from politics and journalism" 2.
  The latter see the awakening and progress of the national identity in the Armenian spiritual restoration.
 The Armenian soul must be protected from foreign influences, the language must be kept free from foreign languages, it must be brought as close to Old Armenian as possible.
  If the Enlightenment is limited only to criticism of the church, then Kostan Zaryan first of all criticizes the lack of understanding of religion, not being deeply Christian.
  "April in the mental poverty we live in means a crime against us and against the cosmic mystery.
 A people that is not morally reformed, would not create new values, is doomed if not to die, at least to live a life of shame, a corpse ”3.
Spiritual moral renewal takes place through art and literature.
 "The heart of the homeland" lives in art, as K. mentions. Zaryan, it is necessary to create a council that is specific to our thinking և "I".
 In other words, if it is necessary to renovate, then only at the expense of preserving and reviving the national soul.
 Subjecting the national soul to the ideas and currents put forward by other nations distorts it, makes it a soul that is cosmopolitan.
  The preservation of the national spirit has a great influence on the formation of the national spirit, if the influence of other nations and other mental structures is reduced in the formation of the national spirit.
  H. is accurate in this regard. Asatryan's following observation: "What is the overcoming, conquering force?"
  Historical spirit.
  Only that, the historical spirit will be able to tell a story. In order for that to happen, turn to the spirit.
 Do not be hostile, but understand that the godless people have no union, strength and future.
 "Return to the Spirit."
 You do not hear what we are saying. We are saying a careful renovation, reconstruction of a strong-minded Armenian man, building in Armenia ”4.
 Analyzing H. This observation of Asatryan makes it clear that the Armenian soul should not be repaired by any other means than national.
  What the Enlightenment tried to do was positive in its own way, but not in its content.
  Instead of calling on the outside world (another culture, another worldview) for help, one could deepen the inner world (culture, language, repair those parts of the inner world that were not viable).
1 Cheraz M., National Education, Constantinople, 1876, page 43.
2 Mehian, No. 1, 1914.
3 Mehian, No. 2, 1914.
4 Asatryan H., Wake up, Armenian man, Yerevan, 1998, pp. 101-102.
It is not for nothing that at present many states are facing the problem of preserving their national identity, they are trying to resist the attempts to create a world without borders through the national.
 As M. rightly mentions about this. Castells, the big world ը The danger of getting lost in it makes modern young people cling to the national - religion, culture.
  Therefore, the following provisions put forward by the Mehenakans become urgent. "To enrich the Armenian life with the mystery և art…, to create the public ground where the enthusiasts of the Armenians can find each other…, the work of the next generation, to rediscover the Armenian style of the Armenian depth, as much as religion is trained in art հոգ souls…" 1.
  In other words, it was, in fact, a call to live nationally, to be reborn by national means.
  The most dangerous phenomenon that can be for the nation is the instability of the soul, the absence of its own.
 The absence of patriotism, the emptiness of the national spirit make the nation immovable by noticing a real national movement.
 It is not for nothing that for almost two centuries the intellectuals have been criticizing that immobility, seeing in it the root of all national problems.
 It is appropriate V. Saroyan's observation that every Armenian ends up in himself.
 About the Armenian of his time K. Zaryan notes, "Souls are absent.
 The ideas are the subject of a half-ruined shop in the village.
 Deep, rough lines on both sides of the lips.
  Petrification in the eyes.
  Armenians are on board every day, kind of headless, devoid of purpose and idea.
  Muscles weakened, will disappeared, a terrible sclerosis, indulging in the winds ”2.
Thus, in general, it should be noted that the starting point for understanding the Armenian identity is the structure of the national spirit.
  These two concepts constantly interact, creating one another.
  Discussing their relationship from the Enlightenment-Mehen position, it becomes clear that the preservation and renovation of national identity is based on the transformation of the soul.
  Based on the same problem, the Enlightenment solves it by external means, the Mehenians by internal means.
Nane Movsisyan THE CHOICE OF SOUL AND SPIRIT IN THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND MEHENIC PROGRAMS OF ARMENIAN IDENTITY Keywords: soul, spirit, national identity, mehenic program, enlightenment program.
