NIKOGHAYOS BUNIATYAN'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE ARMENIAN ARCHITECTURE OF THE XX CENTURY The modern architecture of Armenia began to take shape in the 1920s.
 This period can be considered a new stage for Armenian architecture with a centuries-old history.
  This was a period when the national school of architecture developed, the national mentality changed radically, new goals and problems appeared.
 At the same time, despite the search for such ways այդ architectural solutions, the architecture of Soviet Armenia continued to be based on the traditions of Armenian national architecture1.
  The beginning and development of the new stage was connected with the General Planning (1924), which was undertaken by Alexander Tamanyan on the instructions of the government2.
  This event marked the beginning of the development of the architecture of Soviet Armenia, in which the architect Nikoghayos Buniatyan also contributed.
In professional literature N. A small number of researchers have referred to Buniatyan's work.
  Lola Dolukhanyan's bilingual monograph "Nikoghayos Buniatyan" occupies a central place among them3.
  This work is distinguished by a wide presentation of archival materials (letters, responses, measurements, projects), but the early period of biography is missing.
  Մ. Ilyina's little booklet has 4 references to N. Buniatyan's biography հատկապես focuses especially on his Russian activities.
 Ն. There is brief information about Buniatyan's work in several general works on Armenian architecture5, as well as in a number of articles published in newspapers and magazines6.
  Ն. The first references to the Buniat man և architect belong to A. Vruyr's pen 7, who in the monograph "Ani" is not so extensive, but clearly mentions N. About the character of Buniat.
Nikoghayos Gabrieli Buniatyan (Buniatov) 8 was born in 1878. (according to some documents, 1884) on September 7, in Tbilissi (Georgia).
  Graduating from Fine Arts 1 Harutyunyan V., History of Armenian Architecture, Yerevan, 1992, p. 35.
2 Buniatyan N., Planning g. Еревана и архитектурное оформление, "Soviet Armenia", 1925, № 72.
3 Dolukhanyan L., Nikoghayos Buniatyan, Yerevan, 1990.
5 Doluhanyan L., Architecture of Soviet Armenia.
 20-е годы, Yerevan, 1980.6 The same, Chief architect of the city, ass. The Communist, December 9, 1984.
7 Vruyr A., ​​in Ani, Yerevan, 1964.
8 During his studies, սկզբ at the beginning of his career, the architect bore the name Buniatova.
 After moving to Yerevan, he signed his articles with Nikoghayos Buniatyan.
Academy: 1914-1916 Ն. Together with Marie's expedition he took part in the research work done in Ani.
  Ն. Mar's expedition included such powerful scientific forces as T. Toramanyan, H. Orbeli և many others.
 The association of these devotees, in general, the working years spent in Ani N. They were a real school of Buniatyan computer engineering.
 Ն. Buniatyan also visited Yereruyk to measure the Shirakavan temple and the Tignis fortress.
  The dimensions of some of the monuments are now the only factual evidence of their existence, as many of the monuments have not been preserved.
  Ն. Buniatyan's architectural measurements still surprise with their deep knowledge of the essence of the studied material.
  Many generations of architects recognized the high level of performance with these measurements.
  Ն. In his book about Buniatyan M. Ilyannagrum says that the architect's works are "useful" by the method of performing demonstration measurements and mastering elaboration.
  Even the unfinished blueprints are made with exceptional detail; they gently record the monument, down to individual stones.
Here the mastery of the architect and the artistic taste are expressed.
 There is no dryness in the performance այն the "flattening" of the living lines of the walls, ornaments, which is specific to the dimensions of many, even famous, researchers… "1.
1924 At the invitation of the Government of Soviet Armenia N. Buniatyan came to Yerevan, assumed the position of the chief architect of the city, headed the planning-planning studio of the City Council.
  In those years N. According to Buniatyan, more than 70 residential houses were built in Yerevan, Gyumri, Vanadzor, Hrazdan, as well as public and state buildings.
  According to chronological analysis, one can see in his work the process of successive transition to organic simplicity - the refusal to exchange existing solutions.
  During the gradual development of his creative search, he found his "Buniatian" manuscript, which is easily recognized.
  Especially noteworthy are the corner buildings at the intersection of Tumanyan and Nalbandyan streets, the building of the Department of Internal Affairs on Nalbandyan street, "San", "Yerjan" hotels, Gyughbankishenq, St. The school after Shahumyan, the building of the Fire Depot, a number of other famous and diverse buildings, which are made with the delicate sense of an urban planner, with a great architectural rhythm, with excellent mastery.
 All these buildings were organically included in the construction of Yerevan, with these buildings becoming the city in 1920-1930. the bearers of the architectural image.
 Today it is difficult to imagine Yerevan without N. Buniatyan buildings.
  His work reflects the characteristics of the period of formation of the first stage of the development of modern architecture in Armenia.
 It was a difficult period, full of contradictions and searches.
 The ways of development of Armenian architecture concerned the wide architectural regions.
 There was still no clear idea of ​​how the modern architecture of Armenia should develop.
 This issue was on the agenda.
 Each of the architects went his own way, developing his own artistic understanding.
1 See Iljina M.
Architect N. This complex process of search is somewhat expressed in Buniatyan's works.
 Educated by the traditions of classical architecture, N. Buniatyan could not completely stand back from many classical principles.
 At the same time, the aspiring artist could not limit himself to one, already mastered style. sometimes he was inward, էր so he was unavoidable in searches.
 His work combines "classical" and "constructivist" features.
 However, in 1920. late և 1930s. At the beginning of the 19th century, there were still constant discussions and debates in the environment of Yerevan architecture.
  Al., Confirming the principles of Yerumanneoclassical architecture. Tamanyan was opposed by the representatives of the new direction, the constructivists.
The theorists of constructivism spoke of the need to organize the space of life, not to decorate it.
 At the same time, what the facades of the buildings would look like was being pushed into the background.
The projects had to be rational, and the construction had to be identified and industrialized.
  The vigilance of constructivism sometimes N. He was setting Buniatyan on real ground, destroying his expressionist aspirations, sometimes adding geometric dryness to his works.
 Entering the period of constructivism, N. Buniatyan used warm colors in his structures, soft, calm, realistic style.
  Constructivism N. He freed Buniatyan's buildings from wreaths, jackets, and at the same time from unnecessary complications.
  Constructivism brought with it asceticism և gloomy, bare walls.
Sometimes one prevailed, sometimes the other.
However, the preference acquired in Ani led him back to the classical Armenian architecture.
  In some of his works, the architect sought to recreate the "once forgotten" motives of medieval Armenian architecture.
  He believed that the rich heritage of the historical architecture of Armenia could be a solid basis for a new constructive direction, and the distinctive features of Armenian architecture - the richness of proportions, proportion and harmony, variety of means - could become "the motto of modern Armenian architecture" and "new style". Revival can be achieved by assimilation in harmony with the modern life around us ”1.
 Ն. Buniatyan studied in detail the monuments of the past, found the patterns of their construction in terms of using and developing them in the new national architecture.
 Already in the architectural experiment of that time he saw new embryos.
  Ն. Buniatyan writes. "Architecture has begun to acquire a number of new, unique elements that can become stylists over time.
  Their essence is in the rational-harmonious combination of technical means և construction methods.
  All these directions, no matter what we call them, Cubism or constructivism, have not been created yet, but they will undoubtedly create the style of our age.
 Նշան The motto of the new architecture is the rational use of constructions և materials.
 The rest should be supplemented by the types of materials, geographical, climatic, az 1 Buniatyan N., The style of modern architecture և Armenian fine art, "Art", 1926, № 1-2.
geographical features.
 … The style is created by collective buildings, each country և each people must contribute to the overall development of their global architecture.
  The future will show which of the known directions will create its new aesthetics. ”
Yerևanyan's architecture turned out to be interesting. In many annexes made by Buniatyan, which are made with amazing mastery և Yerjan XIX c. with knowledge of urban architecture.
During the effective work in Yerevan N. Buniatyan acquired a truly emphasized architectural manuscript, which was expressed both in small structures and in the architecture of multi-storey residential houses built on Nalbandyan, Marx (now Khorenatsi), Alaverdyan streets.
During the years he worked in Yerevan, the architect studied the historical monuments of the city, wrote the work "Old Yerevan during the period of Iranian domination" (1938) 1, which gave research on the types of mosques, structures and construction methods.
  He owns the dimensions of the Shaharmzkit on Abovyan Street and the reconstruction project, according to which the mosque was adapted for art exhibitions2.
Ն. Of particular interest from the public buildings built by Buniatyan's designs are the buildings of the Intourist Hotel (1926) and the Village Bank buildings (1927).
  N. works with different works with their architecture. About the wide stylistic inclusions of Buniatyan's work.
 "Intourist" (now "Yerevan", 1926) hotel has four floors, is located in a small semicircular square near Abovyan street, adjacent to the street with one front.
 The urban development role of this building is significant. It "strengthens" the possible angle of the square, the street, predetermines the scale, creates a certain urban environment.
  The layout-composition solution, the organization of the main entrance are subject to the angular position of the building.
  The building "works" towards the square, towards Abovyan street.
  Being decisive in achieving their artistic expressiveness, the author freely interprets the elements of classical architecture and the means of composition.
 The color and texture of the construction material (basalt, colored plaster) are skillfully used when solving the façades.
 The elaborate interior spaces, the excellent proportions of horizontal համ vertical cuts should be mentioned.
  The hall with a delicate taste stands out, interpreted by the nature of the capital's hotels, the highlighted part is the luxurious stairs.
The building of the Village Bank stands out by the interpretation of the image in the work of the architect.
  The architectural nature of the other structures here 1 The work is in the State History Museum of Armenia (N. Buniatyan Archive).
2 Now the house of Armenian artists is built on the site of the mosque.
is relatively different.
  It is one of the first works of Soviet architecture, where an attempt was made to interpret the elements of medieval national architecture in a unique way.
  In search of a national image, the architect turns to the historical heritage.
 The building has a solemn, slightly official character.
 The design emphasizes the angular entrance organized by the architect's preferred horse, solved with solid columns, which give the whole volume a terrestrial look.
  The unique use of Armenian medieval decorative-artistic means makes the composition of the building beautiful and impressive.
  The architectural-artistic expression of the image is supported by the elegance of gray-gray basalt.
  Brightly painted individual details, the organized interior space is interesting.
This speaks of the master և high professional skill of a practical architect.
 There is no doubt that the Village Bank in the 1920s. It is one of the interesting and special buildings, the architectural-artistic solution of which is N. It did not have its continuation in Buniatyan's work.
When designing residential houses N. Buniatyan was also concerned about the interior design of the modern apartment.
 The scope of his creative interests was not limited only to the solution of planning or artistic problems. This makes the architect interesting, because with his work he covered a wide range of ideas, from the interior furnishing of the apartment to various urban planning issues.
Thus, analyzing architect N. Buniatyan's work, from the earliest structures to the large public buildings built in the Soviet period, can be said that, despite their diversity (which was the result of his creative endeavors), there is an inner commonality in the architect's work, which distinguishes them from other structures around.
 Ն. Buniatyan had a unique architectural manuscript. His works differ in the architectural environment with the ability to sense the place, significance and scale of each structure.
Without disturbing the nature and color of the construction of the old city, the architect at the same time gives them a new artistic quality.
  Ն. Buniatyan buildings are still important emphasis on the construction of the center of Yerevan and at the same time are equal members of ensemble solutions.
 Ն. The Buniatyan urban planner does not separate them from other structures.
  He realized the need for a scientific study of Armenian architecture.
  In the last years of his life he worked on the large-scale work "History of Armenian Architecture" 1.
 Unfortunately, death, among other scientific works, prevented the completion of this work - the publication of the monograph.
  The architect did not have time to prepare the publication of the articles dedicated to the monuments he studied: Abughamrents Church, Nikortsminda Temple, Shirakavan Temple, Diraclar 2 Basilica, Oghuzlu Church, Tignis Fortress, Ptghni Church You. From Yaralovik, see Buniatov N., Heralov Y., Архитектура Армении. Awards on the history of the architecture of the peoples of the USSR, Moscow, 1950.
2 Now, Karnut village, Akhuryan region, Shirak region.
publication.
 Famous architect և pedagogue N. Buniatyan died in 1944 in Moscow and was buried in an Armenian cemetery.
Ն. Buniatyan's works have already become history today.
 They express time. We "read" with them, recognize the 1920-1930s. Happy!
 Yerjan is the first chief architect, brilliant designer, theorist, teacher, one of the founders of the architectural higher education institution in Armenia N. Buniatyan will forever remain in the list of grateful people of Armenian culture.
Sona HakobyanNIKOGHAYOS BUNIATYAN'S DEPOSIT IN THE ARMENIAN ARCHITECTURE OF THE XX CENTURY Keywords: Modern architecture of Armenia, medieval Armenian architecture, Yereruyk basilica, Shirakavan temple, Soviet Armenia, 1920-1930. Yerevanian architecture, constructivism.
