EVALUATION SYSTEMS IN RA HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS In our work we referred to the evaluation systems operating in several RA HEIs, with the aim of briefly presenting the evaluation systems operating in RA HEIs և our point of view on the peculiarities.
It should be noted that there are various assessment systems for testing students' knowledge in the universities of the Republic of Armenia.
 Assessment is a measure that confirms the students' progress, the level of knowledge acquired, the result obtained, as well as the latter's compliance with the educational goals.
 The changes in the rating systems are also related to the Bologna process, in particular the introduction of the credit system.
  If in the case of the previous systems the students' end-of-year exam was assessed և the results of the intermediate exams were added, in the case of the credit system the student workload during the whole semester is also taken into account.
 The latter is the evaluation of the process of passing lectures, seminars and laboratory classes, doing independent work, as well as passing the exams.
Each university has chosen an evaluation system in accordance with its educational programs within the limits of its competence.
The universities we observe mainly use the 20 և 100 unit assessment systems, there are universities that have adopted a 10-point system.
Let's present those evaluation systems separately.
Among the universities using a 20-point system of knowledge testing and assessment, we have observed Yerevan State University, the Armenian National University of Architecture and Construction, the Yerevan Komitas State Conservatory, and the National Agrarian University of Armenia.
  Although the same 20-point grading system is used in the above-mentioned universities, there are significant differences in the details of their application.
Assessment (testing) of knowledge at Yerjan State University includes the following components: a) assessment of student participation in the course by attending the course; , c) Final evaluation of the whole course or training module in the examination period, which presupposes the assessment of the level of achievement of the educational outcomes defined for the course or educational module; Assessment 1.
The Armenian National University of Architecture and Construction carries out evaluation by another mechanism.
  This is the professional education provided by the university 1 For more details see http.
//ysu.am/main/.
It is a feature stemming from the sectoral orientation.
  The quality of the course in this university is evaluated through two independent grades, the first of which is the grade of the student 's work done during the semester, and the second is the grade obtained as a result of the exam test.
The unit the student collects for the work done during the semester is formed from the following components: • Doing, handing over independent work (accounting work, homework, tests, essays, etc.), handing over laboratory work և handing over1.
At the Yerjan Komitas State Conservatory, knowledge is assessed in two ways: • current tests, • intermediate tests.
During the current test, the lecturer considers the level of the student's readiness for the practical classes, the student's independent work, the level of mastering the educational material, the level of participation in the classroom activities.
Intermediate examination is a mandatory "test of students' knowledge", the purpose of which is to test the student's mastery of the course, according to the evaluation criteria for the achievement of the results developed by the chair.
 Intermediate tests are written works, essays, academic concerts, technical tests2.
The approach of the National Agrarian University of Armenia is different.
  Here, as in other universities, the students' knowledge tests are carried out during the semester by means of separate parts, sections or topics of the subject, current, semi-final exams.
  However, the number of current (intermediate) exams in the semester is determined by the number of lectures given for the subject in the given semester, ie: • for the subject (s) lecturing 1 hour per week, one current exam is defined in the semester, • for 2-3 hours per week for two current exams; • for a subject (s) with more than 4 hours of lectures per week, three current exams3.
It is interesting that in each of the 4 universities listed above, the grades were different from each other, although the grading system is the same, the 20-point system.
 This can be explained by the following: except for Yerevan State University, all other universities train specialists for a certain narrow field; the knowledge assessment tool is adapted to the given field.
 For example, at the Yerevan State Conservatory after Komitas, it would be impossible to carry out any evaluation process without ongoing practical inspections.
 This, of course, refers to general or special professional education courses.
We have studied the principles of evaluation adopted by the State Institute of Cinema of Armenia, the National Polytechnic University of Armenia, the Armenian State Pedagogical University after Khachatur Abovyan, the "Yerevan Theater" State Institute of Cinema, among the universities using a 100-point grading system.
A multi-factor evaluation system has been introduced in the Armenian State University of Economics.
  According to this system, the student's final grade on a particular subject is formed during the semester, based on the assessment factors և their weights, taking into account attendance և their current activity, individual work և 1st և 2nd intermediate stages of knowledge testing4.
  Evaluation system factors և the points provided are presented below.1 For more details see http.
//www.ysuac.am/.
2 See http for more details.
//www.conservatory.am/.
3 See http for more details.
//www.anau.am/.
4 For more details, see www.asue.am.
Factors (with differentiated assessment (examination Table 1 ․ending), for modules with individual work) Attendance և current activity Student's individual work Intermediate examination 1 Intermediate examination 2 Points Table 1.1ործFactors (with differentiated assessment (ending with examination), individual workbooks with no modules Հ activity Intermediate test 1 Intermediate test 2 Factors (for test end modules) Points Table 1.2 ․ Attendance և Ongoing activity Final check As it has already become clear from the three tables presented above, according to the evaluation horse, there are two types of courses: • Differentiated assessment, in which the assessments are done with differentiated marks with digital lettering;
The courses included in the curriculum of the specialty at the National Polytechnic University of Armenia are divided into 2 groups according to the assessment: • exam, • test.
 During the semester, the maximum amount of points (standard rating) gained by the student is 100 points in the examination subject, course project, term work, internship, final attestation exam, final thesis, defense of the master's dissertation.
Criterion rating of the subject includes the following components: • Assessment of student participation in the course by attending the course; • Intermediate tests of knowledge acquisition by the criteria of assessment of the achievement of the course (laboratory, practical, test, accounting, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments, homework assignments) Assessment), • Testing knowledge acquisition through final exams 1.
When comparing the 100-point evaluation system of the two above-mentioned universities with the traditional evaluation, there are clear differences in demarcations.
They are listed in the table below: 1 See www.seua.am for more details.
The score is 100 pointsThe traditional score in the system (State Economics of ArmeniaTable 2․excellentStudent) The score in the 100 points system (National Polytechnic University of Armenia) is not less than 40 less than 40.The principle of more than 100 points in the university becomes clear.
 Kh. At the Armenian State Pedagogical University after Abovyan, the assessment of knowledge may include the following components: • Assessment of student participation in the course with the help of attendance accounting, • Current examination of the subdivisions of the course (curriculum) ընթաց Mastery և Assessment և Assessment during the semester (current) Summary final assessment of the whole course or module in the assessment period, which implies an assessment of the level of achievement of the educational outcomes set for the course or educational module; • Integration of test results: student participation in the course, current;
Credits from courses from which the student has earned a score below 60 are not awarded, which is considered unsatisfactory 1.
The Yerevan Institute of Cinema և has a multi-factor system of knowledge assessment.
  Factors evaluation system and relevant units Table 3.Gnahatman factors Attendance Intermediate check Final check Final check attendance final ampopumAghyusak 3.2.Gnahatman factors 3.1.Gnahatman factors ampopumAghyusak final test Attendance Intermediate 1 Intermediate 2 final test final test ampopumAghyusak 3.3.Gnahatman factors Attendance Intermediate Examination 1 Intermediate Examination 2 Summary From the above it is clear that the majority of the universities we have studied only score for attendance, thus assessing the level of student participation.
 In contrast to those universities, the Armenian State University of Economics has1 See www.armspu.am for more details.
2 See www.ysitc.am for more details.
not only attendance but also current activity.
  This gives more objectivity to the assessment.
In addition to the 20 և 100 point system, several universities in the Republic of Armenia, in particular the Yerevan State Medical University after Mkhitar Heratsi and the Yerevan State Academy of Fine Arts, use a 10-point grading system.
At the end of the semester at Yerjan State Academy of Fine Arts, student assessment is performed as follows: Table 4 ․Comment Passing gradesSUFFICIENT (the student has the opportunity to do some work և retake) (makes up 15% of the grade), • professional knowledge (makes up 15% of the grade), • professional applied skills (makes up 60% of the grade), • transferable և interchangeable skills (makes up 10% of the grade ) 1.
The evaluation system of the Yerevan State Medical University after Mkhitar Heratsi և consists of the following components: • participation in classes (taking into account attendance), • current progress, • test question, • research work, • oral exam2.
According to this method, the proportion of the components presented in the Knowledge Assessment Scale is: Table 5 ․ Component Points Attendance Ongoing Progress Test Question Oral Exam 10% (Must be not less than 60%) Overall Assessment Passable, Insufficient, Insufficient Score To the 4 presented.
Artsvik Sargsyan EVALUATION SYSTEMS IN RA HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS Keywords: RA educational system, assessment systems, 20, 100 և 10 point assessment systems, features of assessment systems.
