DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS IN ZAKARYAN ARMENIA 1250-1260 - 50-60s of the 13th century Zakaryan In Armenia, political events took place, as a result of which the foundations of government houses were shaken ընդհ, on the contrary, other government houses were living a period of prosperity.
 As it is known, the 13th century was marked by Mongol invasions, as a result of which Armenia was included in the borders of the Mongol Empire.
The Mongols pursued a policy of maintaining an unstable balance of power in Armenia.
  Many prominent Armenian princes, seeing that it was impossible to resist the Mongol hordes on their own, expressed their obedience to the Mongol generals on the condition that they remain in their positions and recognize the supremacy of the great khan1.
 Of course, it was to the advantage of the conquerors to form allied relations with the owners of the occupied countries, according to which all the warring factions with their detachments would undertake to take part in the coming Mongol invasions.
The Great Khan Mangu, coming to power, decides to complete the occupation of Iran. To conquer the neighboring countries.
  For this purpose, a large army led by Mangu's brother Hulawu was separated, which was able to successfully conquer the neighboring countries of Northern Iran2.
 The state or government created as a result of the Hulavu conquests included Archelyan Georgia, North-Eastern, or, as it is commonly called in Armenian historiography, Zakaryan Armenia, which were part of the Georgian province (vilayet of Georgia) 3.
  The administrative, financial, tax and judicial system of their government in the Georgian province was run by local rulers under Mongol control.
  The 5 Armenian tumans (strategic units) entering the vilayet were headed by Zakare, the son of Amir Shahsahlar, the wife of Atabek Avag Gontza, Aghbugha Vahramyan, Smbat Orbelyan and Hasan Jalal.
  They respectively ruled in the domains of "Shahnshahyan", "Avagyan" houses and Vahramyans, in Syunik և Nerkin Khachen.
Zakaryan Armenia was initially dominated by representatives of the Zakaryan ruling house, who were directly dominated by the Georgian Bagratuni4.
 However, a turning point took place, which for the Mongols was an occasion for the Georgian state, particularly Zakaryan, to create a new, more favorable balance of power in the Armenian elite to serve them.
 It was ruled by Georgian King Ulu David in 1249-1251. It was the first Armenian-Georgian anti-Mongol uprising5.
The situation in Transcaucasia worsened in 1247-1248. Because of tax collection in the Middle East.
  The harsh tax policy was dictated by the interests of preserving the large-scale Mongol Empire.
  The tax collection case of Iran և Transcaucasia was assigned to Arghuni և Bugha6.
 As a result of tax collection, the situation in the country has worsened.
 Zakaryan The influential rulers of Armenia, East and West Georgia gather in Kokhtastavi and come to a joint decision that they should revolt together. 1 Grigoryan G., Syunik during the Orbelyans in the 13th-15th centuries, Yerevan, 1981, p. 66.
2 Shahnazaryan A., Zakaryan Armenia in the first period of power, Handes amsoryay, 2010, p. 129.
3 Stepanyan H., The struggle of the Armenian people against the Tatar-Mongol yoke, Yerevan, 1990, p. 60.
4 Shahnazaryan A., Zakaryan Armenia in the second period of power, Historical-Philological Journal, № 3, 2010, p. 85.
5 Ulubabyan B., The rule of Khachen X-XVI centuries, Yerevan, 1975, page 197.
6 Stepanyan H., page 81.
As a result, the Mongol yoke was broken.
  1248 The situation had escalated to the point that even the sergeant Avag Zakaryan went out against Bugha with his army.
 The latter, seeing Avag coming out in front of him, tried to accuse him of rebelling against the khan.
  In fact, Avag Zakaryan was against raising an uprising.
 This must be interpreted first of all by the fact that Amirspasalar Avag took a strong position among the Mongols, and then his conviction that the revolt would not end in victory և will inevitably lead to new raids and persecutions by the Mongols.
 Upon learning of the revolt, the Mongols suppressed it.
 The governor of Syunik Smbat և has practically no participation in the insurgent actions.
 Smbat to strengthen his power, to prove his loyalty to the Mongol rulers "in order to avoid the persecution of Avag Zakaryan's wife Gontza in the conditions of the conflict between the Orbelyan-Zakaryan ruling houses, to which we will return below", 1251. He went to Karakor, the center of the Mongol state, near the great khan of Mangu3.
 This is where Smbat Orbelyan's brilliant diplomatic talent is evident.
 He can skillfully prove that he did not take part in the rebellion.
 The prince of Syunik came out of the court victorious. It was also a victory over the Zakaryans, the enemies of the Orbelians.
It is quite remarkable that the prince of Syunik stayed in Karakorum for about 3 years, but was not imprisoned. he received rochik from the Mongol court.
  From Karakorum he returned to his homeland as "enchu", that is, an independent prince, whose country would no longer be under the rule of the Zakaryans or Georgian kings, but would be considered the personal domain of a noble house4.
 This, in turn, led to the redeployment of forces in the ranks of the Zakaryan Council of Elders of Armenia and in favor of the Orbelyans in the person of Smbat Orbelyan.
 Zakaryan In the history of Armenia in the 50-60s of the 13th century. It was marked by the clash of Zakaryan-Orbelyan houses of power.
  The rise of the Orbelianshankhan մոտ մոտ էր պաշտոն խ խ ինքն և մոտ մոտ մոտ բարձր բարձր պաշտոն բարձր բարձր բարձր ացում և և բ բ բարձր բարձր բարձր ն ն ն ն ն և hostility.
This struggle was especially acute in the 1250s, when Ivan's son Avag died. Կառավարման Zakaryan's government was taken over by Avag's wife Gontza.
In his turn, King Ulu Davit of Georgia in 1257 in order to include the domains of the "Avagyan House" in the Georgian royal estate. He married Gontza, the elder widow.
 Gonza միակ միակ միակ միակ միակ միակ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 Ulu Davit handed over the custody of Khoshak to Sadun Mahkanaberd, known for his rhetoric and knowledge of languages, to the then humble owner of Mahkanaberd5.
  Naturally, Khoshak's marriage led to the weakening of the positions of the Zakaryan ruling house.
In his turn, the positions were strengthened by Smbat Orbelyan, who was favored by the princes.
 The end of the Zakaryan-Orbelyan conflict was that Smbat, by the order of Hulavu Khan, strangled the Georgian queen Gontza in Lake Sana6.
  Smbat's long-term goal was to oust Gonza from power and seize power over his former Suzers.
 Involuntarily, Stepanos Orbelyan testifies to this, who, presenting the desired as a reality, claims that "Smbat became the father of the senior government" 7.
The point is that, as we saw, the father of "Avagyan Tan", that is, the guardian, was Sadun Mahkanaberd.
 Besides, the Mongols would not tolerate the realization of Smbat Orbelyan's goal, as a powerful government would appear in the vilayet of Georgia, which would upset the balance of forces they had established there.
 He would not tolerate it և Sadun Death 1 Ibid., P. 83.
2 For details on the rebellion, see pages 80-93.
3 Manandyan H., Works, h. G., Yerevan, 1977, page 295.
4 Orbelyan S., History of Syunik, Yerevan, 1986, p. 324.
5 Shahnazaryan A., Zakaryan Armenia in the first period of power, p. 133.
6 Orbelyan S., page 334.
7 Ibid., P. 334.
from Kanaberd.
 Therefore, he had to win, because in this matter the interests of his Mongols coincided.
It was through the efforts of Sadun Mahkanaberd that Khoshak married the powerful political weightlifter Sahib Divan1.
 This marriage was the result of detailed calculations by the mediators of both parties, Sahib Dvan and Khoshak Ս, Sadun Mahkanaberdtsi.
  It enabled Khoshak to nullify the ownership of his paternal domains, Ulu Davt and Smbat Orbelyan, why not him, the ambitions of the Shahnshahyan House, having a defender like the almighty Sahib Divan, to restore the dominant positions of the Avagyan House 2.
  This is evidenced by the fact that Khoshak is one of the first Armenian councils to initiate the convening of the Dzagavan Assembly, one year after his marriage, in 1270, preceding Prosh Khaghbakyan, Sadun Mahkanaberdtsi and Smbat Orbelyan3.
 Besides these names, the absence of the names of the representatives of the other branches of Zakaryan's ruling house, "Shahnshahyan Tan", Vahramyans and Tmogvetsyan, proves that they were so weakened that they did not play a serious role in the political life of the country.
Thus, due to Khoshak's prudent marriage, the positions of the "Avagyan Tan" were strengthened.
However, as the events showed, it was temporary, because for the above-mentioned reasons, the positions of the Zakaryan ruling house were irreversibly shaken.
Narine Zohrabyan POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN ZAKARYAN ARMENIA 1250-1260 AD Keywords: Smbat Orbelyan, Sadun Mahkanaberdtsi, Hulavu, Zakaryan Armenia, internal political events, rearrangement of forces.
