FEATURES OF PRONOUN DRAWING IN YEGHISHE'S "BECAUSE OF VARDANA AND THE ARMENIAN WAR" TWO Armenian's pronouns, like those of other Indo-European languages, are derived in two ways.
Grabar's pronouns are of 8 types: personal, demonstrative, reciprocal, reciprocal, interrogative, relative, indefinite, definite.
  Considering that some pronouns of Grabar are derived from nominative conjugation, that is, with corresponding conjunctions, and some pronouns with root changes, the conjugation of pronouns is called in the pronoun conjugation.
 However, it is not all pronouns that are pronounced with a pronoun, some types of pronouns are pronounced with a nominative pronoun, for example, mutual pronouns are pronounced with an a pronoun, which of the interrogative pronouns is pronounced with a pronoun, how many pronouns are mixed with O-A? other և mevs with o ով ով etc.
  It should be noted that all pronouns are examined together based on the semantic-systemic commonalities of pronouns, which allow them to be combined into one semantic group1.
  Pronouns come with their conjugation forms, and the meaning of the infinitive conjugation is expressed in the preposition (ներով with the singular pronouns of the singular tragic plural i, except for the personal pronoun, the meaning of the singular conjugation is expressed in the preposition (in the singular յ singular.
 Now let's look at the pronouns separately in Yeghishe's two, showing their peculiarities.
Personal pronoun. The main feature of this is that, as a general term, this pronoun has two different bases in Indo-European languages. one is straightforward and the other in the other tracks2.
In Yeghishe's "Because of Vartan և the Armenian War", the use of personal pronouns is more common, which mostly appear in direct (24 copies) and tragic (15 copies) syllables, such as: 1) " Distribute my grace to all "3 (p. 10)," Behold, we do not mourn with lamentation, we lament the many blows that we have witnessed "(p. 10)," You have entered into joy, you are full of joy, "" Until we ourselves are great. They wondered why, when all this treasure came out, how the world would visit ”(p. 46).
 2) "As I ought to be with you, those who have fallen into the trap of wisdom, the symbol of heavenly love, this" unearthly ambition "(p. 8), "If that is the case, it is better to say not March, but a half-done corruptor" (p. 66).
 And with the least use they are found in the practical syllable (1 example). "It is not from the beginning to be God, but from Himself to be eternal, nowhere, but in His own time, not in my time" (p. 58).
The personal pronoun itself reveals some practical features. 1) He himself, with personal pronouns like the pronoun, has sometimes been used with extreme meaning by us, the words of you, which are exceptionally obscured characters 4: "ողջ ողջ we are alive with the help of God (= We ourselves are alive with the help of the gods)" (p. 18), "O Is not it worthwhile for you to judge from there for such unworthy teachings (Why should you judge for such unworthy teachings yourself? ”(P. 54).
2) Instead of the pronoun itself, the word itself can be used in a strict sense with personal pronouns, nouns (2 examples): 1 See Essays on the History of Literary Middle Armenian, vol. B, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1975, page 83.
2 See Ghazaryan S., A Brief History of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1981, p. 95.
3 Yeghishe, Vasn Vardanay պատերազմ to the Armenian War, Yerevan, 1989, page 10 (henceforth the copies will be from this book (100 pages studied), therefore, the pages will be marked in parentheses).
4 See Avetisyan M., Ghazaryan R., Grabar manual, Yerevan, 2001, p. 100.
 "But I myself happened to be on the spot, I saw and heard the voice of the dialect speaking loudly" (p. 30), "And the many cries of their shouts, while the king himself witnessed the rebuke, were confirmed by the oath from there" (p. 40).
In the first sentence the word itself is used with the pronoun - I myself, and in the second sentence - with the noun - the king himself.
Sometimes I use the auxiliary verb, the past participle of the past participle, the past participle of the past participle, the past participle of the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle. p. 58), "And it is in my mind (I have put it in my mind), if I do not let anyone in the great blows, that such erroneous laws be inadvertently exposed" (p. 84).
The pronouns of personal pronouns are not infrequently used in conjunction with prepositions.
With the prepositional pronouns of the personal pronouns, it expresses the emotive meaning (3 examples): "And here we are, soaring with you (And here we are climbing with you soaring), as if I were a jumper, passing through all the harmful stormy air" (page 10). ), "On the pillow with them the divine testament of God, many ministering priests (they took with them the divine testaments with many officials and priests)" (p. 20), "առն և behold what he did with them (= և oh! so that the ministers instructed him in his wickedness ”(p. 22).
The preposition with the preposition expresses the close meaning (2 examples): "He sent to him many treasures (he sent many treasures to him)" (p. 14), "եւ who and those who went to them taught voluntarily" (p. 32) .
The accusative case of personal pronouns with the prepositions expresses the meaning of the preposition (prepositional preposition) (one example): "And the unrighteous prince allegedly knew if the mystery of the council had been revealed, the fire prepared until it was blown on him (= no one on him yet) unbroken), the burning of his well-known knowledge of God… "(p. 32)," Zruan said to him (= Zrvan tells him). “Who Are You?” (P. 48)
Demonstrative pronoun.
 The peculiarities of pronoun pronunciation can be seen mainly in the pronounization of demonstrative pronouns.
 Indicative pronouns in Armenian are divided into 3 categories: this, that, that, he, this, that, the same, the root sounds of which are s, d, n, which are used in Armenian as's articles1.
  Yeghishe's two of the demonstrative pronouns often use these and that pronouns, moreover, they are mainly used with nouns, they are used in a short form, agreeing with the nouns in number and number, except for the plural direct-accusative syllables, where they remain unique (12 copies). "But do this as soon as I can" (p. 18). "On the way" (p. 20), "And with all this kindness came the world, and were entrusted to the Holy Spirit, to be rebuked, hastily fulfilled the commandment, all that was done according to his will" (p. 22), "And let all these evils enter into the mind of man." (page 28).
In a few uses (3 examples) these pronouns do not agree with the nouns in verse and number: "What shall we give to the gods in exchange for this great victory that no one can do against our war?" (P. 36), "Here the seven chapters are arranged in a very extreme manner." The means of "fulfillment" (p. 8), "No one can violate our faith (" (p. 80).
In the first example, the pronoun did not agree with the consonant, and in the other two, with the number.
Sometimes, when the corresponding pronoun is used in a sentence, it can be placed on the noun (4 examples): 1 See Ghazaryan S., p. 95.
"And if you consider me faithful to hear my words, in many places in that world you have found his book, read it, you will be informed" (p. 58), "Behold, I have marked these seven galls" (p. 6), "How did this great body make my world… (P. 78), "What is your sorrow for?" (P. 84).
In case of further use, the mentioned pronouns are formed by a long letter, agreeing with the nouns by number and syllable, and the nouns get the corresponding pronoun of the corresponding pronoun (4 copies): "You see this as a proclamation, add a continuous suffix to the kanzis. rebuke me in the world "(p. 20)," O my Lord, our voluntary liturgy, տար do not report to the wicked of this lawless prince today "(p. 98)," As a blessing to me, to those who fell in love with wisdom, heavenly is a sign of this unearthly ambition ”(p. 8).
In case of further use, a disagreement is possible, such as "And this is how my elements are mixed", "But even though all my deeds were difficult, there was nowhere to go" (p. 46).
let us not exchange with thee for the Lord of the earth. but let us exchange God for Jesus Christ, that there is none other than God. ”(p. 82) In the midst of great approval, all the multitudes were gathered together, from the great to the small. They swore by oath that they were alive and well in death” (p. 82), “And At the hands of St. Joseph the Bishop, under the new covenant, they played and went everywhere to the King's Door "(p. 86).
Receipt pronoun.
 Receiving pronouns - me, you (you), us, you, him, are derived from the external inflection. By a simple conjugation they get who in the singular trak, and in the singular exceptional case, the conjugate particles.
  These pronouns are used with nouns in conjunction with the syllable նախադաս sentence, ետconsonant թվ, except for the plural direct և claim syllables, where they are placed in the singular.
  Yeghishe's two use the recipient pronouns more. In 17 of the studies studied, they are used interchangeably, such as, "By the way, something came out of the prophets over them, 'He says,' If he goes around with hunger, he will eat half of his person '" (p. 16), "To every nation of my kingdom." blood, bloodlessness, I will multiply for you the salutation of our humanity էջ "(p. 18)," Servants, subject to the lords of your carnal lords "(p. 22)," he is such a dreamer in his life, յան the lost loss will bring him to his death "(p. page 28).
We have 9 examples of sentence usage, such as, "Teach everyone more invincible power" (p. 10), "This simplicity brings sobriety. which we have seen in you. let us forget my arrogance ”(p. 10),“ And he did this from the fourth to the thirteenth month of his reign ”(p. 34).
When your (your) pronoun is used in a sentence, it is usually used in conjunction with you, and later in conjugations, moreover, the use of the past participle is more frequent. In 5 of the studied examples it has a postposition usage, in 2 - a sentence. 1) "Because you, perceiving your command, willingly undertook this thing" (p. 8), "But if in one day you turn all the nations into your dominion. when the world of the Greeks obeys you according to the laws "(p. 18)," God, who has given you dominion and victory over your enemies, does not ask for anything from your honorable honorable ones "(p. 36), do what I will ”(p. 80),“ Lord, cover our prayers, and do us the pleasure of your commandments. ” (page 100),
Mutual pronouns are mutually exclusive.
  In Yeghishe's two, each other's pronouns are mostly found (2 copies), such as "But the commanded world is not as a toast of expectation, but as a payment of the end, taking on each other's bodies" (p. 22), "Why should I not count? but he did bring forth all the worthless, and took away all that was precious, until the father and the son fell upon one another ”(p. 32).
Interrogative pronouns.
The singular gender of interrogative pronouns has r, the transitive is m, the singular is e, the practical is u, b has conjunctions, for example: • which, in which, in which, in which, • why, what, was, my? , յիմէ, իւ? • Who, what, to whom, to whom?
Only who, who, why (what), which, how many pronouns are used? Who, who, why (what?) pronouns are pronounced with a pronoun, and which one is pronounced with o conjugation, how many with O-A mixed conjugation?
 Interrogative pronouns are often used for why (what), who, yo, where, so how many pronouns, for example? "So why do you lie, why do you compete, why do you burn, why do you burn, why do you not burn, why do you call on those who have taken your soul from you, who have taken away your filth" (p. 16), "He said to him Zruan. "Who are you?" (P. 48), "Was this the reason for this pain on us" (p. 92), "Because of that he was different, if I poured poisonous bitterness, or where? I explained the multitude of arrows ”(p. 14),“ Brave king, do you know how to say such a thing to the Lord? ”(p. 26), but the relative pronoun with its unique uses is very useful. 1) There are many applications in which the pronoun agrees with the relative number of the main sentence; but it is placed in the required sentence of the second sentence: The wisdom of the one who fled from them "(p. 16)," Then all the anger of wrath went to the blessed father, whose name was Garegin "(p. 26).
 "Կոչ Why do you call for the advice of those who have taken the oath of allegiance from you?" (P. 16), 2) in a few cases, the relative pronoun does not agree with the number in the direct, plural, gender-relative clauses, for example: "How blessed I am for you, those who descended to wisdom, to heavenly love as a sign of this ungodliness" (p. 8), "Second, the only Christians who lived in this world with a complete geography" (p. 44), "This is how I divided my creation . The angel is Ormzdi, and he is Arhmnoy, և all the good that is from heaven և this is Ormzdi… ”(p. 50), 3) sometimes he, in the main sentence, the relations expressed by those pronouns are reduced, in which case the pronoun means that it that as "(It) Hand,
Indefinite pronoun.
  Indefinite pronouns in the gender syllable have interrogative pronouns r, in the transitive case, m, in the exceptional case, e, in the practical case, in the verb case, for example, some, some, some, some, some. Who, where, who, where, (with). My, then, my, my. What, really, my, you, you, you.
  Some of my pronouns are pronounced with pronouns, but some pronouns are pronounced with nouns, and some pronouns are mixed with pronoun-noun pronouns.
  What is the most common use of indefinite pronouns, moreover, a large ma 1 See Ghazaryan S., ibid., P. 99.
samb acts as a fresh denial, interrogative `sentence, expressing uncertainty or sharpening, softening the meaning of the word1.
  What's pronoun is not translated in such practices, such as, "Not in the least gifted was the honor of immortality, as an angel in the flesh, but in the whole body of nature, in the breath, in the soul." He felt the whole of nature with his body, with his breath և with his soul…) ”(p. 79), or it is translated into everything, something, that is, no such words, such as:“ As we, contemplating your holy love by your command, nothing (so) you slowly ascended my contemplative ignorance (Thus, seeing that your command is from sincere love, we did not slow down everything, we were not afraid, considering our ignorance) "(p. 8)," The magician said. "Brave king, God has given you strength and victory.
What does the pronoun mean when something is used, something, something, such as (6 examples): "For what's a thing is holiness, to support impermanence" (p. 8), "By doing the law of all this" magic " , that they should not be deprived of anything (anything) "(p. 36)," We are not (in any way) better than the first, who on this testimony have given what they have received, their bodies "(p. 80).
 My, what pronouns when used decisively mean something, that is, something (5 examples), such as: As he created this great body of the world, so without any (any) bodily mediator to the body will experience an experience with a true non-shadowy oath ”(p. 78).
Some (11 examples), some (12 examples) pronouns are mostly used independently և means person, one person, one, and the plural - some, some, such as "… As they said and some (some) ոց" the historian… "(p. 6)," that no one (anyone) should be trampled on by enmity, but should teach everyone his invincible power "(p. 10)," And so day by day in his mind he was deliriously slowing down, someone (one) (p. 26), "For the devil will not sweeten the violent man (man) at the loss, but will make him sweeter at the will of man" (p. 24).
In several uses, does the pronoun come with any interrogative pronouns, such as, "And behold, whosoever will, let him receive as a martyr a virtuous one" (p. 10), "Whoever went to them, they taught voluntarily."
  Other indefinite pronouns follow the noun with a sentence usage, the other agrees with the noun by number and syllable, except for the plural-accusative syllables, where it is usually put in the singular, and the other is preceded by the noun by agreeing with it in the syllable and number, plural. not used with trailers. "And when the unrighteous prince saw that his wickedness had succeeded, he began to meditate on it" (p. 14), "Not worse than others is higher, but from above the heavens have a lawlessness" (p. 60), "Many other heavens They were tormented "(p. 40) (Yez. hajts-hog.hayts)," Again another delusion "(p. 52)," As if he had given birth to another son, he named him Ormizd "(p. 50)," And another step is more ridiculous than that is, Mihr god will give birth to a woman, if one falls with the one who appropriates ”(p. 64).
Certain pronouns.
 All pronouns are derived from certain pronouns - all-all, all-all - all pronouns. All-all-all և all-all-all pronouns are derived from the noun and the participle only in the plural, and all pronouns are singular only in the participle.
 It is more common to use all the pronouns, which are usually used with the noun, in a sentence that does not agree with it in number and syllable, such as "And here we are, soaring with you, as if we were on a high-flying plane, passing through all the harmful stormy air" (p. 10). "Whose spirits are weakened by the heavenly virtue, very much in the nature of the body. "Every wind blows, every thing is agitated, every real thing trembles", "And all these evils will enter the mind of man from the beginning" (p. 28).
The pronouns of all-all-all-all-all-all-all appear mainly in sexual-tragic clips, such as "And since the name of your martyrdom is multifaceted, distribute the grace of multiplicity to all" (p. 10), "Saying this, read a sermon on the large caravan," He put everyone "(p. 20)," He is the true God, make us all. 1 See Avetisyan M., Ghazaryan R., Grabar Manual, Yerevan, 2001, p. 122.
(p. 76), and each և all pronouns are used with the noun sentence, disagreeing with the noun by the number և, such as: "They went to every world with seriousness, masterful counsel" (p. 20), " (P. 24), "Then all the wrath of sorrow was very happy, in whose name was Garegin" (p. 26), "All the soul of the body is life" (p. 30).
Thus, as we can see, the main features of pronouns are the singularity of the singular plural (I-we), the direct-oblique consonants (I-I-I), the divergence, the absence of conjunctions, the convergence of the base-ending, that is, in one concave horse. Both the verbal and the grammatical meanings are expressed together.
Miranush KesoyanPECIFICATIONS OF PRONOUN CLEANING YEGHISHE'S "VAS VARDANA AND THE ARMENIAN WAR" TWO Keywords: pronoun's pronoun, personal pronoun, pronoun, definite pronoun, definite pronoun, definite pronoun, reciprocal pronoun
