SOCIO-PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF PERSONAL CONFORMISM In ancient times, philosophers said that man could not be independent in society.
 Throughout his life, a person has direct or indirect connections with other people, influencing them or avoiding social relationships.
  Very often a person changes his behavior or opinion under the influence of society, agreeing with the ideas of others that he may be internally against the group opinion.
 This is mainly explained by the fact that the individual has a need to be socially accepted.
  In order to satisfy this demand, he is ready to obey the norms and laws created or being created, because he does not want to be rejected by the society or his social group, he is afraid of losing his social position, to become a subject of ridicule. All this leads to the manifestation of conform behavior.
The purpose of this article is to analyze the theoretical provisions of the study of conformism of a person, to point out the socio-psychological features of that material.
  At present, the phenomenon of conformism is the subject of the study of two branches of psychology, social և psychology.
The phenomenon of conformity in social psychology was described by G. Lebon և G. Tard.
 The latter mentions. "Conformism is considered the social quality of people.
  Due to that, stereotypes of social behavior are created.
 He considers conformism as a basis for imitation, which, according to him, individuals in many cases do not realize.
  It turns out that by imitating someone else, the individual acts automatically, as if under the influence of a hypnotic state. "[1]
 And G. According to LeBron, there are two types of artificial masses, one of which is conformism and the other is discipline.
Social psychologist I. Cone explains the concept of "conformism" as adaptability, and more specifically, "conformity is compliance with any accepted or required standard. Conform behavior is possible where the opinions of the individual կարծիք group ամ differ, և the individual gives in to group pressure. ”
  I. The cone distinguished two types of conformity.
 The first is the appearance, when the individual does not change his views, but does not voice them, but begins to act as if he accepts the group opinion.
 In this case, when the pressure stops or the individual gets out of the group control, he starts acting according to his principles again.
 The second is "internal" conformity, when under the pressure of the group the individual changes his initial opinion և accepts the opinion of the majority.
 This is done not out of convincing facts, but out of fear of being isolated.
D. Myers' definition is similar to I. The type of conformity described by Connie.
 Here it seems that the opinions of the authors agree.
The author notes that conformity not only means behaving like others, but also being influenced by "others".
  It means behaving alone with yourself in a different way than in the team.
Conformism, then, is "a change in behavior or belief due to the presence of external or imaginary pressure on the group."
D. Myers, in turn, singled out two types of conformism: concessions and affirmations.
 He mentions that often we show conformity without understanding our deeds.
 We give in to the demands of those around us, to get support or to avoid punishment.
 If our concession is in response to an ambiguous instruction, it can be called submission.
 We often sincerely believe that the group is forcing us to do something.
 Indeed, true conformism is called affirmation.
It turns out that in psychology, conformism is seen as a personal conformity to the group, real or imagined pressure, and in that case the person's behavior, personal attitudes begin to coincide with the principles of the majority, which even the person may not have previously accepted.
  A person gives up his own opinion, unequivocally agrees with the positions of those around him, regardless of the extent to which it corresponds to the ideas, feelings, accepted norms, moral-ethical rules and logic.
 The most common phenomenon in the group is social conformism, which implies the unequivocal acceptance of the prevailing opinion, mass standards and stereotypes, customs, authoritative principles and positions.
  Man does not oppose the prevailing tendencies (although he may oppose them internally), he accepts any socio-political-economic reality without criticism, he does not want to express his own opinion.
 In the case of conformism, a person refuses to take responsibility for his own actions, blindly obeys the demands and attributions of society, government, religious establishment, family.
Conformism has been studied by a number of scholars who have conducted their research to find out the effect of conformism on the individual, his personal qualities, moral-ethical norms, rules and other worldview components.
 How do social psychologists study conformism in the laboratory?
  What conclusions can be drawn from the results of the research on the social forces and their nature?
Psychologists studying this phenomenon create "small social worlds" in laboratories that include everyday social events.
 These are the three studies that are now classified as classics.
 We can say that each of them is one of the possible methods of studying conformity.
The first study was conducted by Solomon Ash (1951).
 From his research we conclude that there are three possible judgments: • The individual is considered by the group to be a source of information that he does not actually possess. not to be specific to the person in the situation; • people understand and experience the separation of their own perception և majority opinion, citing many reasons, such as group or self-accusation, disregard for divergent opinions, joining of conflicting opinions, etc.
The other study was conducted by Muzaffer Sherif.
 We conclude from the sheriff's research that the subjects were influenced by the group, not guessing about it at all, և the effects of the influence were maintained even in the absence of the group.
Մ. In Sheriff's research, we see the potential for information influence, which leads to internalization, long-term change of position, and personal acceptance of group norms.
 Within this framework, the reactions of the other participants are influential in the amount of information they receive about the reality.
 These people are informative for the person as much as the person accepts them as he knows, trustworthy, trustworthy, etc.
 The information influence is the social comparison, the motive of which is the individual's desire to be truthful in his judgments, to be convinced of their subjective validity.
 It may also be the fact that people are involved in that group.
Մ. Sheriff և S. There is no external pressure in Ash research that will lead to conformism.
 If people are unable to withstand the slightest external influence, to what extent can conformism be achieved through overt pressure?
  This is the question that social psychologist Stanley Milgram tried to answer.
 Ս. Ashi և S. There is a general line in Milgram's research.
 They show how compromise prevails over morality.
  Both researchers succeeded in forcing humans to go against their conscience.
 These studies not only teach us an academic lesson, but also make us more sensitive to the moral conflicts that occur in our lives.
 Here we see one of the well-known principles of social psychology: the connection between behaviors, positions, the dominance of the situation, and the persistent fundamental error of attribution.
Ս. Ash's research was repeated by A., a graduate of the Faculty of Philosophy of St. Petersburg State University. P. Sopikova, who surveyed about 550 children and adolescents.
  Uniform results were obtained.
 It became clear that the level of conformity is higher at a young age. It decreases with age, no changes are observed at the age of 15-16.
 Moreover, the conformity of girls is 10% higher than that of boys of the same age.
 Conform reactions are quite stable, we can not get rid of them if desired.
 From the analysis of the researches it becomes clear that there is a connection between the characteristics of the group և individual characteristics of a person և, greatly influencing the formation and manifestation of conformism.
 These factors may include an individual's low self-esteem, low self-awareness, group unity, crowds, position, and prestige.
 And the connection between the "personal qualities" of conforming behavior is conditioned by the underdevelopment of the cognitive sphere, the rigidity of thinking, the scarcity of ideas, the emotional closure, the inferiority complex, the desire to meet external standards, and other factors.
  As for age peculiarities, the manifestation of conform behavior is not related to age և age peculiarities, as there is no stage of development in which the need accepted by society to be similar to others will not prevail.
Consequently, conform behavior can manifest itself at և´ young, և´ adults.
 Studies show that the factors that lead to conformism can be divided into two groups: external and internal.
 External factors include the composition, structure, position and authority of the group, the nature and complexity of the problem given to the group, the nature of the situation, which depends on subjective-objective factors, the individual's position in the group, the group's influence on the individual, the group member's external attractiveness; requirements, acceptance of the group as a source of information, etc.
 Internal factors include a person's age, gender, individual attitude towards the group, expectations from the group, group member competence, a number of personal, intellectual characteristics, etc.
Theoretical analysis showed that, like any other phenomenon, conformism has its positive and negative sides.
  On the positive side, there is an increase in cohesion in post-crisis situations, which helps to overcome them, facilitates joint activities, reduces the time to get used to the collective, and on the negative side can be the creation, the development of different prejudices and beliefs against minorities, the inability to make a valuable contribution to science or culture, as conformism eradicates a unique, creative mind.
LITERATURE [1] Семечкин Н., Социальная ψυхология на рубеже веков.
 historians, theory, research [4] Avanesyan H., In the practice of psychological experiments, Educational-methodical guide, Yerevan, 2015, pp. 42-4. Movsisyan SONA SOCIO-PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MANIFESTATIONS OF CONFORMISM Keywords: person, conformism, conform behavior, social-psychological phenomenon, personal features.
