THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE REAL AND THE IMAGINATION IN SIMONSIMONYAN'S NOVEL "TROUBLESHOOTED" It is a textbook truth that the literary world does not necessarily have to justify its existence in one way or another, in a limited range of content or genre.
  It is another question whether something changes with the birth of a work of art or not, does it not change in the general system of literature, is there a redistribution of values ​​or not?
In this regard, the novel "Anjamandros" by the famous Diaspora Armenian writer, "Diaspora" magazine and the prolific editor of "Sean" publishing house, published after the author's death in 1987, on the one hand the resurgence of only one range of topics: longing, loss, pain, and despair.
As a two-part novel, "Anjamandros" develops on the principle of "story in story", equally mastering two realities, one ordinary, everyday, even everyday, the other unreal, unusual, sometimes extreme, but never an end in itself.
 In other words, Simonyan keeps his reader in two separate dimensions, which, however, contradicting the principle of parallelism, intersect continuously.
 The heroes of "Anjamandros", being natural figures, are at the same time an image-symbol of those who are introspective, dreamers, seekers of justice and real beauty (a phenomenon that is never untimely), and finally, the relentless fighters who achieve their victory.
When evaluating a literary work, the novelty and peculiarity of the book is often mentioned as a positive or more valuable aspect, which, of course, is not a debatable fact.
 On the contrary, literary criticism seldom touches upon the interconnectedness of literary works, their so-called compatibility, mentioning it as a positive fact.
  True literary value, on the other hand, is possible not only from the point of view of innovation, but also from the point of view of preservation of traditions (of course, we are not talking about artificial, artificial similarity).
 "Today it is difficult to imagine how it is possible to defend the proposition that everything in a work is individual, that everything in it is a unique result of an inspired work that has nothing to do with the previous works." [1]
 From this point of view, "Anjamandros" continues the theme of the fate of an Armenian living abroad, looking for a place of soul, which, unfortunately, is the center of all Diaspora Armenian literature, including Simonyan's work, but also gives universal value to the search for his hero.
"Anjamandros" is a series of stories of different people and the author, two separate stories, or rather, two versions of the lives of the same heroes, the first is real, possible, the second is the opposite.
 In other words, instead of presenting the reader with a plain text, in simple structures, the author gives him the opportunity to think, compare and contrast, to interpret the sub-layers of what is said independently.
  Here, perhaps, the words of the famous writer-critic Hakob Oshakan about himself, Oshakan-novelist, are appropriate. ‹‹ This is his novel, which equally respects and transcends the stereotypes we have experienced in the novel, and pretends to be Sephakan, able to use other stereotypes. ”[2]
 Simonyan - the novelist, like his teacher, Oshakan himself, creates a unique, extraordinary world with its own templates.
In this extraordinary but complete world, there are two stories, two plot lines, two realities or two imaginations.
These two stories are inextricably linked, conditioned by each other, each other's discovery and explanation are incomplete without each other.
First, where does this strange name of the novel, "Anjamandros" come from? "My hero, who will be called Anjamandros - is a word I created, that is, timeless or timeless," [3] explains architect Arsen Zamanyan, the second author of the story.
 So, this is a story about a man who is out of time, in some other, lesser-undiscovered measurement.
Time is the strongest and most stressed element in the novel. it is true in one case (the action of the novel begins in 1956, a day in December, even ten thousand years ago, but, in any case, certain), in another case it is a powerless and insignificant unit to which man does not obey.
Architect Zamanyan, one of the main characters of the novel, leaving aside the daily architectural works, tries to finish the thought that has been going on for years until the novel about an "untimely" man, who is doomed to come back to the world ten thousand years after his birth.
 Anjamandros's goal is only to find his beloved, Shekaghjka, but this is only the outer layer of the issue.
 In fact, on his difficult path, Anjamandros encounters psychological, moral, philosophical, political, even national issues, but he thinks about them like a human being, having no prior idea, evaluating them in their original, unmixed form.
Love, loyalty, struggle, victory, defeat, hope, despair, disappointment and reborn faith are the words of "Anjamandros", phenomena woven around, about which this novel is about.
In the novel, Simonyan creates twin, even triple characters. He unites in the image of Anjamandros the images of the architect and the revolutionary Goliath, creating a trinity, the peaks of which are the human mind, the strength, the spirit of struggle for a bright and just life.
 The timeless lover, the blonde girl, is the epic heroine, Alya Kasyan, the girl dedicated to the victory of the revolution until the last drop of her blood.
Alya is the bride of Galust Zakaryan, an Armenian national hawk of the Iranian revolution, who is arrested by the Iranian authorities for attempting to carry out a revolution.
  After mourning the death of his beloved, Alya receives information that Golya is alive and well in Soviet Armenia.
  Architect Zamanyan is the person to whom the girl turns for help to find her lover.
"Revolution, I am ready to sacrifice myself even for your supreme goal" [4] - this is the purpose of Golia և Alaya's life, their mission.
They dream of establishing a communist regime in Iran, liberating the people from the yoke of Shahnshah, spreading freedom and equality, and establishing relations with the Soviet Union.
 Golia's attempt fails in Iran, but soon he and his fiancée see how they live in the countries where their long-awaited revolution is already a reality.
 With the help of the architect, the sister of the Alyan ականի revolutionary Asyan left for Soviet Armenia, where, according to the information they received, Golyan was to be found.
  The daughters of the revolution, however, are so kindly received by the sworn communists in the same communist country, they hinder them in every way, they hide the fighter of the revolution.
Alya also fails in Moscow.
Eighteen years later, the architect met again in Tehran for the last time, already married to a "capitalist" American.
 The architect also meets Golia, a former revolutionary hiding under the name of Rostom Isfahan, whose only meaning in life is to secretly follow his beloved, to live with him, never revealing his existence under any sign.
This is the first novel, the first story.
  The second is Zamanyan's novel about the prehuman Anjamandros.
 Ten thousand years after his death, Anjamandros, who was looking for his lover, the blonde girl, accidentally kills archeology professor Hoffman Melikyan, but is perceived by people as the professor himself.
 Anjamandros can in no way convince people that he is not Professor Melikyan, he has to live his life.
 Everywhere Anjamandros is accompanied by the skull of a blonde girl, who talks to him, leads him to his modern reincarnation, with whom Anjamandros should have been happy.
 But he dies a second time, in the same pit of the Cave, from the same lightning strike as ten thousand years ago.
The central characters in the novel are the architect Alyan.. He reads his novel for the latter, and in his conversations with Alya, the real content of "Anjamandros" is revealed.
 Alyan և her lover is finally convinced of the meaninglessness of the idea of ​​revolution, until there is a revolution of the soul, as one of the heroes of the novel says. "The real revolution must be pushed not only against dictatorships, capitalism and the urban class, but also against our souls, and even between me and your souls, where there are sharper class antagonisms than outside, on the desolate and wrinkled world." [3]
 Architect Zamanyan tries to make Alya understand that political order, no matter what its origins, is the same, that the children of the Armenian people should think of him first: "It seems to me that you are so universal that you do not think of the rejected people" ].
The brave fighter of the revolution, Golyan, now hiding under the name of RostomIsfahan, deeply disappointed with the revolution, makes up-to-date observations. "Communism could not make people happy.
  Whoever thinks differently is a liar.
 A person can not receive a pension of 100 rubles and spend 300 rubles and not lie, cheat, steal, do not commit the sins of the man accumulated since the days of Anjamandros and commit the sins of the new city. "[3]
Changes in political order, all kinds of revolutions are purely conventional, as long as the revolution did not take place inside man. This is the final conclusion of the former revolutionary.
 To confirm the hero's opinion, Simonyan presents a ridiculous vision. Anjamandros' son establishes communist rule in the United States. helps restore monarchy in Russia.
 The author seems to have predicted the collapse of the Soviet Union at a time when there were no signs of it!
At every step, Simonyan confronts the reader with, by his own definition, "dichotomies", paradoxes, which force him to put aside his monotonous and monotonous view of speeches. "We will be united when we are separated from each other, and we will be separated from each other when we are united." [3]
 This really makes you think.
The novel is a series of meetings, which gives it an adventurous tone.
 The meeting, in general, as a separate category, as mentioned in the literature, is one of the most important parts of the novel structure, which acquires a figurative, symbolic meaning.
  There are many meetings in "Anjamandros". they serve to revise public morals and values.
  The high-ranking ladies who met the Pre-Man Anjamandros live in deception, deceiving their husbands, but even ordinary, poor, ordinary people do not shine with their honesty. His supposed relatives, who met Anjamandros, think only of extorting money from him, allegedly Professor Hoffman Melikyan.
Everyone needs to change, not only the states, but also the people, just ordinary people, starting the revolution within themselves and then around them.
 Through his heroes, Simonyan tries to prove to the reader that it is really possible to change what already seems impossible to change. in a change of imagination, because "things that did not exist may have happened, and things that did not exist may not have happened," because "reality is imagination, and imagination is reality."
Several people և several ideologues can live in a person at the same time. The important thing is to listen to all the voices and make a final decision.
 Golyan presents his final decision. he commits suicide because he has irrevocably lost his time, he has not obeyed his imagination, he has not wanted to distort reality, but he looks to the future with faith, already for other people. ‹" The 21st century will come, where man will live, and will not make an effort to live, where man will be happy and not happy, "[3].
"Anjamandros" is the Armenian manuscript that went through the tragedy of the twentieth century, the man who tries to stand up again, to re-establish the right to live, to live happily under this sun.
 Simonyan tries to write the novel of the Armenian man from a different point of view, in a different way, going beyond the ordinary, leaving aside the historical facts, bringing the truth as possible.
  If in Diaspora Armenian literature Hamastegh, Hakob Mndzuri, Vahe Hayk, Karo Sassoun, Simon Simonyan himself, others tried to save their lost birthplace and its people from oblivion, they showed all the severity of the pain of a stateless person looking at the past, then "Immediately" to his people և, in general, to all mankind, sometimes directly, sometimes with an interesting allegory, he offers a new "prescription", the main principle of which is to look ahead.
LITERATURE [2] Oshakan Y., Comparative Western Armenian Literature, vol. 10, Antelias, 1982, p. 94.
[3] Simonian S., Anjamandros, Yerevan, 1998, pp. 9, 79, 491, 5, 532.
[4] Diaspora, 1978, No. 18.
Harutyunyan THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JEWELERY AND IMAGINATION SIMONSIMONYAN'S NOVEL "TROUBLED" Keywords: time, loyalty, love, struggle, revolution
.
