ANALYSIS OF Clark-Leibniz's CORRESPONDENCE OF SPACE AND TIME The problem of space-time is one of the eternal problems of philosophy.
  It has given rise to many debates and discussions in the history of philosophy and science and received various answers.
 To understand the value of these discussions, it is enough to list the names of the people who were interested in it.
 Democritus, Parmenides, Zeno, Aristotle, well-known representatives of ancient Greek philosophy, and Philosophers of the new period, R., expressed their philosophical views on space and time. Descartes, G. Leibniz, the greatest scientists I. Newton, J. Maxwell, H. Lorents, A. Einstein և others.
The present article discusses the Clark-Leibniz correspondence debate, which is a question of space-time, which is one of the interesting pages in the history of science and philosophy.
 This debate gives us knowledge about our ideas about space and time in the 17th century.
The question that Clark's Leibniz was debating is whether space and time exist independently of the material world, are they absolute beings, or are they merely properties of matter?
There were two opposing approaches to the above-mentioned issue.
 According to the first view, space and time are absolute beings, they exist independently of other material objects.
  Space was understood as pure, pure stretch, and time as pure emptiness.
  In other words, they are "emptiness" where the ematerial world is located1.
  This view is known in the professional literature as substantialism, which was followed by Newton's student Clark.
According to the second view, the space and time of attributivism are properties of matter.
 They do not exist independently of the material world, they are not substances.
  According to attributivism, space is perceived as a mere arrangement of things, and time as a sequence of things.
 One of the proponents of this view was Descartes կողմն Leibniz.
A. According to Einstein, if we take out all the things, what will be left, emptiness or nothing?
2 In the same place.
This question was tried to be clarified by two modern thinkers, Leibniz and Newton.
  In the letters, Newton's point of view is presented by his student, Clark.
As is well known, Leibniz, one of the founders of modern philosophy, presents ontological and epistemological views in a deductive way, in which case other judgments are derived from the general true judgment.
  He accepts as a general absolute truth the principle of sufficient basis, which is the cornerstone of his epistemological philosophy.
  According to that principle, nothing happens in the world without sufficient justification. Why is it not the opposite?
 When talking about space-time, the starting point is the principle of sufficient basis.
The main argument of Leibniz, from which the other arguments are derived, can be presented as follows: If space is absolute, then it is homogeneous, but since nothing happens in the world without sufficient justification, then space cannot be absolute, because then it would not be possible to find a reason why this order is maintained.
Thus, according to Leibniz, there is no sufficient basis to claim that space is absolute.
  The space is homogeneous.
  If it gets rid of everything in it, then no point of it will be different from the others.
  Therefore, if we consider space to be absolute, it is impossible to find a reason why God maintains this arrangement of bodies or why He has arranged them in this way and in no other way1.
 With this argument, Leibniz raises the question of why the world is like this and no other way.
To better understand the argument, imagine a situation in which east and west have changed.
  According to Leibniz logic, space and time are substances that exist independently of matter, then the world should have had a completely different structure.
 But if the space were just a regulation of the positions of the bodies or a relation, then nothing would change from the movement of east and west, their difference would depend only on our calculation system.
 The world would be what it is today.
 That is, a sufficient justification for this horse of the world: space is an arrangement of things, not an independent existence.
In the same way he denies the idea of ​​the absoluteness of time.
 Turning again to the fact of God's creation, he asks why God did not create everything a year earlier.
  In the case of such a question, it is "impossible" to find a justification.
 However, Leibniz himself rightly states that this question is wise only in the case of absolute time2.
  But since there is no such answer, God does not create anything without justification, so time is not an absolute existence outside of things, but only a sequence of things.
In terms of interest, Leibniz's argument is not inferior to Clark's.
  He accepts Leibniz's idea that there really is nothing without sufficient justification, but Leibniz's above question remains unanswered even when we accept space և time 2 Ibid., P. 443.
It is also a property of matter.
  That is, if we accept that space is just an arrangement of things, then, as above, there will be no difference whether the parts of matter will be arranged in relation to each other in A, B, C or other sequences.
 In this case, the question will arise as to why this regulation is maintained.
 It will be "impossible" to find a reason for that.
  To make this more obvious, Clark gives me an example. Suppose the Earth, Ar և և Moon, maintaining their alignment ությունը distance from each other, were placed in the same place.
  In that case, it would turn out that they would be in another place, but still they would not be in another place, because space is not independent of those bodies.
 In other words, Clark argues that if space is only a property of matter, then when we move things, we still do not move them; he considers this an obvious contradiction.
In the same way, speaking of time, Clark argues that if God moved the world of matter from one place to another at any speed, it would always remain in the same place at all times, no movement would be felt.
 That is, he sees the same contradiction when he views time as an order of things.
At first glance, it seems that both thinkers present well-founded arguments to each other.
  But both have certain shortcomings in their arguments, which makes them vulnerable.
 For example, Leibniz's argument can be refuted with the help of the principle of its sufficient basis.
 When he claims that God does not create or do nothing without justification, the question arises, but what is the basis for this, why does God not create anything without justification?
  In other words, such an assertion has an internal contradiction, because the problem of finding justification for everything arises from the problem of finding justification.
And in the case of Clark, of course, his argument is quite a nice counter-argument to Leibniz, but it is not without flaws.
 Clark makes the argument of the logical circle error.
 He says that when moving things, their place changes, but in case of denying the absoluteness of space, it is assumed that they remain in the same place. We move the object, but it is not moved.
 He contradicts the fact that things are moved or not moved, it is the same as the substantivist-attributivist views of space, resulting from the error of the second in the case when the authenticity of the first has not been proved.
The other circumstance in the arguments, around which the debate is unfolding, is the homogeneity of the space.
 If Leibniz derives the attribute of space from the homogeneity of space, then Clark derives the absoluteness of space from the same circumstance.
  Leibniz claims that there is no difference between homogeneous spaces and others, therefore they are all the same, they simply present themselves under different names.
 As a proof of this assertion is the idea according to which it is impossible to find two similar things in the world. "Even when we look at water droplets under a microscope, we see that they are not as similar as they seem."
 Clark's counter-argument to that is more like the opposition. he simply says that if two points are similar, it does not mean that they are the same, չկա there is no reason to claim that it is impossible to find two exactly similar things in the world at all.
If we take all the things out of space, according to the substanceists, there will be emptiness.
 But that emptiness, according to Leibniz, will become an attribute without a subject.
  Just as gravity requires subjects that are in relation to gravity, so emptiness must have a subject in order to be an absolute attribute.
 In response, Clark tries to change Leibniz's view of emptiness.
  According to him, space is not an attribute without a subject, because it means space not separated from everything, but separate from bodies.
  Examining this question in relation to the material world, we notice that there is a contradiction in it.
 If space and time are absolute, then they are infinite։ eternal.
The material world is finite և temporary, and God և is eternal և infinite.
 In this case, if we accept Clark's argument that emptiness or absolute space is an attribute, not without a subject, but separate from bodies, then it turns out that it is a God-attribute, since there is nothing in the universe other than them.
However, this reasoning is in stark contrast to the theistic approach espoused by the two thinkers, since God is no longer the only perfect being.
  This circumstance is also mentioned by Leibniz.
  According to him, if space is a real absolute existence, then it must be eternal and infinite.
  If so, it is either an attribute of the Creator or the Creator himself.
  But since space has parts, it is fragmentary, so it is incompatible with the concept of God1.
 Space և time are relative to something. Space is the positional order of things, time is the order of sequence.
  When we see many things together, we realize the order in which things are in relation to each other.
Clark responds to this by saying that space is not eternal's infinite, but infinite և the existence of an eternal essence or its property.
  Infinite space is immeasurable, and immeasurable is not God, therefore space is not God2.
 This argument can not be contradicted, as it is already based on the understanding of the essence of God, but in the continuation of the argument Clark uses an interesting trick.
Denying the fragmentation of space, he says that absolute space is essentially indivisible, because if we consider space to be divisible, we must keep in mind that the divisible requires indivisible particles, such as atoms.
 Clark concludes that in this case, space would become divisible and indivisible at the same time.
  It is noteworthy that this refutation of Leibniz's argument is more like a sophistic trick, which is more expressive when presented in the analogy of Aristotle's example. The skin is white at the same time, because the skin is white, and the teeth are white, or 5 is odd at the same time, because it is equal to the sum of 2 և 33.
2 Ibid., P.
From the arguments presented and their analysis, it seems that in this debate the scales are tilted towards Leibniz, but Leibniz, in turn, is making the mistake of a logical circle.
  If we are not atheists, we cannot disagree with the first two arguments of the argument.
  But he goes on to say that if space has parts, it is fragmentary, then it is incompatible with the concept of God.
 This implies that he is already basing the argument on the attributivist understanding of space, which he is trying to prove.
  In a more simplified version, his argument sounds as follows: If space is absolute, it must be compatible with the concept of God, but since it is not absolute, it is therefore incompatible with the concept of God.
  In other words, space is not absolute, because it is not absolute.
All the above-mentioned facts and their refutations immediately come from the mentality and philosophical views of the era lived by those thinkers.
  Both authors can be opposed by going beyond their philosophical systems.
  In Leibniz's case, his biggest shortcoming is that his principle is unfounded.
 He sees as an axiom a sufficient principle, which is not fully proved anywhere else.
 And Clark, as A. notes. Barseghyan seems to have been able to substantiate his or Newton's point of view scientifically, in this case with classical mechanics, but the whole irony is that Newtonian physics does not derive the absolute or non-absolute nature of space-time.
Thus, in the dispute between Clark and Leibniz, the two authors try to find a solution to the question of what space and time are.
Each of them is a supporter of one point of view և tries to confirm his own point of view by denying the other.
 Of course, Einstein's theory of relativity later turned people's perceptions of these two concepts upside down, but, nevertheless, this debate is of great interest from the point of view of 21st century man exploring and hermeneutizing the New Age.
Mariam Asatryan ANALYSIS OF THE CLARK-LIBNITSIAN CORRESPONDENCE ON SPACE AND TIME Keywords: space և time, substantialism, attributivism, emptiness, material world, principle of sufficient basis.
