COLONY AND DIASPORA. TYPOLOGY OF THE DIASPORA Recently, a wider use of the word "Diaspora" is noticeable. Today, a number of terms are used that did not exist years ago: Diaspora (diasporic and diasporan), rediasporization, de-diasporization, Diaspora, diaspora or diaspora, diaspora, diaspora diasporization)։ etc.
When examining the Diaspora, scholars consider the reasons for its emergence, the main periods of Diaspora formation, and questions related to its definition.
  Studies devoted to the Armenian Diaspora, whether they refer to Diaspora structures, institutions, Diaspora Armenian literature, language, or the problems faced by the Armenian Diaspora, nevertheless do not tend to contain theoretical sociological provisions.
  The aim of this paper is to fill this gap by presenting the main sociological definitions of the Diaspora used in the literature and proposing a model for classifying Diaspora theories of Diaspora identity.
Let us refer to the typological models of the Diaspora by a number of authors.
  The complexity of defining the Diaspora has forced theorists to delve into the reasons and conditions that led to the emergence of the Diaspora1.
  Among the reasons for the dispersal are the forced expulsion from the homeland, captivity (including slavery), forced deportation, exile, voluntary deportation, emigration, migration, imperialism.
  Based on the level of unity and activity of Diaspora organizations, Medam distinguished the concepts of "crystallized Diaspora" and "liquid Diaspora".
  The crystallized Diaspora is characterized by great dynamics, the presence of transnational networks, and activity 2.
  Մ. Bruno's classification approach is based on the organizational structure of the Diaspora.
 He singled out the business (Chinese, Lebanese), religious (Jewish) and political (Palestinian, Tibetan) versions of the Diaspora3.
 Taking into account the political power of the Diaspora, G. Schaefer used the terms "state-based Diaspora" and "stateless Diaspora" 4.
  Butler's Diaspora model is based on identity features: religious (Jewish), national (Armenian, Indian), ethnic (Kurdish, Kashmir), regional (Caribbean), continental (African).
  Diasporaization F. Curtis' approach underscores the initial activities of the Diaspora group, such as trade5.
  R. Cohen6 defines the following types of Diaspora: victims (for example, African, Armenian, Jewish, Palestinian), labor (Turkish), commercial or business (Chinese, Lebanese), imperial (British, French), cultural (Caribbean) 8.
1 See Sideri E., The Diaspora of the Term Diaspora.
  A Working-Paper of a Definition, Cultures in Transit, 2008 (available at http: // www.
//transtexts.revues.org/index247.html link).
2 See Anteby-Yemini L., Berthomière, W., Diaspora.
  A Look Back on a Concept in the Bulletin of the Center for French Search in Jerusalem, no 16, 2005, pp. 262-270 (available at http: // www.
//bcrfj.revues.org/index257.html link).
3 See ibid.
4 The example of the Jewish Diaspora suggests that the stateless Diaspora can be transformed into the opposite of the state Diaspora ենս.
 But so far only the Jewish Diaspora has managed to build a nation-state.
5 See Anteby-Yemini L., Berthomière, W., 2005.
6 See Cohen R., Global Diasporas.
 An Introduction. London, 1997.
7 See Anteby-Yemini L., Berthomière, W., 2005.
8 The cultural Diaspora is characterized by the preservation and reproduction of cultural features.
  African immigrants from the Caribbean managed to preserve the indigenous African culture, to create new means of expression close to that culture.
Numerous studies have been conducted to find out which elements of identity are the defining elements of nationality.
  In the context of the Diaspora, it is possible to understand the "collective identity" of the individual.
 Examining various manifestations of Diaspora members' behavior, Schaefer divides the Diaspora into the following categories: "core" - those individuals who have a pure national identity, can exist as a separate organized community, regardless of all processes (modernity, globalization, etc.), closely Therefore, they are not in danger of extinction.
 "marginal members" are individuals who have an ethnic identity but deliberately do not identify with the Diaspora community.
 "Sleepers" are individuals who are fully integrated into the host society, assimilated, but considering them Diaspora members is problematic1.
H. Gans calls the identity of Diaspora members who have lost their Diaspora «expelling the homeland" symbolic "2.
 Diaspora literature has referred to the most significant differences between the so-called elements "migrants" of the Diaspora in terms of identity.
  The theory is that there is a cultural, linguistic, religious, historical, and emotional connection between the Diaspora's homeland (country of origin), while the status of migrants implies assimilation into the host country, learning new customs, acquiring citizenship, and acquiring citizenship. և etc.
 However, migrants (sometimes reciprocally) are in conflict with both the homeland and the host society and the Diaspora, refusing to join existing Diaspora organizations as well as establishing their own organizations3.
  It should be noted that historically migration flows have a certain impact on the Diaspora4, the Diaspora in turn in turn affects the identity of migrants.
 It is generally believed that the main purpose of migrants leaving the homeland and settling in the west is material well-being, while the need for caring, cultural and emotional values ​​makes them cling to the homeland.
  When expulsion from the homeland is perceived as short-term and return as permanent5, the migrant in the individual is transformed into a Diaspora member.
 But is the Diaspora identity only the result of an individual's decision?
According to Kh. According to Tololyan, the minority whom the political or cultural builders consider the Diaspora adopts the attitude of the Diaspora.
  The formation and survival of the Diaspora (even in the case of migration) is conditioned by the conscious, organized efforts of the cultural, social and political elites, which are of a continuous nature and are passed down from generation to generation6.
  Meanwhile, the lack of efforts for the survival of the Diaspora leads to assimilation7.
  When there is no perception of the homeland, the existing ecosystemic deficit, the Diaspora becomes just a virtual phenomenon, devoid of influence on international "state systems" 8.
  Constructivists have opposed theorists who describe the Diaspora as a state outside of politics that arises automatically through migration.
 According to them, the Diaspora is formed or mobilized through discourse. It is a "social construct through political mobilization of the elite."
 According to Adamson, the Diaspora is the result of a political, strategic undertaking of transnational mobilization to succeed in building social identity.
1 See Sheffer G., Transnationalism and Ethnonational Diasporism. Diaspora 15 (1).
 2006, pp. 121-45.
 When talking about the Diaspora in general, there is a tendency to include everyone in a single group according to their origin or blood ties, which, based on practical-political considerations, can be justified.
2 See Sheffer G., A New Field of Study.
  Modern Diasporas in International Politics, Gabriel Sheffer (ed.) Modern Diasporas in International Politics, London.
 Croom Helm, 1986, pp. 1-15.
3 See Butler K., Free Articles Base, nd Diaspora.
  Origins, Development and Types, 2001, http.
//pagerankstudio.com/Blog/2010/10/diaspora-origins-development-types/
4 See Keck M., Sikkink K., Transnational Advocacy Networks in International and Regional Politics, Blackwell Publishers, 1999, pp. 89-101.
5 See Butler K., 2001.
6 See Tölöyan K., Restoring the Logic of the Sedentary to Diaspora Studies, Les diasporas, 2000; Berthomière W., Sheffer, G., Anteby L., 2000 ans de diasporas, Presses Universitaire de Rennes, 2005, pp.137-148; Gold S., From Nationality to Peoplehood.
Adaptation and Identity Formation in the Israeli Diaspora, Diaspora 13 (2/3), 2004, pp. 331-58.
7 See Tölöyan K., 2000.
8 See Keck M., Sikkink K., 1999.
(Available Taking these approaches together, the Diaspora can be defined as a whole of members of an ethnic group living outside the homeland or a transnational imaginary community և an elite political program that is implemented over time through transnational mobilization2.
Taking into account the level of the homeland when defining the Diaspora, let us separate the following three groups.1. Theorists of the first group U. Safrani, K. Butler, G. Schaefer, R. In Cohen and Brubaker, the homeland is at the core of the definition of the Diaspora.
  Therefore, these theories can be called patriotic.
2. Theorists of the second group S. Vertovek, S. Dufuan, Kh. Tololyan, A. Apadur, who, although defining the Diaspora as a unique social force, institution or national community, still tend to emphasize the nature of the Diaspora as an independent entity.
3. The Third Group Theorists In the works of Clifford, Gilro, and others, the definition of the Diaspora is based on the idea of ​​patriotism.
When defining the patriotic theories of the Diaspora, the existence of an ethnic group beyond the homeland, whose collective memory is based on the vision of returning from the homeland, is emphasized as a victim of national tragedy or forced deportation.
  And. Saffron considers Diaspora the migrant communities that (their ancestors) 1) spread from the pre-homeland (center) to foreign (peripheral) regions, 2) have a collective memory, vision or myth about their true homeland, physical location, history, achievements. 3) believe that it is impossible to fully integrate into the host society, therefore և partly alienated from the place; 4) treat the ancestral homeland as their ideal homeland, where they or their children must return; and prosperity, 6) continue to be individually connected to the homeland, which is the reason for their solidarity and ethno-community consciousness 3.
  And. The definition of saffron clearly emphasizes that geographically separated communities are part of the same whole with their relatives living in the homeland due to their collective memory, pro-patriotic attitude, and emotional connection with the homeland.
Armstrong views the Diaspora as a "monolithic body, a group with emotional, kinship, and genealogical ties to people living in the homeland."
 Unlike Armstrong, Cohen argues that the Diaspora cannot be considered monolithic, given the impact of different migration flows on Diaspora communities5.
  He adds the fact of spreading to two or more foreign countries from the homeland.
  In contrast to the Saffron definition, where the idea of ​​return is seen as a vision, Cohen emphasizes the "existence of a universally approved return movement."
  Saffron և Cohen singles out the idealization of the homeland և The existence of a collective memory of the achievements of the historical glory of the homeland հետ the geography of a certain geographical area,, the collective responsibility for the preservation, restoration, security and even construction of the homeland6.
But is it necessary for the Diaspora communities to try or want to return to the land of their ancestors?
  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each State. 1 See Keck M., Sikkink K., 1999.
 In this context, Diaspora studies is perceived as a sub-branch of transnationalism, and the Diaspora is not a cause but a consequence.
2 See Gold S., 2004.
3 See Safran W., Diasporas in Modern Societies.
 Myths of Homeland and Return, Diaspora 1 (1), 1991, pp. 83-84.
4 See Keck M., Sikkink K., 1999.
5 See Keck M., Sikkink K., 1999.
 Safran W., 1991, pp. 83-99.
 The Diaspora differs from nomadic groups or ethnic communities in having a patriotic identity.
  Communities cut off from the homeland simply because of physical segregation should not be included in the Diaspora, as they found themselves in an enclave due to demographic changes, and were unable to maintain political weight and linguistic autonomy, not because of repatriation, exile or forced displacement.
6 See Butler K., 2001.
the right to return ”1.
  It should be noted that the Diaspora identity is based on two contradictory phenomena. Although far from the homeland, the Diaspora has a strong sense of patriotism.
  The dynamics of relations with the homeland presupposes a possible or actual return, which contrasts the idealization of the homeland with the attachment to the host country.
  Often it is not the physical return that is essential for the Diaspora identity, but its mention as a vital topic2.
 One of the patriotic features of the Diaspora is the significant contacts with the homeland, the real ties և the symbols3.
No less important is the existence of solidarity and emotion between different communities in the Diaspora4.
  The basis of emotion is the loss and appreciation of the homeland as an ideal myth, which is expressed in the inseparable connection between the homeland, the identity, the sense of pride and belonging.
  In fairness, the Diaspora survives when 1) Diaspora members փոքրsmall Diaspora groups, in addition to individual ևfamily's emotions, cognitively ընդուն emotionally acknowledge that they belong to a larger unit with which they are inextricably linked in solidarity ծառայ to serve the whole ethnic-national whole. Individual Diaspora members, their families և small groups unequivocally publicly express their belonging to a larger ethnic-national unit5.
  It is the feeling of belonging that pushes the Diaspora members to show socio-political activity in the host country ևHomeland.
  This element of Diaspora identity is otherwise called the politics of commitment6.
  A collective history based on ethnicity, a unified history, the fact of having a destiny, as well as the fear of the catastrophe that awaits the group, is conditioned by the society that accepts the alienation of the Diaspora identity.
  Another feature of the Diaspora is the existence of at least two generations outside the homeland.
 Groups returning to their homeland during the first generation can be described as temporary deportees7.
Multi-generational emigration of an individual connects the collective history of the group վերThe re-creation of a community outside the homeland8.
According to Brubaker, the Diaspora is a unique demand and attitude with the following characteristics: 1) scattering, which is the result of trauma or forced displacement outside the state, as well as the existence of large communities beyond the ethnic homeland, 2) patriotic orientation to the real or as a source of identity loyalty; 3) differentiation from the main national identity of the host country as a necessary condition for the preservation of the Diaspora.
 Border segregation is the existence of an internal organizational system that differs from the existing self-organization in the host country9.
  Brubaker does not rightly identify the borders of the ethnic homeland with the nation-state, but separates the historical inclusion of the homeland.
  Due to the dispersal of the Diaspora, the homeland ceases to exist physically or undergoes drastic changes, however, it continues to serve as a basis for Diaspora self-consciousness10.
  The connection between the real and imaginary homeland is primary, which, however, can be distorted in people's minds.
 A strong factor here is loyalty to the homeland (real or imagined) 11.
  This feature is especially key in the context of a stateless (as opposed to state-based) Diaspora, where the preservation of identity plays a decisive role in the survival of the Diaspora as a cultural unit.
  The influence of cultural and social symbols formed in the historical homeland, the imaginary homeland, and their reproduction in the Diaspora testify to the Diaspora as a cultural event12.
1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 13.2, "Human Rights", Selection of UN International Human Rights Documents, UN Office in Armenia, Yerevan, 2009, p. 48.
2 See Butler K., 2001; Safran W., 1991.
  Sometimes the return is meant by the discriminatory policy in the host country, which leads to solidarity among the Diaspora.
3 See Sheffer G., 1986.
4 See Cohen R., 1996.
5 See Sheffer G., 2006.
6 See ibid.
7 See Cohen R., 1996.
8 See Rios M., Adiv N., Geographies of Diaspora.
 A Review. Davis, CA.
 UC Davis Center for Regional Change, 2010.
9 See Butler K., 2001.
 In this context, the Diaspora is considered as a model for community formation.
10 Vertovec S., Three Meanings of “Diaspora”, Exemplified Among South Asian Religions, Diaspora 6 (3), 1997, pp. 277-299.
11 See Keck M., Sikkink K., 1999.
12 See Vertovec S., Three Meanings of “Diaspora”, Exemplified Among South Asian Religions, Diaspora 6 (3), 1997.
Asya Tadjosyan EMPLOYEE AND DIASPORA. TYPOLOGY OF THE DIASPORA Keywords: Diaspora, Armenian Genocide, colony, Diaspora member, patriot center, patriotic Diaspora.
