THE PROBLEMS OF INVESTMENT OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS In all the countries of the Republic of Armenia, the transition period from the planned-administrative economy to the free market was characterized by deep socio-economic shocks.
  In Armenia, that transition took place with special complications.
1998 - 1990 In comparison, there was a noticeable decline in industrial production.
  It was especially big in 1992, when the production volumes of the previous year were reduced almost twice.
  This had its subjective reasons, the main ones being: • the blockade of the railway, • the severance of economic ties between the enterprises as a result of the collapse of the USSR (most of the industrial enterprises of the USSR produced not intermediate but intermediate products), • due to the deep energy crisis. Many enterprises were forced to a permanent downtime, etc.
Since 1994 A certain revival of industry was registered in Armenia.
  1994-1997 Compared to the previous year, the industrial growth rates were 105.3, 101.5, 101.4 և 101.0% 1, respectively.
  However, in 1998, 1997 Compared to 1998, the growth rate of industrial production decreased by 2.5 percentage points, the main reason for which in the Russian Federation in 1998. The financial (especially payment) crisis that started in the middle of the 19th century, կամ, as a result, the reduction of demand for a significant part of large enterprises in Armenia և the complete absence, as the products of those enterprises were mainly directed to the Russian market.
  In such a situation, huge investments were needed for rapid economic development, but the extremely low level of domestic savings in the transition years. investments.
 The latter largely condition the development tendencies of the arbitrary economy, the growth rates, the degree of integration with the international community.
Investment promotion is a key part of Armenia's economic policy.
  The main goal is to provide an incentive for foreign investors, which will contribute to the increase of investments բարձ Employment Pillow 1 Peculiarities and stages of economic reforms in Armenia in 1991-1998, RA National Statistical Service, see www.armstat.am/en/?mid=82&id= 85.
racing.
 Emphasizing the role of the Foreign Investment Law in involving foreign participation in the process of economic development, the Government stressed the crucial role of FDI in accelerating economic growth and the need to effectively use FDI benefits for the Armenian economy.
  As a rule, foreign investors are interested in investing in industries that are competitive and have great export potential1.
 Attractive sectors of the RA economy are diamond processing, information technologies և e-commerce, food, mining industry, tourism, telecommunications.
Armenia is heavily dependent on international trade, and it is required to attract the attention of foreign investors.
 The Armenian government has adopted an "open door" policy with the aim of encouraging foreign investment.
  According to the Law on Foreign Investments, foreign capital can have unlimited participation in Armenian enterprises; it is protected by law.
2012 year. adopted "RA 2012-2025. The Strategic Plan for Perspective Development states that one of the main priorities of the state framework policy aimed at increasing employment will continue to be the continuous improvement of the business-investment environment, which will be facilitated by making the investment process easier and significantly reducing unnecessary state interventions.
  The high level of risk in the investment environment is the reason for the decrease of foreign investments.
Armenia's main advantage is the availability of a qualified workforce, the use of which will allow investors to ensure low cost and price competitiveness, especially in foreign markets, by paying lower wages compared to developed countries.
Progress in any sector of the economy can be "neutralized" in the absence of progress in another sector.
  Unstable tax, customs or administration policies can limit the business environment և growth due to the simplicity of starting a business.
 The created unfavorable environment can lead to the creation of dual commodity markets, where dominant businessmen will benefit from the protection of property rights, tax and customs bias, and those who want to enter the market may find themselves in an unfavorable situation.
  Any business, process includes a mandatory implementation of a number of procedures.
 When a businessman develops a business plan, tries to pass it to the implementation, the first obstacles he has to overcome are the bureaucratic-legal procedures.
The methods of regulating the entry of new businesses in different countries have certain peculiarities, depending on the level of development of the economic and legal field of the given country.
  In some economies this process is simple և available.
  In other words, the procedures are so burdensome that the businessmen, avoiding the administrative and time costs of the procedures, are forced to resort to other methods - to run the business informally.
  In addition, business efficiency depends more on legislative and administrative decisions.
The World Bank's Doing Business classification assesses regulations that directly affect the degree of development of the business environment և economic growth, allowing comparisons to be made between the 184 countries surveyed և.
  The criteria of this classification can be the basis for promoting or hindering the inflow of foreign capital to the Republic of Armenia.
  Trying to analyze DB 2014 Indicators: we can conclude how attractive our economy is for foreign investors, what is the limit of FDI growth in the Armenian economy.
 Let's make a comparative analysis with the indicators of the previous year.
  10 indicators characterizing the given economy, except for 3 indicators: establishment of the company (6th place - increase by 4 points), payment of taxes (103rd place - increase by 9 points), implementation of contracts (112th place - increase by 5 points), other indicators decline which can not have a positive impact on FDI stimulation1.
  Important indicators for foreign investors, such as investor protection, construction permits, cross-border trade, declined.
 Trying to compare it with Georgia, we can say that in terms of ease of doing business, Armenia lags behind Georgia in terms of investor protection, 37th-8th, 4th և 2nd places, respectively.
Studying the FDI for 2007-2012. According to the statistics, we can say that the inflow of FDI has increased in the pre-crisis sector, reaching its peak in 2008. ($ 1 billion), however, due to the financial and economic crisis, in the following years we experienced a significant decline in FDI volumes ($ 567.4 million in 2012) 2.
The most profitable areas for investment in Armenia are: • Design of high-tech electronics, • Mining ուր Metallurgy, • Electricity systems, • Chemical production, • Light industry, • Banking services, • Software development, • Food production և Packaging, • Tourism.
Figure 1 shows the dynamics of FDI in Armenia և neighboring Georgia.
 Georgia has always surpassed Armenia in terms of FDI, except in 2009.
 The peak of FDI in Armenia was in 2008, when more than $ 1 billion was invested, but the financial and economic crisis caused a significant decline in this indicator.
Despite the large volume of investments, the FDI / GDP ratio in Armenia is still low, which shows the share of FDI in GDP (Figure 2).
The following conditions have been created for foreign investment: 3. • 100% protection of property, • No barriers to investment, 1 See www.doingbusiness.org.
2 See the official website of the NSSRA: www.armstat.am.
• There are no export restrictions, • There is a free exchange regime for foreign currencies, • There are no territorial, geographical restrictions on investments, • VAT on the import of equipment worth 300 million drams for investment programs is delayed for 3 years.
ArmeniaGeorgiaChart 1. FDI volumes (million dollars) in Armenia և Georgia 2007-2012Chart 2. FDI / GDP ratio in Armenia և RA Despite the conditions created for foreign investments, Armenia has internal և external problems that hinder RA to increase the volume of FDI in
  Therefore, let's analyze the investment environment of the Republic of Armenia - the state policy aimed at the involvement of FDI, try to propose ways to improve the efficiency of the investment environment - policy, which will expand the opportunities for attracting investments in the Republic of Armenia.
 Now let's turn to the issues hindering the involvement of the FDI.
a) Political և military-political stability.
 Political-military-political stability is always among the factors of the investment environment in terms of efficiency in almost all surveys and analyzes.
  From the point of view of attracting potential investors, political instability is not at least encouraging.
 From this point of view, Armenia is in the group of high risk countries.
 In the case of Armenia, the political risk is mainly conditioned by the foreign policy of 2007200820092010201120126,38,68,55,26,25,711,512,26,16,997,625,76 RA / FDI / GDP,% / Georgia / FDI / GDP,% /, which is manifested by the blockade of Azerbaijan and Turkey , As a result of inter-ethnic clashes in Georgia և North Caucasus due to inactivity of means of transport.
The level of corruption is a factor increasing the investment risk of the Republic of Armenia.
  Among 177 countries, Armenia ranks 94th in terms of corruption1.
 Such an indicator can not stimulate further increase in the volume of FDI.
 The shadow economy also has a negative impact on the attractiveness of the country's investment environment.
In fact, the above-mentioned factors are interrelated, it is very important to develop a joint program to combat them.
b) The volume of the internal market.
 The small internal market of the Republic of Armenia, the small number of the population, ցածր the low level of national income per capita, are an obstacle for the involvement of market-oriented FDI.
c) Availability of resources.
  Armenia does not stand out with its wealth of natural resources.
  Great opportunity to invest in the extraction and processing of copper, molybdenum, gold, some rare metals.
  However, the lack of industrial stocks of fuel raw materials keeps the economy highly dependent on the import of those raw materials.
d) Infrastructure problems.
 Armenia, being a country rich in raw materials on the one hand, and a small domestic market on the other, is heavily dependent on imports of raw materials, exports, and consequently high transport costs, which are based on blockades of communication due to military-political conflicts in the region. On the competitiveness of goods produced in Armenia in international markets.
 Problems are the timing of transportation.
The existence of pension funds, brokerage firms, investment funds, leasing, consulting and auditing firms may also be effective, as they can be the basis for long-term investment decisions.
e) Legal field.
  The following provisions are enshrined in the RA Law on Foreign Investments (adopted in 1994): 1. The powers of the state to nationalize or confiscate property are severely limited.2. Allows foreign investments to be made in almost all sectors of the economy by arbitrary means; 3. Provides the possibility of resolving disputes in Armenian and international courts, 4. Allows full repatriation of profits and property, 5. Provides customs privileges, 6. Protects intellectual property.
However, the main shortcoming of the legal framework is the instability of the legislative framework, the lack of necessary decisions and other legal acts to ensure the clear application of by-laws.
1 “Corruption Perceptions Index (2013)”, see http.
//www.transparency.org.
f) Labor resources.
 The typical features of the RA labor market - the cost of labor, the level of education of the labor force - professional training, are the most attractive factors for foreign investors.
  However, due to the socio-economic conditions of the Republic of Armenia, the emigration of the population, especially economically active and qualified specialists, has reached alarming levels.
  If the latter maintains such rates, the advantage of the investment environment in terms of labor resources can be significantly reduced; it is very possible that the state will take appropriate measures.
We can not but refer to the high level of corruption and monopolization, which is one of the main reasons hindering the involvement of the FDI.
  The high level of monopolization leads to a number of consequences that hinder the development of economic growth in Armenia.
  Among them we can mention the growth of prices of goods and services, the high level of inflation, the underdevelopment of the capital, the stock market, the weak development of small and medium-sized businesses, the low competitiveness in the foreign market.
Domestic producers, having no competitors in the domestic economy, do not tolerate production and technical development, which leads to a decline in their competitiveness in the foreign market.
 This has its impact on the competitiveness of the general economy of the Republic of Armenia in the international arena.
  If this process continues for a long time, the interest in our country's products in the foreign market will gradually decrease, և it is not ruled out that it will be pushed out over time.
 As a result of all this, the country will lose the interest of foreign investors.
 Thus, the high level of monopolization, the tight concentration of ownership lead to the reduction of business financing and FDI.
Prerequisites for stimulating the inflow of foreign capital in the Republic of Armenia may be: 1. Raising Armenia's investment rating, 2. Improving the legislative environment 3. Creation and improvement of investment infrastructures.
We believe that in order to increase the effectiveness of the investment policy, it is necessary to: • separate the groups of investors, և take into account the characteristics of each group and the means of incentives towards them, • make the incentive to introduce advanced technologies part of the FDI policy, especially in selling state-owned enterprises; To provide high-quality post-investment services for existing investors, as the positive opinion of the latter towards the investment environment of the Republic of Armenia contributes to the growth of return on investment and is a possible factor in attracting potential investors.• To reduce the possible negative impact of political risks, to take actions aimed at creating a legal framework for the protection of the interests of foreign investors at the interstate level; • To provide complete information on the RA investment environment (analysis of laws, market and other materials) to current and potential investors; to effectively fight against the development of monopolies, • to develop steps to reduce the level of corruption in the country.• Fight more effectively against the development of monopolies at the state level; • Develop steps to reduce the level of corruption in the country.• Fight more effectively against the development of monopolies at the state level; • Develop steps to reduce the level of corruption in the country.
We believe that the implementation of these tasks will allow not only to increase the volume of investments, but also to increase their efficiency, which is a necessary precondition for the development of our country.
Nairi Chagharyan PROBLEMS OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT INVESTMENT IN RA Keywords: investment, foreign direct investment, investment policy.
