THE PROBLEM OF WESTERN ARMENIAN MIGRANTS IN 1915 IN "MSHAK" AND "HORIZON" DAILY NEWSPAPERS The contribution of the Armenian dailies "Mshak" (editor: H. Arakelyan) and "Horizon" (editor: S. Sahakyan) published in Tbilissi (Georgia) was enough to help thousands of refugees who survived the Armenian Genocide.
 Despite the many differences between them, both periodicals did a great deal of work in helping the Armenian immigrants.
1915 The press was completely flooded with material about World War II, but the Mshak Հ Horizon dailies, covering the events of World War I, focused on the massacres in Western Armenia and the plight of Armenians who had fled in search of salvation.
1915 begins for "Mshak" with the fact that the newspaper's editor Hambardzum Arakelyan does not congratulate the readers on the New Year, reasoning that there is no New Year for the Armenians.
 Nacher welcomes the New Year when the number of immigrants reached one hundred thousand, immigrants who lack the simplest conditions for survival1.
Throughout the year, both periodicals actively cover the situation of the migrants, giving a certain picture of their sufferings and deprivations.
 The coverage was mainly in the form of small news items, which were most often published in both periodicals under the heading "Internal Theory".
 They mainly contained brief information about the journey of the migrants, their number and condition.
 Such materials usually had simple titles, such as "The State of Refugees", "About Refugees", "Refugees in Us", "Armenian Refugees", "About Refugees", etc.
The correspondents of the periodicals sent their correspondence from the places where the largest number of refugees had taken refuge from Yerevan, Etchmiadzin, Akhalkalaki, etc., presenting how they lived and what help they received.
  It becomes clear from the correspondence that the condition of the migrants is more than serious. Many of them are deprived of the basic necessities of life, suffering from colds and diseases, and the medical care available in few places.
  The situation of migrants is more or less positive in urban areas.
 In particular, the migrants in Etchmiadzin are under the care of Catholicos of All Armenians George V, who uses all means to provide the refugees with minimum conditions2.
 The situation is much more difficult for the migrants who have found refuge in rural areas.
  Many of them, unable to endure the harsh conditions, died, and those who survived were starved to death.
 The villagers help them as much as possible, shelter them in their homes, feed them, but the number of migrants is too large for the villagers to be able to help everyone3.
In the coverage of the situation of the migrants who took refuge in many settlements, the editor of "Mshak" periodical H. The role of Arakelyan, who personally visited settlements full of migrants, prepared correspondence.
  During his visits, he tried to help the migrants, telegraphed to the companies dealing with the migrants about their condition, and in the correspondence for all the information 1 Aloyan L., "Mshak" - ARF relations, Yerevan, 2010, p. 27.
2 Ter-Rubinyan G., Etchmiadzin գործ The case of helping the migrants, "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), March 3, 1915, № 46.
3 Mkrtumyan B., The situation of the emigrants, "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), 4.04.1915, № 69.
To those who wanted to help the migrants, he wrote down what the migrants needed first.
 This was a very important step, because there were many people who wanted to help, but it was necessary to arrange that help in order to get the basic necessities, հետո only after that, everything that could be of additional benefit to them.
 H. Arakelyan's correspondence was devoid of emotion; they presented the situation of the migrants as objectively as possible1.
Thus, through correspondence, the newspapers gave a certain idea about the Armenian migrants who took refuge in the region.
  It was thanks to these correspondences that many charitable organizations had information about the migrants. Determining how much help should be sent to which city.
More vivid information about the situation of the migrants was provided by the articles, the authors of which traveled around different cities of Armenia, Georgia and met the refugees.
  In three issues of "Horizon" an A-Doyich travel review is published, where he tells about the trip of his two friends to Echmiadzin and Yerevan near the villages2.
  The feelings of the travelers when they saw the miserable life of the migrants were mostly described here. It is the most emotionally influential substance.
  And the editor of "Mshak" H. Arakelyan publishes a review of his four-day trip to Armenia, where he presents the situation of the migrants who took refuge in Yerevan and Etchmiadzin3.
  Here he meets the families of the refugees, gets acquainted with the organization of their help, supports them to the best of his ability.
  H. Arakelyan's example is becoming contagious for many Armenians, who also start traveling to settlements full of migrants to help them as much as possible.
The role of such travel hints was very great in helping the migrants.
 Influencing the reader's conscience, they tried to persuade the public to help the migrants as much as possible.
During this period there were a number of companies in Tbilissi (Georgia) that were actively involved in helping migrants.
  Perhaps the most active of them were the Armenian Central Committee, the Armenian Benevolent Society, the Armenian Relief Society.
 "Mshak" և "Horizon" periodicals not only constantly covered their activities, but also posted announcements on their behalf, contributing as much as possible to their work.
  Such announcements are usually placed on the front page of the newspaper, in the most prominent part.
  For example, the Armenian Central Committee և The charity announces a winter food gathering for migrants4, the Armenian Relief Society announces the address where people can bring donations for migrants ում gratefully accepts them5.
A special kind of announcement was the large font sentences in different issues, which informed about the charitable events taking place in Tbilissi (Georgia).
 For example, in 1915 January 14-15 were announced in Tbilissi (Georgia) as days for collecting linen for refugees. On the 13th of the month, "Mshak" and "Horizon" periodicals wrote in big letters in their pages: "TOMORROW, JANUARY 14 և 15, ARE THE DAYS OF COLLECTING THE WHITE FROM BENEFITS" 6 or just "14-15 WHITE DAYS" 7.
"Calls" had a special place among the announcements.
 These were also mainly placed on the front pages of the newspaper, in order to stand out at once, starting with the headline "CALL" written in big letters.
 The peculiarity of the "calls" was that they were almost desperate statements to help the migrants. When the aid was not enough or when a large influx of migrants came at once, it was necessary.
2A-Do, The Migration of Alashkert, "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), 21,23.01.1915, 3.03.1915, № 15, 17, 48.
3 Arakelyan H., Four days among refugees, "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), 29,30.08.1915, № 190, 191.
4 "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), January 9, 1915, № 4.
5 "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), January 4, 1915, № 3.
6 "Mshak", 13.01.1915, № 7.
7 "Horizon", 13.01.1915, № 8.
Collect groceries for them in the shortest possible time.
 A vivid example of this type of "call" is the announcements published by the Armenian Relief Society in both newspapers in late July, when a new wave of migrants, about 150,000 people, unexpectedly left their settlements in Western Armenia and came to Armenia1.
 And on August 16 S. was published. The "call to all Armenians" of the General Steering Committee of the Echmiadzin Fraternal Aid, where it was urged to collect food for the migrants as soon as possible, as they were already dying of hunger, cold and disease2.
 At the end of the "Call" it is mentioned that the gifts can be sent in the name of His Holiness All Armenians, which proves that Catholicos of All Armenians George V was also actively involved in helping the migrants.
The influence of the materials and announcements about the migrants, which were regularly published in the newspapers, was quite large, as evidenced by the donations, which were also covered in the periodicals.
 They were mostly written very simply, simply presenting who or what organization donated how much to the migrants.
 The information was published under the heading "In favor of Armenian migrants" or "In favor of Armenian migrants".
 The impact of newspaper publications can be measured by the fact that the number of donors published in the issues following the publication of announcements, calls, correspondence or reviews has obviously increased.
  Thanks to the periodicals, donations were distributed not only in Tbilissi (Georgia), but also to many migrants who took refuge in different cities and villages of Georgia, Armenia.
 This was evident from the regularly published "lists", which contained information on how many donations a city or village had collected for which city or village.
 In addition, "letters to the editorial office" were often published, in which people expressed their attitude and donated in favor of immigration.
 In the column published in "Mshak", the reader wrote with sorrow about the death of his relative, expressed his condolences to all the relatives և the small amount of the wreath - 3 rubles, handed over to the refugees3.
The periodicals used artistic tricks to win over the society's friendly attitude towards the immigrants.
 In particular, "Mshak" daily published poems, essays on stories about immigrants under the headline "Philological" 4.
Despite the fact that the flow of migrants from Western Armenia did not stop, in 1915 During that period, the "Mshak" and "Horizon" dailies regularly raised the issue of their return to their homeland.
  Many of the publicists thought that the migrants could not stay for a long time, as most of them had nothing; they left almost all their property in the homeland. Many had left their relatives there.
  The issue of return of migrants is raised in February-March.
  One of those who raised the issue was Ruben Drambyan, who defended the view that an Armenian should live on his land.
 In one of his articles he writes that it is necessary to focus forces not only on keeping and feeding the migrants, but also on arranging their return with a proper egg, so that they do not face the difficulties encountered during the migration5.
  However, it soon became clear that the migrants could not return to their homeland, as there were daily reports of new massacres in Western Armenia, with the arrival of thousands of new refugees, and the need to pay primary attention to their accommodation.
The issue of return of migrants is raised again in July.
  This time the refugees had to return to their homeland by administrative order, the migrants from Salmast and Alashkert regions had to return first.
 This time Hovsep Tad-Osyants raises the issue of safe return of migrants to the homeland.
  In his article published in "Horizon", he calls on the Caucasian Armenians to fulfill their last duty 1 "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), July 31, 1915, № 166, 170; "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), 26,28,30.07.2015, № 166, 167, 1692 "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), 16.08.2015, № 184.
3 Letter to the editor, "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), 13.01.1915, № 7.
4 Chtents G., The Emigrants (short story), "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), 23.08.1915, №184; Ghazanchyan S., Emigrant (poem), "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), October 4, 1915, № 218.
5 Drambyan R., The Return of the Emigrants արդ The Current State of the Country, "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), March 3, 1915, № 53.
և create conditions for refugees to return safely1.
  Unfortunately, the return of the migrants is hindered this time as well due to the new flow of migrants.
As the return of the migrants was not possible, it was necessary to solve not only the temporary problems of the migrants - food, shelter, but also a number of key problems, including education, work, etc.
 In particular, the issue of education was very important, as among the migrants there were not only children with parents, but also many orphans.
 Families were taken from them, provided with food and shelter, sometimes with education, but most of them remained without help.
  Day schools were often organized for them, where in addition to education, they received food.
  Girls' organizations gathered girls and taught them various trades.
  The periodicals also tried to have their contribution in these issues. They called for families who could afford to take care of their orphans to care for their education.
  Those calls did not go unanswered, thanks to them many children did not stay on the street.
  And the Baku Committee is initiating the opening of a bisexual school in Alexandropol, where more than 200 refugee children would have the opportunity to receive education2.
The problem of refugee employment was much more difficult, as their number was very large - it was not possible to create so many jobs in a short period of time.
 The periodicals often urged the migrants to go to the villages, to help the villagers in their work, in return for which they would get at least a piece of bread for their day.
It seems that during this period, when thousands of Armenians were left homeless and helpless, all Armenians, regardless of party or other affiliation, had to unite to help their brothers in every possible way (this was one of the main ideas of "Mshak" periodical).
  But the reality was a little different. "Mshak" publishes an article entitled "Let's remind again" (signed by E.), the author of which expresses indignation about the activities of the Armenian Central Committee և Charitable Society.
According to the article, the organizations do not properly organize the work of helping the migrants. Although donations are plentiful, migrants remain homeless.
The "Horizon" periodical also from time to time expressed its indignation at those who showed dishonesty in helping the migrants.
  In particular, G. Emmanuel spoke in the pages of the newspaper about the fact that many people, pursuing immigration issues, pursue personal interests.
  The author is convinced that this case is exclusively for the devotees, ամ we should try not to leave the profiteers close to the migrants4.
Thus, in 1915 "Mshak" and "Horizon" periodicals faced a difficult task: not only to cover the problems of Armenians deprived of their homeland, property, and often relatives, but also to try to solve them as much as possible in the turmoil of World War II. to help the migrants directly.
 The need to provide immigrants with minimum conditions pushed the periodicals' party and ideological views to the background, forcing them to act as an Armenian who does everything he can to help his brother, who is in a difficult situation.
  The results of their work are obvious. As a result, thousands of migrants were saved from starvation, cold, and disease.
1 Tadosyants H., On the Return of Armenian Migrants, "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), July 22, 1915, № 162.
2 Nazaryan S., The care of the education of bisexual children of refugees, "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), 18.09.1915, № 210.
3 "Mshak", Tbilissi (Georgia), July 9, 1915, № 147.
4 Emmanuel G., Migrant Workers, "Horizon", Tbilissi (Georgia), November 4, 1915, 8 248.
Rafael Zarbabyan THE PROBLEM OF WESTERN ARMENIAN IMMIGRANTS IN 1915 "MSHAK" AND "HORIZON" DAILY NEWS Keywords: The problem of Armenian-Armenian migrants, "Mshak" daily, "Horizon" daily, 1915, press, Hambardzum Arakelyan, A-Do, assistance to migrants, coverage of migrants, coverage of migrants .
