PSYCHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF BRAND PERCEPTION (EXAMPLE OF "APPL" AND "SAMSUNG" BRANDS) Brands have become an integral part of our daily lives. dictates lifestyle, influences the value system of consumers, creates a unique consumer culture.
 Every day the consumer is faced with new products in the choice, with which he does not have time to physically compare.
  Promising to meet the current needs of the consumer, the brands enter into "friendly" relations with the consumers, creating a phenomenon called attraction.
 Especially in recent years, as a result of scientific and technological progress բացահայտ discovering new ways to influence the consciousness of consumers, we face this problem more often, when consumers buy the product of a given brand, regardless of value, beauty և necessity, while believing and giving preference to a clear brand.
The concept of "brand" has been known since the 11th century և has an old Norwegian origin (brand: burn, fire).
 It is called a term, a sign or a design, as well as a combination of all these to distinguish goods և to make a service recognizable [[1].
 A brand is a combination of tangible and intangible assets, which shapes the image of the organization among consumers, causing a positive attitude.
  It is known to a large number of consumers, even those who do not use the product or service.
 A successful brand is a recognizable product, service, or place based on an image through which the consumer or user perceives their unique and added value in accordance with their needs.
 Powerful brands have great power։ provide additional income for the organization.
 The brand can promote the product in the market, as it gives the product individuality, guaranteeing that the consumer will get what he expects.
 It can be concluded that the brand is the "face" of the product.
 On the other hand, the brand promises because it can instill confidence in the consumer consciousness.
The brand helps to solve the following problems: To recognize the product, to separate it from similar products, to create a positive image in the minds of consumers, which will inspire confidence, to create positive emotions related to the product, to stimulate the buying process and to enjoy that process, to form permanent consumer groups.
 It is necessary to take into account the basis on which the brand is based.
  In this case, it is expedient to study personal values ​​և needs.
The primary subject of study is the personal values, which become the basis for a person to orient himself in the question of any trademark.
  And the demands are formed on the basis of personal values.
 Basic personal values ​​are formed in a person during the first 25 years of life և almost do not change throughout life.
 Therefore, one can get an idea of ​​the most influential values ​​in the future by studying today's young generation.
  Individual values ​​are our ideas about the horse needed to satisfy our own needs.
 Values ​​give a certain direction to our needs եցնում clarify the ways of satisfying them, moreover, values ​​are almost always responsible for satisfying or not satisfying our needs.
 The individual values ​​of the person are the basis on which the brand is built.
  Individual values ​​help a brand enter a person's inner world.
  The same happens in the case of brand selection. The person chooses the brand that corresponds to one of his / her personal potential values.
An important component in the process of perception is attraction, which is the process of developing interest in the perceived object.
 The appearance of the latter is connected with the activation of the emotional sphere of the person, as a result of which an emotional relationship arises between the "object" of the subject of perception.
 Attraction is a process in which the perceiver becomes interested in a person or object.
 Attraction is a unique form of social relations, the main component of which is considered to be affective assessment.
 The influence of the unconscious is significant in the formation of this phenomenon [7].
 Attraction formation is influenced by a number of social factors, such as social status, education, profession, communication skills, etc.
 The main purpose of attraction in marketing is as follows. to influence consumers by weakening their vigilance.
Attraction makes it possible to manage consumers. "The more they believe in us, the more they buy our products."
In the framework of our work, we conducted a study with the aim of studying բեր to find out the factors that determine the influence of the attractive force of the brand on the consciousness of consumers, for example, we chose the Apple and Samsung brands.
 The research sample consisted of 40 male and female representatives aged 18-30, who are daily users of Apple and Samsung brands.
  During the research, a hypothesis was put forward, according to which the attractive power of the "Apple" brand is mostly emotional, in contrast to the "Samsung" brand, the perception of which is mainly rational.
  In order to achieve our goals, we have chosen the following tools ․ • The method of free combinations, which made it possible to remove the associative field of the brand և the associative core, • Sh. Schwartz Value Assessment Questionnaire, which was able to extract the baseline values ​​of a person who prefers a particular brand; At the core of the Free Combinations method, a total of 203 words were obtained, 92 of which referred to Samsung and 111 to Apple.
 Then, the ten most frequently repeated words for each brand were singled out, the analysis of which revealed that the combinations with the "Samsung" brand are more related to the functional side of its use, practical-physical features, such as complex functions, multifunctionality, color, roughness. expression (blue color), custom accessories և etc.
  Apple brand combinations are mostly more emotional գնահատում They express the emotional attitude of the user of the product of the given brand, show the emotional evaluation of the user.
This brand is perceived as more feminine, delicate, beautiful and attractive.
  It is expressed in such combinations as beauty, logo design, femininity, fashion, etc.
 In other words, we can conclude that the "Samsung" brand has a more rational perception among consumers, while the "Apple" brand is perceived with a more emotional side.
 The other difference between the perceptions of the above-mentioned brands is that the "Apple" brand is more personal. Almost everyone knows the founder of Apple, Steve Jobs.
 The brand associated with the person of the head of the organization can have an additional impact on the perception of the brand (either positive or negative).
 In the case of the Apple brand, it has a positive impact on consumer perception.
As a result of the application of Sh. Schwartz questionnaire aimed at the study of basic values ​​and beliefs, the following picture was obtained (see Figure 1) ․ The values ​​of independence, stimulation, hedonism, the power of achievement have a high degree of expression among the users of the "Apple" brand.
 In particular, in the case of the supremacy of the values ​​of independence, it refers to thinking and making independent decisions.
  It comes as a value from the need for self-regulation of the organism's self-regulation, on the other hand, autonomy և independence.
 The type of stimulus values ​​derives from the body's need for diversity և deep feelings.
 It is aimed at ensuring an optimal level of activity, constant pursuit of innovation.
 The motivation for hedonistic values ​​is pleasure և satisfaction.
  The main goal of the achievement type of achievement is to achieve competence in accordance with social standards.
  The latter presupposes social acceptance.
 The value group of the government is based on the need to rule, to enjoy social prestige, to control others.
Picture 1 ․ Group Average of Ten Value Orientations As for the Samsung brand, those who prefer it are dominated by the values ​​of security, universalism, conformity, and very little difference between tradition and willingness.
 The type of security values ​​is related to the security of oneself, the security of others, the harmony of society.
 The value type of universalism is related to concerns about understanding և tolerance, societal well-being and justice.
  The value type of willingness is related to maintaining the well-being of those in closer relationships.
  The type of conformity value is associated with refraining from actions that could harm others.
According to the data obtained using the method of Kelly repertoire cells, the users of the "Apple" brand perceive it as a more beautiful, feminine, high-quality, simple functionality, which has a more attractive logo - tailored accessories, as well as expressed color perception.
 By comparison, the "Samsung" brand is perceived by the same users as rude, masculine, relatively low-quality, complex functions - a brand with not so beautiful design.
Apple users are more likely to trust the brand with the person in charge of the organization, at the same time consider the brand more reliable in the field of mobile phones.
  The members of the same group, by comparison, consider the "Samsung" brand reliable in the field of home appliances production.
  Thus, among the users of the "Apple" brand, the latter is perceived with a more emotional tone, there is a built-in trust in the brand, besides, it is a component of their image.
 In other words, we can state that the impact of Apple's attractive force on the consumer mass is greater than that of "Samsung".
As for the perception of the "Samsung" brand, the multifunctionality of the brand, the high quality and the multi-profile are expressed among its users.
 Despite being a user of "Samsung", most of them consider "Apple" as the most beautiful brand with an attractive logo with feminine features.
 Thus, we can conclude that the "Samsung" brand is perceived more rationally among consumers, that is, the emphasis is more on the functional functions, rather than the emotional side.
 In addition, it is also a multi-profile brand, as there is a wide selection of home appliances on the market.
 That is why "Samsung" has a more general expression in the minds of consumers.
  At the same time, the practical significance, multifunctionality and practicality of "Samsung" are considered to be a quality.
The obtained results allow to prove that the hypothesis put forward during the research has been confirmed.
LITERATURE [4] Годин А. M., Branding.
 Учебное пособие, 2-е изд., Москва, Издательско-торговая [5] Гэд Т., 4D бранндинг.
  взламывая корфортивный код сетевой экономики, СПб, [6] Душкина М. R., PR and marketing move.
 коммуникации и воздействие, Poghosyan PSYCHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF ANYBRAND PERCEPTION (EXAMPLE OF "EPPL" AND "SAMSUNG" BRANDS) Keywords: brand perception, brand value, attraction, demand
