THEORETICAL BASIS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY Currently, the number of companies that attach great importance to corporate social responsibility (CSR) in developing their development strategy is growing.
 One of the basic principles of CSR is that the company takes into account not only the company's shareholders, but also larger groups of internal and external beneficiaries, including employees, consumers, government and NGOs.
 In developed countries, CSR policy is one of the guarantees of successful "profitable" business.
 Only a few companies in Armenia apply elements of CSR policy.
  However, with the adoption of long-term business strategies for the development of corporate culture, the introduction of CSR methods tends to become widespread.
The term "corporate social responsibility" originated in the 1950s.
 The first formal definition was given by H. Bowen in 1953 in his book "The Social Responsibility of a Businessman".
 However, the idea that the entrepreneur should take into account social factors when conducting business activities was introduced back in 1938. Ch. By Barand.
 Later, a similar idea was put forward by another author, J. Clark.
During this period, the term "Social Responsibility" was more widely used instead of CSR.
  As companies grew, so did their influence on society.
  For this very reason, the need for companies to participate in public affairs became obvious.
  However, there is disagreement as to what kind of responsibilities should be expected from businesses.
  The issue of types of responsibilities և levels has been raised by H. Bowen.
  In the following years, researchers put forward many new definitions and proposed different approaches in the field of CSR.
  Some research was done to find the link between CSR և profitability and other economic indicators.
 Over the years, the perception of CSR by various economic units has changed.
  There are many approaches in CSR studies. Some authors focus on economic indicators, some on moral aspects.
 There are theories that combine many factors in the study of CSR.
Definitions և approaches.
  Despite decades of research and attempts to formulate a universal definition, there is still much controversy over the definition of CSR.
 Listed by հեղինակ 1 Bowen H., Social Responsibilities of the Businessman, New York.
 Harper, 1953. analyzed the definitions of CSR according to different characteristics.
  The first formal definition was given by H. Bowen. "[CSR] refers to the entrepreneurial obligations under which decisions must be made or guided by a range of actions that are desirable from the point of view of the values ​​of the society."
According to H. Social responsibility for Bowen's entrepreneurial activities is very important, but it is not the solution to any problem.
One well-known definition of the early period was given by Hild. "CSR from the point of view of management is the recognition of the company's obligations to the society, according to which the company serves the society not only to obtain the maximum economic result, but also to pursue a humane, constructive and social policy."
1960s Among the prominent researchers of CSR are K. Dice, Walton, W. Frederick and others.
  Q. DGS established the iron rule of CSR, according to which the volume of business and social responsibility must be in line with its influence in society.
 Another author, J. McGuire differentiated the economic and legal responsibility of the company from the social one.
H. Johnson in his book "Business in Modern Society" 1 gave CSR in several definitions.
  In one of the definitions he used the idea of ​​multiplicity of interests. "The company whose government staff balances many interests is socially responsible.
 "Instead of pursuing greater profits only for its shareholders, the responsible enterprise also takes into account the national interests of its employees, suppliers, the local community."
According to this approach, social responsibility in entrepreneurship is the pursuit of socio-economic goals by clarifying social norms by assigning appropriate working roles.
H. Johnson also notes that the company pursues a number of goals, so profit is not the only variable that the company tries to maximize. "The entrepreneur or manager whose social function is of the second type is socially responsible, that is, he is interested not only in his own welfare, but also in the welfare of other participants in the business, the citizens."
Economic Development Committee 1971 gave one of the most cited definitions of CSR2, according to which CSR consists of three concentric regions.
  Internal area includes the economic responsibility necessary for doing business.
 Liabilities related to goods, jobs and economic growth belong to this region.
  The middle ground includes the obligations necessary to reconcile the economic function of the company with the norms of social values.
  Environmental protection, regulation of relations with employees, etc. are an integral part of the middle circle.
  The external region includes the obligations that the company fulfills proactively, that is, without external influence, on its own initiative.
 This last period 1 Johnson H., Business in contemporary society.
 framework and issues, Belmont.
 Wadsworth Pub. Co., 1971.2 “Social responsibilities of business corporations”, New York.
 Committee for Economic Development, 1971. assumes a much broader involvement of the company in improving the social environment.
However, it should be noted that in the 1970s. The definition of the most powerful CSR was given by A. Carol 1.
 This four-component concept is quite useful when looking at the concept of CSR from different angles.
  A. The Carolingian point became the cornerstone of many other CSR theories, and its definition is one of the most cited in the CSR literature.
 Later A. The four components of Carol's CSR were presented in the form of a pyramid, which is quite similar in structure to Maslow's pyramid of needs.
  A. In a later article, Carolynir replaced the discretionary component with a humanitarian one.
 In the same article, he analyzed the image of the CSR company using the CSR pyramid.
  According to him, the CSR company should strive to make a profit, respect the law, have a good moral behavior abroad and be a good corporate citizen.
1980s Instead of definitions, researchers focused more on alternative ideas, such as business ethics, corporate social efficiency, stakeholder theory, and so on.
  At the heart of these alternative theories is the idea of ​​social responsibility.
  It is these theories that have emerged over the years that have shaped the present-day characterization of corporate social responsibility.
CSR theories.
  Theory of shareholders.
  This theory is based on the works of Friedman.
 According to him, the only social responsibility of the enterprise is the accumulation of wealth for its shareholders, other beneficiaries related to the company are ignored.
  As a result of the critique of this theory, the "Beneficiary Theory" and the "CSR Pyramid" emerged2.
Theory about the agency.
  The theory about Jensen և McLean's agency was put forward in response to the theory of shareholders.
The basic idea is that the interests of the shareholders և the managers of the company may not coincide with each other.
  The conflict of interest between the two is called the issue of agency.
  To solve this problem, the company must reach a balanced state where the interests of both parties are balanced.
Managers are usually less risk-averse than investors, as the latter can diversify their investments.
  In response to this theory, the theories of the beneficiaries' economy emerged.
Beneficiary theory.
  The theory of beneficiaries is attributed to Freeman.
  In contrast to the shareholders' theory, this theory takes into account not only the interests of the shareholders, but also the interests of the other parties influencing the company's activities, the beneficiaries.
  Beneficiaries can be consumers, suppliers, company employees, government and the whole society.
 Beneficiary theory is the basis of many other theories related to CSR.
Theory of self-sustaining development.
 The definition of self-sustaining development was given by the UN in 1983. by the commission formed3.
 According to that definition: 2 Carroll A., The pyramid of corporate social responsibility.
  Toward the moral management of organizational3 l A., Crowther D., The durable corporation.
 strategies for sustainable development, Farnham.
 Gower, 2009: Self-sustaining or sustainable development is the ability to meet the day-to-day needs of the present generation without compromising the satisfaction of similar needs of future generations.
 Self-harm is one of the most important indicators of a company's long-term effectiveness.
  From this principle comes the importance of the relationship between business and the environment.
  As a result of the further development of this idea, a model emerged, such as the three-pronged results approach.
CSR pyramid model.
 The model outlined by Carol suggests dividing the company's commitments into four layers: economic, legal, moral and charitable.
 The mentioned four layers can be presented in the form of a pyramid.
 The primary obligation is economic.
 Only after satisfying the economic obligation can the company proceed to the satisfaction of other obligations.
Economic theory.
  This theory tries to answer the problem of the agency.
  The manager is considered not just as an economic agent, but as a business person.
  That is, a balance of interests will be established if the manager's goals are in line with the interests of other stakeholders.
Approach to triangular results.
 This approach was developed by J. Elkington.
 According to him, the company should be guided by three aspects when operating: profit, people և planet, that is, in addition to profit, the environment և the interests of the society are used.
CSR model of value creation.
 This model is one of the relatively new approaches to CSR, pointing out the interdependence of society ստեղծ the creation of company values ​​և between them.
  The key elements of the value chain are strategy, resources and processes, business proposals փոխ interaction with stakeholders.
 The relationship between both financial and non-financial aspects of CSR արդյունավետ corporate effectiveness is considered.
 The model is based on the CSR pyramid.
 Indicators are identified for each of the four groups of responsibilities, which characterize the level of fulfillment of the given group of obligations.
  The most important liability is the economic one, and the evaluation indicators are considered to be individual - the level of the company's savings, the level of inflation - the production time.
  Indicators of legal obligation are human rights, the tax code, labor market, condominium antitrust laws.
  The moral factor is related to the norms of corruption, money laundering and behavior.
  The layers of the CSPburg are considered as independent variables.
 Culture, technological progress, management centralization և training are considered constant variables.
  Financial (investment, return on assets, assets, operating income) և non-financial efficiency indicators (access to capital, business value indicators) are variables.
Consumer-controlled corporate responsibility.
  The approach contains elements from both the CSR pyramid և self-sustaining development and the beneficiary theories.
  Here, economic obligation is paramount.
  For self-destruction, the company must first be profitable.
 Contrary to the theory of beneficiaries, where all beneficiaries are considered in the same plane, here the priority is singled out consumers, whose satisfaction of CSR requirements is necessary to maintain the profitability of the company.
 Thus, a cycle (phase) is formed. The adaptation of CSR policy leads to an increase in the consumer market, which in turn leads to an increase in profitability.
Along with the expansion of the consumer field, the CSR requirements of consumers are also growing, which forces the company to pursue a more active CSR policy.
Classification of CSR theories.
 In order to study the set of definitions of CSR theories, it is necessary to classify them according to certain features.
  According to one classification, theories can be divided into four types: instrumental, political, integrative-ethical.
 In instrumental theories, enterprise is considered as a profit-making unit, և social responsibility is only a means of generating that profit1.
 In political theories, the levers of enterprise are used to influence society in the political field.
 According to integrative theories, the enterprise should include public requirements in its decision-making.
  Since the enterprise owes its continuous existence and growth to the society, it must assume the satisfaction of certain requirements of the society.
  According to ethical theories, the relations between the enterprise and the society are fixed by moral values.
Conclusion.
  Bringing together the key theories and definitions of CSR, a number of conclusions can be drawn.
 Despite the variety of definitions and theories, it is easy to see their commonalities.
The development of the idea of ​​CSR shows that the majority of theories are based on identical or complementary ideas.
  The same pattern can be observed in the definitions of CSR.
 A. In his work, Dehlsrud examines 37 definitions of CSR according to 5 criteria2.
 According to him, 88% of the definitions of the survey include the beneficiary criterion - public, 86% - economic, and 80% - voluntary.
 The least represented criterion in these definitions is the environmental dimension.
  This can be explained by the fact that it is a derivative of public responsibility.
To describe the theoretical foundations of CSR, it is necessary to understand the dynamics of their development.
  1950s This idea, which was born, has been interpreted in different ways, but the task of defining CSR is the same: to set the scope of business obligations to society.
  Naturally, this range of liabilities has changed, depending on time and other circumstances, so a method that can characterize these changes needs to be used to assess CSR.
 From the above models, this problem is best solved by the model of Carol's CSR pyramid ությունները the theories derived from it.
 Further theoretical models should be aimed at correcting current models such as 1 Garriga El., M lé D., Corporate Social Responsibility Theories.
  Mapping the Territory, “Journal of Business2 Dahlsrud Al., How corporate social responsibility is defined.
 an analysis of 37 definitions, “Corporate Social Resources.
  CSR should be viewed from the perspective of all beneficiaries, not just businesses.
  CSR theory should have a systemic approach, such as a consumer-controlled CSR model.
 The CSR pyramid model can be considered as a derivative of individual needs, ie economic, legal, moral and discretionary obligations directly depend on the needs of individual beneficiaries.
  The development of such an approach is expedient from the point of view of "positive" and "normative" analysis.
  The advantage of this approach is that, considering the changes in the values ​​of individual needs և values, one can predict the directions զարգացման prospects for the development of CSR in the data market.
Davit Budaghyan THEORETICAL BASIS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY Keywords: corporate social responsibility, beneficiary theory, CSR pyramid, self-sustaining development.
