ON THE ISSUE OF PERMISSIBILITY OF CHESS FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF ISLAM "It is said that when Sisa [Sissa ibn Dahir - A. G.] invented and King Shihramin presented the chess game, the latter was shocked with admiration and filled with joy.
 He decided to place chessboards in temples; he considered that game to be the best thing that could be learned as a prelude to martial arts, as a glory to religion and the world, as a basis for all justice. "
Ibn Khaliqa (1211-1282) 1 Playing chess unites more than 600 million people of different nationalities, religions and races living on the planet Earth.
 Of particular interest from this point of view is the world's second-largest religion, Islam մասնագետ its jurisprudential specialists (fukaha) (Arabic: ءاهق
F) the attitude of those who unite under the term) the question of the permissibility of chess as a board game.
  Islamic Law - Fiqh (Arabic: هق:
F) From the point of view, all human activities (including playing chess) are classified according to the following 5 categories (common name: al-ahkam al-khamsa, Arabic: ةس مخ لا لأ امك ح). Vajib (Arabic: بجاو), fard (Arabic: ضر ف) - obligatory actions, the performance of which is subject to reward and the non-fulfillment to punishment, 2. Mandub (Arabic: Being م), mustahabb (Arabic: ب سم) - actions that are recommended to be performed, and their performance is subject to reward, and non-performance is not punishable, 3. Mubah (Arabic: حاب م) - neutral actions, neither the performance of which is subject to reward, nor the non-fulfillment of which is punishable, 4. macro (Arabic: هورك م) - undesirable actions, the performance of which, however, is not prohibited և is not subject to punishment, 5. Haram (Arabic: مارح) - prohibited actions that are punishable3.
This article presents the formation of chess, the often conflicting views on chess among Islamic jurists, their reasons, justification and relevance.
The historical period of the emergence of this game is shrouded in mystery.
 That chess could have been as familiar as its current horse, even to Patanjali, author of the Mahabhasia (2nd century BC) 4, researchers 2 According to an interview with FIDE President's Voice of Russia radio station, see Http:
//voiceofrussia.com/2012_07_20/FIDE-motto-one-billion-of-clever-people/.
According to most, it appeared probably in the 5th-6th centuries.1.
 However, Russian grandmaster և author Yuri Averbach (born 1922) notes that the origins and reasons for chess can be understood only after studying the games that existed before chess2.
  Undoubtedly, a lot of work has to be done in this direction.
Among the first written sources of chess, the following two should be mentioned in Middle Persian: "Acts of Artashir, Papak որդ»'s son "(par. Kār-nāmak ī Artaxšēr ī Pāpakān) 3; Vičārišn ī ranatrang u nihišn ī nēv-artaxšēr) 4.
 The second one is especially interesting.
 The author of this source conveys the well-known story that chess, as a puzzle, was sent to Khosrov I Anushirva (531-579) by the Indian ruler Dsarm.
 The latter, in all probability, corresponds to Sarva Varman (560 / 565-580), the ruler of the Mauhar dynasty of Kanauji5.
 The game-puzzle, according to the source, is solved by the Sasanian legend Vazurgmihr (Bozorgmehr-e Bokhtagan) in just 3 days.
  The artistic retelling of this story can also be seen in Firdousi's (940-1019 / 1025) "Shahnameh" 6.
  The historical and documentary value of these legends is highly questionable, but they give an opportunity to form an idea of ​​the period of chess's arrival in Iran.
  The British archaeologist Harold James Ruthen Murray (1868-1955), a classic in the study of the history of chess, based on the Pahlavi text, even mentions a specific date of the emergence of chess - 570.7.
 In general, agreeing with Murray's calculations, it is necessary to quote the opinion of the Soviet chess methodologist Yakov Rokhlin (1903-1995). "... It becomes clear that the discovery of chess could not be the merit of one person.
 History speaks in favor of the fact that the creator of the idea of ​​chess and a horse with a square board with 64 squares is the collective thinking of the people ... ”8.
Chess brought its Indian name from India to Iran.
 The word "ranatrang" used for chess in the above-mentioned Pahlavi texts, as well as the resulting's անցatrang's horses (Armenian: "ճատրակ", Greek: ζατρίκιον (zatrikion), Arabic: ج نرطش (plural), Georgian: ჭადრჯ The mother ադրaturaṅga (Sanskrit) is the word ճatur, composed of չորսatur չորս four ՝ aṅga, meaning "part, member". original note "Four-legged, four-legged" 9.
  The explanation of the name is probably due to the fact that the Indian prototype of modern chess was a game for 4 people 10 and represented a battle of 4 types of troops (battles: 1 Gollon J., Chess Variations.
 Ancient, Regional, and Modern, 3rd ed., Tuttle Publishing, 2013, p. 7.2 Averbakh Y., To the Question of the Origin of Chess, Moscow, 1999 (http:
//www.schachquellen.de/14912.html).3 Russian. translation see Perihanyan A., Chunakova O., Book of the Day Ardashira by Papaka, Moscow, 1987.
4 Russian. translation see Orbeli I., Trever K., Shatrang. Book of Chess, Leningrad, 1936, pp. 49-52.
5 Syed R., King Sarvavarman of Kanauj.
 Did he convey caturanga to Khusrau Anushirvan, the Sassanid ?, in “Arbeitspapiere / Working Papers. Chess Originated in India. Four Contributions ”, 2000, pp. 1-12. The name "da" in the name Dsarm, often used by Indian kings, means "god" in Sanskrit, see Kochergina V., Textbook of Sanskrit, Moscow, 1994, p. 336.
9 Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, vol. G, Yerevan, 1977, page 190.
"Ratha", elephants - "thick", cavalry - "ashva", back - "padati". "Rajan" was standing at the head of the army.
  Abu Rayhan al-Biruni (Latin: Alberonius, 973-1048), who gave the first ethnographic description of the game, quotes its description in his work "Tariq al-Hind" 2.
Based on Murray's calculations, in 570 (in the year of the birth of the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad) Chess penetrates Iran.
 It is widespread և ասան Sasanian Khosrov II Aparvez (590 / 591-628) entered Egypt during the Egyptian occupation (619-620).
After the conquest of the Sassanid state (633-654) 4 Arabs inherited chess with the Sassanid culture.
 This is proved by the fact that in the last sub-section of the third section of Ibn al-Nadim's (932-990) bibliographic work "Kitab al-Fikrist" 6 5 authors who have already written a book about chess are mentioned: 1. Al-Adli al-Rumi (9th century, "Kitab ash-Shatranj" / "Chess book"), 2. Ar-Razi (9th century, "Latif fi-sh shiranj" / "Elegance in chess"), 3. Abu Bakr bin Yahya al-Suli (854-946, "Kitab ash-Shatranj" / "Book of Chess"), 4. Al-Lajlaj (died in 970, "Kitab Mansubat Ash-Shatranj" / "Book of Chess Problems"), 5. Al-Iqlidis (10th century, "Kitab Majmufi Mansubat Ash-Shatranj" / "Collection of Chess Problems").
Proof of the spread of the game is the fact that the 5th Abbasid Caliph Harun al-Rashid (786-809) and his court loved to play chess7.
 The caliph, despite being a fairly good chess player, lost to his sister Abbasia and his vizier Jafar8.
 During this period, the Arabs already divided the players, according to their practical strength, into 5 categories, of which the players united in the highest were few (only 4 in 820) and were considered the grandmasters of the time (they were generally called aliyat 9).
  Therefore, it is logical that after appearing in the Arab world, discussions started on the issue of allowing the game to conform to the norms of the orthodoxy's lifestyle, and chess was forced to fight for a rather cruel existence10.
  Surprisingly, Islamic legal thought has led to three different approaches to this issue11.
 Because of the questionable Islamic position, it gives rise to misunderstandings, especially in the Western countries where the local Islamic Armenians are actively involved. 3 Wilkinson C., Chess.
 East and West, Past and Present, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1968, p. XV.4 Pourshariati P., Decline and Fall of the Sasanian Empire.
  The Sasanian-Parthian Confederacy and the Arab Con6 “The Fihrist of al-Nadim.
  A Tenth-Century Survey of Muslim Culture ”, ed. and trans. by B. Dodge, vol. 1, New7 Bobrick B., The Caliph's Splendor.
 Islam and the West in the Golden Age of Baghdad, Simon and Schuster, 2012, 8 Forbes D., The History of Chess.
 From the Time of the Early Invention of the Game in India Till the Period of Its10 Averbakh Y., A History of Chess.
 From Chaturanga to the Present Day, Russell Enterprises, 2012, p. 8. In order to get a general idea of ​​the social integration of communities1, it is necessary to reflect in detail the opinions of all parties.
First of all, it should be noted that especially when playing chess in Europe, players և spectators usually made certain monetary bets2.
  From the Islamic point of view, such cases are classified as kimar (Arabic: رام ق) and are forbidden according to the Qur'an (2).
219, 5.
90).
  So we are talking about those chess players who do not assume bets.
It is necessary to state that neither in the Qur'an nor in the Sunnah, unlike anything mentioned.
 And the hadiths that testify to the prohibition of chess, as claimed by Ismail ibn Qasir (1301-1373) - other theologians-muhaddithin, are definitely unbelievable - are false3.
Although chess was known to the Arabs since the time of Muhammad's comrades-in-arms, some of them had their own opinion about the game.
  In particular, the son of the second orthodox caliph Abdullah ibn Umar (614-693) considered chess to be worse than backgammon4.
 The fourth orthodox caliph, Muhammad ibn Abi Talib, the son-in-law of Muhammad (600-661), considered playing chess to be a form of gambling.
  Famous Companions of the Tabi allowed the game, for example, Abdullah ibn Abbas (619-687), Abu Hurairah (603-681), Ibn Sirin (653-729), Hisham ibn Urwan (680-763). , Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib (642-715), Sa'id ibn Jubayr (665–714) 6.
Most theologians of the golden age of Ijtihad considered playing chess to be a macro-haram.
 In parallel with their acquaintance, they considered that the game from outside only distracts people from the necessary things7.
 In particular, the following thought is characteristic of Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi (1076-1148). "... Chess is the brother of backgammon, fed from the same breast, և identical in terms of absorbing people, wasting their time, forgetting about God և praying" 8.
Now let's look at the 3 approaches to the issue separately.
According to the first view, playing chess is a forbidden (haram) or extremely undesirable (makruh tahriman / Arabic: ام ير ت هورك م لا /) action.
 They accept the 3 Sunni sects: Hanbali, Hanafi and Maliki.
 Ibn Qudama (1147-1223) reports that Hanbali theologians state that, nevertheless, chess is in fact identical to games played with dice (such as backgammon), and its prohibition is regulated by analogous reasoning9.
  Interestingly, it is said that Ahmad ibn Hanbal (780-855) himself and his students called for a tough (sometimes physically) attitude towards those who inflicted moral insults on a chess player like a ginemoli musician10.
  For his part, Abu Hanifa (699-767) neither greeted nor responded to the man who at that time was a chess player. 1 See MacEoin D., Music, Chess and other Sins.
  Segregation, Integration, and Muslim Schools in Britain, Civitas.
Institute for the Study of Civil Society, London, 2009 (http:
//www.civitas.org.uk/pdf/MusicChess AndOtherSins.pdf) .5 Abdul-Rahman M., Tafsir Ibn Kathir Juz '7 (Part 7).
 Al-Ma'idah 82 to Al-An'am 110, London, 2009, p. 36.10 Hurvitz N., The Formation of Hanbalism.
 Piety into Power, Routledge, 2012, p. 68-69. He was playing with his finger.
 I passed a conversation to Muhammad al-Ray al-Andalus (1380-1449), during which Malik ibn Anas (711-795) was asked about chess.
  He responds. "Is that part of the truth?"
  They answer. "No."
 Then Malik, quoting from the Qur'an (10).
32), he says. "What can be beyond the truth but delusion?"
  Approximately the same content can be seen in al-Muwatta (52).
7) 3.
The second point of view, which is attached to the Shafi'i sect, states that chess is undesirable, but it is not forbidden.
  Al-Nawawi (1233-1277) states: "Our school thinks that [playing chess] is undesirable, but not forbidden."
  Al-Subki (1284-1355), joining this opinion, considers it a "clear, obvious truth" 5.
Proponents of the third view believe that playing chess is permissible (mubah).
 Such a view was supported by the above-mentioned supporters of Muhammad and their successors.
  The modern theologian Yusuf al-Qaradawi (b. 1926) speaks of the permissibility of chess, noting, however, the following preconditions.1. The player should not be distracted by the game, therefore do not fulfill the obligations, such as prayer (salaat, Arabic: ةلا ص), 2. The game should not involve any kind of monetary bet, 3. Players should not use obscene expressions ևInsults6.
In fact, chess is not forbidden, the main problem is the attitude of the person towards it.
  Andalusian scholar Ibn Abd al-Barr (978-1071) writes: "All this shows that chess itself is not forbidden.
 If that were the case, it would not matter whether they play chess a lot or a little.
 However, this [permissibility] applies if the person is not obsessed with gambling or does not play full time ”7.
  Ramadan al-Bouti (1929-2013), a modern jurist who died during the Syrian war, states: "If they play chess in size (in terms of time, attention), I do not see anything wrong with it.
 I consider that it is allowed.
 There is no direct text on the prohibition of playing chess, unlike playing backgammon, in the hadiths. ”8
Opinions are not unequivocal among the Nazis.
 The proof of that is the "Iranian chess war".
  After the Islamic Revolution of Iran in 1981 The father of the revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (1902-1989), banned chess because it promoted gambling, damaged memory, could disrupt brain function and develop militant psychology.
 1988 Considering that chess is a good exercise, he lifted his own ban, provided there were no bets.
 On the contrary, the leader of the Iraqi Shiites, Ali al-Sistani (b. 1930), considers playing chess to be haram mutlaqan (absolutely forbidden, Arabic: 2 Dutton Y., Original Islam.
 Malik and the Madhhab of Madina, Routledge, 2007, p. 55.5 In the same place.
  اق طم مارح).
 He mentions that it does not matter whether the game involves bets or not, it does not matter whether the game is played in front of a real board or a computer 1.
Despite all this, even in the 21st century, chess is not a very welcome occupation among both conservatives and reformers.
 On Islamic Islamic forums, sheikhs often cite the following words of the ancient thinker Seneca. "Our life is not short, but we spend it too much.
  Life is quite long. ”2
  Experts in Islamic law, even the most neutral ones, call for spending time on more effective, God-pleasing actions.
  It is noteworthy that even the clergy who advise on the issue, often having difficulty giving clear advice, end their opinion with a quote from the Qur'an (2).
216) "Allah knows and you do not know."
 In any case, chess owes a great deal to the Arabs for its final form, for its current glory to the West.
 Its eternal believer is the "diamond of al-Suli", a chess task of incredible beauty, posed by the best chess player of Islamic civilization Abu Bakr bin Yahya al-Suli.
 The problem remained unsolved for more than a thousand years, until the end of the 20th century was revealed by Yuri Averbach3.
Arshak Gorgyan FROM THE ISSUE OF ISSUE ON THE PERMISSION OF CHESS PERMISSIBILITY
