HULAVU'S IRANIAN INVASION On the eve of the Mongol invasion of the Middle East, the Ismaili dynasty in Iran and the Baghdad caliphate in Iraq maintained their independence.
  With the conquest of these two countries, the whole of the Middle East would finally fall to the Mongols.
 Before addressing the issue of the Mongol invasion of the Middle East, one must first pay attention to the factors that led to the weakening of the Ismaili state.
Hasan al-Sabah had left to his successors a strong enough state, which was in an irreconcilable struggle with the surrounding avatar authorities, during which many inaccessible mountain fortresses were captured.
  However, the state of the Ismailis, being in the heyday of the Avatar era, naturally could not but change.
  This theocracy, which waged an unrelenting struggle against the wicked, soon became a wicked country.
  It is reflected in both the government and the ideology.
1240-1250 The representatives of the avatadir group became active.
  Ismail al-Din, the leader of the Ismailis, has been brutally persecuted by Ismailis who opposed his domestic and foreign policies.
  His atrocities have led contemporaries to call him "crazy."
 Thus, on the eve of the Mongol invasion, social divisions broke out in the Ismaili dynasty, which dealt a severe blow to the country's defense.
  The unstable situation in Alamut should have facilitated the advance of the Mongols.
The Iranian or Middle Eastern invasion was one of the most successful Mongol military operations as an imperial enterprise.
  It also had an internal content, as this invasion was to start a war that would continue for a long time between the sons of Genghis Khan, Tolu և Ջ չի չի չի չի չի ժ ժ ժ ժ ժ առանգ և չի ժ և ժ և և և և և և և և
  The violation of the "concordia fratrum", established among the Genghis Khans, which often seemed to be a fish, led to long inter-nuclear clashes.
  The decision to subjugate the "Far Eastern Territories" was made, according to Rashid al-Din 2 Ջ Juwayni 3, 2 "
 That is why in the great culture, after he ascended the throne of the khanate, he was no longer concerned with jealousy, he turned his attention to the conquest of distant western territories "(Dzhuveyani, Chingishan.
3 When the second year after the great cult came, the questions of friends and foes were over, the thoughts of August were concentrated in the cities of the distant world, in the "great" cult of the east and the west, or immediately after it.
 According to E. According to Kichanov, the conquest of Iran and the western region in general was agreed upon in the Onon River valley in 1253. in the spring in the special assembly of the Genghisians 1.
 Most likely, the word is 1251. It is about Kurulta, where Tolu's son Mangu was established on the khanate throne.
 On the other hand, it should be noted that the "great" Kurultay Rashid al-Din և is called the assembly that passed power to the representatives of the Tolu House.
  Moreover, Juveinin notes that the advance of troops to Iran and China began in 1252.2.
 It can be assumed that the issues regarding the conquest of Iran were discussed within the framework of a great cult, but clear decisions were made in 1252. not late.
Information about the final conquest of Iran was also kept by "Yuan Shin".
  According to him, in 1252 At the beginning of the 19th century, Kedbugha (Kitbugha) Noyon received an order to occupy the land of the Ismailis, in particular, the fortress of Hird-kuh3.
The invasion of Iran, in fact, had to be carried out by the joint actions of both the Toluids and the Juchids.
 However, there were serious disagreements in Karakorum on this issue.
 The Mongol conquest of Iran, according to the decision of the Kurult, was to be led by Mangu Khan's brother, Hulawun4.
  The latter was accompanied by his younger brother Subadai, and the Tumans sent by Batu were headed by Juli, Balakhan և Tutar.
  Tekuder և Bugha-Temur5 participated from Chaghatayids5.
 Since the purpose of the invasion was to finally annex the western territories to the empire, the troops participating in the invasion were transported with their families.
  In Mongolian terminology, such naming of territories is called tanima or tanma6.
 It was ordered. "From the troops of Genghis Khan, who are divided among his sons, brothers' heirs", two out of every ten people were given as inju to Hulawu khan so that the latter would obey him.
  And all of them, appointing their sons, sons and relatives, sent them to Hulawu to serve. ”7
 In addition, the forces of Bachu and Dairbahatur, which were located on the borders of Iran and India, were placed at his disposal.
In all probability, it is in this period that they intensify on mutual conquest ”(Rashid ad-Din, Sbornik chronicle, vol. 2, per. J. Verkhovskogo, Moscow - Leningrad, 1960, p. 144).
2 "Ked-Bugha Bavurchi first set out in the middle of the month of Jummad, in the year 650 AH. (July 1252) to take revenge on the heretics (Ismailis) (Джувейни, p. 432).
  Hulavu started the festivities in connection with the coming invasion in 1253. in the spring, ապես finally in the year 651 AH. On the 24th day of the month of Sha'ban (October 14, 1253), it came out with the help of the wind that heralded good luck. ”- Ibid., p. 443.
3 Abramowski W., The Chinese Annals of Mongke.
  Uberzetzung des 3. Kapitels des Yuan-shi, “Zentraasia4 Hulavun or Hulaghun (1217-1265) is one of the most famous Mongol generals.
 Genghis Khan is the son of Tolu և Sorkhakhtani.
  The Iranian invasion led by Hulawu is not inferior to the Chinese invasion of Genghis Khan in terms of both organization and results, see http.
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/hulagu-khan (08.01.2014).
6 This is evidenced by Juve, speaking of engineering work (ibid., P. 442) as he does Kirakos Gandzaketsi, when he mentions the Julians, Tutars, and Balakhanyons sent by Batu, who, according to the narrator, "came in carts" through Derbent. (Kirakos Gandzaketsi, Armenian History, Yerevan, 1982, p. 268).
"But the organization of the invasion showed that some agreement had been reached between them."
  But here Rashid al-Din quotes a very interesting fact. According to him, in order to hide his real goals, Mangu Khan publicly ordered his brother to "end these important affairs and return to their places of residence", that is, not to establish themselves in the conquered countries1.
  This, apparently, was to be expected, because, being the defender of the interests of the Ilkhanate, Rashidad-Din seems to be degrading Mangu's authority;
  The main disagreements referred to the issue of Iranian heritage. After all, what areas of influence should Iran be divided into? և How should the booty be divided?
  Judging by the 2 data of the military number, we see that the Juchids were quite serious about the Iranian invasion, because they were not involved in the Chinese invasion of the south at that time.
  On the other hand, the conquered countries were to be ruled by Juchi's descendants by order of Genghis Khan, so Batu Khan, using this fact, in addition to the actual ambitions, seemed to give all this a legal shade, by which the Juchids would show their ambitions to the whole of West Asia.
In addition, the Juchids, gaining land in the north commensurate with their economic activities, sought to take over the pastures of Iran աղաքcities that were richer than the European cities of the time.
The unprecedented slow pace of the Iranian invasion of Hulawu is noteworthy.
  It did not correspond to the Mongolian military tactics at all. The factor of speed և suddenness was absent.
 Ջ. Smith expressed the opinion that the reason for the slow pace was the huge hordes of Mongol tribes (750-900 thousand), as well as the movement of large and small cattle3.
  The presence of the latter allowed to travel longer than 3-4 km per day.
The historian al-Omar has preserved information on this issue, noting that Hulawu had to wait for more than two years on the shores of Amu Darya, taking into account the factor of Batu Khan4.
  Data on the beginning of Hulawu, the beginning of the Iranian invasion, have been preserved by Persian sources, particularly Jujan.
  The narrator mentions that the Golden Horde was very dissatisfied with the appointment of Hulawu.
 Referring to the number of 2 Mongol armies in Berka, the sources provide different information.
Muin ad-Din Natanzi mentions that there were about 70 thousand at the disposal of Hulawu. soldier.
 In the anonymous work "Sajarat al-Atrak" it is mentioned about 120 thousand. about the army (Amitai Preiss R., Mongols and Mamluks.
  The Mamluk-Ilkhanid War, 1260-1281, Cambridge, 1995, p. 15).
  According to Juveni, Hulawu was given twice as many troops as Khubila, but the historian is silent about the number of troops provided by the latter (Juveni, p. 432).
 According to Rashid ad-Din, "70,000 Tuman troops were sent after Khubila to China (China)" (Rashid ad-Din, vol. 2, p. 156).
 Naturally, this information is greatly exaggerated.
  According to N. According to Munku's calculations, Hulavu received about 27,800 soldiers, joined by 40,000 in Iran, who were still here during the reign of Charmaghan (Munkuev N., Notes on Ancient Mongols, "Tatar-Mongols in Asia and Europe", Moscow, 1970, p. 372) .
և In Batu's conversation, the narrator mentions that, knowing about this, Berkan 1 addresses Batu with the following words: "We raised Mangu Khan. How does he reward us?"
 By responding badly to his friends, violating our alliances, hating our ally, showing ambitions towards the caliph's domains, my ally, whose "image" has a message connection "2.
However, Berkan was the first Chingizyan, now only a Muslim, so it is correct to note Ch. Halperin 3 that the Chingizyans strictly adhere to the Great Khanate. to obey the "disobedient" peoples, those who did not recognize Mongol sovereignty, and as for religion, the religious factor did not play a significant role in the foreign policy of the Mongols.
Berkan undoubtedly played an important role in organizing the Iranian invasion.
  He died in 1251. He was one of the organizers of the great cult and later one of the organizers of the Apricot campaign.
 On the other hand, Berka's concern for the caliph is a bit dubious, as at that stage of events no clear decisions had been made on the fate of the caliph in 1251. in Kurulta 4.
 The caliph had the opportunity to make peace with the Mongols on fairly good terms.
  According to Rashid al-Din, Mangu, sending his brother to the west, demands: "If the caliph agrees to obey us, then in no case do not offend him."
  Here we can assume that the real reason is the struggle for the influence of the Iranian world, which, in fact, received a religious connotation.
Mangu, receiving information about Iran քի Middle East from policeman Arghun, 1252 The latter was sent on a business trip to Iran.
 It is possible that the information received from Arghun forced him to reconsider 1251. Kurulta's decision. The campaign was to be carried out under the control of the central government; և the leadership was to be taken over by the representative of the ruling house, who was to strengthen Karakorum's position in West Asia.
13th century In the middle of the 19th century, the "hereditary system" was finally established in the field of public administration of the Mongolian shop. Each ulus was ruled by the heirs of great princes, "ulus medek ku′ut" 6.
 As their dependence on the center grew, the power of the great khan weakened in those regions.
 The issue was more about Iran.
 After the fall of the Seljuk Empire, Iran turned into a arena of military conflicts, where many meliks, interests, atabeks and sultans of Turkish, Iranian-Kurdish origin fought uncompromisingly.
 And the Mongolian 12201250s. These achievements further contributed to the deepening of the state of anarchy, as the contradictions of the monarchy were compounded by the contradictions of the Mongol neo-Nuclear elite.
  Thus, Central 1 Berkan (1209-1266) was the brother of Batu Khan, the first of the Mongol rulers to convert to Islam.
 If Batu is considered the de facto creator of the Golden Horde, then Berka should be credited with the legal separation of the Golden Horde from the Mongol Empire.
3 Halperin Ch., The Kipchak Con nection.
 The Ilkhans, the Mamluks, and Ayn Jalut, “Bulletin School of Oriental and4 As correctly noted by P. Jackson, no source for this stage mentions that the purpose of the invasion was to capture the Caliphate (Jackson P., The Dissolution of the Mongol Empire, Central Asian Journal, Vol. 22, 1978, pp. 188-191).
Strengthening the position of the authorities իրականաց Implementing further achievements required changes in the system of government.
  Hence the reason why Mangu appointed Hulawu.
He did the same with his other brother, Khubila, and appointed him commander of the Chinese invasion.
 Both Khubilay and Hulawu were suitable candidates to lead those events. This strengthened the power of the Toluid House in the Middle East.
However, the sources do not mention that it was initially decided that a new Ulus should be established in Iran.
  This is evidenced by the fact that Hulawu mentioned his name in the coins issued before the death of Mangu Khan, but it is only after Mangu's death that the title "Ilkhan" appears on the coins1.
Disputes related to the Iranian invasion may have been discussed in 1254-1255, կողմից they were carried out by the Juchids on the part of Sartakh 2.
The sudden movement of Sartakh to the south-east և The westward movement of Hulawu is evidence that Sartakh must have taken an intermediate position between Mangu, Batu և and the Hulawu bases.
During the negotiations, the borders between the two uluses were determined. After the invasion, the Juchids were to be labeled with the territories where the officials of Batu Khan were involved in the implementation of the tax policy together with the policeman Arghun.
 Abdullah Kashan gives us information about the existence of such a label, according to which the Uzbek khan in 712 AH. In the month of Jummad (October 1312), he sent his envoys to Oljaytu Khan, demanding "everything that belongs to us by the order of Mangu Khan" 3.
 The fact that Sartakh was given an imperial order to hand over the domains is also proved by the Armenian historian Vardan Arceltsi.
  And Sardakh, the son of the same year, was poisoned by his brothers out of envy, because the power had been handed over to him by his father հավել with the addition of Mangu ghan. ”
  Kirakos Gandzaketsi, the transfer of power in Golden Horde to Sartakh, testifies to his exceptional position, noting: "His (Sartakh) coming Mangu Ghan was very happy, he went to meet him and honored him with great honor.
  He gave him the power of his father to rule all the troops and all the obedient of his power, his second was called և to rule commandingly. եց sent him to his house. ”5
 In fact, Kirakos Gandzaketsi testifies not only to the inheritance of power, but also to the high position held by Sartakh, which once belonged to his father, Batu.
 Mangu's move to make such a compromise can be explained by the fact that, despite the existing controversies, they have so far been settled through a final agreement on the Iranian invasion.
Thus, the final conquest of Iran was the 2 Sartakhs of the Mongol foreign policy, the eldest son of Batu, the grandson of Genghis Khan, the third ruler of the Juchids.
 According to the letters of Innocent IV, Sartachus was a Christian by faith, probably Nestorian (Bartholomew W., Works on Separate Problems in the History of Central Asia, (2), Moscow, 1964, http.
//www.portal-credo.ru/site/?act=lib&id=214).
4 Vardan Arceltsi, Space History, Yerevan, 2001, p. 199.
5 Kirakos Gandzaketsi, page 267.
in 1240-1250s. It had become an urgent matter.
 The conditions for its implementation were more than favorable.
  It is about the weakening of the Ismailis' state. it made itself felt during the reign of Ala ad-Din.
1240-1250 Ala ad-Din found himself in a difficult situation.
  Many of his close friends secretly supported the Avatar group.
 His own son, Hurshah, was plotting against his father.
Rukn ad-Din Hurshah was the eldest son of Ala ad-Din.
 The age difference of the father was 17 years.
 As al-Hurshah's adolescence, he declared Ala al-Din Dinordi his successor and the next imam, but over time, seeing signs of greed in his son and close ties to the dictatorship, al-Din al-Din decided to neutralize his son.
1252 In August 1945, Ked-Bugha Noyon, with an army of 12,000, marched from Karakorum to Iran as a Hulawi front guard.
  1253 In March of that year, the Mongols crossed the Amudarya River and launched military operations in Kuhistan.
The struggle of the masses against the Mongols clearly showed the attitude of the Ismailis in general towards the Mongol invasion.
The Mongol siege vehicles could not break the will of the Ismailis.
  As for the patriarchal circle, it fully supported Rukn ad-Din.
 The great vassals, the Bozorgans (from the Persian word "ناگرزب" - "great"), considered obedience to the Mongols as the only way to secure their domains, so the coming to power of Rukn ad-Din became urgent the day before.
  Another palace assassination took place.
  Juwayni wrote on that occasion. "One day his (Rukn ad-Din) father (Ala ad-Din) was drinking wine in a hut, the slaves, soldiers and shepherds were sleeping around him.
  He was found dead at midnight.
 His head was separated by the blow of an ax.
 The Indian և the Turkmen who had slept around him were wounded… This event took place on the last day of the month of Shawwal, in the year 653 AH (December 1, 1255).
Rukn ad-Din Hurshah (1255-1256) ascended the throne in Alamut.
  He started pursuing a policy based on the interests of the authoritarian group. He ordered to announce the name of the new ruler in the domain of the Ismailis.
 He ordered the people living in the realms to return to the "true faith" 2, that is, to Sunnism.
  The foreign policy pursued by Rukn ad-Din was attributed to reconciliation with the Mongols, the only way of which was unconditional personality.
 At that time, the rulers of Iran, Maveranahri, Transcaucasia, Asia Minor were in a hurry to express allegiance to Hulawu, thus rescuing their territories from Mongol devastation.
  Rukn ad-Din was not an exception, who was greatly influenced, as Rashid ad-Din 3, Khoja Nasir ad-Din Tusi, doctors Rice ad-Dawl և Muwwafiq ad-Dawl.
  Rukn ad-Din immediately began negotiations with the Mongols, but until the end he was afraid to introduce himself to Hulawu, so he sent hostages to the Mongols.
 In parallel with the negotiations 2 Ibid., P. 518.
3 "They often met secretly, thinking how much easier and faster it must be conquered by him (Hulawu)" (Rashid ad-Din, vol. 3, pp. 28-29).
4 Ruk ad-Din was the first to send his younger brother Shahnshah in 1256. on May 9, and on September 9 to his vizier Shams ad-Din Jilaki, and on October 26 to his other brother, Shiranshah.
 However, these directions did not play a significant role (Stroeva L., pp. 235-236).
Military operations continued to seize the inaccessible fortresses of the Ismailis.
  This proves that ordinary Ismailis did not intend to obey the Mongols at all.
 On July 5, 1256, Yasavur Noyon invaded the Rudbar region.
  At the same time, Hulavu moved in the direction of Meymundiz.
  He demanded that Hurshah destroy the castles and come to him in person.
 To meet the demands, Rukn al-Din sent one of his advisers, Kay-Kubadi, to Hulawu.
 According to Rashidad-Din, he promised to demolish the forts on behalf of Hurshah. He begged to leave the visit next year, to keep Alamut and Lumbesser, which are the ancient settlements of the Ismailis, from destruction, and the remaining forts to be handed over at his request.
 However, the last demand was not so easy to implement, as Rukn ad-Din had no de facto power over the masses.
1256 In October of that year, Hulawo moved to Lar եմ Demavend, approaching Kasran, near Ray.
  From there he sent envoys to Rukn ad-Din, demanding that Maimundiz be extradited.
 If Hurshah did that, he would be warmly received by Hulawu, if not, "only God knows what will happen to him" 2.
 At the same time, Ked-Bugha besieged Shahdiz fortress.
The siege of the castle began in November.
 He ordered Hurshah to appear before him immediately so that there would be no unnecessary casualties.
 However, Hurshah decided to resort to cunning.
  His men told him that Hurshah was not in the castle, but that he could not surrender without Hurshah's order.
  There was no other way out. Hulavun ordered to attack.
  Finding himself in a hopeless situation, Hurshah finally left the castle in 1256. It was handed over to Hulawu in November.
 The latter was warmly welcomed by the last Old Man of the Mountains, as he was still needed by the Mongols to take possession of the other castles relatively easily.
 According to Juwayni, Rukn ad-Din, on the advice of Hulawu, sent orders to surrender to the forts, due to which the Mongols captured about 40 forts3.
  The ruler of Alamut, Muqaddam ad-Din, refused to submit to the Mongols, but could not resist for long. 1256 The castle was handed over on December 16.
 The Mongols gave him the opportunity of "honorable person", that is, they allowed him to take out the property of the inhabitants within three days, և on December 19 they invaded the fortress, demolished the walls, set fire to all the buildings.
As Juwayn testifies 4, when Hulawu ascended the fortress, he "bit his finger in astonishment."
Thus fell Alamut, which had been the center of the Ismailis since 1090.
After the capture of the castle, the other castles were surrendered one after another.
 After the capture of the forts, Rukn ad-Din was no longer needed by the Mongols, so Hulawu began to think of getting rid of him.
 The open murder after this, of course, was not acceptable for Hulawu.
 Soon it is Rukn ad-Din who gives the solution to this issue. He expressed a desire to see Mangu Khan.
1257 On March 9, 1945, Rukn ad-Din headed to Karakor.
 Here he was treated quite coldly.
  Mangu even ordered to see him.
 As Juwayni mentions when Mangu Khan learned of Rukn ad-Din's arrival 3 Ibid., P. 522.
4 Ibid., P. 523.
He said about. "It was not necessary to tire the horses for that journey" 1.
 On the way back, Rukn ad-Din was killed under unknown circumstances.
Such was the end of the last Old Man of the Mountains.
  The fall of the Ismaili state was a result of the deepening of the avant-garde relations in the country, against which the Ismailis themselves had previously fought relentlessly.
 The representatives of the authoritarian group, who had long since lost touch with the masses, were thinking of "saving their own lands", on the way they even bypassed Rukn ad-Din, demanding that he surrender to the Mongols.
  The fall of the Ismaili dynasty ended the Mongol conquest of Iran.
Aram Poghosyan HULAVU'S IRANIAN INVASION Keywords: Tseruni of the Mountains, Alamut, Karakorum, Noyon-Nuker elite, Juchids, Hassan as-Sabah, Ismailis.
