ARMENIAN IMAGE IN CURRENT AZERI CHILDREN'S LITERATURE. GENERAL OVERVIEW An integral part of fiction is children's literature, which has the function of educating the new generation.
 It seemed that after independence, in a republic called Azerbaijan, writers should have continued to maintain this basic function of children's literature, but we are witnessing that all the borders and standards accepted for that literature are being violated quite rudely.
It is true that in the first years of independence it was difficult to break at once all the values ​​that were sown in the Soviet period, but gradually changes were noticed.
In parallel with the political events of the beginning of the 21st century, modern Azerbaijani children's literature changed. It was primarily aimed at instilling nationalism in children.
 This problem is directly related to the need to create the image of a national hero or national leader.
  And this circumstance is explained by the fact that not only the now heroic leaders, but also the false heroic characters of the past are gradually taking their stable place in the Azerbaijani children's literature.
  It should be noted that the tendency to glorify political leader Heydar Ali began at the end of the last century, and in the field of children's literature, it gained a great momentum of development in the 2000s.
 The exaggerated "fetishized" image of the Azerbaijani soldier, which is mainly presented as a fighter for the "historical homeland", for whom national values, people and its freedom are above all, is aimed at strengthening the international self-consciousness of children's literature.
 It is noteworthy that in these works the Azerbaijani soldiers are endowed with false humanity, even with a sense of "compassion" for the enemy, which the enemy, mostly Armenians, use and do not appreciate.
 That "humanity" is the reason why the Azerbaijani soldiers failed to keep the "papal lands".
The formation and development of the image of the Armenian enemy through children's literature goes hand in hand with the long-standing policy of sowing nationalism.
 Examining Azerbaijani fairy tales, children's stories and poems, we see that in many of them there are examples of presenting the Armenian as a pronounced enemy.
  The same tricks used to distinguish Armenians in children's stories and fairy tales, which are unacceptable from the point of view of psychology, are used to distinguish Armenians as in adult literature.
 However, what is to be said, in contrast to adult literature, is more direct, with no hidden subtexts.
 Through fairy tales, stories and poems, Azerbaijani writers present lies and falsifications to children under the guise of desired և reality, making them anti-Armenian, which guarantees that they will raise "Ramilsafars" in the future.
  This policy is systematic, children are taught from an early age that shedding Armenian blood is considered a feat.
In order to intensify the influence of such inadmissible anti-human propaganda, F. Kocharli և S. The Methodological Department of the Central Children's Library of Baku after Vurgun has developed a "methodical manual for propagating patriotism" among preschool and school-age children1.
  Even a cursory study of this handbook shows that there is an equal balance between patriotism and anti-Armenianism in Azerbaijan. 1 See Məktəbli oxucularin vətənpərvərlik tərbiyəsi (metodik vəsait), Baku, 2009, www.clb.az/files/mv/vetenperver1.pf.
A sign is placed.
 Let us quote a few points from the mentioned manual in order to make what is said more grounded.
 Thus. "Let us swear that we will take revenge for every drop of blood shed by our martyrs.
  Let us swear that even if the world turns upside down, the hostile hands of our enemy will be cut off. ”
The second part of the manual mentions topics for educating children in a patriotic spirit and instilling civic will in them. «1. Who are the Armenians? What is our civic duty?
2. What does it mean to be a good person?
3. When did the Khojaly tragedy take place?
The result of this hysterical propaganda is that in 2015 The first republican theatrical festival for children and youth was held under the auspices of the National Assembly of Azerbaijan, the main theme of which was patriotism.
  The theme of most of the plays was the Artsakh war, and the main character was the enemy Armenian.
By the way, one of the plays that won this festival was Sh. It was Khairulla's "My Enemy Toy" mono-performance, the hero of which is a toy named Andranik2.
In this context, the fairy tales provide interesting material for the study.
 The tales "Fairy Tale about Ilham", "Bad Harjan", "Innocent Woman" are among the children's works where the image of an Armenian is presented as negatively as possible.
  The first work is about the "purity of soul", "honesty" of the Azerbaijani hero Ilham, talent, "apostasy", "cruelty" of the Armenian hero.
 The author of "The Tale of Ilham և Fariz" is Gyulzar Ibrahimova, who is a well-known children's writer in Azerbaijan3.
  The name of the Azerbaijani hero is Ilham, which, of course, was not chosen by chance.
 He is an honest and hard-working young man who works and supports his family with his sweat.
 One day, the Russians and the Armenians united to attack the civilian population and mercilessly massacre the Azeris.
  At the height of the massacre, Ilham, who is a blacksmith, is in his smithy, where his former friends Stepan and Valod, an Armenian, suddenly invade.
  They brutally unravel the massacres and kill Ilham.
 To make the tale more interesting, the beautiful love story of Na-Ilham is described, which ends unhappily as a result of the "atrocities" committed.
 It is also interesting that in this tale the Russians are the enemy in parallel with the Armenians.
 Therefore, we consider it right to state that the sowing of anti-Russian sentiments has a certain place in the Azerbaijani propaganda, moreover, among children.
  As in any work related to the conflict, here the Azerbaijanis are presented only as victims. As it is written in the fairy tale, the Azeris are suddenly surprised by the attacks of the Armenians and the Russians, as the Armenians have always been considered "younger brothers" and the Russians "elders".
 The fairy tale, which is very popular among Azerbaijani children, is a kind of propaganda that Azeris were "massacred" and defeated in the war only because of their brotherly attitude towards Armenians and Russians, because both Ilham and the Azerbaijani authorities and people suddenly They came from their "treacherous" behavior.
Another work by the same author is the fairy tale "Bad Harjan", in which the Armenian is also represented in the image of an enemy4.
  But, unlike the previous work, in this fairy tale the actions take place in the early centuries.
 The main character is an Armenian named Vardan, who is presented as a liar, a thief and a liar.
  There is no inhuman value for him.
 The Azerbaijani hero Rovshan is presented in a completely opposite image.
 The events take place in the Atrpatakan state, which, as presented in the work, is the old name of Azerbaijan.
 It tells about the potters and potters of that state.
 Rovshan, the Azerbaijani hero of the fairy tale, is a famous potter who enjoys the love and respect of his fellow citizens, is brave and just.
 Vardan, an Armenian, manages to persuade Rovshan to go to foreign countries with him to sell goods.
  Through various situations, the author shows Vartan's envy and hatred towards Rovshan.
And here Rovshan, in spite of all this, is caring, compassionate and friendly. "Rovshan did not know that 2 Xeyrulla,., Mənim düşmən oyuncağım, http.
//yazarklub.org/?p=955.3 ovabrahimova G., hamlham və Fərizənin nağılı, http:
//www.gulzarnene.com/index.php?id=228.4 The same, Pis qonşu, http.
//www.peeep.us/6bc527d1.
"The heart of a 'friend' burns with the fire of envy, that is why he believes in her."
  In the end, Vartan deceives and robs Rovshan, throwing him into the well, from where, however, the latter is saved by his beloved, realizing the sequence of Vartan's insidious steps.
The "Innocent Woman" fairy tale 2 is full of similar anti-Armenian ideas, where the events take place several centuries ago again.
 The tale is about how the treacherous Armenian Siranuysh, gaining Nadir Shah's trust, enters the royal palace, as a result of various tricks, tries to put an end to the Shah's power, to kill his only child.
  Siranuysh is presented as a spy of the state of Armenia, who obeys the orders of the leaders of her state. "Siranuysh is full of hatred towards Shah's only son, but from the outside she shows the opposite.
  In addition, Siranuysh had a mission և tasks given to her by the leader of her country. that is, to bring his proxy into the court, to gain the trust of the Shah, to destroy the whole empire. ”
  Among the negative characters in the fairy tale are the Armenian Christian clergy, who in Azerbaijani literature are largely identified with Christianity's "disbelief".
 From an early age, Azerbaijani children are instilled with the idea that Armenia has a hostile attitude towards their state, and the Armenian clergy are insidious and insidious.
 However, there is another fact in this tale that contradicts the official Azeri propaganda. Armenia was presented as a state in the early centuries, while according to that preaching, Armenia did not exist as a state before.
These examples best express the anti-Armenian sentiments propagated to the common people today, especially to children and youth.
  The common denominator of all these works is that the Artsakh war and the resulting hatred of the Armenians are considered to be the direct or indirect key line in them.
Diana Karapetyan ARMENIAN IMAGE IN CURRENT AZERI CHILDREN'S LITERATURE. GENERAL OVERVIEW Keywords: child և preschool age, child psychology,
anti-Armenianism, the image of the enemy, state propaganda, the Artsakh war
.
