IVANE JAVAKHISHVILI'S LIFE AND ACTIVITY A great Georgian scientist and public figure, the founder of Tbilisi State University, Academician Ivane Javakhishvili was born in 1876. He was born on April 23, in Tbilisi, in the family of a teacher.
 I. The ancestors of the Javakhishvili dynasty were from Meskheti - Torels, then they moved to the Tezma river valley in Kartli, to the village of Khovle.
 The parents, Alexander Javakhishvili և and Sophio Vakhvakhishvili, had a traditional Georgian family and raised their children with the inspiration of boundless love for the homeland and the mother tongue.
 1885 Little Ivane was admitted to the Tbilisi Gymnasium.
  About the situation in the educational system of that time I. Javakhishvili's friend Ivane Nizharadze later wrote: The "tendency of Russification" and the pursuit of Georgian culture caused mental torment to the conscious students.
  Georgian youth were learning the language and culture on their own.
  Their best representative is Ivane Javakhishvili.
 While still in high school, he decided that he should enter the Armenian-Georgian department of the Faculty of Oriental Languages ​​at the university. ”1
1895 in July I. Javakhishvili successfully graduated from the first gymnasium in Tbilisi and in August of the same year entered the Department of Armenian-Georgian-Iranian Languages ​​at the Faculty of Archeology of St. Petersburg University.
To specialize in Armenology, he studied with the eminent scientist Nikoghayos Marin.
  1903-1907 At the same university he was a private associate professor at the Chair of Armenian-Georgian Philology, teaching Armenian studies.
 It can be said that I. The St. Petersburg period of Javakhishvili's activity was a unique entrance to his activity.
 I. Javakhishvili was already aware that the center of Georgian studies should be in Tbilissi (Georgia), he was waiting for the right moment.
1898 For the work "The activity of the Apostle Andrew և St. Nino in Georgia" the Scientific Council of St. Petersburg University. Javakhishvili awarded a gold medal.
  1899 He graduated from the university and remained at the Faculty of Oriental Languages ​​as a lecturer.
1901 He was sent to the University of Berlin to improve his skills.
 1902 In April-September N. He visited Mount Sinai with Mar to describe and study Georgian manuscripts.
 1903 On January 1, 1917 he was appointed a private associate professor at the university.
 The new stage of Georgian historiography at the beginning of the XX century is connected with his name.
The first scientific monograph, "The State Structure of Ancient Armenia և Ancient Georgia" (v. 1), was published in Russian in 1905, where it was examined by the administrative, ethnic, genealogical, social society of the two countries 1 Melikset-Bek L., Academician I. Javakhashvili և Armenology (on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of his death), "PBH", 1960 1, p. 149.
problems.
 1908 His "History of the Division of Georgian-Armenian Churches at the Beginning of the Seventh Century" was published.
  Here he analyzed "Book Paper" և Ukhtanes's "History of Georgian-Armenian Division".
I. Javakhishvili laid the foundation for a systematic scientific-critical study of history.
  His published works during his years at the University of St. Petersburg are: "Patriotism և Science" (1904), "The King of Georgia - The History of His Rights" (1905), "State Structures of Ancient Georgia և Ancient Armenia (1905)", "Politics և Social Movement in Georgia in the XIX Century "(1905)," History of Wise Leaders in Georgia "(1906)," Economic History of Georgia "(1906)," History of the Georgian Nation. Book I "(1908)," History of Georgian Justice. Book I "(1909)," Georgian National History. Book II "(1914)," The purpose of history, sources and methods in the past and now. Book I "," Ancient Georgian Historiography "(1916), which greatly contributed to the development of Georgian historiography.
 In almost all his works I. Javakhishvili also paid considerable attention to the coverage of medieval Armenian political, social and ecclesiastical history, Armenology, historical geography of Armenia, the life of Armenian historians and their works.
  I. Javakhishvili praised the ancient medieval Armenian historiography for its special significance for the history of neighboring countries.
I. Javakhishvili was not only a great researcher, but also an educator of the young generation.
  1903 In 1907 he established a department studying the history of Georgia at St. Petersburg University. To establish a scientific society of Georgian students, where the reports were read in the native language, which served as a basis for the development of higher education and science in the Georgian language.
1911-1912 I. At the initiative of Javakhishvili, the student company conducted a survey to find out how many Georgian students study abroad in Russia and what specialties Georgian scientists work in higher education institutions.
In parallel with his scientific and pedagogical activities at St. Petersburg University, I. Javakhishvili has been active in almost all spheres of public and political life, collaborating with the Georgian Literacy Society, being a member of the Georgian Historical and Ethnographic Society, lecturing in Georgian cities, and being the editor of the first academic edition of Ilya Chavchavadze's works. member of the council, actively participated in the struggle for the restoration of the autonomy of the church, etc.
During his activity at Tbilisi State University I. Javakhishvili published "A Page from the History of Peasant Movements in Ancient Armenia" (1936), "Materials from the History of Social Movements in Armenia in the IX Century սկզբ Early XIII Century" (1937), "Ancient Armenian Historiography. Book 1 ”(1935, Georgian) works.
  He referred to the epic "David of Sassoun" and published articles in the Armenian press.
1917 After the revolution I. Javakhishvili to his supporters I. Tsipshidze, Ak. Shanidze, Sh. Nutsubidze "returned to the homeland with others" and started actively fighting for the establishment of the first higher education institution in the Caucasus, a university, which was crowned with success.
 1918 On January 26, the Georgian society celebrates the opening of Tbilisi State University, which was initiated by I. Javakhishvili.
  The opening day of the university coincided with the day of remembrance of David Shinarar, thus I. Javakhishvili emphasized that the university is the radius of the Gelati Academy founded by King David.
 On January 13, the lecturer-advisor of the university took place, the participants of which were the rector I. Javakhishvili was offered, but the latter refused.
  At his suggestion, the prominent European scientist, chemist Petre Melikishvili was appointed the first rector.
  The latter confessed. "Ivane Javakhishvili is one of the founders, the inspirer, the only knight in the university, where no one can compete or resist with him" 1.
Initially, the university had one faculty of philosophy, the first dean of which was I. Javakhishvili.
 Gail taught history, philology, philosophy and economics at that faculty.
 The first lecturers of the university were Ivane Javakhishvili, Petre Melikishvili, Georgy Akhvlediani, Andrey Benashvili, Philip Gogichaishvili, Korneli Kekelidze, Shalva Nutsubidze, Andrea Razmadze, Avipi Shimnadze, Dimitri Uznadze
I. Javakhishvili tried to unite talented young Georgians around the university, who worked in Russia and European countries.
 N. was invited to work at Tbilisi State University. Muskhelishvili, I. Beritashvili, A. Janelidze և others.
  In order to make the university a center of Armenological research, I. Javakhishvili in 1918 In October 1913, he invited a young but already well-known scholar to the Faculty of Law and History of the University of Odessa. Graduate Leon Melikset-Becky, at the same time expanded the list of Armenology courses: History of the Armenian People, History of Armenian Law, Armenian Dialectology, Textology Giles 3.
 In order to have his own staff, he sent one of the first graduates of the Faculty of Philology, Ilya Abuladze, to Yerevan.
1928 The State Polytechnic Institute was established on the basis of the Polytechnic Faculty of the University, and in 1930, the Georgian Agricultural Institute and the Georgian Medical Institute were established.
  1933 Scientific institutes of mathematics, geography, art, language and literature have been established since the university.
  These institutes, later separating from the university, were united, և 1941. The Academy of Sciences of the Georgian SSR, which is now called the National Academy of Sciences of Georgia, was opened on February 10, 2006.
  It was a significant event in the cultural life of the Georgian people.
  The academy continued the traditions of both the university and the 12th century. established Georgian education and care centers - Gelati և Igalto Academies4.
 The founding academicians of the academy were Korneli Kekelidze (philology), Dimitri Uznadze (psychology), Akaki Shanidze, Georgi Akhvlediani, Arnold Chikobava (linguist. 1 See the official website of the State University after I. Javakhishvili, Tbilisi:
//www.tsu.edu.ge/ge/about/rectors/qr9kuydxrznrxncuh/.
3 Bayramyan Hr., Pages from the history of Armenian-Georgian literary relations, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 138-139.
4 See the official website of the Georgian National Academy of Sciences: http.
//www.science.org.ge/.
Georgy Khachapuridze, Simon Janashia (history).
  Academician Nikoloz Muskhelishvili was elected the first director of the academy1.
"Ivane Javakhishvili - Some Issues of Georgian Culture" monogamist Roin Metzel wrote: "In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, an individual appeared in the life of Georgia who made a great contribution to chronology, a man who served as an example of true patriotism to his contemporaries, an example of deep scientific research, boundless patriotism, respect for brothers, a citizen-scientist. The establishment of the first higher education institution in Georgia, the University, and the beginning of a new stage in the study of Georgian history and Georgian historiography.
I. Javakhishvili 1902-1917 The courses at St. Petersburg University included materials related not only to Georgia but also to Armenia's past, such as the "Ani Political Organization According to the Protocols" course, which was briefly called "The History of Ani" 3.
  In this connection, in 1911. in the summer I. Javakhishvili visited Ani, where N. A. took part in the excavations led by Mar. Vruyr, N. Sichov, N. Okun, S. Poltoratsky և G. Ghapantsyan.
 In fact, this is the only case that I. Javakhishvili visited Armenia.
 1921-1922 at Tbilisi University. in the academic year I. Javakhishvili studied "Armenian Ancient Historical Literature" as a professional course, but only in V-VI centuries. about.
  The course was published in a separate book in Georgian in 1935. In Tbilisi.
1918 On January 30, I. Javakhishvili delivered his first lecture at the university on "Man, his role in the historical and philosophical literature of ancient Georgia և in life."
  1918-1919 He enriched Georgian historiography with a number of articles: "Cities, urban life and living conditions in Georgia in the XVII-XVIII centuries", "Independence between Russia and Georgia in the XVIII century", "Georgian borders from a historical point of view", etc.
1919 December 17, I. Javakhishvili was elected rector of Tbilisi State University.
 He was lucky to bear the difficult responsibility and duty of the rector in difficult times.
  1921 In February, the Soviet army entered the Democratic Republic of Georgia.
 In order to save the country's independence, the Georgian army, the intelligentsia, the students-youth were armed.
  Professors-lecturers of Tbilisi State University: I. Led by Javakhishvili, they expressed their solidarity with the government of the republic and asked to be included in the ranks of the defenders of the homeland.
 I. Javakhishvili addressed the students going to war with the following words. "It is true that we have a shortage of weapons, there is not enough military equipment, we need many other things, but as our wise people said," The heart of a brave man is made of iron, the armor is at least 1 He headed the academy for 30 years (1941-1972).
  1972-1977 Ilya Vekua was the president of the academy, in 1978-1986 - academician Evgeni Kharadze, in 1986-2004 - academician Albert Tavkhelidze, in 2005-2013 - academician Tamaz Gamkrelidze.
  2013 Academician Georgy Kvesitadze has been the President of the Academy since June 19.
2 See the official website of Tbilisi State University: http.
//www.tsu.edu.ge/ge/about/rectors/qr9kuydxrznrxncuh/.
It must be made of wood. ”
  The White Temple of our national culture will bless all those who rush to the battlefield. ”
 After the capture of Tbilisi by the Bolsheviks, the university was threatened by the invasion of the Red Army.
 I. Javakhishvili demanded to maintain discipline, his unwavering and principled position achieved its goal, the university was saved from destruction.
Years of working as rector I. Javakhishvili dedicated himself to the further development of the university.
  His field of activity was multifaceted. tries to raise the academic level of professors, fights to improve the living conditions of lecturers, invites specialists from different countries, actively supports the maintenance of the university's auxiliary scientific institutions and the improvement of working conditions.
1923 I. Javakhishvili founded the printing house of the university, created new faculties - agriculture, polytechnic - law, helped the needy students in every way, repeatedly supporting them financially and morally.
  It was a model of humanity for the students, very demanding, at the same time infinitely kind and attentive.
 He continued his active social activity. He was the Chairman of the Coordinating Committee of Textbooks and Terminological Guidelines under the Ministry of Education, the Vice-Chairman of the State Scientific Council of Georgia, the Chairman of the Historical-Ethnographic Society of Georgia.
  Published by I. Javakhishvili's new works: "History of the Georgian Nation. Book IV, Part I "(1924)," The purpose of history, sources և methods in the past և now. Book III, Part I "," Teaching Georgian Studies or Archeology. Part II "," Georgian Praise or Diplomacy "(1925-1926) և etc.
1923 On March 30, Tbilisi State University Professor-Lecturers Council I. Javakhishvili has elected a rector for a new term.
  Unfortunately, soon the Soviet government and its obedient "woe-scientists" started I. The accusations against Javakhishvili, which was followed by 1926. His dismissal from the post of rector on June 23.
1928 The article of the new rector, Tedo Glonti, was published in "Towards the secondary school" magazine, where he Javakhishvili considered him a figure who "runs through the culture of the Middle Ages."
  1928 The 10th anniversary of the founding of the university was solemnly celebrated, during which not a word was said in that case. About Javakhishvili's contribution.
  Many understood the injustice of the struggle against him, secretly sympathizing, sending letters of support, but no one dared to publicly support him.
The Council of People's Commissars of the Georgian SSR in 1930 As of July 7, 2012, 4 institutes have been established on the basis of the university.
  1931 of the People's Commissariat of Education By the decision of May 28, I. Javakhishvili was deported from the Pedagogical Institute on charges of agreeing with the "Kondrat-Shchina" group.
  It was a terrible insult to the founder of the university.
 However, in 1933 On February 17, he was appointed Head of the Department of Ancient History of Georgia at the University. He worked until 1935.
Soon the relentless struggle resumed. Against Javakhishvili, the culmination of which was the rector of the university Carlo Oragvelidze in 1936. The report "On the Issues of the History of Georgia" read in the Council of the Faculty of History on March 23, 2012, where he severely criticized I. Javakhishvili's works, and his contribution to Georgian science to the level of collecting and coordinating only empirical material facts.
I. Javakhishvili made a principled decision in 1936. On April 10, he wrote a letter to the People's Commissar of Education informing him that he was leaving the university.
 The campaign against him was interrupted only in the 1930s. the last.
1936 He was invited to the Caucasus Research Institute (later ENIMK) as a permanent lecturer-consultant.
  On March 13, 1937, he was appointed Department of History of the Georgian State Museum.
 1937 He was appointed director of the Shota Rustaveli Museum of his time.
  I. An exhibition dedicated to the 750th anniversary of "The Man" was organized in Tbilisi under the leadership of Javakhishvili in 1937. The 5th plenum of the USSR Writers' Union was organized in Tbilisi on December 27, 1945, where he read a report on "Georgian social culture of the Rustaveli era ը The poem" The Man ".
  1938 On May 25, at the jubilee scientific session dedicated to the 20th anniversary of Tbilisi State University, I. Javakhishvili read a report on "Struggle for the establishment of a university in Georgia", in which he recalled the conditions for the establishment of the first university in the Caucasus.
 With these words he called on the students. "Only sound knowledge allows you to take your rightful place in society.
 We must remember that a great work can never be done without love.
  A cold-hearted, indifferent person can never do anything, everyone must love his people, science, feel responsibility in order to serve his potential to both science and people.
 "Scientific work is happiness, a happiness that not everyone is lucky, he who is one of those happy people who is endowed by nature with natural talent, has the willpower and love for the work, must feel obliged to compensate the nation to which he belongs." .
  1938 On June 15, the presidency of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR I. Javakhishvili was awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labor.
 In the same year he was elected a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Georgian SSR, then a member of the presidency of the Supreme Soviet.
1939 He became a full member of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
1930s I. Several works by Javakhishvili were published: "History of Social Struggle in Georgia IX-XII centuries." (1934), "Ancient Armenian historiography. Book I "(1935)," Ilya Chavchavadze պատմ History of Georgia "(1937)," The Early Nature of the Georgian-Caucasian Languages ​​19 Kinship "(1937)," Issues of the History of Georgian Music "(1938).
1939 On May 26-27, he participated in the conference of the Department of Philosophy and History of the USSR Academy of Sciences, where, as a report ("Introduction to the History of the Georgian People"), he presented one of the chapters of his book I, "Basic Historical-Ethnological Problems иБлижнего Востока древнейшей эпохи ", which was published in the fourth issue of" Вестник древней истории "magazine in the same year 1.
I. Javakhishvili died in 1940. He died of a sudden heart attack on November 18 while lecturing.
  He was buried on November 21 in the yard of Tbilisi State University, the first rector P. Next to Melikishvili.
1953 The sculptor T. was placed on his grave. The statue sculpted by Tsviniashvili.
1975 I. opened from the chair of Georgian history of Tbilisi State University. Javakhishvili Educational-Memorial Cabinet of History of Georgia, where his life and creative memoirs and scientific literature were presented.
  1998 On the occasion of the 80th anniversary of Tbilisi University, the cabinet was completely expanded and supplemented with new exhibits.
  1988 Tbilisi State University was awarded to its founder, I. Javakhishvili's name.
Ekvtime Taghaishvili I. He wrote about Javakhishvili. "It is rare for a person not to have any flaws, even if they are very small.
 When you examined Ivane Javakhishvili with a candlelight, you would not find any defect, he was a flawless, flawless man. ”1
Ruzanna YolchyanIVANE JAVAKHISHVILI'S LIFE AND ACTIVITY Keywords: Ivane Javakhishvili, biography, Tbilisi State University, Georgian studies.
