ARTIK TOMBSTONE RESIDENCE IN LATE BRONZE-LATE CIRCUITS The Artik Mausoleum occupies a special place in the group of monuments dating back to the millennium.
 It is located 4 km east of Artik city, 2 km west of Harich village.
 The tombs of Artik occupy a unique place both in Armenia and in the Transcaucasia, as they contain rich factual material on the material culture of the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age.
 Among these materials, a large group is made of pottery, which is distinguished by unique and distinct samples.
Our work is aimed at presenting, describing the types of pottery found in the Artikidambaran field, the methods of preparation, as well as revealing the general tendencies of the development of pottery, the patterns of changing the shape of the product.
The material used for the study was the large amount of pottery found by the famous archeologist Telmak Khachatryan as a result of excavations in the Artik mausoleum; It should be noted that clay has been widely used in various sectors of the economy in all periods.
 This type of raw material, the superficial veneers of which are common in Armenia, used tools (spindle heads, parquet hangers, melters, wire buckets, bellows, kiln-molds, molds), various cult objects (idols, idols, sacred hearths, ready-made hearths). .
  Clay was an irreplaceable raw material for pottery, the production of which is often the only material that dates the monument.
  From what has been said, it is not difficult to notice that the development of a pottery product, the change of its forms, is a historically complex process, which implies the improvement of technology and, consequently, tools.
 This is evidenced by the study of Bronze Age pottery products in Armenia, including Artik1.
The preparation of pottery consists of the following main activities: 1. preparation of raw materials և firewood, 2. making pomegranate 3. Preparation of a vessel (with the help of plaster or forge) 4. Product drying և decoration 5. frying 2.
The pottery of the first stage of the late bronze of the Artik mausoleum is numerous, most of which are made of wood.
 Some of the vessels have a polished surface, but the main part is gray, rough, like kitchen pottery, which is often greasy.
The group of polished pottery includes multi-sculpted non-sculpted vases.
 The ungulate cavities have a swollen, bulging, narrow neck.
 There are examples that have a higher neck.
  All the pots are mainly richly decorated in the form of horizontally pressed "zigzag" deep lines.
  However, the most common ornaments are ornaments made of glitter, which are distinguished by ornaments made of triangles and vertical lines.
 There are broken "wave" ornaments, which have their parallels in Lchashen, Gegharot, Karm Berd, Yerjan, Metsamor և other shells.
 At this stage, the polished pots are divided into two groups.
 The first group is characterized by large horns, which have small protrusions on their sides.
 The samples of the second group are smaller և have cut lips.
 Patterns often repeat the ornaments of unsteady jars - rectangles with shaded grids, refractory ribbons, wedge triangles, wavy patterns, etc.
Early stage rough shells of Artik tombs are presented with large, wide, low neck, convex body, narrow floor. 53.
2 Khnkikyan O., Crafts in Bronze Age Armenia, p. 55.
with jars with bent lips.
  These are mainly decorated with nails3.
The second phase of the Artik Late Bronze Age also presents a rich assortment of pottery, including specimens typical of both the pre-Iron Age and the Early Iron Age.
The ornaments, mainly preserving the Late Bronze Age pottery, are slightly different from the previous period.
 The glitter ornaments are made carelessly, the vessels lose the former quality of the surface gloss.
The most typical ornaments of the shells of the mentioned stage are horizontal, zigzag, wavy lines, horizontal triangles, concentric circles, hornbeams, etc.
  Rough, polished kitchen pottery forms a large group next to the polished pottery.
 The polished shells are presented in unbroken, single, biconcave jars with different types of shells.
 A large group of unglazed pots consists of vessels with a convex waist, not high neck and protruding lips.
  These are mainly delicate և evenly baked.
There are unkempt pots with a convex body, high neck and relatively narrow floor.
  Next to them, for the first time, single pottery begins to appear, the arches of which descend from the lips or the center of the neck to the shoulder of the vessel.
 The bicuspid vessels form a small group.
Large quantities of pots are divided into several types: convex torso, narrow-bottomed deep-bottomed pots, the edges of which are either bent out or cut straight.
 Medium-sized pottery with medium shoulders, rising shoulders and flexible lips is more numerous.
 There are pots with ring handles.
 The ornaments of these vessels, in addition to the general patterns mentioned above, are different on this or that vessel.
 Thus, the bottoms of some vessels are decorated with concentric circles, which meet on the shoulders of individual vessels.
 Wedge jewelry, shower, shiny stripes, etc. occupy a large place.
 Decorative motifs of the hands of vessels 3 Yesayan A., Archeology of Armenia, volume 1, Stone Age-Late Bronze Age, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 1992.
4 Yesayan A., note work, page 265.
A detailed study shows that the pottery of Artik, the second stage of the Late Bronze Age, preserving the ancient horses, acquires new lines, which existed until the Early Iron Age, testifying to the tradition of the material culture of Armenia.
Rough kitchen pottery is not distinguished by the variety of eggs and ornaments.
 The uniform pottery is presented with a large, elongated torso, broad, sometimes with a convex torso, with vessels with rising shoulders.
There are a large number of unkempt, sometimes low-bodied pots with necks of different heights.
  Rough pottery ornaments are represented mainly by ropes of different shapes, with deep belts, zigzags, more rarely with wavy patterns.
  The most common are nail ornaments and beads.
  They meet vessels decorated with convex protrusions, which is typical of BC. To the pots of the beginning of the 1st millennium 5.
Among the early artifacts of Artik, the largest group is the kavamans, which were found in all the tombs.
 These pots are presented with new shapes and patterns, which are very different in quality from the Late Bronze Age pots.
Early Cretaceous pottery is mainly made of durgivra, there are only one or two specimens that are handmade.
  Unlike the previous Late Bronze Age, in this period the pots are divided into two new large groups: փայլ gray polished pots և rough kitchen pots.
  The pots mainly have thick և made of clay containing different mixtures.
A large number of specimens were found from unglazed pottery of the Early Cretaceous period.
  This type of pottery has a convex body, a flat floor and a relatively narrow neck.
 A unique group is represented by the unglazed pottery, which lacks any type of ornaments.
  Here we find a variety of pottery - gray polished, narrow-necked "bombed" with a waist - medium-sized small pots with a bombed-back, short neck - folded lip.
Artik pottery with a single handle has a special place in the Early Cretaceous pottery, which have a convex 5 Ibid., Pp. 270-271.
ran, short, narrow neck, outward-facing lip.
 As we know, single-handle pots can be found in Artik's Late Bronze Age tombs, but already in the early morning period these pots get rich formation.
 Common ornaments are convex lines, zigzag և concave lines.
 In some cases, there are patterns when the ribbons made of glitter create triangular patterns.
Artik single-handle kavans were excavated from Nº Nº 206, 217, 298 tombs6.
The third group of Artik early Early Cretaceous pottery consists of double-sided pottery, which has large size, narrow, short neck, very convex waist, slightly folded lip.
 The bowls have large handles on both sides in the middle of the waist, which are often decorated with protruding-convex lines.
 The bowls have various ornaments, mainly decorated with linear, nail-patterned, as well as longitudinal grooves.
 There are often combinations of zigzag "wavy" lines, which end in a thick ornament.
The Artik double-handle pottery of the early twentieth century is also considered to be a typical pottery of the given period; it is widespread both in other ancient sites of the Shirak region, in Armenia, and in the Transcaucasia.
One-handle cups are more special for Artik Early Cretaceous pottery.
  Despite their small number, these cups are diverse; I create one separate, general group.
 Most of the cups are polished, deep, have a flat bottom, weakly expressed, in some cases, a cut lip.
 Similar glasses were found in Nº Nº 217, 295, 206 tombs.
 The cups have various ornaments.
 The ornaments are mainly convex lines, ribbons made of glitter, longitudinal grooves.
Early Middle Ages in Artik, a large group of polished pottery - the bowls, which were found next to the pots we observed 7.
As in the case of the pottery, here, too, there is a combination of new specimens with the traditional specimens typical of the former Late Bronze Age.
Early medieval bowls are generally not deep և have a folded or cut edge.
  Kavamans are characterized by the presence of various ornaments.
  Almost all the specimens are decorated with convex lines, which are drawn very strictly, "located on the lips", ութ carelessly made lines, which are located in the middle of the bowl.
In the large group of bowls there are also two examples, which are polished vases, have a cut edge, on which is preserved an ornament in the form of "triangular" patterns of vertical lines8.
The next group of Early Cretaceous pottery is the rough kitchen utensils.
  The group we are observing is represented in all Artik early tombs.
  These pots are mainly made of poorly mixed clay containing various mixtures.
  Traces of burning on the surface of all pottery allow us to assume that they were widely used in everyday life.
The above-mentioned kitchen pots are presented in various forms and patterns.
  The shells are mainly large, thick walls, with a wide neck and a folded lip.
 As in the previous two stages of the late Middle Ages, here too the bases of the pots are decorated with successive rows of sloping lines, often made in two or more rows.
 The ornaments are mostly homogeneous, we find convex lines, which are combined with curved lines, nail-patterns and patterns in the form of flower seeds.
 Only in rare cases are convex lines combined with zigzag lines9.
In the large group of pottery in the Artik mausoleum, there are women who have rare shapes and ornaments.
 Similar specimens have been found in various tombs next to various metal pots.
These rare clays have a polished surface.
 The above group includes 18 vessels, which have the following characteristics:
1. The polished pottery has a narrow base, a convex waist, with an elongated well-defined neck, like a well-defined lip.
 9 In the same part of the section connecting the neck of the mentioned pot to the waist, pp. 253-254. There are double horizontal horizontal convex lines decorated with glitter, the open space between which is decorated with oblique, convex ribbons.
 From the base of the canvas lip to the waist, there are vertical lines made of glitter, the distances between which are filled with zigzag lines.
 The same patterns are present in the area under the nave.
The above-mentioned pottery is made of clay mixed on top of the pottery, but the pot is disproportionately fired.
 The pot has 8.5 x 27 cm 10.
2. S, polished container with a narrow base, slightly sharpened ribs, low neck, well-defined lip.
  The container has rich patterns.
  From the edge of the container to the ribs are several horizontal convex lines, which are present in the middle of the boat, are made carelessly.
 The free spaces between the horizontal convex lines are decorated with various patterns painted with glitter, including oblique ribbons that create triangular images facing the tops.
 Horizontal "vertical zigzag" lines are arranged in several rows between the oblique ribbons.
  The mentioned pattern reflects the patterns of Middle Bronze Age pottery.
The above-mentioned container is made of well-mixed clay, it is evenly baked on the pottery.
 The container is 11.5 cm wide և 12 cm long 11.
3. S, a polished kavaman, which has a narrow base, a convex torso, a not well-defined neck իչ an outwardly expressive lip, under which, as in the middle of the navakan's torso, horizontal convex lines are drawn, which are made at great distances.
 It is noteworthy that these lines are made very consistently and symmetrically.
  The free spaces between the lines are filled with rich patterns made of glitter, which are oblique lines, creating triangular images.
  The triangles are filled with slanted dashes that create a grid-like image.
 From the convex line in the middle to the base of the cauldron, fine lines made with glitter go.
The kavaman is made of pottery, made of well-mixed clay, it stands out with even roasting.
  The cauldron has 12 widths և 15.5 cm length 12.
10 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 438-60.
11 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 194-60.
4. SJ, polished kavaman, which has a narrow base, round waist, pressed neck և cut lip.
 Six rows of convex lines are carelessly made on the upper part of the body of the kavaman, from which lines made with glitter go to the base of the kavaman.
  The kavaman is made of durgivra well-mixed clay է evenly baked.
 The container is 9 cm wide և 14 cm long 13.
5. SJ, polished pottery, which has a narrow base, a convex waist, an elongated neck, and a well-defined lip on the outside.
  Horizontal ribbons are made with glitter at the junction of the neck հիմ from the base of the canvas to the waist.
 In the upper part of the body of the canvas there is a belt from the convex line, above which there is a unique ornament.
  It is a series of lattice patterns, animal motifs.
 The animal-shaped ornament consists of deer, which have branched horns - goats, one pair downwards - with sloping horns.
 It is noteworthy that this ornamental belt is typical of the pottery of the Transcaucasian-Bronze Age.
  Lines made with glitter go from the convex line of the canvas to the base.
The above-mentioned pottery is made of fine clay mixed on a pottery.
  It should be noted that the cauldron is distinguished by its "polishing" master.
 The pot is 12 cm wide և 25 cm long 14.
6. SJ, a folded pot on a narrow base, with a convex waist (especially in the upper part), with a narrowing neck and a cut lip.
 In the upper and middle parts of Cavanotiiran there are rows of horizontal ridges, under which a horizontal wavy line passes.
 The open spaces between the horizontal convex lines are filled with beautiful ornaments, which are oblique ribbons made of glitter.
From the last row of convex lines to the base of the canvas, fine lines made with glitter are drawn.
The above-mentioned pottery is made of wood, has thick walls, stands out with even roasting and polishing, has a width of 10.5 cm and a length of 20.5 cm.
7. S, polished container, which has a narrow base, round torso (especially in the upper part), neck curved inwards և cut lip.
Horizontal, consecutive lines are drawn directly from the container.
12 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 272-60.
13 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 109-60.
This container is characterized by careless depiction of lines, they often merge with each other.
 Horizontal convex lines run from row to row։ downwards.
  In the middle of the horizontal lines, oblique ribbons are glazed, which are at a certain distance from each other.
 From the last line to the base of the vessel there are lines made of glitter.
The above-mentioned container is handmade, made of well-mixed clay, it stands out with its high mastery of baking and polishing.
 Kavamannuni 11.5 cm wide և 17 cm long 15.
8. S, polished kavama, which has a narrow base, a convex waist, a low neck, like a thin, expressive lip.
  Small handles are attached to both sides of the container, on which there is a passage hole.
 Horizontal lines are drawn from the lip to the middle of the container, which are arranged in a strict sequence.
 The spaces between the lines are filled with lightly polished triangular patterns, the vertices of which are directed upwards.
 Oblique lines drawn with glitter are drawn from the belt of the container to the base.
  It is symbolic that images of swastikas are engraved on the base of the container, which create an intricate ornament.
The above-mentioned container is made of wood, made of well-mixed clay, with a slight shine.
  The bowl is 8 cm wide և 12.5 cm long 16.
9. SJ, polished pottery, which has a flat base, straight walls և cut edge.
 There are two small handles near the edge of the canvas.
 From the upper part of the body of the pottery to the middle part, horizontal convex lines are depicted symmetrically, on which there is a pattern made of glitter, which has the shape of thick, unevenly stretched ribbons.
 Glazed lines are stretched from the bottom line to the base.
  The pottery is made of clay mixed on top of the pottery, it stands out with good firing, polishing, it is 12.5 cm wide and 12 cm long17.
10. S, polished container, which has a narrow base, convex, slightly uneven body, which gives the container a biconical appearance.
 The cauldron is pressed on the part of the mouth և has a cut lip.
 Under the sides of the container there are small, convex handles on all four sides, which are equipped with upright 15 Stored in the State Medical University, sample N 2173 / 519-60.
16 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2208 / 68-61.
17 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 233-60.
with a corridor opening.
  In the middle part of the container's mouth there are inverted horizontal lines, which are made in a strict sequence with a sequence.
 The open space of the horizontal lines is complemented by an ornament consisting of thick lines made of glitter, on which the lower edges merge.
 From the bottom of the lines, thin, oblique lines drawn with glitter are drawn to the base.
 The pot is made of well-mixed clay on a pottery, it is well-baked and polished.
  The bowl is 8 cm wide և 9 cm long 18.
11. A polished container with a round body and a cut edge.
Lines made of glitter are drawn from the mouth of the container to the base.
 There is a corridor opening at the base of the container.
  This fact indicates that the container was probably used as a funnel.
 The container is 9.5 cm wide և 4.5 cm long 19.
12. With a cut lip, s, a polished container.
  Three pedals, which look like human feet, are attached to the lip of the mentioned container.
 There is one corridor opening at the top of the container lip.
  The distance between the legs's feet is filled with carelessly drawn horizontal lines with glitter.
The above-mentioned pot is made of clay mixed on top of the pottery, it is evenly baked and well polished.
  The clay is 12.5 cm wide և 5.5 cm long 20.
13. SJ, elongated, polished kavaman, which has a flat base, slightly convex torso, which narrows at the top, a well-defined lip from the outside.
  In the middle part of the cauldron there is a series of convex horizontal lines, which are placed in a strict sequence with a certain preserved distance.
 Lines depicted with glitter are drawn from the base of the lip to the base of the waist.
 The pottery is made of well-mixed clay on the pottery, as it is evenly baked and glazed.
 The bowl is 7 cm wide և 11.5 cm long 21.
14. SJ, rough clay, which has a flat base, straight walls և slightly curved ribs.
  The walls of the kavaman are covered with sand, which testifies to the fact that the kavaman had a kitchen use.
 Cavana form 18 Stored in the State Pedagogical University, sample N 2173 / 233-60.
19 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 234-60.
20 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2208 / 212-61.
21 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2194 / 3-61.
It is made of badly mixed clay, which is why it has thick walls.
  The bowl is 18 cm wide և 19 cm long 22.
15. SJ, rough clay with a narrow base, convex waist, pressed neck և cut lip.
 Corrugated handles run from the lip to the base on both sides of the bowl.
 Underneath the side walls is a convex, wavy-horizontal line that wraps around the side walls of the canister.
 A wire harness is drawn below the wave line.
 It is made of clay վատ made of poorly mixed clay, it is 11 cm wide և 14.5 cm long 23.
16. Rough clay, which has a narrow base, a convex waist, a low neck, a well-defined lip on the outside, inside which horizontal convex lines are drawn.
  The upper and lower parts of this belt are decorated with oblique patterned ornaments.
 This specimen is unique in that it shows the transition from polished ornate ornaments to rough canvases when the aforementioned ornament loses its significance in the Late Bronze Age.
The above-mentioned pot is handmade, made of badly mixed clay.
 There are traces on the walls of the canvas, especially in the lower part.
 The bowl is 13.5 cm wide and 18.5 cm long 24.
17. S, a coarse-vessel vessel with a massive narrow base, a large, widening lip with a folded lip at the top.
 A weak horizontal convex line is depicted in the middle of the container.
  The technique of making kavaman, which is typical of the given period, is more interesting.
 The upper part of the bowl is made of wood, and the lower part is handmade.
 It should be noted that the clay is not well mixed.
  Traces of wood have been preserved on the walls of the cave.
  19.5 cm wide և 8 cm long 25.
18. S, lightly polished container-shaped pot with a flat base, round torso at the top, ending in a slightly pronounced lip.
 With its egg, the kavaman imitates the gold-silver kavans of Lchashen and Vanadzor.
22 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2208 / 201-61.
23 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 391-61.
24 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2208 / 79-61.
25 Stored in ASUE, sample N 2173 / 289-60.
Based on the previous work, we tried to outline the directions of development of Artik ուշ Late Bronze Age հիմնական early types of Early Iron Age խ pottery։.
Moreover, even the brevity of the examination showed that the development of Late Bronze Age-Early Cretaceous pottery proceeded both through the expansion of product types and their improvement, which is due on the one hand to the diversity of shellfish use, on the other hand to the presence of skilled craftsmen. requirements, passed the experience from generation to generation և Improve product output.
ARTIK TOMBSTONE POT LATE BRONZE-EARLY IRON Khachatryan Keywords: Artik, tomb field, archeology, late bronze period, early iron period, potteryCYCLES.
