TERMINATION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR STATE NEEDS AND PUBLIC INTEREST The basis of society's economic relations is property.
  Property itself is a relationship. Describes the right and responsibility of a person or their group to the means of production, management, possession and use of a specific property.
 The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution), exercising the role of the right of property in the whole system of law, to enshrine provisions aimed at the protection of the rights of the owner և legal interests.
  Problems with the termination of property rights require more complex legal regulation.
  The existence of guarantees for the protection of property rights is first and foremost used in the event of termination of property rights.
Methods of termination of property rights can be classified based on whether the property right was terminated by the will of the owner, or against his will or against his will.
  Against the will of the owner or against his will, the right of ownership can be terminated only in cases provided by law և in the manner prescribed1.
 More complicated legal regulation requires the termination of the right to property in connection with the կարիքpublic interest of the state.
 This is considered to be one of the types of termination of the property right against the will of the owner.
  Compulsory alienation (Latin: Ex-propriatio - deprivation of property) is a legal situation in which the property (property rights) of any person is forcibly alienated for the benefit of the state.
 Guarantee of fundamental property rights based on the concept of rule of law, property rights must be secured by all natural and public persons, including the state.
  Therefore, the state act, which is aimed at the termination of the forced right, must: • serve for the benefit of public expropriation, 1 See Barseghyan T., Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia, part A, 3rd ed., Yerevan, 2009, p. 298.
• be carried out through due process; • include the fair value of compensating for lost rights; • respond to the principle of fairness in terms of public liability for actions that serve the common good2.
In the Republic of Armenia, this issue is subject to legislative regulation, in particular, the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Alienation of Property for the Needs of the Society and the State", which came into force on December 30, 2006, has a number of problems. The expression "victims of the needs of the state" has become widely used.
 Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution enshrines the guarantee of inviolability of property rights. "No one may be deprived of property, except in cases provided by law in court."
  The constitutional principle of inviolability of property rights presupposes, first of all, that a person can be deprived of property rights only on grounds that are directly provided for by legal acts at the level of law.
Legal acts with legal force lower than the law, including decrees of the President of the Republic of Armenia, decisions of the Government, the Prime Minister or other legal acts of sub-legislative nature may not provide grounds for compulsory termination of property;
 Part 3 of the same article states: "The alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state can be done only in exceptional cases of overriding public interests, in the manner prescribed by law, with initial adequate compensation."
  As we have mentioned, the alienation of property is voluntary and obligatory.
 According to Part 3 of Article 31 of the Constitution, the possibility of state alienation of property does not contradict the principles of the rule of law և inviolability of property rights4.
  Property guarantees are also enshrined in a number of international legal acts. "Every natural or legal person has the right to use his property without hindrance.
 No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and international law. А. HALABUDENKO FEATURE RIGHTS Book 1. VERTICAL LAW, page 125.
3 See Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, edited by G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 365.
4 See ibid., P. 369.
according to the general principles of religion ”5.
 The RA Law on Alienation of Property for the Needs of the Society's State regulates the termination of property on this basis, but the law is incomplete and has a number of shortcomings.
  Work is underway to create a new law.
  It is a big problem to interpret the terms "superior interest", "public interest", which will come not from the interests of the state, but of the people.
And. Referring to the concept of "public interest" in European law, Matthew says: "Modern jurisprudence largely leaves the regulation of the institution of compulsory termination of property to the discretion of the authorities in connection with their decision-making in this matter, emphasizes the need to maintain a formal procedure in this matter, which is called to narrow the scope of discretion (discretion)."
  The author rightly states that it would be optimal to narrow the boundaries of this notion (և) especially in cases when it comes to the forced termination of the rights of a private entity in favor of another private entity6.
  The public interest is a key element of democratic governance, as is representation and the rule of law.
 The public interest refers to "public welfare" or "general welfare".
 Black's legal dictionary defines the public interest as "the general welfare of society, which guarantees the recognition of 'protection, something in which the whole of society's interest, և an interest which justifies state regulation.'
 The principles of determining the exclusive, overriding public interest for the alienation of property for the needs of the society are: a) the public interest must take precedence over the interests of the owner of the alienated property; b) the effective realization of the overriding public interest cannot be ensured without the alienation of the property in question. (c) the alienation of property in the public interest must not cause unreasonable harm to the owner; Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights.
6 See Matei U., Sukhanov E. A., Decree. soch., pp. 187-189.
7 See Blacks Law Dictionary, 9th Edition.
e) the fact of the existence of the overriding public interest may be challenged in court8.
 He also referred to the issue of overriding interest, the Constitutional Court, which emphasized that the existence of overriding public interest is a condition in which the alienation of property becomes possible for the needs of the state and society.
  The Constitutional Court emphasized that the court is obliged to answer the following questions. First, is there a need for society or the state in relation to the alienation of the given property, and second, is that need conditioned only by an exceptional, overriding public interest or not?
  In case of answers to these questions, the further process may have the continuation provided by law9.
 The decision of Article 4, Part 2 of the RA Law on Alienation of Property for the Needs of the արակ State's State for the needs of the state, defines the goals of the overriding public interest, such as the 2006 decision of the Constitutional Court. Paragraph 12 of the decision SDO-630 of April 18, 2006 stipulates the needs accepted in the international practice of the state and society.
 These are: a) ensuring the protection of the state, security of the state and society, b) ensuring the fulfillment of obligations under international treaties of the Republic of Armenia, c) ensuring the creation or protection of international "national history", cultural values ​​or monuments, as well as nature reserves; d) Ensuring the protection of the environment, e) Ensuring the development of education, health, sports, as well as science or culture, f) Energy, telecommunications, water supply, drainage, heating, urban development, subsoil exploration, entrails use, transport,Ensuring the implementation of programs of national or community or inter-community importance in the field of communication infrastructure or settlement infrastructure development; g) protection of life, health or property of individuals; .
9 See SDO July 14, 2009 Decision No. 815.
h) prevention of emergency situations, reduction of possible consequences of emergency situations, elimination of consequences of emergency situations.
 Commenting on all the points, it seems that everything is clear, but we can interpret each goal very broadly, which will lead to arbitrariness.
  The mere existence of the mentioned goals does not mean that there is a public interest.
 For example, the goal of ensuring the protection of the environment can be understood as any activity aimed at protecting the environment.
 This raises the issue of legal certainty.
 The European Court of Human Rights, referring to the concept of "law" within the meaning of the Convention, stated in particular that no legal norm can be considered if it does not comply with the principle of legal certainty, in particular, if it is not formulated with sufficient clarity to allow a citizen behavior.
 The citizen should be able to use the advice, if necessary, to predict the consequences that may occur from the action.
  In this regard, it is proposed to supplement Article 2.1, which requires that the criterion for recognizing the overriding public interest be the vital necessity of that interest.
 "Each of the objectives listed in points (a) of part 2 of this Article may be recognized as a overriding public interest if its implementation has become a vital necessity and the non-implementation has led or may lead to serious consequences for a certain group of society or society."
  We think that in this case there will be a problem with the interpretation of "vital interest".
  The vital interest can also be broadly interpreted, as a result of which we will have the same problem.
  We propose to attach an appendix at the end of the law, where the cases when it will be possible to alienate the property for the benefit of the society and the state will be mentioned in more detail.
  If we compare our German legislation in the context of these goals, we will notice that in Germany they are more clearly written.
  Land confiscation in Germany is possible only in the interests of the public.
 At the same time, these goals must be legally established, as another social right on the other side of the scale. 10 See the draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state".
The purpose of the occupation may be the construction of common areas (roads, airports, energy, industrial facilities, transport, etc.), facilities of social significance (nursing homes, schools, universities, cultural institutions, etc.), preservation of the appearance of cities, sights, cultural monuments. Ensuring security, protection considerations, optimization of land boundaries during land allocation, ecology, suppression of environmental violations, avoidance of inefficient land use, alienation of land from the circulation of the economy.
11 It is not appropriate to use the word "purpose" here. The goal presupposes a well-thought-out, planned project, and for the public interest it is alienated not for the purpose, but motivated by the need, so it would be expedient to replace the word "goal" with the word "need".
  The formulation of general utility criteria needs to be studied in the Russian legislation. A. Sirodo thinks that it would be expedient to return to the concept of "society needs", as the concept of "political" or "municipal needs" does not always coincide with the real needs of society.
 The terms "needs" and "purpose" are often used interchangeably or are often disputed.
  The legislation of the Russian Federation mentions such purposes of land use as road construction, development of mineral resources, etc.
 Very often the mentioned activity is carried out not by state, but by private organizations.
 It is not right to consider such events as state needs12.
Part 2 of Article 7 of the law stipulates that in the case of real estate, the process of alienation of property must begin no later than 5 years after the adoption of the government's decision on recognizing the overriding interest.
  According to the authors of the project, the owners are allowed to keep the "property rights" in uncertainty for up to 5 years, it is too late to start the process, so it is proposed to make it 2 years.
  Thus, according to Article 7 of the draft, "... the final period for starting the process of alienation of property can not be more than one year, and in the case of property rights to real estate or wholly owned property in two years 11 See Gerasin S. I., ъяъяе земе земе ь ь ь ь ь ь у ь у у у ча у в у ча в в у в в // // // // // // // 60-62.
12 See Сыродоев Н. А., Возникновение право на землю // Государство и право, 2004, N 10, с.69.
more defined from the day the government's decision on recognizing it as an exceptional, overriding public interest. ”
  We think that the law leaves open the regulation of the legal repercussions that may arise, if the alienation process does not start in two years, then the law should provide for the owner to appeal in court.
 In order to exclude the illegal alienation of the right to inviolability of property under the name of "overriding interest", we propose to include a norm in the law, with the following wording: "If the confiscated real estate or the rights to it are not used within two years, according to the purpose of the expropriation, աշխատանք accordingly, the works have not started, the former owners can demand their return."
 The issue of compensation will be solved as follows: The owner will demand the return of his property, the other party, if he objects, will go to court and demand the return of compensation, and the owner will prove the damages and will keep it to that extent.
The draft makes the preliminary study of the property subject to alienation mandatory.
  "Prior to the adoption of a government decision on the recognition of an exceptional, overriding public interest, a preliminary study of the property subject to alienation (hereinafter referred to as the property) must be carried out, the qualifications of which are taken into account by the government."
The government makes a decision on the study of property 13.
  Here another question arises. Is the Government competent to make such a decision?
  Considering the scope of powers of the Government of the Republic of Armenia under Article 85 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, adding to it the imperative requirement of Part 2 of Article 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, we must state that the Government of the Republic of Armenia may ից be obliged to act from the needs of the state. is able to distinguish from them, to correctly determine the needs that are typical of society.
 The facts of mass violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms as a result of construction projects do not allow us to say that the Government of the Republic of Armenia, while recognizing an exceptional, overriding public interest, can equally take into account the needs of the state and not ignore the needs of society.
  I think this decision should be made by the court, acting independently on behalf of the state, 13 See the draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state" Article 8 part 1.
Impartial supreme justice body.
  The court, having thoroughly and objectively examined the preliminary examination of the property to be alienated, will make a decision that is free from all kinds of interference, which in many cases is not provided by the Government.
One of the controversial points of the law refers to the compensation given to the owner of the area recognized as a priority public interest, according to Article 11, “Equivalent compensation is paid to the owner for the alienated property.
  Fifteen percent more than the market value of the property to be alienated is considered equivalent. ”
Taking into account the losses suffered by the owner, the sharp increase of apartments during the mass alienation leads to the fact that the mentioned compensation is not adequate.
 An attempt was made to correct this problem by the draft law: "In exchange for the alienated property, the owner ունեցող to those who have other property rights are given adequate compensation - equivalent property or money.
 Equivalent is compensation that provides an opportunity for the owner or other property right holder to acquire property at market value within one year after the alienation of the property, to cover all losses incurred as a result of the alienation of the property, including lost benefits.
  The appraisal of the alienated property is based on the market value of the alienated property, not less than 15% of the total value, so that the total amount of compensation ensures the restoration of the same conditions for the owner or other property owners լի
Reduction coefficients are not used when calculating the market value of the property to be alienated.
  However, I think that it does not completely eliminate the existing problems in the given sphere.
 And in the law, in the project, the compensation is calculated regardless of what will be built in the given area in the future, what will be the profitability of the given area in the future.
  This gives a great opportunity to those who have the appropriate desire և funds, apply to the government, get the appropriate permission ել build a department store or hotel complex.
 In this case, we are already dealing with a direct change of owners.
 I think that the compensation must be related to the purpose for which the property is being alienated.
 In recent years, we have witnessed dozens of examples of how, by the decision of the government, an area that is owned by a specific person or people is recognized as a priority public interest and given to another person who builds in that area, whatever he wants, of course, mainly a profitable object.
 The law should clearly state that it is forbidden to build a profitable institution in an area recognized as a public interest, the income of which will not be used for the interests of the state, but will belong to private individuals.
The market price of the object is determined by the real estate agents in the contract with the acquirer, which makes it more probable that they can cooperate with the acquirer.
 In that case, the residents lose confidence that their property will be evaluated objectively.
It is necessary to create a structure that will be independent, will be controlled only by the state, և will be financed by the state.
  A number of compensation cases have been heard by the European Court, which have been partially upheld, and these disputes relate to the compensation of non-pecuniary damage decided by the government.
  The calculation presented to the residents արը The amount received as a result was too much.
 The Government states that the compensation should be based on the revealed violation, and not on the proposal made by the Government in a unilateral statement.
 The European Court has agreed with the Government that pecuniary damage should be calculated on the basis of the violation found14.
Due to these and a number of other problems, buildings and structures of historical and cultural value are being demolished in Armenia today.
 The problem is that our officials use the "overriding public interest" as a weapon, depriving the population of their property, without taking into account their views.
 "The so-called overriding interest is not always justified, the overriding interest must be the interest of the society, the republic, while today the overriding interests are aimed at the interests of individuals.
  I think that in this case it would be better not to deal with the incidents when the next building is demolished, but to think about what the public is complaining about. ”15
 Examining the problems of the people who have become victims of the public interest, one thing becomes clear. Their property rights have been violated, and now they need legal assistance.
 Many people whose property they want to seize do not even know what the overriding public interest means.
 I think the state should provide legal assistance to these people, 14 See the decision of the European Court. Complaint No. 23566/05 Ghasabyan և Others v. Armenia.
 Ghasabyan և Others v. Armenia.
15 See the interview of Architect Hrach Poghosyan http.
//www.aravot.am/2016/02/29/662283/.
They should be explained in detail about their rights and responsibilities.
  They should have the right to appeal the decision on the recognition of the public interest in court.
  Listening to those men, the stories, we see that no one took into account their opinion, their right to vote was violated.
 I think all this should come to an end. There should be a norm in the law, which will make it obligatory to hold public hearings before the expropriation of the property is discussed.
  An area that has an owner can be alienated only with the consent of the owner, even if the area is needed for the most important purposes of the state.
 It would be appropriate to mention a French film here. "They are building a state, strategic road.
  Signing contracts with the owners of all the houses on the road, freeing that area.
 They can't take a house.
 The boy says that it is his father's house, they go to his father, who greets the state officials with a gun and tells them not to come anymore!
 He says that he inherited that house from his grandfathers, և if the whole of France gives it to him, he will not let it be demolished.
 The film shows how all the houses are demolished, only that house remains in the middle of the road.
 "Unfortunately, the opposite picture is in Armenia."
In general, it can be stated that in the case of alienation of property for the needs of the state and society, human rights in the Republic of Armenia are grossly violated.
Mary Margaryan TERMINATION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR THE NEEDS OF THE STATE AND PUBLIC INTEREST "Keywords: Exclusive interest, overriding public interest, society և state needs, expropriation of property, owner, initial equivalent compensation, government compensation
Summary.
