ENTERPRISE EFFICIENCY MANAGEMENT MODELS AND THEIR APPLICABILITY OF ENTERPRISES OF STRATEGIC ENTREPRENEURSHIP EFFICIENCY EFFICIENCY
 The ongoing process of maintaining and increasing the efficiency of the company presupposes periodic efficiency assessment measures.
  The urgency of this study is due to the fact that modern economics offers a variety of methods for assessing the effectiveness of enterprise activities, from which it is necessary to consider և identify modern models and approaches to efficiency management that have found universal application և most meet the requirements of efficiency assessment of strategic enterprises .
The main provisions of the article, which can claim to be scientific, presuppose the introduction of possible modern models for the management and evaluation of the efficiency of the activities of large enterprises of strategic importance in the Republic of Armenia, taking into account their peculiarities and expediency.
From the second half of the 20th century, along with the development of science and knowledge-based economy, the concept of "efficiency" գործ as a guarantee of success of the enterprise գործ factor gave way to the concept of "technology" / factor.
  This explains the fact that since the 1980s, economists have moved from traditional methods of assessing the effectiveness of enterprises to measuring efficiency by purpose.
If in the Western capitalist economy income was considered an indicator of efficiency, in Soviet countries efficiency was mainly measured by generalizing indicators: labor consumption, fixed assets, working capital, capital investments, material resources1.
The founder of the "Management by objectives" (MBO) concept, created by the imperative of time and offering new turning point solutions, P. Drucker believed that managing the efficiency of the enterprise was to maintain the right balance between the various needs and goals of the company2.
The innovation of this concept in the 1950s was that with the new approach, the "result" is to achieve the goal. It was not the course of action that was assessed, but the end result of the activity, whether the goal was achieved or not.
 This concept requires organization և Systemic approach, use of available resources, focusing on the ultimate goal.
  MBO presents strict requirements to the staff. Each employee must realize the importance of his / her participation in achieving the common goal, take responsibility in teamwork.
  On the other hand, the employee, feeling his / her potential, becomes even more interested in doing effective work.
A number of economists adopted P. Drucker's idea of ​​"goal management" as a starting point.
 In the 1990s, P. The idea of ​​Druker efficiency was perfected by Harvard University professors R. Kaplan and D. Norton.
 In the joint work: "Balanced system of indicators.
  From strategy to implementation ”, the authors propose a new method of evaluating efficiency - a balanced system of indicators (balancedscorecard / BSC) based on the level of implementation of the enterprise strategy.
As a rule, the balanced system of indicators is developed for 3-5 years և includes indicators of the company's strategic development, maintaining the previous financial regulators.
  This system measures the efficiency of the company according to the optimally selected indicators, which reflect all the financial-non-financial aspects of the company's activity3.
  The name of this method of performance appraisal itself expresses the balance that must be maintained in the case of efficiency management in the short-term and long-term goals of the enterprise, 3 Kaplan R. S., Norton D. P., Balanced system indicator.
 From strategies to financial և non-financial indicators, internal և external environments.
  The authors note that the BSC analysis is carried out in four areas: finance, clients, internal business processes, training-development4, on the basis of which the following steps are developed: specification of strategic goals, causal correlation of strategic goals: development of strategic map definition, development of strategic measures.
Thus, the BSC is a measure of effectiveness, which reflects the extent to which the strategic goal has been achieved.
 At the same time, it is a measure of productivity and efficiency of business processes.
 Thanks to the BSC, the company's strategy is clarified, each employee և subdivision finds the right place and role in the system, the main և related operations are separated, vertical efficiency management becomes more tangible, and due to such work style, the efficiency of the enterprise increases sharply.
  Weaknesses of this system are the risks associated with misinterpretation of methodology, wrong choice of tactical goal, which ultimately lead to strategic targeting.
In this regard, it should be noted that very often և confuse B confuse BSC և KPI (key performance indicators) efficiency management և evaluation methods.
 To determine the difference between BSC և KPI methods, let us first refer to the KPI system.
A number of Western economists (W. King, D. Cleland, D. Norton, R. Kaplan, F. Bea, E. Dichtl, M. Schweitzer, etc.) advocate for evaluating the effectiveness of the enterprise according to its objectives.
In the 1980s and 1990s, a number of Western companies, following the example of the British airline, developed a new performance appraisal system based on Key Performance Indicators (KPI).
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are a system of limited valuation indicators, a measurement tool based on a number of financial և non-financial indicators that characterize the most essential aspects of an enterprise որոշում determine the current state of the company և their relevance 4 See ibid. .13. for strategic and strategic goals5.
 KPI can be described as a system of indicators that assess staff efficiency and productivity, the effectiveness of the company's management functions and processes, the technological and production efficiency of the enterprise6.
 At the same time, it should be noted that each KPI is designed specifically for the staff, operation, process, subdivision, they are strictly "personalized, specified, privatized, specially defined."
 A KPI is a set of 5-8 components (limitation of the choice of indicators is a fundamental factor in the KPI system), and the final efficiency indicator is determined by the sum of those components.
The use of the KPI valuation method is primarily appropriate for the management of the organization for effective management for several reasons.
 First of all, KPI offers solutions to the management in defining the functions of the staff (passport of the position), determining the efficiency of the employee and, accordingly, the payment of bonuses.
  Then this method forces all the employees of the system to unite their efforts for the common goal.
  Another advantage of the KPI system is its flexibility. KPIs can be developed for any position or department: accounting, human resources, finance, production, sales, supply, etc.
  Corresponding authors generalize five main types of KPIs: product KPI, cost KPI, productivity KPI, and overall efficiency KPI7.
  Another important methodological feature is that the KPI is an actual quantitative indicator of the goals achieved.
 The unit of measurement KPI is a mandatory condition.
 In addition, the KPI is a tool for measuring objectives; if any indicator is not correlated with the end goal, it cannot be considered a component of the KPI.
However, the shortcomings of the KPI method of evaluating effectiveness should be noted.
 The main drawback is the volume of its operation. It is very likely that in a crisis situation the company will not be ready for a new way of working, և system p 2014 Economy and Management of Innovative Technologies .. № 12. URL.
http:
//ekonomika.snauka.ru/2014/12/6529 (12.11.2015) 6 Лазовицкий И. B. KPI (Key Performance Indicator).
  development and application indicatorзаhttp.
//www.businessstudio.ru/procedures/business/kpi/ (23.11.2015) .7 Лазовицкий И. B., KPI (Key Performance Indicator).
  development and application indicatorзаhttp.
//www.businessstudio.ru/procedures/business/kpi/ (23.11.2015). The change will make the situation worse.
 It is also possible to have a biased effectiveness assessment by combining improperly selected or inappropriately selected KPIs.
Returning to the difference between BSC and KPI methods, it should be noted: • BSC is also a concept of efficiency, KPI is only a tool for measuring efficiency, • BSC analyzes the overall level of implementation of the company's strategy, և according to that analysis, adjusts the system activities. .
  The KPI method evaluates the efficiency and productivity of the staff, the efficiency of certain functions and processes, the technological, productive efficiency of the enterprise according to the unity of defined components. Manages the internal model of the enterprise և Coordinates the current activities and efficiency.
Thus, considering the advantages and disadvantages of KPI և BSC methods, referring to the international experience, taking into account their comprehensiveness, wide applicability, flexibility, we think that both key performance indicators (KPI) and balanced system of indicators (BSC) are appropriate. From the point of view of investors's assessment of the efficiency of large enterprises of strategic importance և for management բարձր top management,, but other evaluation methods should be additionally taken into account the requirements of other stakeholders, employees և relevant bodies of the Republic of Armenia.
Another model of efficiency management - EVA (Economic Value Added) was developed by B. Stuart կողմից is a registered trademark of Stern Stewart & Co Ջ by Stern.
 This model evaluates the efficiency of the enterprise by increasing the value of the investments of the shareholders of the company.
 The evaluation of the company's efficiency with EVA index is based on the following mathematical equation: 8 where: NOPAT (net operating profit after tax) - net operating profit after tax, WACC (weighted average cost of capital) - weighted average cost of capital, IC (invested capital) - invested capital.
  In fact, the EVA efficiency index can be defined as the net profit, the difference between the value of the company's equity used to make that profit.
Based on the mentioned model B. Stewart Ջ Ջ. Stern later introduced the EVA-based management system (EVA-based management), which is interconnected with 4M components: Measurement, Management system, Motivation, Mindset-9.
In general, this method makes it possible to identify the unprofitable subdivisions that exist at the expense of profitable subdivisions, in case of a clear determination of the amount of equity used, so that in this way it is possible to distribute the capital more efficiently among the subdivisions.
  This model of increasing the efficiency of the enterprise is distinguished primarily by its orientation towards the depositor, as it constantly strives to justify the investments of the company's shareholders.
  However, the EVA rating system consists solely of financial indicators, which underestimates long-term success factors such as staff knowledge, information technology, and corporate culture.
  Therefore, the EVA model of efficiency management is more focused on short-term rather than long-term efficiency.
Effective governance views the VBM (Value-based management) method from the same perspective, in particular it defines the efficiency of an enterprise as increasing the market value of the organization.
  This method studies the effectiveness of decisions made at all levels of the organism.
  McKinsey & Company, an international consulting firm specializing in strategic management and enterprise efficiency, is engaged in the research and implementation of VBM efficiency management systems.
The VBM concept of value management assumes that the command "above control" model cannot work particularly well with large, multi-directional hands. 9 Chandra Shil N., Performance Measures.
 An Application of Economic Value Added, march 2009, in articles.
  Instead, it encourages managers to be guided by value-based management principles to make better decisions10.
  This method "argues" that when making management decisions at all levels of the organization should be guided solely by the principle of increasing the value of the company, as shareholders invest in the expectation of return.
  However, since the powers of the hired manager are temporary (due to which he can earn extra through various mechanisms), he prefers projects that may not be very favorable in the long run in terms of increasing the value of the enterprise11.
  In this regard, in order to increase the efficiency of the company, the top management of the company should be paid not with a fixed fixed, but with a changing salary, the amount of which should be determined according to the efficiency of increasing the value of the enterprise.
VBM is not focusing on methodology, but on how to change the company's corporate culture.
 VBM's market value management is best understood as a "union of value creation thinking and management processes և systems" that need to be implemented in the day-to-day operations of the company12.
Taking into account the exclusively investor-oriented EVA և VBM models to increase the efficiency of the enterprise, we believe that from the point of view of efficiency management these two models can be used in the process of efficiency management և evaluation of the strategic enterprises of the Republic only in connection with the multifaceted missions of strategic enterprises.
1990 K. McNair, R. Lynch և K. Cross introduced another model of efficiency management, which was called the "Performance Pyramid" (Figure 1).
10 Koller T., What is value-based management? An excerpt from Valuation.
 Measuring and Managinghttp.
//www.mckinsey.com/insights/corporate_finance/what_is_value-based_management(VBM), http:
//vlastdviu.ru/downLoad/rio/j2010-4/10.doc, 27.11.2015.12 Koller T., What is value-based management? An excerpt from Valuation.
 Measuring and Managinghttp.
//www.mckinsey.com/insights/corporate_finance/what_is_value-based_management This model of efficiency management շրջանակներում fits within the concept of "Goal Management", reinterprets corporate strategy to financial and economic performance.
  The pyramid provides two-way communication, with the company's goals moving from top to bottom, while the company's indicators do the opposite 13.
The pyramid describes the organizational structure of the company through four levels.
 At the first level, the company's management develops a corporate vision.
 At the second level, the company's goals are changed and adapted to the market financial situation.
  The third level ensures quality management, customer satisfaction և works on product flexibility.
  The fourth level is the daily activities of the organization to meet the needs of customers.
We think that this model of efficiency management is not so applicable in the case of evaluation and management of the efficiency of strategically important enterprises, because, according to the authors, the model is developed for financial institutions, first of all for banks.
In contrast to the above-mentioned efficiency assessment և management models, 2002 Representatives of English Cranfield University A. Nilin և Q. Adams unveiled a new model of efficiency management, which they introduced as the second generation of the բ efficiency pyramid's performance prism (performance prism) (PP).
  This modeling difference is that the latter considers the interests of not only investors or owners, but also stakeholders - all customers, intermediaries, employees, suppliers, state - community supervisors - as the starting point, and efficiency management involves a combination of the five sides of the prism (Figure 2).
At the same time emphasizing strategy and strategic goals, proponents of the Efficiency Prism (PP) model argue that strategy should be subordinated to the interests of stakeholders14.
The authors of the model believe that recently organizations have been absorbed in the idea of ​​evaluation.
  Managers measure everything possible and impossible, they blindly believe that they manage well by estimating.
 This approach leads to the fact that the company's mission is forgotten through the process of measurement and evaluation.
  The authors of the model give three main reasons why the previous methods of efficiency management and evaluation are outdated15.
It is no longer acceptable for organizations to focus solely on the needs of one or two stakeholders, owners and customers, when other stakeholders are neglected.
 Many evaluation methods ignore that change. 15 Ryan N., The performance prism, http.
//www.accaglobal.com/ca/en/student/exam-supports to be implemented in the organization's strategy, processes and capabilities to meet the needs of stakeholders.
  Stakeholders must have some participation in the organization. The principle of "service for service" applies.
  The interested party has certain expectations from the organization, and the response organization has certain expectations from the interested party.
Any model of efficiency management և evaluation definitely has its advantages and disadvantages, և depending on the situation, they are effective in their own way (see Table 1).
Model Table 1. Effectiveness Model Orientation Direction Strategy Implementation Efficiency of Individual ElementsInvestment JustificationCorporate Culture, Company Market Value Performance pyramidFinance Efficiency for all Stakeholders: Comparing the most effective performance models to the ones that are most effective. apply A. Նիլի և Ք. The model of the efficiency prism presented by Adams, because it takes into account the interests of all stakeholders, external and internal environment, when measuring the efficiency of the enterprise.
EFFICIENCY OF APPLICATION OF STRATEGIC MODELS YEVDRANTS jasmine DanielyanDZERNARKUTYUNNERI NSHANAKUTYANDZERNARKUTYUNNERI ACTIVITIES ARDYUNAVETUTYUNEGNAHATELISBanali words, Efficiency, enterprise performance management, performance management models, assessment methods, BSC, KPI, EVA, Summary.
