THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND THE DEFENSE OF HONOR AND THE HONOR OF PUBLIC FIGURES The international .
  Article 162, Clause 1 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia) defines the concept of intangible property, including personal non-property rights as a separate category.
  By stipulating the latter as inalienable, non-transferable, the legislator distinguishes such basic values ​​as personal life, health, dignity, privacy, personal immunity, honor, business name, business reputation, etc.1.
  From this series we want to separate the honor and dignity of the person.
 The legal regulation of public relations related to the latter is, unfortunately, one of the most delicate issues of law.
 The need for active measures to protect them most often arises in connection with the abuse of freedom of speech.
  Both the honor and dignity of a person and the right to freedom of speech have a clear constitutional provision; they are recognized by international legal acts ratified by the Republic of Armenia, but their scope is wide., In practice, there is difficulty in protecting the honor and dignity of the violator. This is the reason for the variety of legal interpretations and video discussions created around the Institute for the Protection of Personal Dignity and Dignity.
It is noteworthy that the number of public and political figures and officials applying to the court for protection of honor and dignity has increased in the last decade.
 This is evidenced by the results of monitoring of defamation and defamation lawsuits by Armenian organizations, according to which state officials, politicians and state organizations yielded only citizens to non-state organizations among those who filed lawsuits for the protection of honor and dignity2.
 The same tendency was observed in the Russian Federation3.
  We think that such activity among public and political figures can not be conditioned only by raising legal awareness or dictating "legal fashion".
  Along with the latter, political issues or the frequent abuses of the right to freedom of expression by the mass media are essential.
4 In the process of restoring the violated rights of the judicial protection of the honor and dignity of public figures, one of the primary tasks of the court is to find out whether there is an intention to humiliate the honor and dignity of a person. For example, ARPA 1998.08.10 / 17 (50), Article 162, point 1.
2 Monitoring of defamation and insult lawsuits, Rule of Law NGO, Yerevan, 2012.
3 See “Union of Righteous Powers,” New News.
  Была бы честь ”,“ Новые արտстия ”, 08.07.2010, available at http.
//www.sps.ru/?id=235430.
4 Given the fact that the protection of the honor, dignity and good reputation of officials, politicians and public figures is identical in nature, there are no significant differences between the above-mentioned subjects, and finally, their common goal (should be) to act for the benefit of society. We will consider officials և politicians among public figures.
whether they are aimed at a figure or an official, as a private person or a public authority, և clearly distinguishing whether the impugned expression is a fact (factual information - LD) or an evaluative judgment.
As for the intention of the offender to humiliate the honor and dignity of the victim, then the RA city. For example, "insulting is a public expression made by a word, image, sound, sign, arbitrarily, which is intended to tarnish the honor, dignity or business reputation of a stranger", while "slander is such factual information about a person in public" (publicly - L.D. is to present, which do not correspond to reality են tarnish its honor, dignity or business reputation ”1.
 That is, the legislator does not literally consider the intent or purpose of the offender to be a necessary precondition for qualifying the act as slander, as opposed to insult.
  However, it should be noted that the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia) considered it necessary to consider the terms "insult" and "slander" in the context of intentional, intent to name a person.
  At the same time, the RA city. Article 1087.1, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that "if the person who has publicly presented the factual data proves that he has taken reasonable measures to find out its truthfulness, justification, as well as balanced" conscientiously presented that data. " then they will not be considered slander.
 Prof. According to T. Barseghyan, it is not fair to release the accused party from responsibility on such grounds, because, in the same way, "the motives and purpose of the act do not change."
  However, we believe that such a legislative regulation is conditioned by the need to ensure the effective implementation of the right to free speech.
In one case, the accused may have the direct aim of defaming the honor and dignity of the person, in another case, he may not have the mere desire to present credible factual information about this or that person, in particular, a public figure.
 Therefore, the motives and goals of the above cases are not the same, but only the consequences can be identical (the statement in question can have the same effect on the honor, dignity and good name of the victim, regardless of the intent or purpose of the accused).
  If we look at the international legal system from this point of view, one of the best examples is the USA.
  It will be used բազ a huge base of legislative acts related to the protection of dignity և more experience.
 Proof of intent in the United States is required only in cases where the public figure is the victim, whereas in the case of individuals the intentional presence or absence of the offender has no bearing on the outcome of the case4.
 This, of course, is a guarantee to ensure the freedom of political debate, the right to express oneself freely on issues of public interest, without subordinating the protection of authority, good reputation, to the right to freedom of speech.
We do not think it is lawful not to envisage a clear distinction in the responsibility of persons who have such intent to name, to defame the name.
  That in the case law of the RA Court of Cassation no separate reference was made to the lawfulness or purpose of the insult in the qualification of insult, slander, but that circumstance was not clearly regulated. in e.g.
 Is it possible to To conclude from the content of Article 1087.1, Clause 2, Sub-Clause 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that if the person who presented the factual data publicly took measures to find out its truthfulness, justification, as he presented those data in a balanced manner, he did not have the honor of the person. դիտ Intentionally or intentionally defaming dignity.
  From a logical-moral point of view, this is exactly what should be understood, because such actions by a person can not be done in good faith, at the same time presupposing an intention to humiliate the honor and dignity of the "addressee".
1 RA city. For example, ARPA 1998.08.10 / 17 (50), Article 1087.1, points 2 և 3.
2 Decision of the RA Constitutional Court SDO-997, point 11, Yerevan, 15.11.2011.
3 Barseghyan T., "Civil and legal protection of a person's honor, dignity, business reputation", Banber Yerjan University, Law, 138.3, Yerevan, 2012, p. 7.
4 "To the west of the hot spot", "Vzglyad" part of the newspaper, 16.07.2012; http:
//vz.ru/politics/2012/7/16/588701.html. Based on the above, we find that it is worth taking into account all the factual circumstances, the purpose այսինքն the goal, that is, the subjective attitude and assessment of the offender when determining responsibility for his act վիր insult, և slander.
As mentioned, one of the important issues in the judicial protection of the honor and dignity of public figures is to find out whether the insult or slander is directed at the figure as a private person or has been committed in a political context.
 On the Protection of Human Rights - Fundamental Freedoms, 1950 The protection provided for in Article 10 2 2 of the Convention (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) is vested in all individuals, including politicians and officials.
 Moreover, according to Articles 14, 14.1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia միջազգային international legal acts ratified by the Republic of Armenia, in particular, Article 11 of the Convention, the state is obliged to respect։ protect the rights and freedoms of all.
 And in the exercise of that protection, the fact that a person is a public figure or official should not in any way affect the scope of the defense, if the insult or slander was directed at an individual as a private person, և "criticism to the full extent of Article 10 2- 2 of the Convention" the restrictions of point "1.
  However, the situation changes when the expression or action in question is addressed to the individual as a public figure, criticizing his actions, words or views.
  In this case, the weight of a public figure is placed on one scale and the right to debate on issues of political or public interest և "the interests of openly discussing political issues" 2.
 The limits of permissible criticism are wider. This is dictated by the nature of political activity; the right to "freedom of thought", "to have one's own opinion without interference", "freedom of expression" contained in Articles 9 and 10 of the Convention and Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights և 19th, as well as 26 in Articles 26 և 27 of the RA Constitution.
  This decision is directly related to the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: "Tamer v. Estonia և Karhuvaaran" և "Iltelehtin v. Finland".
 The court's conclusions regarding the latter can be considered as two opposite burdens of the same problem.
  In one case the ECtHR ruled that there had been a "violation of the admissible limits of interpretation of a politician" and in the other a violation of Article 10 of the Convention3.
 The court's interpretation of the legal norms governing the factual circumstances of the case plays a bigger role in the decision-making process than the factual circumstances and legal norms.
  At the same time, the precedents adopted by the RA Court of Cassation and the precedent decisions of the ECHR continue to remain in the forefront among the state regulators of civil law relations arising in this sphere.
The issue, which is legally open in the field of protection of honor and dignity of public figures, the restriction of the right to freedom of speech, leaves great discretion to the courts, its solution through legislative reforms makes it a current issue.
  It is necessary to regulate this institution thoroughly, of course, by law.
  Moreover, such a regulation can be made both by adopting a separate legal act and by adding new provisions within the framework of the existing legal regulation, which is more preferable from the point of view of legal coordination.
  Such regulation will make the provisions of case law more accessible and accessible to the general public.
 Defending the position of Judge Griev of the European Court of Human Rights that "in a democratic society, according to the principle of political debate, politicians who have been subjected to purely personal harassment should not be in a more unfavorable position than the media; instead, they should use a wide range of freedom to respond to criticism." Court of Cassation, "Civil-Administrative Chamber. Annual Report "," Legal Positions Fixed in the Decisions of the Civil-Administrative Chamber of the RA Court of Cassation "," Liabilities arising from causing damage "," Criticism of officials ", Yerevan, 2013, p. 67.
2 Lingens v. Austria, ECtHR 08.07.1986 judgment, paragraph 42.
3 Mubrey El., "Cases և Materials. European Convention on Human Rights ", Article 10 (1) Scope of the right to free expression. The right to free expression on political issues ", Yerevan, 2010, p. 678.
We believe that it is necessary to establish legal structures and guarantees that will ensure the scope of that freedom.
One of the main reasons for the difficulties in the process of civil protection of the honor and dignity of public figures is that "the scope of acceptable criticism of public figures is wider than in the case of individuals" 2.
  One of the main preconditions for the viability of a democratic society is pluralism, which can be guaranteed by the right to political debate3.
 The views and approaches of public figures, the views expressed by them and the steps taken are in the center of attention of the general public, especially the media, and are subject to their study and criticism.
  Consequently, those engaged in socio-political activities should be tolerant of their views, activities or assessments of their official position4.
  However, it must be agreed that the current press, especially the online print media, is flooded with expressions that are not so much critical of public figures as personal insults.
  If the media criticizes the views, behavior or words of a public figure, then it should be exclusively substantiated, within the limits of journalistic ethics, mostly referring to the person as a public figure5.
In the face of a huge media flow, the US Supreme Court has ruled that published information should be considered an opinion only if there is a direct reference to it in the text of the article or in a public speech6 in order to protect individuals' honor and dignity from harassment.
  Such a regulation does not work in Armenia.
  However, in a civilized democratic society, quality information must be provided on the one hand, and on the other hand, the honor and dignity of public figures must be protected from unnecessary encroachments on them.
  Moreover, the above decision of the US Supreme Court is justified by the fact that the press must perform a certain important function to provide the public with reliable information and as objective an interpretation as possible on issues of concern to it.
  Meanwhile, the RA Law on Mass Media defines the provision of the constitutional human right to seek, receive and disseminate information and ideas freely, regardless of state borders, as its main goal.
 We think that the notion of mass media is flawed in this part of the above-mentioned law.
 It is worth mentioning the fact that the above-mentioned law, envisaging restrictions on freedom of speech in the field of media, does not indicate the dissemination of information that violates the honor and dignity of the individual.
 RA city. When defining the concept of intangible assets, the Code of Criminal Procedure clearly distinguishes between the inviolability of a person's private life, the privacy of private and family life, "honor and dignity", while Article 7 of the Law on Mass Media mentions only the first two of the above.
  This law was passed on January 14, 2004, when insult and defamation were still criminalized (the decriminalization law was adopted on May 18, 2010).
 We believe that such fundamental changes in the legislative sphere should have found their expression in the legal acts related to them.
Are unfair remarks made about a close figure or family member of a public figure in relation to the figure, his or her actions or views considered from the point of view of the public's right to be informed?
  This question was referred to in the case of "Bela և Sedrak Kocharyans v." Skizb Media Center "LLC" (EKD / ​​2479/02/10).
 In particular, the court referred to the "public interest" in the information about the politician, but did not consider the factual circumstance of the case, finding that "the case differs significantly in its factual circumstances from the information about the politician" 1 Moubray El., P. 684.
2 In the case of "Incal v. Turkey" ECHR 09.06.1999 judgment, paragraph 54.
3 Moubray El., P. 675.
4 Ibid., P. 683.
5 Sunday Times v UK, A.30 (1979) 2 EHHR, 245 Case Judgment Series A, No. 30, p. 40, para. 65.
6 "On the west side of the heat", "Vzglyad" part of the newspaper, 16.07.2012, available at http:
//vz.ru/politics/2012/7/16/588701.html.
From the nature of the wider scope of dissemination, as in this case it does not refer to the politician, but to the members of the family of the second President of the Republic of Armenia endowed with the immunity defined by Article 56.1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia.
  It is noteworthy that the phrase in question may not contain direct insult or slander to the politician, but the offender may knowingly allow it to indirectly affect the reputation of the person with negative consequences.
  In this case, unfortunately, it is necessary to study in detail the direct-indirect effect of the fact in question or the evaluative judgment on the honor և dignity of the figure.
 However, these are issues whose main guarantee for a fair and effective solution is their regulation at the legislative level.
RA city. The next legislative gap in Article 1087.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure refers to the delimitation of fact-finding judgments.
  The ECHR attaches great importance to the latter.
  In particular, in the case of "Ukrenien Media Group v. Ukraine", the court criticized the Law of Ukraine "On Defamation" for not providing for a difference between facts and subjective assessments2.
  In its decision, the RA Constitutional Court emphasized that "the legal regulation related to defamation must make a clear distinction between the" fact "of the evaluative judgment" 3.
 It is supposed that this separation should have been made by the RA Civil Code. Clause 5 of Article 1087.1 of the Criminal Code, which stipulates the presentation of such factual data to the public, which are not considered defamation.
  However, it continues to be done at a precedent level.
  The RA CC, based on the content of international legal standards on qualifying an act as "slander" (or) "insult" in the disputed norms, and the need to apply them accurately, finds that in law enforcement practice the courts insult the honor and dignity of a person. No discretionary freedom of normative interpretation shall be exercised in each case to be examined, as a result of which the fact of non-divergence of opinion և evaluative judgment, otherwise, every restriction of free speech applying the norms of the impugned article cannot be considered legal from the point of view of the disputed article.
 In the context of Article 10 of the Convention, the ECtHR has established the following principle: "If the existence of facts can be proved, then the proof of evaluative judgments is an impossible task, և such a requirement violates the freedom of expression…" 5.
  That is, no matter how insulting the fact (factual information) in question is, it is objectively perceived as such, if it has factual grounds, it can be qualified as an evaluative judgment, an opinion for which no liability is envisaged, citing Article 10 of the Convention.
However, this principle is controversial. It was referred to in the ECHR in connection with the cases of "Lingensnand v. Austria" and "Oberschlik v. Austria".
  In connection with the latter, Judges Matscher իլ Wiljaulmson expressed an opinion that did not contradict the court's conclusion, finding that "insult can never be considered a subjective assessment defended by the provisions of Article 10".
  In the case of "Wobble v. Austria", Judge McBride found that "the insult can be defended, but in that case it would be controversial to decide whether the insult was justified or not."
 Taking into account these approaches, we think that "concepts", "evaluative judgment", "court discretion" - such concepts should be legally formulated and fixed.
  However, the national mentality, morals and other national peculiarities have an impact on qualifying the subject as an insult or slander.
 In particular, the ECHR does not extend the scope of protection under Article 10 of the Convention to views in support of Nazi ideology.
  At the same time, calling an Armenian a "Turk" in the Armenian national mentality is supposed to be an insult, while it may not be interpreted in the same way by the ECHR.
1 Analysis of the Judicial Practice of Armenia in Defamation and Insult Cases, Yerevan Press Club, Yerevan, 2012, p. 7.
2 Mowbray El., P. 679.
3 Decision of the RA Constitutional Court SDO-997, point 8, Yerevan, 15.11.2011.
4 In the same place.
5 Moubray El., P. 676.
6 Ibid., P. 677.
Longevity is one of the important institutions for the protection of the honor and dignity of public figures.
  RA city. According to Article 1087.1, Clause 13 of the Criminal Code, a claim for protection of honor, dignity and business reputation may be submitted to a court within one month after the person (victim) became aware of the insult or slander, but not later than six months after the insult or slander. during the month.
  According to the RA Court of Cassation, this period also includes the one-month period established by the RA Law on Mass Media, during which a person has the right to demand to refute the factual inaccuracies in the disseminated information from the day of disseminating infringing information.
 The court also found that the terms envisaged by Article 13 of Article 1087.1 are subject to restoration. in accordance with Article 342 of the Criminal Code 1.
  In particular, "the one-month period, being included in the six-month period, is subject to recovery… Whereas in case of the omission of the six-month period, it is not subject to recovery" 2.
 This is explained by the Court's interpretation that the level of insult և slander decreases over time, losing its negative impact on a person's reputation.
  Therefore, the submission of such a claim to the court becomes meaningless.
 Taking into account the above, it should be noted that the legislator has set double-term criteria for statute of limitations for protection of honor and dignity, and the RA Court of Cassation has extended the general regulations for restoration of statute of limitations only for a period of one month.
 From the interpretation of this court it can be assumed that if the RA city. The exceptional circumstances provided for in Article 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure arose within one month from the day when the person became aware of the violation of his / her rights, և at the same time it happened in the last six months, then due to those respectable circumstances the six-month statute of limitations .
 It is also noteworthy that the RA city. For example, when defining the terms of compensation for damage to honor, dignity, business reputation ներից from personal non-property rights, the law provides for statute of limitations.
  Prof. T. According to Barseghyan, "extending the statute of limitations on the demands aimed at the protection of personal non-property rights is not only illegal, but also immoral."
  Indeed, the imposition of time limits significantly shorter than the general statute of limitations on personal non-property rights such as honor and dignity cannot be justified solely on the ground that the level of insult and defamation is limited or diminished over time.
  For example, the level of dissemination of information defaming a public figure's reputation increases over time, աժամանակ at the same time there are exceptionally good reasons, which are not allowed to go to court within the maximum six months provided.
 Will the figure be left without protection of violated rights due to the need for uniform application of the law?
  We think that in such a case, it would be necessary to consider the omission of the six-month period as respectable, to consider the day of the last publication of the information in question as the beginning of the statute of limitations.
Compensation for moral damage is one of the most important aspects of protecting the honor and dignity of public figures.
  The latter is envisaged by the RA legislation in cases of non-pecuniary damage caused by violation of conventional rights, unfair conviction4.
 The institution of compensation for non-material (moral) damage is still a novelty in the RA legal system.
  RA city. Article 1087.2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is entirely devoted to the definition of the terms and conditions of its compensation.
  The basis for making changes in the Code was "Based on Arthur Khachatryan's application, the RA city. The decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia on the issue of determining the issue of conformity with the RA Constitution, Part 2 of Article 17 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia.
  According to that, the RA city. The Code is supplemented by Article 162.1, which clearly defines the concept of non-pecuniary damage, that is, "physical or mental suffering of a person caused by the birth of a person or not belonging to the law of the Republic of Armenia, Article 342 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia."
2 "Tatul Manaseryan v." Skizb Media Center "LLC", city. Case No. EKD / ​​2293/02/10, 24.07.2012.
"Vano Yeghiazaryan against Boris Ashrafyan", city. Case No. LD / 0749/02/10, 24.07.2012.
3 Barseghyan T., page 8.
4 RA Civil Code, Article 1087.2.
by violating material rights or violating his personal non-property rights, by act or inaction ”1.
 It is noteworthy that the legislator does not consider the damage done to honor and dignity under point 4 of this article to be non-material (moral) damage, which in itself contradicts the content of Article 162.1, point 1, Article 162 of the Code.
 Moreover, the procedure and conditions of compensation for non-pecuniary damage on this basis do not apply to damage caused to the honor, dignity and business reputation defined by Article 1087.1.
 It is obvious that by damaging the dignity in honor, moral suffering is caused to the person2, and the RA city. The institution of compensation for such moral damage is not envisaged by the law, but in cases of insult, defamation in the amount of 1000-fold, 2000-fold of the minimum wage, respectively, which performs the preventive-compensatory compensatory functions of moral damage, but is not considered moral by the RA legislation. compensation for damage.
  Thus, the legislative amendments and additions not only, as it was mentioned, caused a contradiction between the provisions of the Code, but also their adoption did not eliminate the legislative gap that the ECHR pointed out in a number of decisions made against Armenia in the case of compensation for damage to dignity. "Failure to provide pecuniary compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused to a person was considered a violation of the relevant provisions of the Convention" 3.
As for the compensation of the media for defaming the honor and dignity of public figures, the RA Court of Cassation, noting that within the framework of the issue under discussion, we are dealing with information on the one hand - freedom of speech, on the other hand - to demand respect for the dignity of a person. ավորված With the guaranteed rights, it is necessary to take into account the financial situation of the abuser's slanderer when determining the amount of compensation և to exclude the definition of այնպիսի measures that may be crucial for the respondent, especially if the latter is a media outlet to continue his activities.
 The court pointed out the need for the reasonableness of the compensation և proportionality, but justifiably considered it necessary to take into account the circumstances and peculiarities of the specific case4.
 If the media enjoys great public prestige, has not encountered such problems in its activity, presenting to the public only information that is ethically relevant and reliable, then setting a milder amount of compensation is certainly legal, as opposed to the case where the media frequently in its information և Continuously names public figures և slanders their honor and dignity.
 We believe that in such cases, the court should not be constrained by the circumstances of bankruptcy or forced termination of media activity in order to determine a sufficiently high amount of compensation.
  This will ensure the reputation of public figures from unnecessary harassment, and the media will be more consistent and vigilant in publishing information.
Thus, it should be noted that the current legal regulations for the protection of the honor and dignity of public figures are largely in line with Armenia's international obligations.
  The established legal practice has in a short period of time corrected the various interpretations that arose from the ambiguous perception of the legal norms.
 However, it is not possible to effectively overcome the gaps that exist in the current legal regulations only through legal practice.
 On the one hand, the protection of the honor and dignity of public figures, on the other hand, the realization of freedom of speech demand that the generalizations based on legal practice be included in the current legal regulations, making the latter certain and complete.
1 RA Civil Code, Article 162.1.
2 "Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia", edited by G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 165.
3 Decision of the RA Constitutional Court SDO-1121, Yerevan, 5.11.2013.
4 RA Court of Cassation, "Civil և Administrative Chamber. Annual Report "," Legal Positions Fixed in the Decisions of the Civil-Administrative Chamber of the RA Court of Cassation "," Liabilities arising from causing damage "," Compensation for damage in case of insult, defamation ", Yerevan, 2013, p. 64.
Lili Drmeyan RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND DEFENSE OF HONOR AND DIGNITY OF PUBLIC ACTIVITIES Keywords: freedom of speech, honor of public figures խոս dignity, reputation հեղինակ Personal non-property right, fact և evaluative judgment, right to political debate, freedom of information, insult արտ slander, acceptable criticism of public figures.
