THE PRINCIPLE OF AUGUST In Rome, there were preconditions for the transition from a republic to a monarchy during the reign of Sulla.
  A plan for monarchical reforms was drawn up by Julius Caesar, but after his death a 14-year phase of civil war was needed to finally resolve the issue of civil reform.
 The thirst for peace contributed to that.
 It was associated with the restoration of the moral foundations of pietas ides fides in Roman slavery.
  These slogans reconciled Octavian with large sections of the enslaved society and secured the establishment of a new political order called the Principality.
Octavian 29 sextile (August) returned to Rome.
 Nratriumf predetermined the beginning of a new era in Roman society.
 Of course, everything was presented as if the radical Roman horse of government was being reborn in Rome. The influence of the laws was restored, the authority of the courts, the power of the senate, the power of the magistrates with the ancient horse, the ancient horse of the state, the honor of the temples, the cultivation of the fields, the security of the people, the security of property were restored.
 And in the coins and inscriptions, Octavian is portrayed as a man who freed the state from party domination and brought freedom to the Roman people.
  Octavian strongly opposed the proclamation of Romulus, the new founding leader of Rome, for fear that he would be suspected of seeking royal power.
  With the same fervor he renounced dictatorship because Caesar's example did not give him peace.
  Q.A. 31 he was elected consul in a row, Q.A. 30 He is given the position of tribune for life, which in fact ensures the integrity of his power.
The period of totalitarianism of the Senate րդ People's Assembly passed into the arms of the past.
 Q.A. 29 A new list of senators was compiled, and in BC 20 In August he was elected consul (with Marcos Vipsanios Agrippa) censor.
 Q.A. A new census was introduced in 28,, The composition of the Senate was renewed.
 The peculiarity of the new list of senators was that in BC 28 Octavian was considered the first member of the Senate (princeps senates).
  Q.A. 27 At the Senate session on January 13, Octavian announced the restoration of the traditional republican order.
  He relinquished his extraordinary powers, but the senators begged him to accept them.
 Eventually, Octavian obeyed the "command" of the Senate, but demanded authority to carry out mature government reforms.
  The Senate gave him powers that made him the supreme leader, legitimized his supreme authority, allowed the radical transformation of the Roman Empire, and restored power.
Octavian preferred to emphasize that he had handed over the state to the Senate և the people, and that his unlimited power was based on the fact that his authority (auctoritas) was higher than that of the others, when he was equal in authority.
  It was his so-called "reputation" to give a worthy shade to the de facto monopoly of the first in the Senate.
 Significantly, Octavian always resisted being called a dominus, avoiding meetings and farewell ceremonies.
 He generally tried to behave like an ordinary citizen.
  With his candidates, he visited the citizens to gather supporters for them during the elections according to the ancient Roman tradition.
 He voted in his rostrum as an ordinary citizen, introducing his sons to the people, gaining the favor of the Romans for them, repeating "if they deserve it."
 He did not interfere in court proceedings, even when it came to his friends.
Q.A. 27 On January 16, 1945, Munazios Planck proposed naming Octavianos Augustus as a completely neutral name.
  From then on, Octavian was renamed Emperor Caesar Augustus, the Son of the Divine.
  What was significant here?
 The emperor was not a praenomen, but was given in a real sense.
 The title "Emperor" (commander, leader) was usually given by the soldiers to the victorious commander, he was given the right to triumph.
  Octavian was first proclaimed "emperor" in 43 BC. After the battle of Mutin.
 Q.A. 40 He began to call himself Emperor Caesar, probably following the example of Julius Caesar.
  Q.A. 29 That title was given to him by the Senate for life.
 It showed the supreme power, which included the right to lead the troops, to collect taxes, to declare war, to establish peace, to govern the provinces, to exercise power over the citizens.
Q.A. 23 Augustus resigned from the consulate of the following year and regained the power of the tribune for life, with the right to make proposals to the sessions of the Senate, as a life consul.
  Q.A. 24 years By the decision of the Senate, he was released from the restrictions written by law.
  Q.A. 19 he was given the marks of consular power, the right of 12 lictors to sit on the consuls.
  After the death of Lepidus (13 BC), Augustus 12 years He became a great pontiff, that is, the head of the Roman priesthood.
 His decisions were equal to those of the Senate.
 Q.A. 5 և 2 years He was re-elected consul, and three times (19 BC, 18 և 11 BC) he was appointed sole guardian of the law.
  Q.A. 2 years He received the title of father of the homeland, which gave him "paternal" power over the Romans.
 The title was previously given only to Cicero (after the discovery of the conspiracy of Catilina) և Caesar (after the Battle of Munde).
  Augustus established a regime that met the socio-economic and socio-psychological needs of Roman society.
  The civil wars showed that the traditional Roman system could not ensure peace and stability, and Augustus did.
The August peace was glorified and preserved, tents were dedicated to him.
 When Augustus returned to Rome from Spain, BC 13 On July 4, the Tabernacle of Peace was erected on the battlefield.
 Augustus considered it great that the temple of Janus was closed three times during his reign, signaling that peace was spreading throughout the Roman Empire, while in the entire history of Rome it was closed only twice.
The establishment of civil peace in August secured the broad support of all sections of Roman society.
In the internal life of the Roman state, first of all, it was necessary to establish and maintain the basic order that suffered from the civil wars.
 In Italy, armed bandits roamed in the afternoon, "freeing" slaves on the roads, locking them in jails, forming new boards, de facto gangs.
 Augustus ordered the deployment of guards in convenient positions, the revision of ergastulae, the dissolution of the boards, in addition to the legal ones, which had existed for a long time.
  The destruction of the treasury debtors' lists, the ceding of disputed territories in Rome to their users, and the cessation of protracted lawsuits were to serve to calm the society.
 Augustus in every way showed his desire to increase the prestige of Roman citizenship; he was too stingy to say that there were exceptions.
  He even refused the petitions of his wife, the Libyan's stepfather, the future emperor Tiberius.
 He managed to get the Romans to wear ancient Roman clothing, the toga.
 All of this was aimed at strengthening Roman society.
Octavian was primarily concerned with reforming the governing structure of the Roman Mediterranean.
  He began to rebuild the former republican order and adapt it to the monarchical government.
 He carried out the formation of the new authorities with political caution, creating new governing bodies, introducing the traditional forms of governance into the simultaneous monarchy1.
 The ancient Roman authorities, first the Senate, continued to function, but their activities were aimed at implementing the decisions and drafts of Augustus, which he adopted at his council.
 It included one consul from one of the other magistrates (one praetor, one quaestor, etc.), as well as five senators, who were elected by lot for a term of six months.
  The issues were discussed in the council in accordance with the wishes of Augustus.
  The Consuls reported his decisions to the Senate, which approved and sealed them. Գ August published them as an edil.
 The People's Assemblies met to approve the laws passed by Augustus and to elect the masters on his advice.
August was trying to show that he gives the old meaning to the elections to the magistrates.
  The penalties for electoral bribery were tightened, which, however, did not prevent August from distributing thousands of sesterces in several tribunes in order to hold the necessary candidates.
  August even voted in his tribune as an ordinary citizen.
Sometimes it seems that the old order has returned 2 գլխավոր Main organs of the Roman Republic The Senate and the People's Assembly took their special place only in the system of government.
  The traditional role of the People's Assembly was changed.
  It had become almost impossible to convene a congregation of several million Roman citizens, so it soon ceased to exist.
  His state powers (election of magistrates, adoption of laws) were partly given to the Senate.
 In the commissions, laws were passed at the suggestion of Augustus (leges Juliae) or other magistrates.
  Magistrates were elected to the commissions, but voted for the persons nominated by Augustus on the basis of the right of juscommendationis (assignment).
  Thus, the commissions were an obedient tool in the hands of the prince during the time of Augustus1.
The status of the Senate as a state body was more difficult, but even in August it was considered the highest body of the state.
 It is true that the Senate with which Augustus dealt was far from the senate in which the speeches of Fabius the Conqueror or Cato the Elder were heard.
 Prolonged civil wars, proscriptions, and other manifestations of mass intimidation taught the senators obedience and submission.
  In addition, there were many non-aristocrats of Roman descent in the Senate.
At their expense, the number of members of the Senate grew rapidly, reaching more than a thousand.
 Many Republican senators were annihilated as a result of wars and repressions.
 And yet the memories of the Senate's decisive role in the life of Roman society were still fresh, the senators still seeing their equal in August; open opposition 2.
Q.A. 22 years The powers of the praetors were expanded to some extent. They became not only judges, but also managed the games, the state treasury, Erarium.
  However, this did not change the general situation, as the elected magistrates were openly pushed into the background only by the officials appointed by Augustus: the mayor, the governors, the plenipotentiaries (legates), the commander of the praetorian garrison3.
 There was a strict sequence of master's degrees, but all their activities depended on the principle.
August became the highest court of the state.
 The most serious criminal offenses were investigated by standing courts (quaestiones perpetuae).
 Augustus himself was involved in criminal proceedings in Rome, sometimes with death sentences.
  Citizens accused of committing serious crimes were sent to all the provinces to be tried4.
The special garrison of the emperor was headed by the prefect-praetor appointed by him.
 Deputies were appointed to the positions of imperial legates to govern the imperial provinces.
  They were assisted by prosecutors, who were in charge of managing the finances հավաք tax collection.
 They relied on their subordinates in their work. 1 Mashkin N., History of Ancient Rome, Yerevan, 1951, p. 548.
3 Ibid., P.
on bi.
  Thus, every year, instead of elected magistrates, a permanent governing apparatus was gradually created, which was entirely subject to the will of the monarch, and the traditional electoral bodies were incorporated into the new system as an organic part of it.
  The monarchical order officially established by Augustus was called neither a monarchy nor an empire, but a "restored republic."
  All these peculiarities of the new system gave it a republican tone, but the power belonged to the prince, the first senator, the first person of the state.
Thus, the newly formed state order was a special form of monarchy, a principality imbued with republican ideas.
During the Second Trinity, the army played a major role in state life.
  For a short time the army was opposed to almost the entire civilian population1.
  After the end of the civil war, it became clear that most of the troops were dangerous to Roman society, and in August it was necessary to see a support in the form of an army, not an opposition.
  He is faced with the task of transforming a professional army.
  The command staff was subordinated to August.
  The whole army should have realized that it was led by Augustus, և the career of each soldier depends only on him2.
  August released 300,000 veterans from the army, giving them money and land.
 This was an unprecedented event for the reduction of the armed forces, which was held after the detailed preparation of the land fund.
  August left 25 legions (250,000 men) of the armed forces, և it was the largest army in the world.
  The transition to a permanent mercenary army is over.
  The regular army was stationed in the border provinces.
The Roman army continued to be based on a legion consisting of 5,000 heavy artillery, a small number of light artillery.
 The cavalry was still small.
  The recruitment was carried out on a voluntary basis, from Roman citizens who took an oath of allegiance to the emperor, realizing that they owed him a life and a career.
  However, the recruitment of regular troops was already a difficulty in August.
  There were fewer and fewer volunteers, in exceptional cases they had to apply for compulsory conscription, they even recruited slaves who had been released, they had been granted citizenship3.
  Young people aged 17-20 enlisted in the army served for 20-25 years.
  Every day they were paid 225 denars, provided with the spoils of victory, from which the legionnaires at the time of retirement (40-45 years old) could have savings, becoming a veteran, receiving land, which was enough for a non-poor existence.
 Comrades էին cavalry, beside the legion, included the զոր Primary military units of the siege vehicles, the arsenal.
  Each legion had mixed auxiliary units (cavalry և rear) consisting of provincials who did not have Roman citizenship.
  The Legion was a large military unit capable of carrying out strategic tasks on its own.
  In the Eastern Provinces, the army was made up mostly of Roman citizens.
1 Mashkin N., page 563.
3 Mashkin N., p. 564.
Discipline was maintained by strict means, using corporal punishment, hard labor, moving entire military units to other provinces.
  Relocations were a means of combating the highly developed corporate spirit that had intensified during the years of civil war, often contributing to military unrest and unrest.
The leadership of the Legion was indirectly subordinated to Augustus.
 At the head of the Legion was a legate of senators called legatus pro praetore, who ruled the province, or a legally appointed special legate (legatus pro Augusti legionis).
  High-ranking commanders, such as military tribunes, were formed from the senatorial class, and the prefects, who were the commanders of the auxiliary troops, were pursuing ammunition, army supplies, camps, and cavalry.
 The middle commanders included the centurions, who were the mainstay of the Roman army.
 As a rule, they came out of the soldiers, led the centurions and manipulated.
 Senior officers and students received several times higher salaries than ordinary legionnaires.
  The centurions maintained order համար for special merits could be included in the cavalry2.
 Additional salaries were three times lower than for legionnaires, but the desire for Roman citizenship made the provincials interested in serving in the army.
  The well-armed, well-trained, efficient army became the bulwark of Roman power, the pillar of a new order of government.
 During the Roman invasion, there was a praetorian garrison to protect Pretoria (the emperor's tent).
  Augustus created a garrison called the Praetorian Guard for the personal protection of the emperor's saint.
  It consisted of 9 garrisons, each with a thousand soldiers, in contrast to the legions, where only the first garrison consisted of a thousand soldiers.
Augustus had two garrisons in Rome, and the others in the major cities of Italy.
 Their task was to protect the emperor, to maintain order in Italy, from whose inhabitants the garrison was formed.
 They became the most privileged part of the army. They served for 16 years, received a salary of 75 denarii, that is, 3.5 times more than ordinary legionnaires.
 The garrison was headed by the prefect of Pretoria, who was personally appointed by Augustus.
The large but dispersed naval forces of the Roman Republic were recaptured by Augustus to turn the Mediterranean into a peaceful navigable region.
  This guard function was performed by the three navies, whose bases were located at strategically important points.
  The naval base of the campaign was in the order of the Western Mediterranean, the navy of Ravenna (Northern Italy) in the central part of the Mediterranean, and the base of Alexandria in the eastern part of the Mediterranean.
During August special cohorts (cohortes urbanae և cohortes vigilum) were set up to maintain order.
 The city garrisons (4,000 men) obeyed the prefect of the city, guarding during the day.
  The Wiggins' special garrisons (7,000 men) were under the prefect's command; they had to put out the fires, but K.H. 6.2 Mashkin N., page 564.
Their powers were extended to guard the rural areas until night guarding the city.
  The foreign policy of August can be divided into two main regions: 27 - Ք.հ. In the 6th century, when the Romans conquered some territories in the West, they achieved diplomatic success in the East. 6-14, when the Romans had to pursue a defense policy1.
The first two decades of August's rule were marked by offensive military operations on the northern border.
  The struggle on the northern border begins shortly after the end of the civil war.
 Clashes broke out in various parts of the country, and the Romans sometimes escalated into major wars fought by those close to Augustus.
 Agrippa took part in those wars, and the great sons of Augustus, Tiberius and Drusus, played a major role.
 But soon the Roman conquest of the Rhineland came to an end.
  To the south of the new province was formed a respectable Swabian kingdom ruled by Marobod, a man well acquainted with the Roman military.
  In order to make the German province safe from his attacks, Augustus decided to launch an invasion against Marobod, երկու two armies were to move against the Swabian kingdom, one from the Rhine and the other from the Danube.
 But that plan failed 2.
The occupied territories, in addition to taxes, had to provide additional troops.
 This was often accompanied by abuses by Roman rulers, leading to organized resistance.
  The Roman armies, destroying everything in their path, showed that the Roman army could attack, but Augustus refused to continue the advance, saying that the Roman border should cross in the direction of the Rhine.
The change in Roman policy can be explained not only by the defeat in the Toburg Forest, but also by the Pannonian revolt that preceded it.
 The Rhine վրա Danube was home to more than half of all Roman armies (15 of the 25 legions).
  The further increase in the number of troops was "extremely difficult for the Roman treasury," in the conditions of the almost impossible principles of recruiting erlegians, when only Roman citizens were included in the legions.
The political crisis established during August ends the crisis that the Roman state experienced for decades.
  These categories meant the victory of the military dictatorship և developing bureaucracy.
 The strengthening of the imperial power, the creation of a permanent army։ bureaucratic apparatus were conditioned by the fact that Rome had turned from a city-state into an empire comprising almost all the states of the Mediterranean region.
  In August, Italy experienced an economic boom, gradually recovering from the devastation of civil war.
 Since the establishment of the empire, civil wars have ceased and the governance of the provinces has been regulated.
  Romanization is quite advanced in the west, and Roman rule is strengthening in the eastern regions, with which 2 Mashkin N., pp. 568-569.
3 Ibid., Pp. 570-571.
The upper classes of the local population were interested.
  A new political regime contributed to the development of the economy and culture of many regions.
In Augustus' attitude towards the free Roman population we see similarities with the social policy of Julius Caesar.
 August is also characterized by maneuvering between social groups, but he tries to emphasize his conservatism, to show that the old, paternal kags are being restored in Roman life1.
The task of the creator of the empire was to create a pillar for the monarchical system, not only with military power, but also with civil institutions.
  For the last hundred years, the political structures of the Roman Republic have been unable to neutralize class-social contradictions, and the struggle between individual factions within the ruling class has nullified democracy.
 The creation of the "August peace" presupposed the creation of social peace, the elimination of the preconditions of the dissatisfaction of large social groups.
Tatik Gogchyan THE PRINCIPLE OF AUGUST Keywords: principality, slave society, court authority, traditional republic, Senate, emperor, consul, peace, civil wars, state apparatus.
