THE ROLE OF PARENTS IN THE PROCESS OF PROFESSIONAL CHOICE OF YEREVAN UNIVERSITY APPLICANTS The historical and social conditions of the Armenian reality are connected with the development of the transit nature of the society, institutional changes. During the last twenty-five years, since the collapse of the USSR, there have been large-scale institutional and economic changes, which have affected the institution of education.
 In 2008, the reform of the general education sphere was carried out in the Republic of Armenia. A separate high school system was established, the mission of which is to play the role of the main "vocational education" link 1.
  Along with the introduction of the high school system, vocational orientation centers started working.
  In the modern Armenian reality, the process of choosing the profession of high school students is based on the high value of higher education in society, which is reflected in a number of phenomena, such as the mismatch of the number of students applying to universities to the requirements of the Armenian economy.
  Another concise example is the existence of the institute of tutors, its expansion and the high salary of specialists in that field.
 Accordingly, the student of Yerevan High School is socialized in an environment where great importance and attention is paid to the process of choosing a profession.
  This study focuses on the study of the relationship between the family environment and the choice of adolescents.
Research Methodology 8 focus groups were conducted with applicants from higher education institutions (4 with males, 4 with females, դի 4 dyadic-thematic interviews with applicants' parents).
  The video-methodological basis of the research was P. Bourdieu's Constructivist Slave 1 "Strategic Plan for the Establishment of a High School System", 2008, http.
//www.edu.am/index.php?id=1465&topMenu=-1&menu1=9&menu2=129.
toralism, in particular the theory of habitus 2 և M. Weber understands sociology, in particular the theory of social action 3.
  According to M. Weber, sociology as a science, seeks to understand և interpret social action և thus explaining its process and impact.
  From this point of view, every sociological research is aimed at the interpretation and explanation of social action, ընտր the choice of profession should be interpreted first of all as a social action: M. According to Weber's classical definition, which implies a subjective meaning of action by the acting individual ում orientation towards the other4.
The choice of profession under the habitus theory is considered not as a direct chain with a "means-goal" structure, but as a complex social game.
  P. Bourdieu mentions. "There is nothing more free, at the same time more obligatory than the action of a good player" 5.
 From this point of view, the agent who makes a choice of profession is, on the one hand, free to choose both a profession and a strategy for making that choice, and on the other hand is limited by the conditions of the "game" of choosing a profession.
  The unpredictability and diversity of possible practices speak to the relative freedom given by the habitus, and the limitation of that diversity to the existence of "frames" or boundaries of the same habitus.
 This approach makes it possible to consider the practice in this case, the choice of profession both in terms of its internal diversity and external constraints.
 From this point of view, the purpose of this research can be redefined in more detail as a study of the logic of the unique, historically defined social game of choosing a profession, the strategies of the agents involved in that game, university applicants, and their parents.
Perceptions of the role of parents in the choice of profession - children Research in various disciplines proves that the family plays a key role in the child's education and profession 2 See Burdie P., "Practical example", SPb.
 Алетейя, 2001.
XX century, M.
 1996, c. 455-491.4 Ibid.
5 Burdje P., "Nachala", M.
1994, p. 96. In making decisions6.
  The analysis of the focus groups revealed that although the nature of the discussions on the issue of choosing a profession within the family differs from family to family, nevertheless university students usually mention the family, mainly the parents, as the main participant in choosing a profession.
Ranging from complete mutual agreement with the parents to a deep conflict in the choice of profession, the expressions of the students applying to the university mainly emphasize both sides of the relationship with the parents. The first is the use of parents' opinions as referents, which is seen by children as an indisputable, non-explanatory approach.
 The second aspect, which is expressed by the applicants' perceptions of the role of parents in the process of choosing their profession, is the need to obtain parental consent.
  Parental consent is seen by the child as a certain legitimation of the action. Moreover, this was expressed both among the respondents, whose profession choice was agreed with the opinion of the parents, as well as among the respondents who tend to oppose the opinion of the parents.
In such situations, there is anxiety about the disagreement of the parents, a state of fluctuation - in the future, the parents' consent is still sought.
  This phenomenon can be interpreted on the one hand as a value strategy, which is conditioned by the respect of children for their parents, based on their status in the family hierarchy, cultural normative order, on the other hand, as a rational strategy. preparation by attending tutors, later studying at the university.
There were also several cases when the respondents did not emphasize the possibility of parental consent. They either noted the absolute lack of consultation with the parents or stressed the importance of personal preferences, regardless of whether the parents were "against" or "for".
 Such cases are rare, խոր For a full interpretation it is necessary to conduct an in-depth study of individual cases, however, it should be noted that the presence of such cases leads to 6 See Splete H., & Freeman-George A., “Family influences on career development of young assumes that in some families latent or overt, conscious or unconscious decision-making independence is encouraged when parental consent is not required to choose a profession and parental opinion is seen as a valuable but not guiding factor.
The Evaluation of Higher Education and Its Gender Perspective Interviews with parents have shown that in the absence of higher education for parents, a child receiving higher education is seen as a way to be financially secure in the future.
 In this case, the most important issue in the discussion of the choice of profession is the opportunity to have a job in the future.
 Moreover, it is interesting that in this case the nature of further work is used mainly from the point of view of hierarchical position, and higher education is considered as a mandatory condition to avoid working "under someone else".
 There is a purposeful connection here, where financial security is the goal, and higher education is the way to achieve it, but the strategy is limited to the generalization of personal experience. The parent, having no higher education and working under someone else's guidance, prefers to see their child in that leadership position, as "being a leader" is equated with being financially secure, and no alternative means of achieving financial security are considered.
Parents with higher education mention that continuing their education at the university after school is an opportunity to express themselves, gain life experience, as well as create a new environment.
 In this case, the strategies for choosing a profession are of a more pronounced value nature, because learning as such is valuable, regardless of its outcome.
  Purposefulness is also expressed when preference is given to a specific faculty (for example, YSU Faculty of Physics) based on the program of that faculty, which allows students to start working.
 These observations on differences in perceptions of families with different levels of education suggest that the strategies and meanings of choosing a profession as a social action horse vary depending on the level of education of the parents in the family, as well as the success of the professional career.
It has been observed that parents have differentiated strategies towards children of different sexes due to their perceptions of gender roles.
 If in the case of boys the expectations of the parents are related to "keeping a family" and having a well-paid job in the future, in the case of a girl the emphasis is more on self-expression, but here, too, there is a certain limit of permissible diversity. For example, parents who find that their daughter is talented can try her hand at art, however, they keep the girl from the idea of ​​entering a theater university, because, according to them, she will not find a job as a director in Armenia.
 Thus, in general, there are two goals of higher education և career choice strategies: ensuring a prosperous future, ensuring a level of internal satisfaction, and self-expression.
Among the surveyed parents, more effective approaches to the choice of profession were observed among mothers than among fathers.
 Wishes have been expressed by mothers that the child should continue his education in this or that profession, conditioned by the "pleasure" of that profession, "being likeable", etc.
  Fathers are more inclined to make sense of their approach either through perspective rational attitudes or through a strategy of lack of special involvement in the child's choice of profession.
  In such cases, the parent sees his role on the one hand as a financial and on the other hand as a psychological basis, which will allow the child to express himself in the future in a way that contributes to his sense of self-satisfaction, and the choice of a specific profession is left to the child.
 Moreover, the first approach is more pronounced towards boys than girls, and the perception of higher education as a horse of self-expression is typical of parents with higher education.
Referring to the evaluation of higher education, taking into account P. Bourdieu's principle that "to understand what a habitus is, it is possible only by combining the social conditions in which it was formed (at the same time producing the conditions of its own formation) with the social conditions in which it was formed" 7, it should be noted that In modern Armenian society, the parents of school-leaving children represent the last generation, whose habitus, particularly in the field of education, originated in the USSR, in a social system in conditions where the transition from school to working life took place differently, respectively, had a different meaning of higher education. appreciation.
 It can be assumed that the appreciation of higher education in the current situation is due to the fact that the Soviet higher education acted as a guarantee of the possibility of having a job in the future, of creating sufficient living conditions.
 Nowadays, in other social conditions, this habitus is passed on to children, who, however, are related to the internal conflict, which is connected on the one hand with higher education, on the other hand, with the less successful example of parents.
As a result, the child is faced with the problem of having to act within the family habit, which implies receiving a higher education, and at the same time does not want to follow the example of the parents, who "failed" from the child's point of view.
  In the conditions of such a role conflict, the solution is the child's own desires, which have a more current orientation from his point of view և inclinations towards a specific profession (among those professions are programming, marketing, business courses).
In cases where the choice of profession can be viewed as a traditional act, when the child chooses the profession of his parent or any related profession, the professional habit of the parents is reproduced. Here social experience plays a role, which acts as a certain framework of habitus.
 It is necessary to take into account the cases when parents persuade the child to continue their profession. Եւ Submission of children in such cases can be considered as an expression of a collectivist culture in terms of the role of the parent within the family as a choice agent տի at the head of the family hierarchy.
 It should be noted that the experience of disagreement with the parents only speaks of the tendency to break that culture in the given family, while as a more pronounced form of collective thinking, we can consider the cases when the child does not even think of going against the parents' opinion.
Strategies for the child's parent-child relationship relationship Different forms of child-parent relationship relationship are formed within the family, depending on how much the parents restrict their child in their choice, whether the child is inclined to accept or not to accept those restrictions.
  The data obtained from the focus groups provided an opportunity to identify the following strategies for the relationship between the child and the parents on the issue of choosing a profession.1. subject, 2. restriction, 3. cooperation, 4. lack of participation, 5. resistance.
The category of subordination includes the situations when the choice of the child's future profession was made by the parents, completely or almost without taking into account the opinion and desire of the child.
 The specific situations are different from each other. In some cases, the choice of profession is made at the request of the parents, and the child, trying to justify the obedience by his own motivation, finds interest in that profession over time.
  In other cases, the parents do not allow the child to choose his / her preferred profession,, the child obeys the parents 'opinion, in some cases choosing a profession related to their favorite, in other cases simply accepting the parents' preferred profession.
The category of restriction includes the situations when the child has chosen the profession within the limits previously given by the parents.
  In this case, the child is forced, often unknowingly, to choose from several possible options separated by the parents, while other professions are left out of the list of possible options for the child.
The category of cooperation is the widest, as many specific forms of cooperation between parents and children in choosing a profession have been identified.
  This category includes all the situations when the decision to choose a profession is mutually agreed. It satisfies both the child and the parent.
 In some situations, children turn to their parents և for advice so that they can decide on their choice of profession / university; in other situations, children choose their profession և they turn to their parents for consent նպատակով for help.
 In this case, the choice can not be considered final without the consent of the parents. The parent acts as the approver.
The category of non-participation was separated conditionally, based on one case, when the respondent mentioned the absence of parental consultation.
 The main emphasis is on one's own preferences և interest, as well as on a concrete idea of ​​future work.
Include in the category of resistance the situations when the parents are against the choice of the child, and the child does not make concessions, defending the choice.
 Situations vary depending on the child's degree of confidence. In some cases, by taking a very decisive position, the child manages to reach an agreement with the parents, in other cases, the child hesitates about the intention to oppose the parents, does not take concrete actions, at the same time not leaving the idea of ​​continuing education in the chosen profession.
 This category also includes cases where there is a disagreement between the parents - a conflict of opinions about the child's future profession. One parent supports the child's choice and the other opposes it.
 Such situations are characterized by the formation of a "coalition" by one of the child's և parents, which works to change the other parent.
As a result of the analysis of the above considerations և data, it has been hypothesized that career choice strategies differ depending on the educational level of the parents in the given family, as well as on the success of their professional career.
 The verification of the mentioned hypothesis needs a quantitative measurement.
Lilit Iskandaryan THE ROLE OF PARENTS FOR THE PROFESSIONAL CHOICE OF YEREVAN UNIVERSITY ENTRANTS Keywords: university entrant, higher education, profession choice, strategy, habitus, parent Summary.
