SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE INSTITUTION OF PLEDGE UNDER THE DRAFT NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Precautionary measures are one of the guarantees that ensure the implementation of the goals of criminal proceedings.
One of the measures included in the pre-trial detention system is bail, which is not connected with depriving the accused of liberty.
 According to point 1 of Article 125 of the draft CCP, “Collateral is a sum of money established by the decision of a competent body, which is transferred to the Republic of Armenia for safekeeping in the form of a bank or other credit organization in order to ensure the proper conduct of the accused.
 Real estate may be accepted as collateral if the decision to apply collateral specifically mentions its possibility ”1.
 According to the current code, bail can be applied only to persons who have committed minor and medium-gravity crimes, while the European Court has addressed this issue in the judgment in "Caballero v. England".
 In this case, Article 5 3 3 2 2 of the Convention (any arrested or detained person shall be brought before a judge or other official empowered by law to exercise judicial power within a reasonable time or before release pending trial).
  The release may be conditional on a guarantee that he will appear in court. Article 25 of the Criminal Code, which automatically prohibits the use of bail against anyone charged with a felony (murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, rape, attempted rape) who has previously been convicted of any of these offenses. .
 In such a situation, the magistrate court had no authority to use bail to release the person from custody.
  This decision was also referred to by the RA Court of Cassation on 13.07.2007. In the decision made in the case of VB-11507, by which the RA courts were allowed to discuss the issue of applying bail in all cases.
  In contrast to the current Code, one of the possible achievements of the draft is the exclusion of such a restriction, which follows from the interpretation of Article 125. We think the project managed to settle the issue in accordance with international norms.
Let's talk about the following aspects. First of all, it should be noted that the draft includes precautionary measures that are not currently applicable.
 One of them is the bail, which can be said to occupy the third place in the hierarchy of precautionary measures of the project after the house arrest of the detainee.
  It is obvious that the reason is the imperfection of the active structures of the CPC.
  According to the data fixed on the official website of the RA Judicial Department, in 2014 The court granted 1,091 motions to use detention as a measure of restraint, and in the case of bail, 42 out of 220 were satisfied.
 In fact, it turns out that the competent authorities are more inclined to use detention than bail.
 In contrast, in some European countries and the United States, bail is used on a larger scale than one might think ևit is considered an alternative to restraint instead of detention.
 In the draft, such a circumstance was eliminated, in contrast to the current CPC.
  According to point 3 of Article 115 of the draft, "Precautionary measures are detention - alternative precautionary measures."
  It follows that bail is an independent precautionary measure, which definitely contributes to both the role of this measure and the removal of restrictions on its application. 1 See Draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, available at http: // www.
//www.justice.am/storage/files/legal_acts/legal_acts_5771447415_QrDat-_VERJNAKAN.pdf2 Available at http:
//www.gov.am/u_files/file/kron/EuoroConvent-Arm.pdf.
with your brother.
  Let us now turn to the advantages of collateral over other precautionary measures.
  As we have already mentioned, it does not deprive a person of liberty.
  On the other hand, the state does not waste its budget funds to keep the detainees, the accused does not submit to direct coercive measures against him, continues his work activity, as a result of which he can compensate the damage caused by his act.
 However, due to certain risks, the draft provides another important provision: "If the accused hid from the body conducting the proceedings or went to another place without permission, did not appear regularly at the invitation of the body conducting the proceedings or significantly obstructed the proceedings, the supervising prosecutor decision ", which is a possible guarantee for the smooth conduct of the trial.
The experience of foreign countries in making the pledge the income of the state deserves enough attention.
 In particular, according to Article 145 of the French Code of Civil Procedure, bail ensures the participation of the accused in all legal proceedings; the execution of the verdict, as it is stipulated that the amount of damages, fines and other expenses incurred by the civil plaintiff 1.
 Such an attempt was made in the Estonian CCP, where it is stated that the pledge becomes the property of the state only after calculating the court costs from that amount2, and in the CCP of Ukraine the issue is settled as follows: the pledge can be fully directed to the fulfillment of the judgment և property claims when the pledge has been paid by another person, it can be directed to the fulfillment of property claims only with the consent of the pledgor 3.
 In our opinion, it would be more effective if the following was enshrined together with the norms stipulating the minimum amount of bail: "Property claims in a civil suit, possible court costs are covered by the amount of bail, in case the accused is the pawnshop."
 It is true that the draft enshrines such an institution as the seizure of property, which applies to the possible confiscation of property, the possible property claim to cover possible court costs, but it would be more expedient not to take unnecessary legal action (seizure of property) if the pledge has already been applied. offset those claims from the amount.
 The establishment of such additional safeguards will contribute to "the proper enforcement of this measure of restraint" and to the more effective protection of the rights and interests of the subjects of the trial.
According to the draft CCP, the accused or any natural or legal person can act as a pawnbroker.
 In this regard, it is necessary to address some issues.
First, consider the cases when another person acts as a pawnbroker.
 In this case, the draft states: "If the bail is paid by another person, then he is explained the essence of the accusation against the accused, as well as the possible consequences in case of improper behavior by the accused", without referring to the relations between the accused and the pledgor.
 In our opinion, it should be considered essentially open to try to settle the issue in the following way: to establish norms that will allow the pawnshop to exercise control over the accused, which may be expressed in the form of certain obstacles.
  We think that the general complex of criminal procedure, penitentiary-criminal can serve as a basis for such prohibitions.
The following prohibitions can be envisaged, without informing the pawnshop, not to change the places of residence, work, study, not to attend certain places, to work, etc.
  The latter is more favorable to exclude the commission of new crimes or offenses by the accused.
 Such prohibitions shall not, however, restrict or deprive a person of his or her personal rights to privacy or to degrade or violate his or her honor and dignity.
It follows from the analysis of the norms in the draft that the accused can go to another place with the permission of the competent body.
 We think that it should have been determined when and how many hours 1 See Code of Conduct-Procedural Code of France 1958, under the order of V.I. Каминской, с изм. and more. January 1, 1966 Moscow, 1967, page 80.
2 See Code of Procedure Code of the Republic of Estonia from 12.02.2003http.
//estonia.newscity.info/docs/sistemsw/dok_iegblz/index.htm, available on 25.04.2013.
3 See Code of Conduct Code of Ukraine, as of February 15, 2011, available at http: // www.
//www.legislationline.org/.
(ed. from 19.06.2008), it is available, the accused can go to another place. that would further clarify the normalization of those relations.
There is an opinion in the legal literature that when a pawnshop is another person, he should be obliged to inform the law enforcement agencies and the court about the proper conduct of the accused, which will allow the pawnbroker to realize the nature and significance of the precautionary measure. in terms of 1.
In our opinion, such a circumstance can be reflected in the draft, taking into account the following preconditions: First, the pawnshop, from the moment of imposing a precautionary measure until its abolition or modification, must be aware of the legal basis and nature of the obligations imposed on it; second, it must provide accurate information on the convict's conduct.
  In this case, we think that it should be regulated at the level of the law, from when to when the pawnshop should provide such information.
Examining the circle of persons acting as pawnshops, the question arises whether the pawnshop has the opportunity to refuse to fulfill its obligations.
 There is no uniform approach to the realization of this right.
  In particular, some authors argue that "the mortgagor's application to waive the pledge, to return it, which was submitted after the protocol was drawn up and signed, cannot be a ground for not applying a precautionary measure" 2.
  We think that such an approach is not acceptable, as it restricts the right to property enshrined in Article 31 of the Constitution, which is also a matter of state protection, so it would be fair to agree with the second group of authors, that is, the mortgagor should be given such an opportunity. , returning the amount of collateral already paid3.
  The reservation of such a right to the accused can be considered more important.
  According to Article 296 of the draft, "The arrested defendant, his defense counsel" and his legal representative have the right to submit a motion to the court to lift the detention or to apply an alternative measure of restraint instead of seven days before the expiration of the detention period.
 The copy of the motion is sent to the investigator conducting the pre-trial proceedings, to the supervising prosecutor. ”
 In other words, the draft has given the accused the opportunity to change the detention or eliminate it, we think that in such a case the issue should be resolved as in the above-mentioned case by submitting a motion.
  However, in this case it can be submitted not only to the court, but also to the investigator, the prosecutor, as they also have the right to impose bail as a precautionary measure.
  Such an opportunity was provided by the CCPs of some CIS countries.
  The Uzbek CPC enshrines the right of the pledgor to waive his obligations if there are no grounds for making the pledge state income4.
  The issue was also settled in the Ukrainian CCP, but with some procedural differences.
  In particular, here too the pawnshop can waive its obligations until the grounds for returning the pledge to the state have emerged, but the peculiarity of the procedure is that the pawnshop is obliged to ensure the presence of the accused in court or investigating bodies to change the measure of restraint. The pledge is returned only after the application of the new precautionary measure5.
Presenting the legislative regulations of the above-mentioned countries on this issue, we think it is necessary to come to the conclusion that it is necessary to introduce such a system in the draft HKHDO, proposing the following regulation: First, there are currently only two instances in the draft where the pledge is reimbursed, that is, when the circumstances set forth in Article 125 5 5 of the draft are not proved, or the pledge has been revoked or changed as a precautionary measure; 1 See Buryakov AD, Pledge of the extent to which the Soviet legislature intervened in the Soviet conflict process, Irkutsk, 1969, pp. 281-282.
2 See Balanduk OV, Fulfillment of obligations for pledge during realization p. 106 УПК РФ, 2014.3 See in the same place.
4 See Code of Conduct Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (cf. Law Ruz from 22 September 1994 № 2013-XII, with edits in accordance with Law Ruz from 18 September 2012 № 3RU-335), http.
//www.fmc.uz/legisl.php?id=k_ ug_pr_28, available on 10.02.2013.
5 Available at http: // www.
//www.legislationline.org/ru/documents/section/criminal-codes.
norms for changing or eliminating the measure.
  We believe that the further process should be settled by the following procedure: if there are more than one pawnbroker, one of them or the group has waived their obligations, the bail can be reduced only if it is sufficient for the defendant to behave properly to ensure the other goals of the precautionary measure. , but in case of insufficient amount of collateral it can be redeemed at the expense of other mortgagors or changed by another means of restraint.
The right of the pledgor to waive the pledge must be distinguished from the right to change the subject of the pledge.
 The latter means the replacement of the collateral with another equivalent property.
 The draft CCP does not provide for such a situation, but it indirectly follows from Article 125.
  Thus, the pledge is a certain monetary unit, which is transferred to the custody in the form of AMD, securities or other securities as a deposit of the relevant bank or other credit organization.
  By the logic of this article, it is assumed that these values ​​are transferred not by forced taking, but by the will of the pledgee subjects.
 From here it becomes clear that the issue of changing the subject of the pledge should be solved in such a way.
 Of particular interest is the mechanism by which the procedure for changing the subject of pledge should be regulated.
  We think that in this case, first of all, it should be assessed whether the obligations of the pledgor have been fulfilled properly, and then, only if possible, to solve the issue of changing the subject of the pledge.
 It would be fair to regulate these relations as follows: Reserve the right to change the pledged property in the pre-trial proceedings to the investigator-prosecutor, and in the case-litigation to the court, as on the one hand, these bodies apply the precautionary measure, on the other hand, the latter, having a direct connection with all the circumstances of the case and to effectively solve such a problem, which, of course, is in the interests of the pawnbroker.
  However, let's make one reservation: the investigator can make such a decision only with the consent of the prosecutor, moreover, the right to petition to change the subject of bail should belong to both individuals and legal entities, including the accused, if the subject of the bail belongs to him.
  And in the case when individuals and legal entities raise such an issue, we think that they should be obliged to inform the accused about it.
It is necessary to make some considerations related to the subject of the pledge.
 In particular, according to the draft CCP of the Republic of Armenia, the subject of pledge may be the Armenian dram, securities or other values, and real estate, in case the decision on the application of the pledge specifically mentions its possibility.
 In this case, some problems may arise if the securities are chosen as collateral.
 According to the Civil Code, the security is a document certifying the property rights, subject to the observance of the obligatory conditions, the implementation or transfer of which is possible only when submitting it, but the RA Law on the Securities Market defines their types: shares, bonds, deposit receipts.
  Let's talk about the shares, through which the shareholder gets the right to participate in the management of the joint-stock company's share of the profit of the joint-stock company and to receive a share of the property left after its liquidation.
 As a rule, they are fixed electronically; the rights to it are verified through electronic media.
Discussing the above values, we must move on to the main issue. The draft does not regulate how to act when the share is the subject of collateral; at the moment the organization whose member it belongs to has been declared bankrupt.
 From what has been said, it can be deduced that over time such goods may depreciate, as a result of which we have serious problems.
 In other words, the chosen precautionary measure loses its significance without bringing the proposed results.
  We think that in such a case either the securities should be removed from the scope of the collateral, which is definitely not justified, as the unjustified narrowing of the borders of the collateral is assumed in a situation where individuals, without appropriate means, can not exercise such a right, or should be provided specifically. bodies to which certain obligations will be imposed, to regularly inform about the stability of the mentioned values ​​and the expected changes.
We think it is more reasonable to solve the issue in such a way.
Explaining the regulations related to the subject of the pledge, the question arises whether it is justified to set the minimum amount of the pledge or not.
  According to the draft CPC of the Republic of Armenia, the bail cannot be less than two hundred times the minimum wage (when determining the amount of bail, the degree of gravity of the crime attributed to the accused is taken into account և the property status of the accused).
 However, there is also the following opinion in the theoretical literature: the amount of bail should depend on the possible punishment, which is supposed to be imposed on the accused based on the circumstances of the given case1.
  Despite the supposed justification of this position, it must be argued that it contradicts the position of the ECHR, that is, the measure of restraint that can not predetermine the nature of the accusation to be made և criminal punishment.
Today, in our opinion, the issue of determining the minimum amount of collateral remains unresolved.
  Thus, according to the information posted on the official website of the National Statistical Service of Armenia, the employment rate in Armenia is 53.2%, and the poverty rate is 32% 2, which is a significant indicator for a country with a small population.
 From the presented figures, it is assumed that the minimum amount of collateral has become inaccessible for some people.
  In this case a problem arises. In particular, there is a marked inequality in the use of detention as a measure of restraint for the materially secure, in contrast to those whose material means prevent collateral from being used as a measure of restraint.
 We believe that the current situation is not in line with Articles 5-14 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which stipulate: "Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
  The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in the Convention shall be without discrimination, whether on the basis of sex, race, color, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, nationality, property, birth or other status.
Taking into account the above, we think it will be justified not to set the minimum amount of collateral. This will allow a reasonable amount of bail to be imposed on a financially vulnerable person, which will not only ensure the fulfillment of his / her obligations by the accused, but will also have a significant value for him / her, at the same time not being devalued by the financially insured.
As we have already mentioned, when determining the amount of bail, the competent body takes into account the degree of gravity of the crime.
 Article 117 of the draft CCP states: "If during the operation of the precautionary measure the conditions of its legality have changed or disappeared, the body conducting the proceedings shall make a decision on changing or eliminating the precautionary measure within its competence."
  Already in Article 116, which defines the grounds for the lawfulness of the application of a precautionary measure, the re-qualification of the act is not a ground for changing or eliminating the precautionary measure.
  In fact, it turns out that the draft does not provide conditions for changing the attractiveness in such cases.
 In this case, even if we try to lift the precautionary measure and apply the bail in accordance with the severity of the already re-qualified act, there will be a contradiction with Article 116, as none of the conditions of legality explicitly mentioned in that article have been changed or removed.
 We think that there is only one way out of such a situation: the following provision should be fixed in Article 125 of the draft. "In case of re-qualification of the act committed during the investigation of the case, the body that used the bail as a precautionary measure has the right to change its amount."
Thus, in view of the above, we can assure you that bail, as a precautionary measure, has many purposes; no doubt, legislative reforms will further modernize the institution of bail, contributing to its effectiveness, as it is not justified to detain the accused if an alternative can be chosen instead. a precautionary measure, including bail.
1 See Smirnov AV, Kalinovsky KB, Comments on the Code of Procedural Code of the Russian Federation post, post. A.V. Smirnova, SPS, 2012.
2 Poverty level (according to 2009 methodology), available at http: // www.
//www.armstat.am/am/?nid=126&id=15005.
3 Available at http.
//www.gov.am/u_files/file/kron/EuoroConvent-Arm.pdf.
Garik Abelyan SOME REMARKS ABOUT THE INSTITUTE OF BAILIFF ACCORDING TO THE DRAFT NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
