THE ROLE OF THE ARMY IN TURKISH POLITICAL LIFE 1920-30 The Turkish military and the army in general played a great role in the development and implementation of the country's political guideline during the nearly one-century existence of the Republic of Turkey.
 The latter was able to carry out military coups 4 times 1, to interfere in the political life of the country.
 The beginning of these processes was partly set in the early years of the formation of republican Turkey, when the army was one of the main pillars of the newly formed political power.
This has a further impact on the formation of the military elite in the country, which, in particular, in the early years of the republic, in fact, was merged with the political authorities.
 However, during the mentioned period, the main opposition currents were fed by the army.
 That is why in order to better understand the role of the military in the political life of Turkey in different years, to understand the essence of military interventions, it is necessary to study in depth the role of the army in the early years of the Turkish Republic.
After the defeat in the First World War և 1918 ․ After the Mudros armistice, the Allies deployed troops in Istanbul, limiting the number of Ottoman troops in the empire's capital, but not paying enough attention to disarming and neutralizing Ottoman troops in the eastern part of the empire.
 This policy leads to the fact that the command staff of the remaining Turkish army in those regions, in the conditions of the sultan կառավարության's ousted rule of the Ottoman government, 1 1 Speech 1960 և 1980 ․ military coups, such as 1971 և 1997 ․ It is about military interventions.
11 / Issue 04 / July 1959, Published online.
 18 July 2011, p. 522. takes the initiative to influence political processes.
  This was due to the fact that there was no established political system in the Ottoman Empire, and the military had a great influence in defining the political direction of the empire and maintaining the statehood.
As early as 1919, the Kemalist nationalist movement in the eastern part of the Ottoman Empire was led by a number of high-ranking officers in the Ottoman army, including Mustafa Kemalpaşa, the leader of the movement.
 In the transitional period, in the absence of democratic traditions, it was the latter who led the above-mentioned movement, one of the primary goals of which, as the further course of action showed, was the establishment of a Turkish nationalist state in the Ottoman Empire.
 The mentioned could not but influence the political mechanisms of the Republic of Turkey, founded in 1923.
  In a state founded by direct participation in the army, the same military was generally allocated to the army in general.
In order to better understand the role and significance of the Armed Forces in the political life of the country during the early years of the Republic of Turkey, let us briefly refer to the laws defining the responsibilities and responsibilities of the Ministry of Defense's separate military commands and their spheres of influence.
During the years of the Kemalist movement, the General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces was part of the government. He received his military education and in 1905 served as a staff major in the 5th Army of the Ottoman Empire (headquarters in Damascus).
  In 1906, together with a few friends, he founded an organization called "Homeland Freedom" in Damascus, which became one of the branches of the "Union for Progress" party of the Young Turks.
  Later he served in other units of the empire's armed forces, including the 3rd Army, assuming various military positions.
  In 1916 he received the rank of brigadier general (the first military rank of general).
 In 1919, by the order of the last Ottoman sultan, he was appointed inspector of the 9th Army, but Kemal began to use this position as a mechanism for launching a nationalist struggle.
  In July of the same year he was expelled from the Ottoman army and sentenced to death in absentia.
  However, at that time the Ottoman leadership had almost no power, which allowed Kemal to gather under his command the units located in the territory of the empire, including Western Armenia, to declare his own government, de facto independent of the Ottoman sultan.
Ministry of Education ”(Erkân-ı Harbiye-i Umumiye Vekâleti).
  In addition to the ministry, there was also the "Ministry of National Defense" (Müdafa-i Milliye Vekâleti) 4, which was later renamed Millî Savunma Bakanlığı, which, in essence, had the same meaning, simply replacing words of Arabic origin.
Both ministries functioned within the government, "in fact, there was no hierarchy between the latter", that is, one was not a structure subordinate to the other.
  Only according to Law No. 429, dated March 3, 1924, 5 the "Ministry of General Military Command" was abolished and replaced by the "General Military Staff" (Erkân-ı Harbiye-i UmumiyeReisliği), which was already a purely military body outside the government. .
 Only the Ministry of Defense remained in the government.
  However, before leaving the government, the leadership of the General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces, including պետsmet Pasha, considered to be the Chief of General Staff of the 1st Armed Forces (May 3, 1920 to November 10, 1921), of the Kemalist government և 1920 ․ They were deputies of the Turkish Grand National Assembly (hereinafter TAMJ), which was established on April 23 and was declared by Kemalik to be the highest governing body of Turkey.
In addition to his military position, եթsmet Pasha actually held the civilian positions of head of the Kemalist government and foreign minister.
  Being the Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, եթsmet Pasha received the military rank of General of the Army in 1926, which at that time was the second highest military rank in the Turkish Army after the Marshal.
  Mustafa Kemal was promoted to the highest military rank of "Ismarshal" from the founding of the republic until 1944. Fzi Chakmak, who has assumed the post of Chief of General Staff of the country's Armed Forces.
  Ismet Pasha resigned from the military rank only in 1927 according to his own application7.
  Similarly 4 Ankara University Law Faculty Lecture, Yisil 2005, Volume 54 Page 4, Page.
 375- 430, Dr. Halithttps.
//www.tbmm.gov.tr/tutanaklar/KANUNLAR_KARARLAR/kanuntbmmc002/kanuntbmmc002/kanuntbmmc00200429.pdf (Visible: 11.05.2015) 6 He was deprived of all leverage.
 The self-proclaimed Kemalist government had not yet been recognized by any international entity.
7 Chiefs of General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces, Mustafa եթsmet ոնn Ինnü, see http.
//www.tsk.tr/1_tsk_hakkinda/genelkurmay_baskanlari/ismet_inonu.html (available: F խորհրդz Թուրքիայի Çakmak, a member of the Turkish parliament and government, was also the head of the country's armed forces.
 The latter only in 1924 ․ After 8 of the relevant prohibitions defined by the adopted constitution, he left the TAMJ ից from the Minister to the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, which, as we mentioned, was already turning into a purely military position.
It should be noted that before the proclamation of the Republic of Turkey, the adoption of the Constitution in 1924, a law drafted by the Kemalist government as a provisional constitution stipulated that the TAMJ fulfilled the duties of the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, but on August 5, 1921 secret Greek votes. Mustafa Kemal was entrusted with the post of Commander-in-Chief of the Turkish Army.
  Taking advantage of this law, Mustafa Kemal strengthened his position in the army, later using it to neutralize his opponents և to achieve sole power.
A number of facts show that when making serious political decisions, Kemal took into account the army, a commanding staff loyal to him.
 Especially when in 1922 ․ After the victories of the Greek troops, the 10 sultanates were abolished by the decision No. 308 adopted on November 1 of the same year, and the TAMJ was endowed with supreme power. Kemal began to work out ways to eliminate the caliphate, which required the support of the army.
 Proof of this is the fact that before taking the step of abolishing the caliphate in 1924. On February 15-20, Kemal held a meeting in Izmir (Smyrna) with the Prime Minister մsmet ոնnոնnü, the Minister of National Defense Kazզm ալzalp, the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, Marshal Fևz Չ Çakmak, and the commanders of the Armed Forces.
  During the meeting they discussed the endowments of the Caliphate, the Ministry of Sharia (ie, religious foundations). The constitution, which came into force on April 20, 2006, prohibited him from being a deputy and holding another state position at the same time.
 More details below.
9 Asst. Assoc. Dr. Ahmet Emin YAMAN, The Law of Presidency, see http:
//dergiler.ankara.edu.tr/dergiler/45/803/10243.pdf (available: 14-04-2016).
https:
//www.tbmm.gov.tr/kultursanat/yayinlar/yayin001/001_00_008.pdf (available on 11.05.2015).
The issue of elimination 11.
 Receiving the support of the military, Kemal insured himself against the dissatisfaction of the opposition and possible waves of protests, after which only in 1924. On March 3, 1945, TAMJ passed a law abolishing the caliphate, according to which the caliph and his entire family were deported from the country12.
 On the same day, a law was passed to abolish the Sharia Ministry of Waqfs and establish a Presidency of Religious Affairs in its place13, which was to be subordinated to the Turkish government14.
Thus, we can say that before 1924 ․ The Turkish army had grown closer to the country's civil power with all the powers and responsibilities arising from it.
  The political leadership of the newly created Turkish Republic consisted of the military, who used the army to gain and maintain power.
 However, the same leaders tried to rule out the existence of opposing currents in the army, as well as the role of the army in the political life of the country, as an independent factor opposing the ideas of the government.
In addition to the military under the Kemalist rule, the leading nucleus of the "progressive Republican" (WTO), founded on November 17, 1924, was the leading nucleus of the first, perhaps the most powerful opposition party in the Turkish Republic.
  Four of the six co-founders of the party were among the first five generals involved in the Kemalist movement, including Ali Fuad Pasha (Jebeso), Qazim Karabekir Pasha, Rauf Orbay and Refet Belen16.
  The latter are Dair Kanun. Kanun Numarası.
 431. Kabul Tarihi.
 03/03/1924, URL.
http:
//www.mevzuat.gov.tr/MevzuatMetin/1.3.431.pdf (available on 11.05.2015).
13 Until 1961 it was called "Diyanet işleri reisliği" (Department of Religious Affairs, and by a law passed in 1961 it was renamed "Diyanet Işleri Başkanliği" (Presidency of Religious Affairs).
http:
//www2.diyanet.gov.tr/BaskanlikMevzuati/1%20Kanunlar/01%20Diyanet%20%C4%B0%C5%9Fl
C3% B6revleri% 20Hakk% C4% B1nda% 20Kanun-2011.pdf (available on 11.05.2015).
15 The party was founded on November 17, 1924 under the Ottoman name "Terakkiperver Cumhuriyet Fırkası", which in modern Turkish is called "İlerici Cumhuriyet Partisi". 16 One of the founders of the party was also the Ottoman politician բանակsmail Ա Janabփ ծառայ .
They had the highest military rank in the Ottoman army, the last of the five generals named Mustafa Kemal.
 Rauf Orbay, one of the mentioned figures, presents the first clearly criticized criticism of Kemal's ideas and activities.
  The latter, in an interview with an Istanbul newspaper on October 29, 1923, the day after the proclamation of the Republic of Turkey, strongly criticized this step, considering it hasty and untimely.
 At the same time, holding command positions in the army and engaging in civilian government made these figures serious opponents of the Kemalist monopoly power.
  It should be added that according to various data, about 15% of the TAMJ deputies were representatives of the army.
Realizing the danger of such a course of events, Kemal laid the foundation for the process of separation of civil and military authorities.
 For that purpose in 1924. Article 23 of the Constitution adopted on April 20, 2006 stipulates that "the same person may not be a Member of Parliament at the same time and hold any state position."
  "After the ban imposed by the new constitution, many servicemen were forced to choose between engaging in politics or continuing to serve in the army."
 Some of the servicemen resigned from the parliament and continued their service, but Qazim Karabekir, Ali Fouad, Refet Bele, Jafar Teyar and a number of other high-ranking military men refused to resign, after which Kemal's resignation ousted the military.
With this step, Kemal managed to neutralize the opportunities of the opposition generals, depriving them of their influence in the army and making them incomparably more vulnerable.
By effectively cutting ties between the army and the opposition party, the Kemalist government proceeded to the process of final closure of the WTO.
 The first reason for that was the Kurdish uprising that started in 1925, when the authorities accused that very opposition party of preparing and supporting the ground for the Kurdish uprising.
  The then Prime Minister Ali Fethi Okyar Anayasa hukuku sitesi http.
//www.anayasa.gen.tr/1924tek.htm (available on 15.04.2016).
He resigned, մ եթsmet Ինnոնnü took over the helm of the government again19, through whose efforts the TAMJ was adopted և the law of "maintenance of order" 20 was put into effect20, which gives broad powers to the government21.
 As soon as the law came into force, the basis was laid for the process of closing the opposition WTO, which reached its logical end on June 5 of the same year.
 The assassination attempt on Kemal in Izmir on June 14, 1926, led to the arrest and sentencing of opposition members of the already banned WTO to death.
  However, among those arrested were generals Kayaz Karabekir Pasha, Ali Fud Pasha, who had a great contribution to the nationalist movement in the nationalist movement, which caused a great wave of discontent among the active military.
  Under pressure from the local military, Kemal was forced to give special orders to the generals22, but some of the figures were nevertheless executed.
  This fact showed that in reality the army was not only a body that carried out Kemal's orders; if necessary, it could force him to take it into account.
Already in the 1930s ․ The Turkish army received another mechanism for intervening in the foreign and domestic policies of 23 countries, the National Security Council (Milli Güvenlik Kurulu) 24, which was established on April 24, 1933 by Resolution 14443 of the Council of Ministers. (Yüksek Müdafaa Meclisi).
  According to the charter, the head of the council was the prime minister of the country, and the members were the members of the council of ministers and the chief of the general staff of the Armed Forces.
  Initially, the goal of the National Security Council was to bring the country's civil-military leadership together and discuss a number of issues together.
20 Takrir-i Sükûn Kanunu (Ottoman name of the law, in modern Turkish, "Huzurun Sağlanması Yasası") was adopted on March 4, 1925 and operated until March 4, 1929.
21 Takrir-i Sükûn Kanunu, see https.
//www.tbmm.gov.tr/tutanaklar/TUTANAK/TBMM/d02/c015/b069/tbmm 020150690132.pdf (available from 15-04-2016).
23 Until 1960 ․ The military coup was mostly advisory in nature, the military was an obvious minority.
URL:
http:
//www.mgk.gov.tr/index.php/kurumsal/hakkimizda (available on 11.05.2015).
It was to make.
 However, given the initial composition of the council բացառ the purely advisory nature of its activities, it became clear that the military leadership had not yet received any leverage to engage the country's civilian administration.
Significant changes were made to the Council after the coup of May 27, 1960, with the new constitution adopted in 1961 25.
  On November 7, 1982, Article 268 of the new constitution, adopted by popular vote and adopted by popular vote by the military leadership, adopted 26 councils of an apparently militarized nature.
Thus, we can state that in the early years of the Republic of Turkey, in the conditions of the newly formed political system, the army was the main lever for the formation and maintenance of power.
  However, the military was not completely under Ataturk's control, and the main opposition currents opposed to Kemal's rule had formed in the army.
 However, after the establishment of the republic, Kemal was able to neutralize the main opposition forces operating in the army, trying to deprive the military of the mechanisms to interfere in its own political direction.
  And if in the beginning Kemal took into account the military, then already in the late 1920s և 1930s ․ In the beginning, the army, in fact, did not refrain from interfering in the political life of the country, it was controlled by the government, it supported the policy pursued by Kemal.
Taron Hovhannisyan THE ROLE OF THE ARMY IN THE POLITICAL LIFE OF TURKEY 1920-1930 - Keywords: Turkey, Turkish Armed Forces, Progressive Republican Party, military coup, Mustafa Kemal, Kինzինlte Karabekir,'s ևsmetmakփp F,
