Monastery TOUR GRAVCHUTYANBARDZRATSUME as a regional KAYUNZARGATSMAN PRECONDITION (HAGHARTSIN AND GOSHAVANKVANAKAN COMPLEXES example) Introduction One of the main tourist attractions of Armenia churches and monastic complexes that are actively involved in a variety of tour packages and itineraries.
But, as experience shows, for a tourist who is not interested in cultural or religious tourism, visiting monastic complexes is not very attractive, as the variety of services offered is very limited.
  In addition, as a rule, visiting tourist facilities performing the same function for both inbound and outbound tourists can cause boredom.
The object of study of the work was the Haghartsin-Goshavank monastic complexes, which are located in the territory of "Dilijan" National Park in the Tavush region of the Republic of Armenia (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Haghartsin և Goshavank Monasteries The aim of the work is to present the peculiarities of the above-mentioned monastic complexes և to reveal the potential of the tourist destination դրանց of their adjacent areas և the precondition for sustainable development.
Material և MethodHaghartsin Monastery is a structure of the 10th-13th centuries, located 18 km from the city of Dilijan.
 Kirakos Gandzaketsi gives information about the complex.
 It flourished in the late 12th and early 13th centuries under the leadership of Khachatur Taronatsi.
  The Haghartsin complex consists of three churches, two vestibules (one is destroyed), a refectory, chapels and khachkars.
  In the territory of the monastery, east of the main group of monuments, there are prayer halls on the rocky slope, sculpted khachkars.
  The complex was renovated with the financial support of Sheikh bin Mohammad al-Qasim Sheikh.
Goshavank is a structure of 12 12-13 centuries in Gosh village of Tavush region, on the bank of a tributary of Getik river.
  It was founded by the famous scientist, legislator, theologian, fable writer, pedagogue Mkhitar Gosh (1130-1213), called Nor Getik.
The complex was one of the famous religious, educational and cultural centers of medieval Armenia.
  2 churches, a vestibule, 2 chapels, a two-storey bookstore-bell tower with the remains of an adjoining chapel, khachkars, foundations of small buildings have been preserved in the architectural complex.
 Renovation of the dome of the main church և Mkhitar Goshidambaran is currently underway.
The opinions, analyzes and evaluations of the work are the result of a summary of the author's field research և interviews with various travel companies and people involved in the tourism industry, as well as clergy serving in these churches.
  The work also used descriptive, comparative-geographical, sociological survey and cartographic survey methods with tourists.
  The resulting mapping and analytical work was performed using the ArcMap10.1 software package.
Results և Discussion Both of the above-mentioned complexes are located in the territory of Dilijan National Park և are among the leaders of the number of monasteries in Tavush region, which is mainly due to their presence 1 Есаян С., Ватинян Х., Историко-архитектурные памятники Дилижана; Yerevan.
 Ajastan, 1988, p. 49.2 In the same place, v. 43. It is located in a non-border area (Haghartsin monastery complex is 41 km straight from the border, and Goshavank is 31 km away (Fig. 1)), with a convenient transport-geographical position (next to the interstate M4 road), near the resort town of Dilijan ( The Haghartsin monastery complex is located 17 km from Dilijan, and Goshavank at a distance of 23 km) in relatively good condition.
 One of the motivating factors for the visit is that these two monastic complexes are obligatorily mentioned in foreign language tourist guides and are included in the routes of tour operators.
At present, there are caring servants in both complexes. A liturgy, which is one of the circumstances that attracts tourists.
However, one of the main problems is that the tourist currently visiting the church area, in addition to the architecture հնարավոր the opportunity to buy souvenirs spread throughout the country, finds other interests with difficulty (Table 1), so the church visit period is 30-40 minutes, which is not is a sufficient period of time for the tourist to meet the need to use other services.
From a tourism point of view, we consider the existence of bathrooms in the vicinity of the two complexes to be positive.
Based on the above, we can conclude that although Haghartsin և Goshavank monastic complexes are visited by many tourists (about 100-120 thousand people a year), but to increase their role as a precondition for sustainable development, they need to improve the tourist attractiveness of the complexes. We follow the following steps: scientific features.
  For example, in Goshavank it would be very desirable to see the translated version of Mkhitar Gosh's "Judgment Book" (albeit not in full), which would present parts of the law that were the basis of the legislation of a number of European countries.
  It would be interesting for the children to translate some of his fables, which would be sold as a typical gift for the given monument.
  In Haghartsin, create an opportunity to see a billboard about the 450 kg bronze baptistery in the History Museum of Armenia at the moment, which is also one of the values ​​of the monastery.
 It would be positive to renovate the watch և to provide information in a foreign language, which is also attractive for tourists. • To attract tourists, it is necessary to create an attractive design and distribution, which can be provided by the newly created logos of the complexes (Fig. 2).
a)
 b) Fig. 2. Haghartsin (a) և Logos of Goshavank (b) monastic complexes The presence of well-informed guides in the given churches would be a positive impetus to achieve the mentioned goals, as not all tourists come with a guide.
Expand tourism services. By the service of monastic complexes we mean the services provided in the territory of the complexes, which do not contradict the norms of tourism, the caring role of the given complexes contributes to their tourist attractiveness and deeper perception.
 Therefore, the type and nature of services should be adapted to the cultural value of the object.
  Tourism animations should be developed in the services.
  An example of this type of service could be the creation of the Haghartsin Choir, which will regularly perform Khachatur Taronatsi's "Mystery of the Deep", created and composed in Haghartsin at scheduled times.
  Tourists must be informed that these complexes were not only caring, but also educational and scientific centers, where various works were written, lived and created by scientists in different fields.
  From this point of view, it would be very positive to raise the menu of the monks, to prepare dishes according to that list, which tourists can taste in a pre-separated place.
  It should be noted that this region stands out with its unique dishes (especially edible plants, mushrooms, berries).
  In this sphere it is necessary to involve the population of the region, who will sell their goods and food.
  This is also one of the components of sustainable regional development.
  At the moment, a tonratun is being built in Haghartsin, which will introduce the process of traditional lavash to tourists.
  Production of aromatic oils of local herbal teas is envisaged.
  The church already produces "Vank Anush" jams, which are made from local fruits, they are small, so they are convenient to take as a souvenir from Armenia.
Horseback riding on pre-arranged routes can be a source of income for the local population.
Develop complex routes. By showing only churches to tourists visiting Armenia, we can not provide a complete picture of the country, as well as extend their visit to the area, which is a possible circumstance of additional demand.
 That is why we offer to develop complex routes.
 Research shows that it is much more attractive for a tourist when the church is combined with a natural object, it is the final destination.
  For example, the route from Parz Lake to Goshavank, which is one of the most used routes.
  It is about 7 km long, the duration is 3-3.5 hours, the road is relatively difficult for hiking, it has tourist infrastructure (it is marked, there is a toilet ավար pavilion for rest).
  The next route is from Dilijan city or Jukhtak monasteries to Haghartsin monastery complex (this is a relatively more complicated route).
Goshavank-Gosh Lake is a relatively easy և attractive route, the end point of which is Lake Gosh surrounded by forests, near which there is a cold spring, comfortable pavilions for eating, where you can protect yourself from the rain.
 During this time the tourist communicates with the local nature, gets acquainted with the history of "Dilijan" National Park, the flora and fauna, the peculiarities of Gyle, which is a necessary condition for a good idea of ​​the region.
It is recommended to carry out the mentioned routes with a well-informed guide, who will present and answer the various questions of the tourists.
 When going from Haghartsin to Goshavank, you should definitely stop at the local rural food market (one of the upcoming programs of Dilijan community և it will get a systematic look soon).
In this way we promote the sale of ecologically clean food, we provide income for the local population.
Involvement of rural houses as a new type of accommodation. By the decision of the government, the city of Dilijan was declared a tourist, stable, eco-city.
 The prices of hotels and guest houses are getting more and more expensive.
 The mentioned are mainly concentrated in Dilijan city.
Naturally, you will not surprise the tourist who visits the region with luxury.
  They are looking for something new, local, so it is expedient to develop staying in rural housing.
  In this respect, we have a positive experience in Goshavak, when (even if they do not stay) they eat in the village garden, try local dishes and drinks.
 This contributes to the increase of the income of the local population, as well as to the increase of the level of tourism perception.
  It has a direct impact on the environment, because if before a person had to cut down a tree to heat his house, in parallel with the increase in income he gets the opportunity to supply gas.
 There is a unique opportunity for tourists to spend the night in rural yays, where people live during the summer months, taking their animals to the mountains.
Organizing regular tourism festivals and events.
We have traditional festivals in Armenia, which attract many tourists (Areni wine, Sardarapat dolma, Akhtala barbecue, Berd honey (berries, etc.).
  In this case, the Wine Festival is one of the best, when our tourists take part in the process of making wine, their own squeezed wine is sent to them by mail.
 In addition, they taste local dishes and get acquainted with the culture.
The mentioned festivals are included in the packages of different tour operators.
In this respect, the holding of the Haghartsin festival on August 18-24 of the current year is positive, during which the bronze cauldron kept in the History Museum and the ornament of the Mother of God will be brought to Haghartsin.
  Various exhibits belonging to the church will be displayed.
 Tasting and sale of clinical dishes in the neighborhood, various cultural events.
 This is possible to involve the local population and ensure their income, which is one of the components of sustainable development.
Identification of problems hindering the development of tourism Reduction.
Among the factors negatively affecting the tourist attractiveness are the man-made household waste in the sub-region, the poor condition of the inter-community roads, the attitude of the local population, deforestation, the presence of animals in urban areas, modern inscriptions on church walls and khachkars.
 Necessary work should be done in this direction both by the local self-government and the officials of the sphere, the reduction of the mentioned obstacles will significantly contribute to the inflow of tourists.
Conclusion Based on the above, we can conclude that in case of proper organization of tourism in Haghartsin բարձր to increase the tourist attractiveness of Goshavank monasteries, we contribute to nature conservation ավել increase the income of the local population, thus improving the sustainable development component of the region.
  We can also state that in case of providing the mentioned points, the flow of tourists ության the period of stay will increase, which will be more favorable for the solution of the mentioned problems.
 The expansion of services should not contradict the principles of preservation of the cultural object ացման implementation of the concept of sustainable development.
  Moreover, the services should be spatially differentiated according to the value of the distance from the object.
It is possible that tourists visit these areas not only during the summer season, but also throughout the year, ensuring a stable course.
Tigran Keryan THE RISE OF TOURIST ATTRACTION AS A PRECONDITION FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN THE REGION.
