Ս. FITCHERALD'S "THE GREAT GATSBIN" MODERN SCREENING OR ORIGINALIZATION OR "EXPERIENCE OF THE NOVEL" The Great Gatsby "by Francis Scott Fr. in April.
The book was screened five times: 1926, 1949, 1974, 2000 և 2013.
From the beginning, Jet did not succeed in screen adaptations.
Owen Davis' The Great Gatsby was first staged in Bordeaux in 1926, and the film premiered the same year, starring Gatsby as Warner Baxter and Daisy as Lois Wilson.
 We have received only the trailer of this silent film, which was released in 2004.
  This short video is kept in the Library of Congress.
  This was the only film screening that the author of the novel saw.
 However, Fitzgerald and his wife left the cinema without even watching the movie to the end.
  Zelda Fitzgerald immediately wrote to her daughter that the film is disgusting and horrible.
The next screening of the film took place in 1949, after the death of the author.
Here in the role of Gatsby is Alan Ledd.
 The plot of the film is adapted to the other roles played by Alan Leddy.
  In other words, Gatsby's character suffers, we see Alan Ledd more in the film than Gatsby.
The next major producer of the 1949 film, Robert Evans, went on to direct Gatsby for Daisyder to play his wife, Ellie McGraw, in the film, but the latter suddenly ran away with Steve McQueen. She was expecting a baby.
 Her body is hidden in loose clothes, and for this very reason the close-up, close-up scenes in the film are much closer, where she blinks her eyes, leaving the impression of a foolish happy woman.
  Moreover, he և Robert Redford (in the film, Gatsby) plays indifferently, as if feeling nothing.
 The film lasts more than two hours, but Redford only plays half-Gatsby, that is, he plays relatively well only the role of a hopeless lover, ignoring Gatsby's character peculiarities.
 The film made in 2000 is very little different from the previous films,, if someone who has not read the book, he will feel bored և indifference.
 The character of Daisy can be considered relatively successful in the film, which, however, is maximally sentimental.
 The screening that caused the most noise, the most profit, the most awards is in 2013.
  The film was shot in 3D format, duration 143 minutes.
  The cast of the film is as follows: Leonardo DiCaprio-Jay Gatsby, Toby Maguire-Nick Caraway, Carrie Mulligan-Daisy Buchanan, Joel Edgerton-Tom Buchanan, Elizabeth Debbie-Jill F.
 This screenplay differs from all other screenplays by a number of advantages, so we used BazLurman's film as a basis for comparison with the book.
  Literary critics, analysts have expressed different opinions and views on the film "The Great Gatsby", which can be found mainly on the Internet and in newspapers.
 The view that the film is more successful than the book և են surprisingly many supporters of this view, but there is also և the opposite view.
Below are some of the critics' opinions on Scott Fitzgerald's novel The Great Gatsby և Baz Luhrmann's film of the same name.
Writer, film critic Alex Axler writes: "Before the film appeared on the screen, watching Lurman's other films, I thought that the screening of 'The Great Gatsby' would be very heartbreaking.
 At the same time, I hoped that Lurmango would try to portray the era in the film, for which it would be interesting to watch.
 But Lurman did not live up to my expectations by presenting a film worse than I imagined.
 His version of "The Great Gatsby" is a completely tearful vulgarity, where there are, in fact, no living people, but other characters who try to take different positions, showing the decorative environment, playing a love story for enthusiastic teenagers, "noble" women.
 In short, I did not like it at all.
 Suffering, heartbreaking և very primitive film, where even the color, the curtains և Generally, the interior is not pleasing to the eye "[1].
Journalist, analyst Ani Asatryan writes. "Apart from a few conversations about racial discrimination (which, by the way, are the advantages of the original) and a few scenes from factories or industrial railways, the film does not emphasize the influence of place and time on the novel, which is one of the main points of Fitzgerald's work.
 If we pay attention to the soundtracks of the film, there is a lot of rap music, the existence of which in the context of America's 20s is not substantiated by the director. "[2]
Tai Boer praises DiCaprio at The Boston Globe. "It's wonderful. the only word that can describe this performance.
  This is the best screenplay of "Gatsby". superhuman charm և a mold that is beyond imagination.
 There is a dangerous deception in his heart, which he had in a hopeful relationship with a woman. ”
Journalist, film critic Natalia Grigorjan writes: "Respecting the author of the novel, Lurman does not forget about himself. With his light hand, the main symbol of time, jazz, disappears from the film.
 Instead, the characters dance to the ingenious "retro" music of Gershwin and Beyoncé, and hip-hop music is heard through the windows of cars.
It is possible to feel the spirit of the time without visible signs. "Instead of showing what kind of music Fitzgerald was famous for, the director tries to draw our attention to Fitzgerald's ridicule of his contemporaries."
 Then the critic adds: "DiCaprio և Mulligan's duet turned out to be very delicate և brittle ․ Through their movements and looks, they are able to convey the painful ending that must have taken place in the final shots, the development of which was actively "hindered" by Lurman until the last episode, boldly creating images combined with "discouraged" music.
Then, in parallel with analyzing the novel "The Great Gatsby", the film, let's try to show the separation of the writer, the director, the creative worlds.
First of all, we should not forget the fact that the writer has a lot of time - he is free to cross stories existing in the personal lives of different characters.
  The writer gradually develops the story of Gatsby, sometimes deviating from the story itself, filling the novel with secondary conversations and episodes.
 But the director does not have that time. he does not manage to complete the characters of "Out of Gatsby".
  The film, for example, omits facts from Nick's personal life that are not related to Gatsby, but are mentioned in the book, so Nick's character in the film somehow becomes a "servant" character for Gatsby.
Gatsby's story rises like a rippling wave in the film, all the foams that have little to do with Gatsby's greatness are erased during a sea storm.
 And if the writer, calling Gatsby the Great, mocks, showing the symptom of his time, then the director creates a story, the title of which does not contain any irony.
  The film ends with a change in the title of Nick Caraway's novel "Getsby". Nick adds the word "The great" - "The great Getsby".
 It does not even occur to the viewer that the word "Great" contains an ironic connotation.
There are few descriptions in the book. It can be said that there are no original descriptions, the author leaves it to the reader's imagination to imagine the characters.
  There are only facial expressions, external details with a caravan description.
  For this reason, difficulties have arisen in the choice of characters.
 For example, the role of Daisy was chosen for such actresses as Natalie Portman, Keira Knightley, Rebecca Hall, Scarlett Johansson, Amanda Seyfried, Blake Lively, Abby Cornish and Michelle Williams.
 Bradley Cooper, BenAffleck and Luke Evans could play Tom Buchanan.
The historical epoch described in the novel is known for its unprecedented economic and cultural prosperity, the development of jazz music, and the growing connection with new technologies.
 Some critics believe that the film has not preserved the features of the era, that in some episodes the music does not correspond to the epic time, causing an imbalance, but they do not try to find an explanation for this important question.
 This question has a modernized context, which is mainly realized through music, it follows from the idea that the issues raised in the novel are relevant today, and the connection with our times is implied through sound, music, because sound is very important for Fitzgerald.
 In fact, he does not describe Daisy outwardly, but only emphasizes his voice.
If we compare the entries of the film և novel, we will see the difference from the very first seconds.
 In the novel, the writer gives our imagination an idea of ​​a scene. Someone sitting at a desk in front of him who was writing lines.
 By focusing on that person who writes something, we deprive our imagination of the opportunity to imagine the space, the time in which the person sitting at the desk is in front of him.
 The film somehow reduces the cut, as it begins with a scene of green light, which later becomes part of the film, և accordingly, a part of Gatsby's essence, then complementing the green light և at some point, the snow, the cold weather, which becomes more provocative. for the first words to be heard later.
Thus, the film begins in the same order as the book, but the "initial silence" is different.
 In other words, the film psychologically prepares the preface, և we immediately enter the course of the novel.
Unlike the book, where, as we mentioned, Nick writes his story in the first person, the film begins with a dialogue with a doctor, which is interrupted by a "storm of memory." Nick Caraway, standing by the window ("After all, you look at life much better when you look at it from the only window," says Nick in the book, so it is no coincidence that the film's director throws him into memory just standing in front of the only window from which He remembers his acquaintance with Gatsby.
The heroes of the book live in the fictional cities of West Egg և East Egg.
It is not by chance that the author has created new cities, his cities (like Matosyan - Tsmakut, or Faulkner - Yoknapatuf, etc.), opposite to each other, starting from the names.
 The writer's ideas, feelings, time are inhabited in those cities.
 The existence created by the author must be properly reflected in the film.
 The director must be able to portray a scene in a film, a city that will not have a second like it, but will have its opposite.
  The choice is difficult especially because, as we mentioned, Fitzgerald hardly describes those cities.
 Baz Luhrmann approved the way out. There are no duplicates in nature, so he chose the predominantly green landscape of nature, where Gatsby Castle is located in infinity, out of space, with a tower that rises, which elevates Gatsby from the real, indifferent, mocking world.
 The non-existent non-existence in the book, West Egg, found the perfection in the film in which it can be molded.
 After remembering his acquaintance with Gatsby, Nick slowly walks away from the only window, the snow slows down, he moves to another world of memory when he visits Daisy և Tom's house in East Egg.
 It can be said that the director deliberately removes Nick from the window, as Gatsby separates from the others ("They are all nothing.
 "You yourself are worth that damn group, taken together," says Nick Gatsby. The window from which memories of the Great Gatsby arise can not lead to another monument, even to Daisy.
Nick's memory is a kind of fairy tale, reminiscent of the passage from Gatsby's house to Daisy.
  Nick's memory travels at lightning speed from Gatsby House to the sail of a boat in the middle of the ocean, behind the white waves of which Daisy's house.
  The cameraman-painting episode is not accidental. What separated Gatsby from Daisy was a white thing: a sail of expectation, loss, hope, again of expectation և it's no coincidence և that the film won an Oscar for Best Director.
 Fitzgerald later shows Tom's connection to the other, but for Lurman, that episode makes the character more complete.
  The episode of the phone call has changed in the film. At the moment when Nick tells about Tom, the phone rings, և Tom arranges. "Do not call my house."
  The director has to intrigue the story from the very first minutes in order to keep the viewer լար tense.
The room where Daisy և Jordan was is described in the book as follows: "We went through a wide corridor, entering a bright, pink space that was barely connected to the house, with high, double-glazed windows reaching the ground.
  The wide-open windows gave way to white on the grass outside, which seemed to have crept into the house.
 In the breeze of the room, the curtains resembled faded flags, sometimes outside, sometimes inside.
 In our opinion, that episode is more influential in the film, because there is nothing rosy. Everything is white, simple and luxurious at the same time.
  Luxurious chandeliers shine above the white rays, which, however, do not illuminate the area.
 The breeze fills the whole room with white for a while, from which it is accompanied by carefree giggles of women.
  The director begins to present his second central character first from the hands, more specifically from the ring (this is how the scene describing Gatsby begins: first we see the ring in his hand, then Gatsby with all his charm, the other hand in his pocket, slender, ambiguous but different are the tips of the rings…).
 Then, when Nick introduces his place of residence, Jordan says that he knows someone who lives next to Nick ․ That's Gatsby.
Daisy's response in the book is very primitive, it can be said that it says nothing, "Gatsby?" Daisy asked.
 "What Gatsby?"
 But Daisy's reaction in the film is not ordinary. he turns suddenly to the negligence of a man who listens to a familiar, unforgettable name, with suspicious eyes (at least so from Tom's uncertain look), which bow sadly, but at the same time hide behind the curtains, which open again from the wind and rise above the windows.
 A few notes at that moment suggest that the name was not accidental for Daisy.
Then the events of the novel are presented almost unchanged in the film.
  The splendor of the Gatsby gatherings is especially noteworthy.
 In that crowded scene, there is an old-new clash, an old image with new eyes, various representations of human psychology, a hidden mockery of Gatsby, who never took part in those gatherings, which in turn did not serve their purpose.
 All this is followed by vain mornings, the day before which seemed to be nothing, only the servants of the house had done something for themselves.
  During the gathering, the ocean periodically sings for a second or two, silent, calm, patient, like Gatsby in the hustle and bustle, empty, like those feasts.
In conclusion, we can say that the director was indirectly able to depict the main message of the writer, using more spatial signs, dumb shots, which are subtextual.
LITERATURE [1] URL.
 eco.msk.ru/blog/exler/1148252-echo/ (data date.
 18.05.2017). [2] Asatryan A., The Great Gatsby, May 20, 2013, 12.
05, URL.
  https:
//hetq.am/en/article/26636 (Accessed.
 12.05.2017).
[3] The Great Gutsby.
 Fitzgerald without jazz, May 16, 2013, 10.
15, URL.
 https:
//ria.ru/20130516/821768008.html?utm_source=freedly?utm_source=feedly(дадащения.
 14.05.2017). [4] Fitzgerald S., The Great Gatsby (translator: Seferyan S.), Yerevan, 2014, p. 27.
Botsinyan MarianaS. FITCHERALD'S "THE GREAT GATSBIN" TIME-SCREENING ․ ORIGINAL ORIGINATION OF THE NOVEL? EXPERIENCE OF THE NOVEL Keywords: screenplays of the novel, critical response, shots.
