UNDERSTANDING OF GUILT IN CONTRACTUAL LIABILITY One of the peculiarities of civil liability is that, unlike administrative-criminal liability, it can reach the euro in the absence of the offender's guilt.
 Moreover, this refers to both contractual and extra-contractual (tort) liability.
The general provisions of liability for breach of contractual obligations are envisaged in Chapter 1 of the RA Civil Code (hereinafter referred to as the Criminal Code), Article 417 of which refers to the fault.
 Point 1 of the mentioned article defines responsibility according to guilt, and point 3 defines responsibility without guilt 2.
Thus, according to Article 417, paragraph 1, the debtor is liable for non-fulfillment of the obligation և / or improper fulfillment in case of guilt, unless otherwise provided by law or contract3.
 It is clear from the literal interpretation of this norm that, according to the general rule, guilt is a necessary condition for contractual liability.
  There is no definition of guilt in this norm, but paragraph 2 contains a definition of sinless behavior. The debtor is found not guilty if he proves that he has taken all the measures dependent on the debtor for the proper fulfillment of the obligation.
As we see, this norm presupposes a presumption of guilt, և the debtor is obliged to prove that he has taken all the measures dependent on the debtor in order to fulfill the obligation properly.
  In this case, the civil law traces the global development trends of the unification of private law, as it discusses guilt with an objective, behavioral approach.
 As it is mentioned in the literature, the discussion of sin as a psychological attitude of the offender towards his behavior and his consequences is practically meaningless.
 Vityansky notes that such a change in the notion of guilt testifies to the rejection of the criminal idea of ​​guilt previously enshrined in the science of civil law4.
Simply in the science of modern civil law, the psychological theory of sin continues to exist, which is borrowed from Soviet civil science by the science of criminal law.
  Thus, in one of the recent professional monographs on the problem of guilt in civil law, the authors Pashents և Garamita made inquiries that present guilt as the delinquent psychological attitude of the offender towards his consequences, which is manifested as anti-state, anti-state, anti-state, anti-state. by choice of behavior.
 The above-mentioned authors discussed the guilt subjectively, as a result of which they mentioned that it is necessary for each specific person to establish a lawful situation in the given situation 1 See RA Civil Code, No. HO-239, adopted on 05.05.1998 .
2 It should be noted that in this article the legislator made a mistake.
 Unlike the previous legislation, which considers guilt as a condition of liability, the new code considers it a ground for liability (Article 417 is entitled "Grounds for liability for breach of obligation").
 It should be noted that such an approach can not be considered reasonable, as the lack of grounds excludes liability, and paragraph 3 of the same article provides for liability without fault.
 Sin is a condition of responsibility, but not the only one.
3 It should be noted that in point 1 of Article 417, the legislator made a mistake. In particular, the first paragraph speaks of non-fulfillment of the obligation և (or) improper fulfillment, that is, the conjunction "և" is used with the "or" link, while it is absurd to imagine that the debtor who has not fulfilled the obligation may simultaneously perform it improperly.
4 See Braginski M., Vitanyan V., Contract law.
 general position. Moscow, 1997, p. 582.
its own limits of the possibility of expressing the behavior, limits within which its free will will allow to avoid unfavorable property consequences1.
Guilt, as the offender's psychological attitude towards his behavior, has been discussed by a large number of well-known Soviet civilists.
Such an approach to sin, however, is not acceptable.
  The solution to the problem of guilt և innocence must be determined by analyzing a person's attitude towards his actions and responsibilities.
 If he exhibits the necessary vigilance, care that could be required of him, taking into account the nature of the situation in which he was acting, then such a person must be recognized in the event of a breach of innocent duty.
 This only applies to the case when it comes to carelessness.
If, in case of negligence, the person does not show the necessary due diligence նկատմամբ care required in the given situation, the egg of proven guilt is manifested by a conscious action or inaction, which causes property damage to another person2.
 The definition of guilt with its behavioral approach has also been reflected in the civil codes of foreign countries.
Thus, according to Article 3 1297 of the Austrian Criminal Code, every reasonable person should exercise the means of diligence and attention that are possible under normal circumstances.
 According to Article 4 276 of the German Criminal Code, a person who does not exercise the necessary vigilance acts negligently.
 According to Article 5 1176 of the Italian Code, the debtor must act with sufficient care of a reasonable subject while fulfilling his obligation.
In other words, the civil codes of these countries reflect the approach that society dictates to all participants in civil legal relations by the standards of prudent behavior, that market participants must be confident that their counterparts must act in accordance with the general requirements of prudent and prudent conduct.
This approach is also reflected in the RA Criminal Code, which particularly states that in order to be released from liability, the offender should not explain his psychological attitude towards the fulfillment of the obligation, but the fact that he has taken all necessary measures to properly fulfill the obligation.
 In other words, it is not a question of psychological attitude towards the offense, of realizing the obstacles of not fulfilling other obligations or of improper fulfillment, of looking for opportunities to overcome them.
On the other hand, it should be noted that it is unfair to make the creditor's right to receive fair compensation as a result of breach of contract dependent on the specific, unpredictable "will" of a particular debtor, "on his own limits on the manifestation of lawful conduct in the relationship."
 Such personalization of responsibility is necessary in criminal law, but in civil law it can lead to uncertainty in civil circulation.
 At the same time, it should be emphasized that the approach of the Criminal Code is not acceptable, which considers any precaution, care, any application of all measures dependent on it as a basis for release from responsibility.
 The specific creditor և the whole society has the right to expect from each debtor proper behavior, which will correspond to the social requirements accepted by all, the nature of the obligation, the terms of circulation, ie the proper level of prudence ած care during the fulfillment of obligations.
 It is from this point of view that the behavior of a specific debtor in a specific situation should be discussed.
According to point 3 of Article 417 of the RA Criminal Code, a person who has not fulfilled his obligation or has performed improperly in carrying out business activities shall be liable if he / she does not prove that proper execution was impossible due to insurmountable force, ie due to extraordinary and unavoidable circumstances. ., Garamita V., Wine in civil makes. Moscow, 2010, pp. 67, 117.
2 See Civil Law, 4 vols. / under row. E.A. Sukhanova /, Moscow, 2006, p. 4, Obligatory Law, pp. 634, 635.
3 Austrian Civil Code, available at http: // www.
//landwise.landesa.org/record/1084.
4 German Civil Code, available at http: // www.
//www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bgb/.
5 Italian Civil Code, available at http: // www.
//www.altalex.eu/content/italian-civil-code-translated-english.
not by law or contract.
 The legislator also stipulates that such circumstances are not, in particular, the breach of obligations by the debtor's counterparts, the lack of necessary goods in the market or the necessary funds of the debtor.
  In this case, in fact, the legislator has established responsibility without guilt.
Professor Barseghyan considers that this article envisages not liability without guilt, but liability regardless of guilt, in which case the priority is not to reveal guilt, but to apply the principle of mandatory compensation for the damage caused1.
However, the study of the Criminal Code shows that there are many exceptions to this general provision (Articles 547,691, 775, 866, etc.).
In order to find a solution to the current situation, it is necessary to study the norms regulating the responsibility for non-fulfillment or improper fulfillment of the obligations of international Criminal Code of foreign countries, combining the method of comparative law with the method of quantitative analysis.
In French civil law, guilt has traditionally been given an important role as a basis for contractual liability.
  The importance of guilt as the main condition of contractual liability comes from the famous French civilists from Pottier և Tomato, many of whose ideas were the basis of the French Criminal Code.
  However, it does not give a legal definition of "sin".
  According to Article 1147 of the French Penal Code, if there are grounds, the debtor is obliged to compensate the damages that occurred as a result of both non-performance and non-performance on time, if he does not prove that the non-performance was due to external reasons.
It is clear from the literal interpretation of this norm that the basis for compensation for damage is not guilt, non-fulfillment of the contract (inexecution).
  In this respect, Article 1137 of the French Criminal Code is interesting, according to which a person responsible for taking care of his / her property is obliged to do it with the necessary care and attention.
 As Rovan mentions, Article 1137 It is assumed from the behavior of the intended reasonable և prudent subject that guilt is taken into account when assessing such behavior2.
At first glance, it seems that there is a contradiction in Articles 1147 և 1137. between, because in one case the basis of responsibility is considered non-fulfillment of obligations, in the other case - guilt.
  According to Rowan, in order to overcome the conflict between the above-mentioned norms of the French Criminal Code, it is necessary to classify contractual obligations.
  The classification of contractual obligations became a concept that was introduced in the 1920s. Demog suggested, taking into account that the criterion of liability depends on the type of contractual obligations.
  The author divided the obligations into 2 groups: obligations aimed at achieving a specific goal (obligations de resultat) և obligations for the fulfillment of which the necessary efforts must be made (obligation de moyens) 3.
Liability for the first type of obligations is provided by Article 1147, and for the second type of obligations by Article 1137.
 The analysis of liability for the mentioned types of obligations shows that there is a model of liability for obligation de moyens and a model of liability without fault for obligations de resultat.
It is interesting that the above classification of liabilities has a tendency to develop in the legislation in France.
 It has been fixed in the "Draft Law on Improvement of Obligations" 4.
Thus, according to the draft, for contractual liability, if the person has committed to achieve a specific goal, the basis for liability is non-fulfillment of the obligation; only insurmountable force is considered a basis for release from liability (Article 1349).
  In the other case, the draft envisages liability according to the fault, because in case the party undertakes to make maximum efforts, there is an obligation 1 For more details, see Barseghyan T., The Evolution of Property Liability և Current Issues, Yerevan, 2006, pp. 278-302.
2 See Rowan S., Fault and breach of contract in France and England.
 some comparisons, European Business Law Review, 2011, No.22 (4), pp. 467-485.
3 See ibid.
4 See Proposals for Reform of the Law of Obligation and the Law of Prescription (Pierre Catala) / English translation by J. Cartwightand S. Whittaker, Oxford, 2007.
He can be held liable if he has not shown due diligence and care required of him in the circumstances (Articles 1149, 1364).
It is interesting that Article of the Principles of the International Trade Agreement (PICC). 5.4 և separates the obligations: obligation de resultat և obligation de moyens.
  Thus, according to point 1 of this article, in case the obligated party undertakes to achieve a certain goal, he is obliged to achieve that goal.
 By virtue of paragraph 2, where the obligated party undertakes to make every effort to fulfill its obligation, that party shall be obliged to exclude those which it could have excluded under such circumstances.
  Komarov writes in this connection. "These two points of the article provide a criterion for the arbitrators of the courts taken together, by which the proper fulfillment of the obligation can be assessed.
  In the event that it is necessary to achieve a concrete result, the party is obliged to achieve the promised result;
  On the other hand, non-fulfillment of the obligation, which requires maximum effort, implies a milder responsibility, based on the reasonableness of making efforts in similar circumstances.
 This difference means that, given his experience, more can be expected from a highly specialized person than from an ordinary participant in civil law. ”1
It would be desirable to include such a version of contractual liability in the HCO in connection with contracts used in the field of business.
There is a tendency for such a classification of liabilities in the case law of the Russian Federation2.
Accordingly, we propose the following wording under Article 417 of the RA Criminal Code. "A person is liable for non-fulfillment or improper fulfillment of the obligation in case of guilt, unless otherwise provided by law or contract.
 A person is presumed innocent if he / she has exercised due diligence or care during the performance of the obligation, ie he / she has taken all the necessary measures for the proper fulfillment of the obligation.
The absence of guilt is proved by the person who violated the obligation.
In carrying out business activities, if a person is obliged to achieve a specific result, he / she is liable in case of non-fulfillment or improper fulfillment of the obligation, if he / she does not prove that the fulfillment or proper fulfillment was impossible due to force majeure, ie due to extraordinary or unavoidable circumstances. not provided by law or contract.
The pre-concluded agreement on the elimination or limitation of liability for intentional breach of obligation is null and void. ”
The reason for prosecuting a person engaged in entrepreneurial activity without fault is such a feature of that activity as the risk of his / her ability in the field of economic relations.
 The entrepreneur, as an experienced participant in economic relations, is obliged to always show the highest degree of prudence and attention for the proper fulfillment of his obligations.
  The idea of ​​unlimited liability requires everyone to fulfill their obligation to the end, which does not allow the non-fulfillment of obligations to destabilize the chain of economic circulation.
 It also reflects the principle of non-inviolability of the contract.
However, establishing non-compliance with liability for non-performance or improper performance of obligations in the conduct of business, as seen in the text above the article, is related not only to this activity but also to the subject matter of the contract, to achieve a specific result.
 To substantiate this approach, let us consider the features of the legal regulation of a paid services contract.
  Thus, Article 777 According to point 1, services are paid 1 See Principles of international commercial agreements UNIDRA 2010 / Per. с апгл. A.S. Komarova, Moscow, 2013, pp. 154155.
2 See Establishment of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, from 23.01.2007 N1-P, Establishment of the Presidium of the Russian Federation from 24.01.2012.N11563 / 11 by section N A41-27081 / 10.
Under the supply contract, the contractor is obliged to provide services at the request of the customer (perform certain actions or carry out certain activities), and the customer is obliged to pay for those services.
  The article envisages the following types of professional services: communication, medical, veterinary, auditing, consulting, information, training, tourism և other services.
  Thus, in continental (for example, French), in common law, professional service obligations are classified as obligation de moyens, according to which the performer is not obliged to achieve a certain result, but is obliged to provide the service with reasonable care. with reasonable care andskill).
 This is how domestic legislation develops (whether the service provider is, as a rule, an entrepreneur), because according to Article 779 3 3, in case the impossibility of performance arose from circumstances for which neither party is responsible , the client shall reimburse the actual costs incurred by the contractor, unless otherwise provided by law or the contract for paid services.
  In fact, this norm extends the criterion to the perpetrator's behavior, because in the event of accidental circumstances that impede the performance of obligations, which could not have been foreseen, prevented by prudent behavior, the executor retains the right to reimbursement of expenses incurred.
Many Russian authors do not agree with such a special rule.
  Thus, Kabarov notes, "Since the role of the executor is a person who is engaged in business activities, it can be assumed that in conditions when he is not held accountable for the impossibility of execution, the violations may become more frequent."
  Of particular interest is the approach of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, which particularly states: "… Ultimately, in such an essential element of the contract as its subject, the legislator did not include the achievement of the result for the contract of paid services, for which it is concluded.
 The subject of this contract is the performance of certain actions or the performance of certain activities, even the result of the same service for which the contract was signed, in each specific case is not always possible, moreover, by the force of objective reasons ”1.
 The Supreme Court has further developed this approach, noting that the subject of paid services is the performance of certain actions or the performance of certain activities.
 However, since at the same time the CC allows the parties to establish by mutual agreement any conditions that are contrary to the law, the parties may enter into a contract not only for certain actions or activities, but also for a specific result (written consultation, draft contract, etc.). ) in connection with.
 These obligations represent different degrees of responsibility.
 If in the first case the executor guarantees maximum effort, in the second case a concrete result.
 In the latter case, stricter standards of responsibility apply2.
In this respect, the contract for the performance of the ACA և PKTA stands out, the subject of which is the specific result, but it is defined according to the responsibility of the fault.
 Such a circumstance is conditioned by the peculiarity of the subject of this contract, which is not only the creative nature of the obtained results, but also the fact that the parties are not able to determine the criteria accurately and clearly in advance, the probability of achieving it.
In fact, the approach that guilt in violating obligations under civil law should be perceived not as a psychological attitude of the offender towards his behavior and its consequences, but as a necessary precaution, outside of care, which can be reasonably expected from a person in similar circumstances.
1 See Establishment of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, dated 23.01.2007 N1-P.
2 See Establishment of the Presidency YOU RF from 24.01.2012. N11563 / 11 according to part N A41-27081 / 10.
In addition, the responsibility for non-fulfillment or improper fulfillment of obligations when conducting business activities should be conditioned not only by the nature of this activity, but also by the subject of the contract, that is, to achieve a concrete result.
Kristine Aleksanyan CONCEPT OF GUILT IN CONTRACTUAL LIABILITY Keywords: contractual liability, guilt, due diligence
: care, business activity, responsibility without guilt
.
