SOVIET-GERMAN RELATIONS 1940-1941 1939 After the signing of the Non-Aggression Pact, the relations between the USSR and Germany significantly improved.
  The powers cooperated especially in the field of economy.
  Specialists assessed the Soviet-German pre-war economic cooperation in different ways.
 Some historians have considered it inadmissible to cooperate with a potential enemy.
  Igor Pikhalov in his book "The Great Falsified War" mentions that establishing commercial relations with the future enemy is a completely natural phenomenon.
  As an example, he mentions that on the eve of the First World War, Germany was the main trading partner of the Russian Empire, while the agreement with France, which was strongly anti-German, was signed by Russia in 1893, and with England in 1907.
 The volume of trade between Russia and Germany was constantly growing1.
Referring to the Soviet-German-economic-economic relations in the pre-war years, it is necessary to answer a very important question: were those relations mutually beneficial?
 It should be noted here that the national economy of the USSR had inherited scientific and technical backwardness from pre-revolutionary Russia, it could not get out of that situation alone.
 The country needed modern industrial equipment for economic development.
 1931 On February 4, I. Stalin, speaking at the 1st All-Union Congress of Socialist Industry Workers, noted: "We are 50-100 years behind the advanced countries.
 We must overcome that difference in 10 years.
 Either we will do it or we will be destroyed. ”
 I. This definition of Stalin was not so far from reality, so the USSR needed systemic changes in the economy, especially in industry.
1930s At the beginning of the 19th century, the import of industrial equipment reached record levels, moreover, the main suppliers of the USSR were Germany and the United States, so the Soviet-German trade and economic cooperation was established before A. The coming to power of Hitler.
  ArdenA. Under Hitler in 1935 In April, an agreement was signed between the governments of the two countries on additional orders from Germany to the USSR2.
1939 There were certain preconditions for the maintenance and development of mutually beneficial cooperation. There is a lack of raw materials in Germany, and the USSR needed modern equipment and technologies.
 The Western powers, represented by England and France, to put it mildly, 1 See Pyhalov I., The Great War, Moscow, 2011.
2 See Bezymensky L., Gitler and Stalin before Shvatko, Moscow, 2000.
They were not very interested in helping the USSR, so the USSR sought to deepen cooperation with Germany.
  1939 On August 15, German Ambassador to the USSR F. Schulenburg to the USSR Foreign Affairs Committee V. Molotov conveyed the proposal of the Third Reich government to improve Soviet-German relations.
 During the next meeting of the Ambassador և People's Committee, on August 17, V. Molotov stressed that before starting negotiations on normalization of political relations, it is necessary to solve trade and economic problems.
 This circumstance was emphasized by F. In the memorandum passed to Schulenburg. "The USSR government considers that the first step in improving relations between the USSR and Germany may be the signing of a trade credit agreement."
  As a result, a Soviet-German credit agreement was signed on August 19.
Compared to similar documents signed earlier, this agreement was more profitable for the USSR.
  The USSR received 200 million marks in 7 years at a 4.5% interest rate.
 Later, inter-economic agreements between the USSR and Germany were signed in 1940. February 11, 1941 on January 10.
 At the same time, a number of additional agreements were signed, due to which the trade turnover of the states was expanded1.
  It should be noted that the Germans had a great appetite for raw materials from the USSR.
  1939 On October 8, 2012, Karl Ritter, the German government with special authority to conduct economic negotiations, presented an annual procurement plan of 1,300 million marks.
The very next day, the People's Commissar for Foreign Trade of the USSR A. In a conversation with Mikoyan, Ritter expressed Germany's desire to receive 1 billion marks worth of goods from the USSR.
  A. Mikoyan, however, mentioned that the USSR wants to take as a basis the maximum supply volumes of the previous years, in the amount of 470 million marks.
 Despite the efforts of the Germans, in 1940 The contract of February 11 envisages the supply of 420-430 million marks in the coming year, but only a little more than 400 million.
As mentioned, there was a sharp shortage of raw materials in Germany.
 The latter, in the 1930s. In the middle of the 19th century, he bought large quantities of raw materials from different countries and instead sold them goods that he did not need.
  For example, Yugoslavia had to buy large quantities of aspirin from the Germans, Romania thousands of printing presses, and so on.
 However, Germany could not use such a tactic in its relations with the USSR.
  The USSR was going to buy only the goods that were vital to it.
 1939 On January 21, 2012, the decision No. 68/182 of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Armenia was adopted, by which A. Mikoyan, L. և Մ. Submit to Kaganovich, Sergey, Vannikov և Lvov on January 24 the list of all necessary machine tools հաստ other types of equipment that could be ordered on German credit.
 1939 The 48-member delegation of the USSR has been in Germany since October 26. Led by Tosyan.
  Among the members of the delegation were aircraft designer A. Yakovl, leading experts in naval affairs, tank building, artillery, chemical defense, machine building.
  Visiting many factories, the delegates got acquainted with their most interesting 1 See Безыменский Л.
factory equipment, production processes, technologies 1.
  K. In a conversation with Ritter, N. Tosyan emphasized that their task is to get samples of the latest weapons and equipment from Germany.
 He added that they will not buy old weapons, և demanded to show them the latest achievements of the military industry, otherwise they will not make supplies.
 On October 29, A. Hitler allowed the members of the delegation to get acquainted with the military equipment in the military units.
  The latest models, which were still in the testing phase, were not shown to the USSR delegates.
  Soviet experts realized that the latest models were not shown to them, the German side was forced to show some of the latest models.
 In the end, the parties came to an agreement.
 Unique industrial equipment was ordered.
  Soviet experts ordered hundreds of copies of the latest machines.
  According to German statistics, 1940-1941. Germany supplied 6430 metal-working machines to the USSR, the total value of which was 85.4 million marks.
 For comparison, let us mention that in 1939 Only 3458 metallurgical machines were imported to the USSR from different countries.
  German supplies contributed to the development of the USSR military industry and the rearmament of the army.
 Powerful engines for motorboats, electrical equipment for warships, artillery for submarines, and numerous waterproof devices contributed to the development of the navy.
  Anti-aircraft artillery, T-III tanks, as well as equipment for radio communication, equipment for protection against chemical disasters, etc. were important for the rearmament of the ground forces.
  As for the Air Force, Heinkel 100 (5 pieces), Junckers 88 (2 pieces), Dorne 215 (2 pieces), Brucker W. 131 և 133 (6 pieces), Fokke Wolf 58 (3 pieces) ս Messerschmidt 109, 110 (5 pieces each) models, moreover, spare engines and spare parts were provided with all the planes.
  The planes were sent to expert institutions for research.
 1940 Some steps were taken to introduce some German technical solutions into the Soviet aviation industry.
  As for Germany, the latter needed raw materials.
  1939-1941 Large quantities of oil products, cotton, grain, nickel, phosphates, wood, etc. were exported from the USSR to Germany.
Thus, the Soviet-German economic cooperation was effective for both Germany and the USSR.
  If the former needed large-scale raw materials to further develop the powerful industry, to increase production, to improve the demand of the army and the population, the latter, despite the need for rich resources, economic transformation, modernization of industrial production, new equipment, needed this mutually beneficial cooperation. the demands of both parties.
Soviet-German political relations were quite stable after the signing of the non-aggression pact.
 1939 October 31, V. In a speech delivered by Molotov, he mentioned: "Our relations with Germany Pharma 1 See Pyhalov I.
… The Non-Aggression Pact obliged us to be neutral… We pursued that line consistently… Our troops entered Polish territory only after the dissolution of the Polish state.
  "Of course, we could not be neutral towards those facts, because as a result of those events, we were faced with acute issues related to the maintenance of our state security."
 1 V. Molotov, in fact, interpreted the entry of Soviet troops into Polish territory as a necessary step taken for security reasons.
  It was only decades after the war that it became clear that the move was due to the Soviet Union's commitments under a secret protocol signed in parallel with the non-aggression pact with Germany.
  In the second half of 1940, there was a certain coldness in Soviet-German relations due to the German supply of arms to Hungary and Romania, the entry of German troops into Finland, as well as fears in the USSR that Germany might be attacked due to dizzying German success in the West. On the USSR.
  1940 On October 13, 1945, Ribbentrop wrote a letter to Stalin, assuring him that Berlin was seeking further normalization of relations with the USSR and asking Molotov to allow Germany to negotiate.
 On November 10, Molotov left for Germany by special train from the Belarusian station in Moscow.
  The delegation consisted of the People's Committee of Metallurgy I. Tosyan, 5 vice-committees: V. Dekanozov, V. Merkulov, D. Krutikov, V. Balandin, V. Yakovl, heads of departments of the Foreign Affairs Committee, etc., a total of 65 people.
 Ambassador Schulenburg, his advisor Gerhard von Walter and the head of the German economic delegation Karl Schnourre are leaving for Germany with the Soviet delegation.
  The train arrived in Berlin on the morning of November 12, and negotiations began immediately.
 At 12.00 Ribbentrop received Molotov and Dekanozov.
The meeting with Hitler took place at 15:00.
  In the evening, a dinner was served in honor of the guest (without Hitler's participation) at the Kaiserhof Hotel.
  In the first half of November 13, Molotov met with Hitler և Hess, and at 14.00 again with Hitler.
 At 19.00 Molotov gave a reciprocal dinner at the embassy.
 It is noteworthy that Molotov and Ribbentrop stayed in the shelter until midnight due to the air alarm announced after the dinner (British airstrikes), and in the morning the Soviet delegation left Berlin.
  What did these meetings give? What issues were discussed?
  The negotiations were difficult from the beginning.
 Hitler tried in every way to involve the Soviet side in the "Troika", and Molotov paid great attention to certain issues, such as the withdrawal of German troops from Finland, the issue of Bulgaria, and so on.
  In addition to political issues, some issues related to economic cooperation were discussed, in particular, the Soviet side demanded to fulfill the obligations stipulated in the agreements, to deliver supplies on time.
  In response, Hitler stated that they were now fighting with England not for life but for death, then added that Germany had concentrated its forces: 1 Vert A., Russia in the War of 1941-1945, Yerevan, 1969, p. 72 .
to achieve a final victory against the English.
  According to B. According to Solovyov, Hitler's claims had nothing to do with reality; the Germans directed the lion's share of their resources to the preparation for the war against the USSR.
 During the negotiations, the German side tried to involve the Soviet Union in the war against England1.
  Molotov, however, responded cautiously to this offer, noting that England had not yet lost the war.
  While in the bomb shelter, Molotov's nerves gave way, he turned to Ribbentrop with the following words: "If you are so convinced that the score with England is settled, then why are we now sitting in the bomb shelter?"
 In the end, the negotiations did not lead to a tangible result.
  After the return of the delegation, the results of the negotiations were discussed in the political bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Armenia.
  On November 25, Molotov sent a memorandum to Schulenburg outlining the conditions (withdrawal of German troops from Finland, the issue of Bulgaria, Japan's renunciation of Sakhalin), which the Soviet Union was ready to consider if it agreed to join the Troika.
There are different views on this memorandum.
  According to one of them, this document was originally drafted in such a way that Hitler would not accept it, և thus closing the issue of membership in the "Troika".
  Membership in the "Troika" would mean a radical change in the foreign policy of the USSR, a renunciation of official neutrality, which was associated with serious risks.
  B. Solovyov, however, claims that the Berlin talks were originally planned by Hitler and Ribbentrop to disguise the anti-Soviet orientation of the Troika3.
  If we look at the issue from this point of view, it turns out the opposite: the conditions proposed by the USSR, regardless of the content, could not be approved by Germany, Germany did not respond to this memorandum in any way.
 Moreover, on December 18, Hitler signed the 21st directive of the attack on the USSR, which went down in history as the "Barbarossa Plan" 4.
1941 At the beginning of the 20th century, tensions between the USSR and Germany escalated.
 On January 30, Soviet newspapers published a detailed account of Hitler's speech, in which he predicted new victories over the British, declaring that the Americans, was only wasting time helping Britain.
 However, it was unexpected for the Soviet people that there was no mention of the Soviet Union in that speech.
  Moreover, at the end of the speech there was a small but ominous expression: "I have taken into account every possibility that can be imagined."
In the USSR they began to pay more attention to military-professional training.
  On the day of the Red Army, on February 23, "Pravda" published the Chief of the General Staff of the Army G. Zhukov's article.
  The latter mentioned that in 1940 It is a crucial year for the reconstruction of the army's training system, but he made it clear that the reconstruction is going on, that the situation is still far from perfect.
 On February 25, Hitler delivered a new speech in which he again predicted victories. Ang 2 Vert A., p. 82.
4 See Bezymensky L.
He did not speak about the USSR at all.
  A serious danger was created in the Balkans.
  German troops were already stationed in Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania in early spring.
 On March 27, an uprising broke out in Yugoslavia.
 A group of officers, led by General Simvolic, staged a coup following the signing of the Vienna Agreement by Prime Minister Cvetkovic to make Yugoslavia a member of the Troika.
  The USSR signed a treaty of friendship and non-aggression with the new Yugoslav government in Moscow on April 5, but a day later German troops entered Yugoslavia.
  Undoubtedly, Stalin and Molotov were aware of the danger of German aggression, but they hoped that they would be able to postpone the fateful hour until the autumn, when Germany was unlikely to attack, given the severe Russian winter, and until 1942. The USSR would have time to complete the preparations1.
  However, as history has shown, their expectations were not met.
Thus, if after the signing of the Non-Aggression Pact the Soviet-German relations had significantly improved, as evidenced by the mutually beneficial economic cooperation and the absence of political disagreements, then in 1940. By the middle of the 19th century, serious controversies had already arisen over the German occupation of Finland, the supply of arms to Hungary and Romania, and other issues.
 In terms of clarifying these issues, the Berlin meetings did not lead to a tangible result.
  The Germans did not respond to the memorandum presented by the Soviet side, which led to the escalation of the existing tension, which in 1941, gradually growing, turned into a war.
Gor Msrikyan SOVIET-GERMAN RELATIONS 1940-1941 Keywords: Great Patriotic War, Germany, USSR, Soviet-German relations.
