CHARACTERISTICS OF A JOURNALIST'S WORK PRESENTATION From ancient times we have a number of bibliographies describing the military operations and tactics of the warring powers in different parts of the world.
  All this proves that the origins of military journalism can be traced back to the earliest periods of world history.
 If we are guided by this point of view, taking into account the general features, we can notice that the first journalists covering warfare were the authors of those works, the historians.
  However, there is a significant difference. In ancient times, the purpose of historians was to compile protocols for government officials, while in the modern world the main mission of a military journalist is to provide information to the public from war hotspots.
The invention of printing բարձր raising the level of human literacy contributed to the availability of military information.
 However, the issue of operativeness remained fatal. After all, the troops of the states were fighting far from the homeland, it took a long time to get the news from the front to the place.
One of the first military journalists was Henry Robinson, a reporter for the British Times, whose editorial office was sent to Spain in 1807.
 The aim was to present to the reader through the eyes of an eyewitness the war between the French and Spanish troops, because at that time the society was obsessed with the Napoleonic wars.
The creation of the telegram և camera helped to convey information from the battlefield as quickly and efficiently as possible.
 Examining the articles in the newspapers Rech Ու Utro Rossi [1] during the First World War, we see that an attempt was made to coordinate the work of military journalists.
 Besides, we see in the press of this region the first serious attempts to create a propaganda, an "enemy image".
During World War II, military journalism underwent significant changes.
 A large number of new newspapers and magazines began to be published, the main purpose of which was still propaganda.
 At that time, the journalist covering the military operations, who was by the side of the army, was risking his life at all times, he was almost indistinguishable from an ordinary journalist both in terms of professional knowledge and status.
We see elements of military journalism in Armenia in the 1990s.
  During the years of the Artsakh war, hundreds of volunteers went to the front line, including journalists, writers, photographers, directors and cameramen.
 Witnesses testify that many of them combined war documentaries with military work.
 They were in the hot spots of the war, communicated with the civilian population, the military, witnessed complex military operations.
Thanks to them, a number of footage of the Artsakh war, photos և recordings from military operations, detachments ներից from the military are available today.
  But at the same time, there is very little information about the war documentaries, the obstacles to their professional activity, the difficulties, the technical possibilities.
 While preparing the scientific article, we recorded that the book "They Painted the War" was published in May 2017, where they found 34 interviews with those who in 1991-94 ․ They were on the battlefield, they painted the war (note that the book is based on interviews from the "War Documentaries" series published on the "Cinema World" website [4]).
Journalists working during the years of the liberation war drew the line between what is allowed and what is not allowed.
  The conscience, acting as a professional guide, suggested what to do and what not to do in the situation.
 They were not theoretically aware of the journalist's right to disguise themselves, but if necessary, resorted to this trick, involuntarily exercising their reserved right.
Freedom of information and communication are especially important during hostilities.
 That is why the adversary is also targeted by TV or radio stations.
There was a precedent in Artsakh as well.
 Artsakh Television was established in 1988.
  The first program was aired on June 1.
  That day is considered the birthday of Artsakh TV.
  Journalist, publicist Vardges Baghryan is one of the founders of Artsakh TV.
 The other eyewitnesses tell how in 1992 The building of the TV center was completely destroyed due to the rocket fire in Shushi in February.
 The bomb fragment fell into the library.
 The videos were easily bright, they ignited immediately.
  The employees, including Vardges Baghryan from the fire zone, managed to remove only the equipment.
 According to him, the archive of four years has burned almost completely.
 Only what was copied was kept in the houses.
Let's name the names of some of the documentarians of the Artsakh war • Norek Gasparyan. He is the chairman of the board of the Artsakh Television and Radio Company.
 He started working in television in 1988, during the war he was in almost all hot spots.
• Director of Photography Tachat Yesayan together with his colleagues Ruben Khachatryan and Tigran Gorgyan moved to the field of television in 1987 from the field of cinema.
 The cameras were replaced by cameras.
 They became the operators of the "News" program of the Public Television.
  Memorable dates, events and figures in Tachat Yesayan's Artsakh stories, which are fixed as facts and evidence three decades later.
• Benjamin Gharakhanyan has been working for Artsakh Public Television since its establishment, is an NKR Honored TV Journalist, co-author of screenings of eight TV films.
• Editor-in-chief of Hetq electronic periodical, journalist Edik Baghdasaryan left for Artsakh as a journalist in the 1990s.
 He was in Artsakh in April 2016.
  We can conclude that in some way the journalists who worked during the Artsakh war in the 1990s are considered to be the pioneers and initiators of military journalism in Armenia.
 There were no definitions, professional principles, ethical norms.
 At the same time, they became the creators and applicants of professional conditions and rules.
 This freedom facilitated the work of documentarians.
We must prove that in that crucial period for Armenia, it would not be realistic to think about maintaining professional ethics.
During the April 2016 war, we witnessed a completely different picture.
  Over the years, the Armenian media field has developed.
 Along with the technical development, the level of media literacy of both journalists and the society had relatively increased.
  A number of media outlets developed ethical codes.
  The triumph of information technology ումը the spread of the Internet contributed to the availability of operative information.
  This circumstance relatively facilitated the work of journalists covering the front lines, but at the same time there were a number of ethical issues, and large flows of misinformation were registered.
It is no secret that since 1994, when the ceasefire was established, the ceasefire regime has been violated many times in different parts of the border.
 Going back to the activities of the Armenian media, we can say that over time, more favorable conditions have been created for covering the hostilities, however, there are many shortcomings, the main reasons for which are the unskilled, inconsistent and illiterate work of journalists.
 Both the RA Ministry of Defense and the Azerbaijani Defense Army provide reports on sabotage infiltrations and other military operations.
 Such cases cause panic in the society, especially when it comes to victims or wounded.
In addition, we face the problem of misuse of military terms, which can cause panic.
 When covering war situations, the appropriate terms may be used correctly.
  In April 2016, journalists and cameramen from different media left for Artsakh.
  Any journalist should be well prepared to go to the front lines, especially to cover combat operations.
 Of course, first of all it is about psychological preparation.
  The journalist must soberly realize the "danger to the life of his colleagues, understand where he is going, what task is set before him", but most importantly, he must realize that he will deal with delicate human feelings (especially during interviews).
  Only a live journalist and cameraman can prepare reports from the scene during hostilities.
 Therefore, one should pay due attention to the safety of one's own life.
Unfortunately, today all over the world (also in Armenia) there are journalists who think that the coverage of military operations is a way to become a hero, to gain recognition, for that one has to take risks at the risk of risking one's life.
However, this is not only far from a professional style of work, but it is fraught with various problems and consequences.
In civilized countries, a journalist covering war է hostilities ceases to be a target at the scene when there is a "PRESS" sign on his back, arm, head, chest, as well as on his head.
  Anything surrounding the newsgroup in hotspots should be covered with that sign, starting with the car.
We mentioned the need for "PRESS" writing on the journalist's clothes, as it is to some extent insurance for the journalist's life.
 But there is another circumstance. The clothes of the media representatives should not look like military uniforms (all shades of yellow-green, brown-earthy should be excluded), because regardless of whether the word "PRESS" is on the clothes or not, the journalist is vulnerable.
We face this problem in conditionally peaceful situations.
There is a vivid proof of what has been said in the Armenian reality.
  We are talking about the incident that took place on May 10, 2017, when in the northern part of the Artsakh-Azerbaijani line of contact, the enemy opened fire on the film crew of "Shant" TV's "In Position" program.
 In the area between the combat positions located in the northern direction of the Defense Army, the enemy fired from large-caliber weapons, sniper rifles and machine guns.
  Davit Arayik Atoyan, the cameraman of "SHANT" TV, was shot and wounded by the enemy. He was sent to a position for filming (surgery was provided in Stepanakert hospital).
  This case became the subject of a number of discussions.
  A criminal case was initiated in the Third Garrison Investigation Division, according to Article 34-104, Part 2, Clauses 1, 6, 13 of the RA Criminal Code, motivated by the enemy for national-religious hatred, in a way dangerous for many lives, illegally intentionally by two or more persons. on the occasion of attempting to take a life.
Although enemy fire could have had a tragic end for any member of the film crew, from a professional point of view, it should be noted that: • The car of the film crew passing through the battlefield was no different from a military vehicle.
 Moreover, the "PRESS" sign was not missing at all, but the car was completely covered with military patterns. • The members of the film crew were in military uniform (according to some sources, armed), so the enemy could not guess that media representatives were in the car.
We do not intend to justify the hostilities with this example, however, from a professional point of view, we must state that the media representatives have no right under any circumstances to appear in the conflict zone in this way, endangering not only their lives but also causing more border tensions and shootings. .
The main document on the rights and responsibilities of journalists working in the conflict zone was signed in 1949. Convention: 1977 with additions-protocols.
  It is desirable that any journalist covering conflicts know their basic principles for two reasons. First the violations of the protocol, then the square, including the war crimes.
  In addition, some of the points in the document refer to the rights of journalists.
 According to the UN Convention, journalists performing their professional duties in the conflict zone must be considered as citizens unless they have taken a step contrary to this status.
 For example, if they are not in military uniform or have not taken up arms.
For a front-line journalist, it is important to stay in touch with the editorial office and report on the group's movements as quickly as possible.
  Definitely, there are problems with the equipment, the primary of which is charging.
  Recently, this gap is being filled by additional batteries, which the journalist must obtain in advance.
The image is more influential than the word.
 "Hetq" electronic periodical is one of the unique ones in Armenia that in 2002 has adopted a code of ethics.
However, in 2016, Hetq violated some rules of ethical journalism.
 An article entitled "Atrocities in Talish (WARNING: Photo of shot dead)" was published.
  No details were hidden in the photo.
  The editorial office shared the following opinion next to the photo. "We apologize to the readers. "Hetq has never published such photos, this is a violation of our ethics, but we have no other way to present the reality at this moment."
  As Hetq Editor-in-Chief Edik Baghdasaryan has repeatedly stated, the publication of those photos was the result of a joint decision by the editorial board.
  The position of the editorial board is clear. a factual basis for presenting the atrocity was needed.
  Later, a group of lawyers and journalists took the initiative to apply to the International Criminal Court, the European Court of Human Rights, thanks to this photo.
 However, in the comments accompanying the article, there were many opinions that the editorial office should not publish not only the photo of the killed elderly people, but also their names. [6]
During the April war, Artsrun Hovhannisyan, the spokesman of the RA Ministry of Defense (especially on the "Facebook" social network), stood out as a source of information, as he was very active.
  Media experts contributed to the dissemination of sober and literate information, again using the Facebook platform.
 With their advice and encouragement, they helped both the information workers and the citizens waiting for information from the border at all times.
Speaking about the omissions, the IT specialists, in order to avoid similar situations in the future, proposed to change the amount of information provided by the state agencies, passing from press releases to briefings.
On October 24, 2017, an information center equipped with modern technical equipment of the Azerbaijani Defense Army was opened in order to coordinate the work of journalists working on the front lines and create the most comfortable conditions possible during these operations.
  The Artsakh Military Defense Information Center will operate under the press service of the Defense Army, which will be supported by the press services of all state bodies in crisis situations.
  There has never been such a center in Artsakh before.
  The work of journalists had to be organized in a non-coordinated manner in various public facilities.
The need to have a modern information center arose especially after the April 2016 operations.
The Geneva Convention defines the movement of journalists on the front lines during hostilities.
  The work of war journalists in Armenia is regulated by the order of the commander of the Defense Army.
  It should be noted that the Armenian media watchdog has developed a guideline on "Journalists and media behavior during war, armed conflict, and civil strife."
The UN Security Council regularly expresses its concern over the freedom and security of journalists.
  A recent Security Council document adopted in 2015 called on states to take steps to protect journalists from being targeted during hostilities and to act as civilians in the event of capture.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) also deals with the security of journalists.
 In particular, since 1985, the organization has a hotline (now also online at ICRC.org) for journalists who find themselves in a hopeless situation.
The ICRC provides exclusively humanitarian assistance.
 Not only journalists, but also their employers or relatives can apply to the organization for support.
  In such situations, the ICRC can provide a variety of assistance, including information on a journalist's possible arrest, information on the journalist's whereabouts, active search operations, or first aid for injured journalists.
Thus, journalists working on the front lines must be able to transmit information through professional work not only to their own citizens, but also to the international community, strengthening their leading position in information wars.
LITERATURE [1] Foreign Correspondence.
  The Great Reporters and Their Times, John Hohenberg, [2] Ддук Д. В., Война и печать.
 to the history of military reporting in the Russian newspaper [3] "Benon documenting the liberation war", URL.
 www.hayzinvor.am/48592.html (link made on 28-06-2018).
[4] URL.
 www.kinoashkharh.am (link made: 14-09-2018).
[5] URL.
 www.mil.am/media/2016/07/11192.pdf (link made: 19-02-2018).
[6] Petrosyan V. G., "Ethical Challenges in the Days of the April Four-Day War", YSU, Ijjan Branch, "Akunq", 2017.
MILTA MKRTCHYAN FEATURES OF JOURNALIST JOURNALIST'S DESIGNATION Keywords: military journalism, frontline coverage, front, war, security, liberation war, conflict, ethics, Artsakh, press, army.
