WHY SIGN A FACTORING AGREEMENT, IF A JESIA AGREEMENT COULD BE SIGNED? According to the RA Civil Code1 (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Code).
Despite the fact that the institute of factoring has been present in the RA legal system for seventeen years, the Armenian factoring market is still in the initial stage of development, while the experience of advanced countries shows that the institute of factoring շ its developed market has great economic potential.
In order to fully introduce the factoring institute in the RA market, it is necessary to create appropriate legal-practical preconditions, for which purpose it is necessary to study the factoring institute and reveal its peculiarities.
  In this scientific article, an attempt has been made to study the factoring agreement by comparing it with a cession transaction.
Thus, Civil. day. According to Article 892, “Under the financing agreement for the concession of the monetary claim, one party (financial agent - factor) transfers or is obliged to transfer funds to the other party (client) at the expense of the client (creditor)'s claim from a third party (debtor); which arises from the client providing goods, performing works or providing services to a third party, and the client gives in to the financial agent or undertakes to concede that monetary claim. ”
City. day. Paragraph 1 of Chapter 25 provides for the legal regulation of the transfer of creditor rights to other persons (hereinafter referred to as cession).
 In particular, City. day. According to Article 397. "The right (claim) belonging to the creditor on the basis of the obligation may be transferred by him to another person by a transaction (concession of the claim) or transferred to another person on the basis of law."
It turns out that Qagh. day. The norms enshrined in different chapters seem to govern similar legal relations.
 And the basis of the factoring agreement, the cession transaction is the concession of the claim from one subject to another.
 Under a factoring agreement, the customer transfers the right to a monetary claim to a third party based on the obligation to provide goods, works or services to the financial agent in order to receive money from him, and under the cession agreement, the creditor relinquishes his claim based on the obligation. to another person և it may not be due to a performance.
City. day. It follows from the analysis of Articles 892 և 893 that a factoring contract is a type of contract used in a business relationship.
City. day. Article 397 does not impose an imperative claim on the compensable or gratuitous nature of the cession, therefore the cession transaction can be both gratuitous and compensable.
 In this paper, when referring to the cession transaction, only the paid cession transaction will be considered.
 Moreover, although Civil. day. It does not follow from the literal analysis of Chapter 25, but in practice a compensatory cession is concluded between the subjects of business activity.
 The jurisprudence of the Russian Federation, for example, tends to enter into a compensable cession transaction between commercial organizations, otherwise it is considered a donation agreement2.
 We consider that such an approach is acceptable for the RA practice as well.
 City. day. 598th 1 HHPT 1998/17 (50), 10.08.98.
2 See Establishment of the Presidency YOU RF from June 15, 1999. N 1134/99. www.consultant.ru 10.05.2015 as of.
According to this article, donation is prohibited in the relations between commercial organizations.
In this case, the question rightly arises as to the reasons why the civil turnover entities should prefer the factoring agreement over the cession.
 What is the advantage of a factoring agreement over a cession for the subjects of civil law to involve the financial agent in their relations?
A comparative analysis of the factoring agreement cession reveals that they are correlated as general, specific institutions.
 In both cases there is a transfer of money from one entity to another.
 Unlike a cession, in which the right of claim arising from any obligation is subject to transfer (taking into account the exceptions provided by the Civil Code), only the right to a monetary claim arising from the provision of goods, works or services is subject to transfer under a factoring contract.
Thus, the cession law regulates a wider relationship, all the relationship of the waiver of the right of claim, which arises (except for the cases prescribed by law for the factoring contract) from any obligatory relationship.
 Jeddah can make concessions to the assignee, as well as one or more requirements.
 In case of division of the subject of the obligation, a partial cession is possible: the assignor concedes a part of the claim, and the other part remains with him or gives way to several cessionaries 1.
Only the right arising from the provision of goods, works or services (Article 892 of the Civil Code) can be transferred for lending under the factoring agreement (Article 892 of the Civil Code).
City. day. According to Article 894 1 1, the subject of the concession for the provided financing may be both the monetary claim whose due date has expired (current claim) and the right to receive funds (future claim).
The monetary claim subject to the concession must be determined in the contract concluded by the client with the financial agent in such a way as to enable the existing claim to be identified at the time of concluding the contract and the future claim no later than the moment it arises.
As it seems, Qagh. day. From the analysis of Article 894, the transfer of a future claim within the framework of a factoring agreement is possible.
 The cession deal with this feature differs from the factoring contract, as Civil. day. It follows from the analysis of Chapter 25 that only the right to an existing claim that has already arisen can be transferred through a cession transaction.
A factoring contract is a special way of lending, where the waiver of the right to demand is a means of securing financing provided by a financial agent.
  However, the factoring structure does not preclude any transfer of the right of claim arising from the monetary claim, but presupposes the provision of certain services related to the financing of the client's activities by the financial agent և the acquisition of the client's claim to third parties2.
  Factoring is a set of measures aimed at the rapid growth of the organization.
  It allows you to increase sales in a short period of time և allows the organization to grow faster than lending.
  The main goal of the factoring service provided by the bank is to ensure the employment of the organization with its main function - selling, providing services, without constantly looking for solutions to financial problems.
From this point of view, the factoring agreement seems to be more profitable for business entities. The entrepreneur assigns the right of his claim to the factor, which provides the transferred amount և the amount to be demanded to the businessman, is engaged in the management of receivables, and the businessman is engaged in his main activity.
  However, a closer look reveals that the factoring agreement "the cession deal is a parallel plane" in this case.
 The difference between the two institutions is in which property of the transferred receivables are transferred after concluding the contract (transaction).
 If the cession of the transaction 1 See "Essays on the right of trade" Collection of scientific papers under the editorship of the candidate Eridicus E.A. Krashennikova. Выпуск 6, Ярославль, 1999, p. 14.2 See Gabov A., Some Problematic Issues of Institutional Rights // Cruelty and Law, №4, 1999 pp. 53-60. The receivables of the assignee pass to the assignee և enter into his property, become the property of the assignee, then in the case of a factoring contract those receivables continue to be the liabilities of the customer.
  The financial agent simply performs the function of managing those receivables due to his more knowledge, experience and availability of relevant staff.
  Transferring receivables to a factor is a good way to optimize your business1.
 City. day. With this regulation, however, there are cases when the customer does not transfer his receivables management function to the factor.
  Thus, Civil. According to Article 892, Part 2, "The financial agent's liabilities under the financing agreement for the concession of a monetary claim may include accounting for the client, as well as providing the client with other financial services related to the monetary claims that are the subject of the concession."
The phrase "may include" in the wording of the above article indicates that the transfer of the customer's receivables management function to the invoice is not an essential condition of the factoring agreement.
  An invoice management contract with no receivables is, in effect, more like a cession deal.
  City. day. Article 892, Part 2 արդյունքում As a result of a comprehensive analysis of the essence of the factoring institute, we find that it is necessary to provide the customer's receivables management function to the invoice in an imperative manner.
We are not talking about all the receivables of the customer, but only the receivables related to the obligation conceded to the invoice under the factoring contract.
 This proposal is based on the experience of countries with developed factoring markets.
 Abroad, the functions of factoring are more widely understood, և financing is not its only function.
 Moreover, the purchase of a claim may be made not so much for financing purposes as to protect the seller from evading payment by the buyer2.
The financial agent acquiring the receivables from the client should be interested in assuming such liabilities, which allows him to control the client's activities (in terms of receivables) and to follow the solvency of his debtors3.
  This feature is probably one of the most important differences between a factoring contract cession.
 If the factoring agreement does not provide the financial agent with an obligation to provide accounting and other financial services to the client, the factoring agreement is identical to a reimbursable assignment.
In addition to the above, to provide accounting and other financial services to the customer, envisaging an imperative order of factor obligation. In fact, the content of the factoring agreement will be closer to the understanding and content of the international factoring agreement, new ways and opportunities for the development of the domestic market will appear, while currently The concept of a factoring agreement enshrined in the Code does not fully reflect the content of the legal relationship.
In fact, factoring is an integral part of the legal relationship in addition to providing financial resources to the client, as well as the provision of other financial services to the customer, ie debt management, disbursement of debts, etc.
 This ensures the stability of the market, as the client does not have to spend certain funds for debt management, but due to the implementation of this activity by the financial agent, you have a clear idea of ​​the status of debtors and receivables, knows that debts are overdue. problems և etc.
 It is important for a financial agent to carry out this activity, because in that case he has an idea of ​​the debts to be acquired, it is reduced unreasonably or unreasonably. 1 See Solntsev M., Factoring becomes a good alternative credit for small and medium-sized businesses. Ведомости ”19.11.2013, www.factorings.ru, was available on 05.05.2015.
2 See Fomkin K․, Is it possible for the Russian war factor to be called factoring ?, “Company”, 26.11.2013, www.factorings.ru was available on 05.05.2015.
3 See Braginski MI, Vitrinsky VV, Contract Law, Book of Voyages, Volume 1, Loan Agreements, Bank Credit and Factoring. Agreements, made on the creation of collective education M., 2011, p. 262.
the risk of acquiring slab requirements.
  In fact, the financial agent has the opportunity to assess his risks in more depth.
The main difference between a Jessia transaction and a factoring contract is their subject matter.
 There is no requirement for the subjects of cession by the legislator, which means that a cession transaction can be concluded by any fully functional subject of civil turnover.
 As mentioned, a factoring contract is a type of contract used in business relations, which implies a special subject staff of the factoring contract.
According to the norms on the factoring agreement, with a special requirement set for a financial agent, only certain relations are regulated, where banks or other credit organizations act as concessionaires, as well as other organizations with a license to carry out such activities1.
City. day. According to Article 893, banks, other credit organizations, as well as other commercial organizations licensed to carry out such activities, may enter into financing agreements as monetary claims as financial agents.
  City. day. It follows from the literal interpretation of Article 893 that, in addition to banks and other credit organizations, any commercial organization that has a license to carry out factoring activities may act as a factor, while Article 43 43 of the RA Law on Licensing defines the subject of licensing. Types of activities, factoring activities are not available as a separate type of activity subject to licensing.
  Clause 6 of Article 43 of the RA Law on Licensing envisages licensing the activities of a credit organization as a type of banking-financial-credit activity.
  Part 6 of Article 3 3 of the RA Law on Credit Organizations states: ով In terms of other laws and normative legal acts of the Republic of Armenia regulating the activities of credit organizations of this Law, the following are considered types (groups) of credit organizations: d) Money financing () factoring organizations, whose main activity is the conclusion of financing (factoring) transactions in exchange for a concession of monetary claim, in accordance with the procedure and conditions defined by Chapter 48 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia.
It follows from the above article that factoring companies are credit organizations.
  In this case, it is practically incomprehensible. The phrase "like other commercial organizations with a license (license) to carry out such activities" of Article 893, for example.
The financial agent sets a number of requirements, to which the factoring agreement is concluded only with the client.
 Such requirements are, for example: • Customer / debtor experience in the field, • Partner experience, • Financial data, bank account turnover, • Transaction frequency, credit history.
It is necessary to take into account that there are no common requirements set by the financial agent.
 This means that different financial agents can sign different factoring agreements with a customer.
  For example, in practice, there may be cases when only 1 See Civil Code is sufficient to conclude a factoring agreement. day. Article 893
  In our opinion, this article needs to be edited.
  According to the 2nd paragraph of the 10th point of the 45th article of the RA Law on Legal Acts, when listing the conditions when the presence of only one of the enumerated conditions is sufficient, the conjunction "և" or "and" cannot be used.
  City. However, in the mentioned article, the phrase "banks - other credit organizations" is used, in which case the participation of other credit organizations becomes a mandatory condition for the application of the article at the same time as the banks' participation.
  To remedy this situation, the article should be edited as follows: "As a financial agent, banks or other credit organizations may enter into financing agreements in exchange for a monetary claim, as well as other commercial organizations with similar licenses."
2 ARPA 2001.08.08 / 26 (158).
3 ARPA 2002.07.03 / 23 (198).
An invoice for the supply of goods, services or works as proof of the customer's right to claim.
City. day. According to Article 403, the assignment of the creditor's claim to another person is allowed, if it does not contradict the law, other legal acts or the contract.
City. day. Under Article 398, the transfer of claims inalienable to a creditor, including alimony, damage to life or health, is not permitted to another person.
As we can see, in the case of a cession transaction, the law does not provide for mandatory conditions for concluding the transaction, which must be documented.
 The only obstacle to concluding a Jessian transaction is that the law may prohibit the granting of a corresponding claim.
  As for what kind of cooperation the businessman has with his colleague, what kind of experience he has in the relevant field of activity, etc., it is not a subject of the assignee's interest.
In essence, in the case of a cession transaction, as in the case of a factoring agreement, the parties decide what documents the party conceding the right to claim must submit to the other party in order to prove the existence of the right of claim which is the subject of the concession.
L.A. Studying the benefits of a factoring contract, Novosyolova notes that the economic interest of the debtor is that he receives the money immediately, that his debt service costs are reduced, and that the debtor is partially or completely relieved of the risk of insolvency.
  The financing party (factor) receives remuneration for the services rendered դեպքերում in some cases reaps additional benefits from the difference between the amount paid to the creditor ացված and the amount received from the debtor1.
It cannot be said that the parties lack such positive results during the signing of the cession.
Moreover, from this point of view, cession has a significant advantage over factoring contracts. The scope of the obligations underlying the right of claim subject to cession is not limited.
  In addition, in the case of a cession transaction, according to the agreement of the parties, the cedant, in fact, sells the right of his claim ստանումreceives the full amount at once, while when concluding a factoring contract, the customer usually does not receive one hundred percent of the transferred amount.
 The study of the banking practice of the Republic of Armenia shows that the banks provide 90% of the value of the right of claim to the customer during the factoring contract, and the remaining 10% are provided after the debtor fulfills the obligation (from 10% the bank takes the rent in advance).
This is due to the fact that day. According to Article 399, the right of the original creditor passes to the new creditor to the extent existing at the time of the transfer of the right, under the conditions. day. Pursuant to Article 894 ման 1, the object of the concession for the provided financing may be both the monetary claim for which the payment period has expired (current claim) and the right to receive funds (future claim).
The reason for the claims presented to the client by the financial agent, unfortunately, is to insure himself against risks.
 Since the factoring is allowed to give way to a future claim, it is not clear from the wording of the law when saying a future claim, the legislator meant the right to claim arising from a contract, so for a financial agent to calculate risks, the client դառնում based on which he will be able to assess the possibility of receiving the amount required from the client's counterparty.
Future monetary claims, in our opinion, should be considered those based on installment payment contracts, although there is no consensus in the scientific literature on this.
Summing up the above, let us mention that the factoring agreement is a commercialized cession agreement.
  According to factoring experts, cession is a version of the Soviet factoring era.
  In the conditions of modern rapid development, unfortunately, 1 See Deresh S., Significance of Factoring in Pre-Employment Activities // Current Problems of Russian Rights.N1 (10) 2009, pp. 215-221.
Factoring is more convenient for business people, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, as it ensures a constant flow of funds to the organization և gives the organization the opportunity to ensure continuity of activities.
In addition, the factoring agreement allows customers to offer their counterparties a more flexible payment system without compromising the continuity of the customer's operations in the event of a counterparty.
  Along with all this, it is necessary to improve the existing legislative base factoring market regulation in order to ensure the uninterrupted and rapid development of the market.
Table 1 ․ Factoring agreement and cession factoring transaction affinities and tarberutyunneredramakanpahanjipokhantsumpahanjihimkisahmanapakvatsutyunapagapahanjizijmanhnaravorutyunhatuksubyektayinkazmlratsutsichtsarayutyunnerimatutsmanhnaravorutyunpastatghtayintsanrabernvatsutyunfaktoringipaymanagirtsesiayigortsarkAnna AvetisyanINCHU SIGN AGREEMENT IF WE CAN CONCLUDE cession PAYMANAGIRBanali words, factoring, cession factor, financing requirement.
