OWNERSHIP ASSEMBLY AS A PRECONDITION FOR ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY RIGHT TO REAL ESTATE.
 It is not accidental that the right to property is enshrined in the chapter "Fundamental human rights and freedoms" of the RA Constitution, which guarantees a higher level of this right, because, as enshrined in the Constitution, it has the highest legal force, and its norms apply. directly.
  Article 31 of the RA Constitution stipulates: "Everyone has the right to own, use, manage and bequeath their property at their own discretion.
 "No one shall be deprived of his property except in the case of law and order."
 As it becomes clear from the above-mentioned constitutional norm, it enshrines the powers belonging to the owner, which belong to him as the holder of the subjective property right, thus showing the scope of the content of the property right.
  Article 163 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Code) complements the constitutional norm, revealing the content of the powers of the owner սահման the limits of application.
  In particular, in the 1st-2nd parts of the given article it is fixed: «1. The right of ownership is the right of the subject, recognized and protected by law, by other legal acts, to possess, use, dispose of the property belonging to him at his own discretion.
 The right of possession is the legally defined opportunity to actually own the property.
 The right of use is a legally secured opportunity to derive from the property its beneficial natural properties, as well as to benefit from it.
 Իրավ The right of disposal is a legally secured opportunity to determine the fate of the property.
 2. The owner has the right to perform any action that does not violate the law and the interests of others protected by law, including the alienation of his property as property to other persons, to transfer to them the rights of use, possession and disposal of that property, to pledge or dispose of property. in a way. "
As the RA Constitution shows և RA city. The system analysis of the law, the powers of the owner are discretionary.
  This means that the legislation of the Republic of Armenia has given the owner the opportunity to freely choose the ways of using, possessing and managing his property by his own will, internal conviction, which could not depend on the permission or will of other persons.
 The only basic criterion for exercising these powers is the discretion of the person, which can be limited only by law, ie the owner is free to exercise his powers at his own discretion, but on the condition that it does not violate any legal act or legitimate interest of another person.
As stipulated in Article 31 of the Constitution, property can be deprived only in cases provided by law.
 Such a unique basis is provided by Civil. Article 187 of which stipulates: "A citizen or a legal entity who does not own real estate, but for ten years in good faith, openly or continuously owns it as his own property, acquires the right of ownership over that property (statute of limitations)."
 This norm establishes a special "procedure" in which the former owner, regardless of his will, loses his subjective right of ownership, and at the same time the right of ownership over that property arises from the person who actually owns it.
 This norm has a dual nature, as the latter acts as a "legalizing" and "legalizing" norm.
 The significance of the institution of the statute of limitations should not be underestimated.
  In general, every property must be in normal civil circulation.
However, there are cases when the property is out of circulation for some reason (eg, ownerless property).
  This institution is called to return such property to normal civil circulation.
  However, as is evident from the norm-disposition cited, a number of preconditions are necessary for a property right to arise by virtue of the statute of limitations.
  Part 1 of Article 86 of the RA Law "On Legal Acts" stipulates that the legal act is interpreted in the literal meaning of the words and expressions contained in it, taking into account the requirements of the law, besides the interpretation of the act should not change its meaning.
  Guided by the above-mentioned procedure of interpretation of legal acts, it becomes clear that the following preconditions are necessary: 1) Possession should be exercised over real estate, 2) The person should not be the owner of the property, 3) Possession should be exercised for more than ten years, 4) Possession should be exercised continuously, 5) Possibility of possession is a mandatory feature; 6) possession must be obvious, 7) the person must possess the property as his own.
From this it becomes clear that the cited preconditions must exist at the same time. The absence of at least one of them is an obstacle by virtue of the current norm of the origin of property rights.
  It is necessary to pay attention to the term "honest possession".
For that, first of all, the essence of mastery must be revealed, and then it must be clarified from the point of view of good faith.
K. In his work, Sklowski describes possession as "a factual situation in which a person rules over the physical substance of property" 1.
  It is noteworthy that the government itself does not certify anything to the property except the right of possession, but it assumes that the person has the right to property.
 The right of possession was enshrined in Roman law.
 According to Roman sources, possession is a relatively long, solid, physical, real power secured from the influence of other persons with the corpus և animus unity over the thing, that is, the actual power combined with the intention to possess2.
  Corpus և animus are the qualitative properties of possession, that is, will (animus) ացի actual power (corpus) are intertwined in possession.
 It is clear from the above that Roman law reflects the two elements of possession: the material side of possession, the body of actual possession (corpus possessionis) and the will to possess (animuspossidendi).
 According to the modern understanding, de facto power is present in all the cases when the possibility of long-term, unhindered influence over the thing is provided for the person3.
  Some theorists interpret this category more narrowly, considering that possession exists only in the presence of physical influence։ in the presence of a person.
  Another group of theorists gives a wider interpretation to it. Actual control over things is exercised through measures taken to preserve those things that are commonly accepted in society4.
 In this case, physical influence and presence are not necessary.
 In our opinion, the second point of view is more in line with modern practice.
The next attribute of possession is the will to possess.
  It is noteworthy that there is no common approach to this category.
 There are two views in the theory: 1) will is a feature of possession (subjective theory of possession) 5.2) will is not considered as a feature of possession (objective theory of possession).
Moreover, when solving the issue, it should be taken into account that the manifestations of the will during the possession of the thing differ from each other.
  The peculiarity of the will manifested during the possession 1 See Sklovsky K., Ownership in civil law, 2nd ed., Moscow, 2000, pp. 205-366.
2 See Novitsky I., Roman Law, Moscow, 2002, pp. 93-94.
3 See Movsisyan V., The Institute of Possession in the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, dissertation, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 14-30.
4 See Yering RJ, Foundations for Protecting Governments.
 review of the teachings of the government, Moscow, 1883, pp. 129-130.
5 See Pokrovsky IJ, Basic Problems of Civil Rights Statute 2001, pp. 230-231.
Depending on the situation, several cases can be distinguished, for example, when a person owns something on his own behalf, in another case the possession is carried out on behalf of another person.
 A special category is the case when a person exercises possession of an item as an owner or thinks that he is the owner of the item.
 The founder of the subjective theory of possession K. According to Sklovsky, in order to possess, it is necessary to have such a de facto power over the thing, in the case of which the person possesses it as an owner1.
  R. Iering, who is the founder of objective theory, concludes that the actual power exercised over him is already sufficient to establish the right of possession.
  We agree with the objective theory, because, as shown by Civil. eg system-analysis, cases of possession have been regulated when the person does not possess as an owner, but he does it legally, ie his possession has a legal basis (title), է there is an objective need to protect the legitimate interests of such possessor և rights.
 It is in this direction that Germany was guided, point 1 of paragraph 854 of the Civil Code of which stipulates that possession of an object is acquired by the establishment of de facto authority over that object.
  Thus, by generalizing the opinions expressed in the theoretical literature, comparing them with the legislative system, it is possible to have a general definition of tact in accordance with modern practical understandings. Possession is the possession of property in the owner's economy, under his actual economic power.
 The right of possession is the ability of the economic authorities to keep property in their own economy based on the law.
  Moreover, the actual physical influence և presence is not one of its obligatory features, միայն only the confirmation of the actual power is used.
After discovering the essence of possession, it is necessary to discuss the category of "honest possession".
 How does it become clear? From the content of Article 187 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, possession must be in good faith in order for a person to have the opportunity to become the owner of the thing in possession.
  Conscience is referred to in Article 275 of the Civil Code. "Բեր the acquirer did not know և could not know…".
 First of all, the good faith of the owner is an evaluative category,։ it should be considered from the point of view of the subjective perception of the person.
  In fact, there are cases when the current situation corresponds to the content of the legal relationship, but in such a case there is no de facto right (there is no title in the basis).
  In this case, the bona fide possessor has reasonable doubts that the actual situation fully corresponds to the right2.
 From this we can assume that the possessor is honest, who has grounds to believe that his possession arose on the basis of law, that is, his possession is based on a title.
 The conscientious possessor, on the other hand, not only knows that there is no title in the basis of his possession, but also has no necessary grounds to think the opposite3.
 It is necessary to keep in mind that This article covers this category in a very general way.
  The RA Court of Cassation tried to fill that gap with its precedent decisions.
The term "conscientious possession" has been repeatedly discussed by the Court of Cassation, in particular, its number EKD / ​​1221/02/08 2009. April 17 և EACD / 1272/02/08 2009 fixed in the decisions of July 24. "The integrity of possession is assessed when the property is transferred to the actual possession of the person.
  The property must be transferred to the actual possession of the person without the use of violence.
 The owner must have the conviction that he is acquiring the property on legal grounds.
  Possession must be based on the fact that the person will possess that property as property ”4.
Inextricably linked to this category is Civil. The term "owns as own property" mentioned in Article 187 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
  From this it can be concluded that the possession should not only be in good faith, but also the person should own the real estate as property.
  The Court of Cassation, referring to this, noted that the existence of the above-mentioned category requires a number of preconditions, which allow assuming that the person possessed the property as his own, in particular, the actual owner of the property must 1 See Sklovski K., p. 512-515.
2 See Movsisyan V., pp. 109-114.
3 See ibid., P. 122.
4 See Torosyan G., Practical Comments on the RA Civil Code, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 232-248.
Participate in the management of the property, take care of its maintenance, as in the case of his own property.
 In addition, the person must own the property as his own in relation to third parties.
 Possession of one's own property is one of the most important features without which it is impossible to apply the statute of limitations.
  This category will be referred to by the RA Constitutional Court, which in its case of 21.11.2006 / SDO-667 referred to the Civil Code. Compliance of Article 187 of the Criminal Code with the RA Constitution, stating: "The statute of limitations for acquisition is one of the ways of acquiring property rights.
In order to acquire the right of ownership over the real estate on the basis of the statute of limitations, it is required to have a bona fide, open, continuous, local possession of that property as one's own property.
 These preconditions preclude the possibility of acquiring another's property as property which the holder possesses և uses, in particular, on the basis of a lease, custody or other contract, albeit in good faith, openly, continuously և long-term, but knowing it's another's property համար owning it not as our own property. ”
  The RA Court of Cassation was guided by this logic.
 Today's practical developments show that the courts, during a comprehensive, objective և full examination of the case, finding that the person did not have grounds to assume that he owns the property as his own, fix the lack of conscientious possession.
  In other words, "possession as one's own property" and "honest possession" are considered interconnected and complementary phenomena.
  This is evidenced by the Court of Cassation 3-184 (VD) of March 27, 2008, 3-433 (VD) 2008. July 25 և 3-47 (VD) 2008 The decisions of February 29, 1945, which established the view that when a person does not have sufficient grounds to assume that he will possess that property as his own from the moment of possession, then in such cases there is a lack of conscientious possession.
 However, as it follows from the legislative formulations, from the points of view expressed in the theoretical literature, the above-mentioned two categories are separate phenomena.
 It is true that they complement each other, but they should be considered separately, և if one is missing, it does not mean that the other does not exist.
 There may be cases when the person is a bona fide possessor (for example, he possesses on the basis of a contract, etc.), but he does not have sufficient grounds to suppose that he possesses that property as his own.
  In such cases, fixing the existence of unscrupulous possession, the person finds himself in unfavorable conditions (for example, there is an obligation to compensate the income in a larger amount, etc.).
 In such situations, it is necessary to fix only the absence of owning property as a condition of disposition.
 Besides, as mentioned, conscientious possession is an evaluative և subjective category.
  In general, subjective categories are very difficult to prove in practice. It is not even clear who bears the burden of proving it.
  In order to solve this problem, it is proposed to enshrine in law the presumption of bona fide possession, ie the person is initially a bona fide possessor, until the opposite is proven.
 Another problem is that The law does not define the "tenacity" of conscientiousness, and in practice it is not clearly interpreted when's conscientious possession begins and ends.
 There may be situations when possession is conscientious at the time of acquisition, but during possession it turns into unscrupulous possession.
  The question of theorists is whether conscientiousness is sufficient at the beginning of mastery, or whether it should be accompanied throughout the mastery.
 D. Meyer notes. "If the bona fide possessor of someone else's property is informed about the lawsuit filed against him by the owner, then he does not lose the good faith from that moment."
 Meyer agrees with K. Sklovsky.
 The other part of the theorists thinks that honesty should be manifested during the whole period of mastery1.
 We agree with the first approach, because just filing a lawsuit or making a claim is not enough to claim that possession is dishonest.
 It is possible that this claim is unfounded or the plaintiff is not the holder of the given subjective right, Gyle.
In addition, there is a theoretical need to protect the interests of the unscrupulous owner.
 Let us bring two examples.
1 See Barseghyan T., Antiquity of Acquisition, Banber Yerjan University ․ Jurisprudence, 143.3, 2014 (№ 2), pp. 32-34.
1) The person is an unscrupulous possessor from the beginning, has acquired the property illegally and possessed for more than ten years, and the statute of limitations expires with the legal owner, which is referred to by the respondent.
2) The person is a bona fide possessor from the beginning, but during the possession, circumstances have arisen, by virtue of which the possession has become dishonest, but the legal owner does not claim the property back.
In the first case, a case situation is created, as the owner cannot compulsorily defend his interests, and, as it is known, the subjective right without coercion becomes null and void in this case.
 On the other hand, possession is dishonest, which is an obstacle to the origin of property rights.
  In the second situation, even though the possession was in good faith from the beginning, it turned into dishonesty, the owner does not demand the return of the property, as if by giving it up.
 Due to the case presented in these two examples, the future fate of the property remains uncertain.
 Such situations give grounds to claim that there is a need to protect the interests of unscrupulous owners, which is the essence of the institution of statute of limitations, as it is called to return property to normal civil circulation, except that the fate of such property should not remain uncertain.
  In this case, the only way to put the property into circulation is the institution of the statute of limitations.
 Thus, in conclusion, the following conclusions can be reached: 1) The interpretation of possession should be based on an objective theory, according to which the actual physical impact on the object is not necessary.
 It is possible to establish de facto power by that realization այն the measures taken towards that thing which are sufficient for the preservation of the thing; 2) Conscientious possession is a subjective category, which is very difficult to prove in practice.
 Therefore, it is proposed to define the presumption of good faith possession, according to which possession will be considered conscientious until proven otherwise. 3) Conscientious possession is the category of owning property, which is a subjective, evaluative category.
 This situation exists in the case when, according to the subjective perception of the person, the actual situation coincides with the legal situation, while in reality it is not so.
 Therefore, one should pay attention to the self-subjective perception և if there are sufficient grounds to suppose that he owns the property as his own, then in such a case its existence should not be questioned, 4) "owning property" և "conscientious possession" as much as They are interconnected, they are so independent categories.
 It is necessary to consider them in practice as separate phenomena; not to make the existence of one unnecessarily dependent on the existence of the other. it can cause significant damage to the interests of the possessor; 5) It is a practical necessity to protect the unscrupulous possessors.
 The essence of the institution of antiquity of acquisition is to ensure the normal civil-legal circulation of property.
  In addition, no property should be left in a state of uncertainty.
Sargis Isoyan POSITION OF OWNERSHIP AS A PRECONDITION FOR ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY RIGHT TO REAL ESTATE Keywords: property, right of ownership, acquisition.
