THE EXTERNAL STRATEGY OF THE COLLAPSE The collapse of the USSR is one of the most important events in the world history of the 20th century, which is studied by many Western, post-Soviet historians and political scientists.
 The collapse of the USSR took place due to internal motives and external influences.
 The reasons for the collapse of the USSR are the sharp fall in world oil prices, Gorbachev's policy of reconstruction, the "dry law" Gail.
  According to some historians, the cause of the collapse of the USSR in 1991. The referendum was held in Ukraine on December 1, 1945, in which the majority of voters in that country voted to secede from the USSR.
 In modern historiography, the hypotheses of the anti-Soviet conspiracy actions of the US Central Intelligence Agency, the "Belozezh conspiracy", are popular.
  One of the reasons for the collapse of the USSR is considered by some researchers to be 1991. the August riot.
There is also no common position in Western historiography on the reasons for the collapse of the USSR.
  Some Western political scientists and historians consider the collapse of communist ideology to be the main reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Others tend to attribute the collapse of the USSR to external factors, including the defeat in Afghanistan, the weakening of the USSR, the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, the destructive activities of the centers of Montrealism against the Soviet Union, the machinations of the CIA.
  These scholars are proponents of the conspiracy theory, who do not hide the fact that the collapse of the USSR was planned and carried out by the centers of worldism - the Bildenberg Club, the Committee 300, the Tripartite Commission, the Council on Foreign Relations.
 The United States was most interested in the collapse of the USSR, the main goal of which was to create a "New World Order" with the American horse.
  1948 of the American National Security Council The March 2008 memorandum stated that "the defeat of the USSR-led forces of world communism is vital to the security of the United States."
Security Council Resolution 1948 Order No. 20/1 of August 18, 1918, set the task of turning the USSR into a "politically, militarily and psychologically weak state" 2.
 In 1949, at the direct initiative of the United States. The North Atlantic Alliance was formed on April 4, 1945, against the countries of the anti-socialist camp, first of all the USSR.
One of the most famous secret programs was the Harvard program.
 Novikov describes it in quite detail.
  The program was developed in 1949-1951 in Munich.
  It envisages at least starting an ideological-psychological war against the USSR, presenting the existence of the USSR to the younger generations as a historical mistake.
 The main goal of the program was to destroy the love for the homeland among the Soviet people, to replace patriotism with universal values.
 The Harvard program outlined programs and ideas to train beginners in the event of a psychological war between east and west.
 The Harvard program is supplemented with new scientific developments every year.
  There was a special line in it, that is, it provoked nationalism and hatred among the peoples of the USSR.
 Of particular note in this regard is the anti-Soviet Zbigny Brzezinski, a well-known American political scientist, former National Security Adviser to the US President, and a member of several centers of Montrealism.
As such, the struggle against communism was only one stage of his activity for him - 1 Shironin V., Agent perestroika.
 KGB case file, Moscow, 2010, p. 24.2 Etzold T., Gaddis J. (eds.), Containment.
  Documents on American Policy and Strategy, 1945-1950, Columbia University after the collapse of Soviet Russia.
 In fact, he was solving not an ideological, but a geopolitical issue, trying to "eliminate" the Soviet Union from the face of the earth, and then Russia.
  1980s At the beginning of the 20th century, Brzezinski presented to the American leadership the so-called Game Plan, the geostrategic structure of the struggle between the United States and the USSR.
  Brzezinski mentioned in the letter attached to the report. "This report is not just one of the regular arguments about the flaws of the Soviet system, it is a program of practical management of actions.
 Decentralizing the empire (Soviet) means leading it to collapse.
 Any decentralization, even in the economic sphere, will intensify separatist sentiments among the non-Russian population of the Soviet Union.
 "Economic decentralization will inviolably lead to political decentralization."
1 1948 The US National Security Council proposed a huge propaganda effort against the USSR.
  A special body, the public relations apparatus, began to engage in planned propaganda.
 From the state budget in 1949 he was given $ 31.2 million, in 1950 - $ 47-3 million.
 From these figures it became clear that the American strategy was carrying out destructive propaganda for its main and main goal - the establishment of a new world order.
 1949 A national committee was formed in the USA with its own "Free Europe" radio station.
 The committee included CIA Director Alain Dales, future President D. Eisenhower, some American ambassadors, bankers.
 Cold War theorists immediately realized that the most powerful weapon could be a radio.
 During the Cold War, the "Voice of America" ​​was propagandized.
  They said that their material should always be concentrated.
 Their products should serve to defend their policy.
  The American Committee for Liberation played an important role.
  It was founded in 1951. ։ At first it was called the "Consolidation Center for the Struggle against Bolshevism".
  It consisted of two separate bodies, the Institute for the Study of the USSR and the "Liberation" radio station, whose activities were directed against the Soviet Union from the very first days.
  "Liberation" was soon renamed "Azatutyun" and aired in 1953. March 1.
 From the very first day, "Azatutyun" was intended as a base for American intelligence in Europe.
  The aim of all of them was to destroy the USSR economy, to weaken its strategic power, to break the friendship of the Soviet peoples, to instill nationalism in them.
Soon the "Heritage Foundation" research center specially R. Reagan coined the Doctrine of Liberation.
 The authors of the doctrine offered Reagan to finally deconstruct all the regions of the Soviet Empire, using all possible means to achieve this goal.
1982 At the beginning of the 19th century, President Ronald Reagan and his close advisers embarked on an offensive strategy to dismantle the "Soviet Empire."
 The means of targeting this global attack were reflected in the National Security Council (NSDD) signed by President Reagan.
 1982 In March 1945, Ronald Reagan signed the NSDD-32 National Security Directive, authorizing economic, diplomatic, and covert operations to thwart the Soviet Union's efforts in Eastern Europe.
  During the presidency R. Reagan signed several secret national security directives, which were implemented by his close associates and cabinet assistants.
  CIA Director William Casey and Caspar Weinberger, Advisor to the President of the United States of America, played a major role in their implementation.
  1982 Reagan signed a new directive on US National Security (NSDM) authored by William Clark.
  It reflected the US economic strategy towards the USSR.
  The document intended to use the weaknesses of the Soviet economy to launch a technological race to destroy the USSR economy.
  In the same year, President Reagan addressed the British Parliament, calling on the West to launch an offensive against Communism.
 The announcement came after the President met with Pope John Paul II in the Vatican.
  Together they discussed the implementation of a tough policy towards the USSR - the issues of independence of the Pope's homeland, that is, Poland, from the influence of the Soviet Union.
  Pope John Paul's blessing Reagan for the project.
On November 13, the President said that first of all each of the partners undertook not to sign, not to accept new conditions related to the sale of Soviet gas, գազ to look for an opportunity to use it in the West.
 Second, he noted that they և their allies would strengthen control over the transfer of strategic means to the Soviet Union.
  Third, the process that enabled the control of financial relations with the Soviet Union had to be clarified immediately.
 And it was on that day that Reagan signed the most important secret document in US history concerning the Soviet economy, the NSDD-66.
  The author of the document was Roger Robinson.
 It stated that the political goal of the United States was to destroy the Soviet economy by attacking its "strategic three," that is, the three basic branches of the economy.
 Roger Robinson noted that the NSDD-66 was declaring a secret war on the Soviet Union.
  The NSDD-66 planned to quickly outline a "strategic troika" to deprive Moscow of the means necessary for vitality.
 The US administration had made preparations for the NSDD-66 plan a year earlier.
 1981 CIA Director U. Casey made a secret trip to Middle East։ Europe.
  For this purpose he was provided with a C-141 Starlifter aircraft without identification plates.
 Casey had meetings in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Kuwait, Pakistan, then headed to Europe.
 Everywhere he was discussing the issue of lowering the price of oil in the world market.
 He substantiated the idea that the price of oil on the world market, even if it rises by one dollar, brings billions of rubles to the USSR.
 The USSR accumulated its main wealth in the 1970s, when oil prices rose much more than expected.
  Casey concluded that if they want to prevent further economic strengthening of the USSR, it is necessary to reduce the price of oil.
 Saudi Arabia, which accounted for 40 percent of the oil-exporting countries, had good reason to agree with the US proposal.
 Sheikh Turki al-Faisi of Saudi Arabia was convinced that his country was surrounded by the Soviet Union, as there were about 1,500 Soviet military advisers in southern Yemen, 500 in northern Yemen, 2,500 in Syria, 100 in Ethiopia, Iraq, and one in Afghanistan. 100 thousand.
 Aware of all this, Casey offered Saudi support to Saudi Arabia, promising to sell arms, instead demanding a reduction in oil prices.
 Sheikh Turki-al-Faisi, based on the country's security, agreed.
  Later, the proposal to reduce the price of oil was accepted by other oil-exporting countries.
  The budget of the Soviet Union gave a serious rift.
  1988 The budget deficit amounted to 60 billion rubles, and next year - 100 billion. rubles.
 1989-1990 The Soviet Union's debt reached an incredible amount of 70 billion for those years. dollars.
He also dealt a severe blow to the economy of the Soviet Union in 1981 with the US Customs Administration. Exodus operation, which began in October 1945, was to cut off the supply of advanced gas export technologies to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union had undertaken 5500 km of underground under the name "Urengoy-6". to build a gas pipeline in two directions, which would bring gas from northern Siberia to the Soviet-Czechoslovak border.
 Here the pipeline was to join the Western European gas system, which reached as far as France, Italy and West Germany.
  1982 On January 25, the US National Security Council received reliable information about the financial difficulties of the Soviet Union.
  It turned out that in 1981 in the investment banks of the USSR. decreased by 3 billion dollars, making 8-5 billion dollars.
 The American administration decided to take advantage of the financial difficulties of the USSR to bring its economy to normal.
  And. Casey urged President Reagan to suspend construction of the pipeline, which would bring $ 15-20 billion a year in revenue to the USSR.
 The construction of the gas pipeline was not beneficial for England, France, Germany, where tens of thousands of new jobs would be created in the conditions of 8-14% unemployment.
 And. Casey և K. Reinberger suggested R. Reagan persuaded the leaders of Western European countries not only to impose an embargo on Soviet exports, but also to stop selling advanced gas and oil production technologies to the USSR.
 This plan is 1 Shironin V., p. 42.
for feminization R. Reagan in 1982 On June 4-6, he participated in the World Summit of the World's Most Developed Countries in Paris, urging them to stop lending to the USSR and to sell advanced technologies.
 As a result of this policy, the Soviet Union was forced to spend limited reserves of stable currency to build the first line of the pipeline, so that the construction would be completed at least without the use of American technology.
  1982 in August Casey again conducted a secret operation, met with the leaders of a number of countries.
 In South Africa, he promised to support Jones Savimbi in his fight against the Angolan-Cuban armies.
  Instead, he suggested that South Africans weaken economic ties with the Soviet Union.
 In Egypt And. Casey discussed a number of issues related to the Afghan war that were of mutual interest.
  Weapons were supplied to Afghanistan through three routes, two of which passed through Pakistan.
Each year, tens of thousands of tons of weapons and equipment were transported along those roads.
  1985 That amount reached 65 thousand tons.
  In Pakistan, U. Casey promised to provide Afghans with heavy weapons, missiles, satellite reconnaissance information, advised to bomb Soviet facilities, warehouses, gas pipeline in Afghanistan.
  Secretary General of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Yu. Andropov, Foreign Minister Gromyko received Pakistani President Ziaul Hakin and Foreign Minister Yakub Khan, and announced that the Soviet Union would support Afghanistan.
 When they returned to Pakistan, K. Reinberger և U. Casey was contacted by Ziaul Haq.
 Casey offered to do everything to help Pakistan 1.
  The war in Afghanistan caused the greatest economic and military damage to the USSR.
  The Reagan administration was particularly concerned about the fact that the Soviet Union had no serious casualties in Afghanistan.
 The war in Afghanistan killed 13,000 Soviet soldiers, while the US government put 54,000 dead in the wars in Vietnam.
 1982 Recently, Bill Clark suggested to the National Security Council to clarify Reagan's strategy on Moscow, to prepare a secret order, which would be signed by the President.
 It was not easy to do that.
 He predicts a persistent struggle between the east and the west, constant military threats from the Soviet Union.
Already in 1983 In January 1945, Reagan signed the NSDD-75 Directive, which aimed to bring about radical change in the Soviet system.
  The author of the document was Richard Pipes.
 It became the basis of further US policy towards the Soviet Union.
 According to Pipes, NSDD-75 meant breaking ties with the past.
 It was the only document that clearly determined the future US strategy towards the USSR.
  It is about the fact that the next goal of the USA is not the coexistence with the USSR, but the change of the Soviet system.
  Pipes was of the opinion that the document was based on the conviction that a change in the Soviet system under external pressure was quite possible.
  It was an active offensive strategy against the Soviet Union.
 This basic document, in fact, defined a qualitatively new stage of destructive actions against the socialist countries, as from now on, the special services would not carry out any action without the consent of the US political leadership2.
 The weakest was the Soviet economy.
 Reagan's Order No. 75 provided for interference in the internal affairs of socialist countries in order to destroy their state system.
  The main emphasis was on the formation and consolidation of internal opposition forces, which, receiving comprehensive support from abroad, were to seize power and orient their countries politically to the West.
Reagan perceived the foreign policy of the United States համար carried out the struggle for world domination through the prism of the contradictions between the two superpowers - the USSR և US relations։.
 Overcoming them would allow him to establish a "new world order" for America.
  The world would become united իկան America would dictate its will to the whole world, and to achieve that goal it was necessary to eliminate all spheres of influence of the USSR, no matter where in the world they were located.
 For this purpose, in 1982 The Reagan administration embarked on a so-called Caribbean initiative against Cuba and Nicaragua, which had friendly and ideological ties to the Soviet Union.
1983 USSR leader Yu. A few days after Antropov's death, Casey visited 13 countries.
During this journey he wanted to reach an agreement to carry out a series of tasks.
  He wanted to move the Afghan war to the territory of the USSR, strengthen US relations with Saudi Arabia, and finally clarify the price of oil on the world market.
 In Beijing, he discussed cooperation in intelligence, the installation of electronic listening devices across the USSR, the Afghan war, the Vietnam invasion of Cambodia, and the start of a civil war in Pakistan. to provoke conflicts and uprisings among ethnic groups by promising military and financial support.
 Pakistan agreed to carry out the plan to attack strategic points in the Soviet Union together with the Afghan mujahideen.
  There were also discussions in Saudi Arabia on oil prices, the war in Afghanistan, joint operations against their enemies, and the sale of missiles.
1983 On March 23, President Reagan underlined his strong support for the newcomer.
  The United States is launching a Strategic Defense Defense Initiative (SDR).
 Reagan took this step for both strategic and economic reasons, which would pose new problems for the economy of the Soviet Union.
 1984 In January, Reagan addressed Congress, outlining the government's foreign policy stance, noting that the United States' priority in that area was to fight "Soviet expansionism."
  Reagan's order was clearly intended to establish a "new world order" by exporting American values.
  It was a call to other countries to interfere in the internal affairs, which was prohibited by international treaties.
  The Prime Minister of England Margaret Thatcher came to Washington soon to discuss a number of issues.
 Issues related to the Soviet Union took precedence during that discussion.
 Thatcher told Reagan in 1984. Regarding his conversation with Mikhail Gorbachev in December, he mentioned that the man was an impressive person.
 Soon the conversation reached the RPN և the government's plans.
 At the same time, he noticed how interested the president was in talking about that program.
  He explained that the RPN would be a world system, eventually even Moscow would have the opportunity to enter there, as it concerns the welfare of the whole world.
Of all the governors, Thatcher understood Reagan's philosophy best.
 Together with McFarlane, the Prime Minister clarified 4 points, which, in his opinion, could have a great significance for involving the Europeans in the RP of cooperation.
  The United States should have assured Europe that the aim of the missile defense system is not in the interests of the United States, the establishment of the missile defense system will be agreed to with the existing conditions, the goal of the missile defense system is to strengthen, not to weaken the agreements.
 Մ. Thanks to Thatcher, the RPN ceased to be just the president's dream, it turned into an intelligence program.
1 1985 In March, Reagan signed the NSDD-166 directive, which for the first time outlined the main objectives of the Afghan war in the context of a common strategy.
 The new directive contained some key questions.
 First of all, it was necessary to improve the supply of weapons to the mujahideen.
 The main emphasis was on new technological types of weapons.
  At the same time, American intelligence was instructed to gather more information about Soviet military intentions.
  Special attention should have been paid to the Soviet military orders, strategy - the structure of the army.
 The third key issue was that a great deal of attention was paid to raising the political significance of the Afghan war in the international arena.
With the help of organizations such as the UN, the United States had to exert maximum pressure to oust the Soviet Union.
 It should have been made clear that the improvement of relations with the United States is directly related to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
 The most important goal of the NSDD-166 was victory - a decisive defeat of the Soviet armed forces in Afghanistan.
  Reagan's directive, which was directly aimed at defeating the USSR, was drafted in the 1980s.
  His motives were related to the fact that the Soviet Union was the main geopolitical rival for the United States, the main obstacle in establishing a new American world order.
The Reagan administration decided to continue the economic war against the USSR, the best way of which was to reduce the price of oil on the world market, which was economically profitable for the United States.
  The American economy, like the Soviet one, depended on world oil prices.
 But this dependence was different.
 Reducing the price of oil from $ 34 a barrel to $ 20 a barrel should have reduced US energy costs by 71.5% to allow it to emerge from the economic crisis.
 For the USSR, on the contrary, energy revenues were the main source.
 Some felt that oil prices were falling on their own, while others said that Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer, needed US support.
  1985 In August 1945, the Soviet economy was hit by Saudi Arabia, which increased oil production to 6 million barrels per 2 million barrels. barrels.
 In the fall, Saudi Arabia already exported 9 million. barrels of oil.
 It was a disaster for the Soviet Union.
 In order to maintain a stable currency at the required level, the Soviet Union in 1985. Forced to double the sale of gold 1.
  As the price of oil fell, so did the price of Soviet gas, which was also a loss of billions of dollars.
 The depreciation of the US dollar caused a loss of $ 2 billion annually to the USSR.
  And finally, the USSR suffered serious financial losses from arms sales.
  The USSR sold arms mainly to Middle Eastern countries, which were enriched by petrodollars.
  The Soviet Union increased arms sales to the Middle East fivefold in the 1970s, and in 1986. had to reduce arms sales by 20 percent.
1985 M. became the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev.
 He hoped that the anti-communist president of the United States would weaken his conspiracy against the Soviet Union, so he engaged in active political contacts with him.
  In November 1985, Gorbachev and Reagan met in Geneva. in October in Reykjavik.
This was done because a turning point was made in US-USSR relations.
Becoming the leader of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev declared that the foreign policy of the USSR was not flexible, it was focused on issues that were not subject to change.
 Gorbachev soon began to speak not in the interests of his country, but in favor of the welfare of humanity.
  1985 In the spring of 1918, Gorbachev announced the launch of medium-range missiles in a six-month unilateral moratorium in Europe.
 Ten days later, he announced at the memorial that he was testing a nuclear weapon.
  In secret meetings of the Politburo, he stated that the deployment of Soviet SS-20 missiles in Western Europe was a gross mistake in the foreign policy of the USSR.
 1985 Gorbachev stated that there were no "civilized" relations between the states.
 After changing the composition of the military leadership of the USSR, Gorbachev in 1988. In December, he unilaterally announced at the UN that the Soviet troops would be reduced by half a million.
 The Supreme Military Council of the USSR was in favor of its bilateral reduction.
2 1985 During a meeting with Reagan in November, he surprised the US President.
He considered US policy in the Middle East to be very natural.
  Gorbachev cultivated the American offer to take a tough stance towards Nicaragua.
  Gorbachev tacitly agreed that the internal situation of the USSR should be the subject of Soviet-American discussion.
  R. Reagan stated to Gorbachev that the Soviet Union should reconcile with the US Strategic Defense Initiative, give in to regional conflicts, acknowledge its mistake in civil rights, and only then could the United States agree to normalize bilateral relations.
  In the Soviet-American negotiations, which focused on three key issues: the reduction of medium-range missiles, the exercise of strategic control over them, Soviet diplomats made concessions.
 During the negotiations, the Soviet Union conceded to the American side in a number of issues.
 It was agreed to reduce the SS-198 heavy missiles.
 Gorbachev agreed to reduce the Soviet Union's entire arsenal of heavy missiles by 50 percent.
  The Americans were not only surprised by these concessions, but shocked.
 1987 In April of that year, Gorbachev allowed Schulz to appear on television to assess developments in Afghanistan.
  Schulz condemned the Soviet Union for its armed conflict with the people of Afghanistan and called for the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan on behalf of the Afghans. Speaking in Berlin on June 12, 1941, Reagan addressed Gorbachev, saying that if they wanted peace, if they wanted the prosperity of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, they had to tear down the Berlin Wall.
  Gorbachev yielded to the United States in this matter without any condition.
1988 George W. Bush won the presidential election and implemented his policy as Reagan's successor.
 1989 In December 2007, US President George W. Bush, a member of the Skull and Bone Masonic Lodge, and a member of the Trilateral Commission, President of the USSR M. Gorbachev.
 In Malta Gorbachev joined the Malta Order of Malta.
  During that meeting, the leaders of the two countries finally clarified the scenario of the final collapse of the socialist system, in particular, the collapse of the USSR.
 Eventually all this led to the collapse of the USSR, which took place in 1991. on December 8.
  The leaders of the 3 Slavic republics signed a document on the establishment of a union of Slavic states in the forest of the Belovezhyan reserve.
  With this, the USSR collapsed, the Commonwealth of Independent States was established.
Rosa Magdalasova THE EXTERNAL STRATEGY OF THE COLLAPSE OF THE USSR Keywords: CIA, NSDD programs, foreign strategy, reconstruction policy, Belovezhskaya Pact, the collapse of the USSR.
