ANIN, THE CENTER OF ARMENIAN ARCHITECTURE, being studied many times, does not cease to be in the center of attention of both domestic and foreign scientists, as well as those with a wide range of interests.
 The city has not lost its power and charm even in a ruined state.
 Indeed, the capital of Bagratuni had a unique beauty and attractiveness, first of all, in an unsurpassed form.
As it is known, architecture occupies a central place in the medieval history of Armenian culture.
  Ani was a "cultural crater", and some experts consider Ani "the legislator of the architectural and state direction in Armenia" 1.
Ani has been studied more in terms of architecture.
 Toros Toramanyan, in addition to the defensive walls, describes other areas that he considered to be former gardens2.
 Toramanyan divides the history of Ani architecture into three regions.1. The times of the Kamsarakans.
2. The period of rapid development of Ani architecture (covers from the second half of the 10th century to 1064).
3. Zakaryan region3.
When talking about the Architecture of Ani, it is impossible not to refer to the plan of the city, one of the first restorers of which was H. Abikh's claims are considered quite acceptable by a number of scholars, including T. Hakobyan 4.
  It turned out that the city planner was formed at once.
 Initially, only the citadel existed, and after being declared the capital, the New Town and its suburbs were formed around the citadel.
 The new city was the most luxurious, architecturally important part of Ani, where many church and monumental buildings were built.
 The large structures were mainly located on the outskirts of Akunkyan and Tsakhkotsadzor5.
All the travelers who came to Ani stated that the city was densely built, the houses were often connected, which was the reason for the creation of the cave Ani.
  The streets had an irregular layout, big and small alleys, in some places there were stone stations, which was copied in modern times in Alexandropol և Akhaltsikhe6.
1817 Ani is visited by Robert Kerr-Porter from England, who devotes several pages to Ani's description in his travelogue.
  He was especially impressed by the royal palace, on which his description lays the first stone of Ani's fame in Europe.
  The British visits to Ani ատակ The mention of her encourages the French, who send Eugene Bobe here, instructing him to examine the ruins from a scientific point of view.
Staying in Ani for seven days, he examines in detail and copies a number of protocols.
The French scholar found the Byzantine "Oriental" styles in the architecture of Ani, among which he noticed the original Armenian one.
 In his opinion, the Armenian architects were the executors of these three styles on their own, և their handiwork is of such subtleties that those who see them will not envy the Greek architects.
 Eugene Bobey replaces T. Toromanyan T., Materials on the History of Armenian Architecture, Yerevan, 1948, p. 178.
3 Hakobyan T., History of Ani, Yerevan, 1980, p. 226.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., P.
Texie, who, seeing Ani, mentions. "The Armenian people had its culture, its developed, delicate taste, creative talent.
 Proof: Ani herself. "
1 The city of Ani, like the cities of Central Asia, had many contrasts.
  Its backward districts and suburbs were not improved, instead the central streets were improved.
  The fencing and protection of Ani is generally used because the city is densely populated3.
 964 The Ashotyan wall of the city was built, which separates the Old city from the New city, in 988, the Smbatyan two-row wall4.
Ani was a predominantly tuff city, and tuff cultivation was perfect here, with all the walls of all the monuments lined with polished stones inside and out, with such a skill that the lines between them were barely noticeable5.
All the roads of medieval Armenia led to big cities or passed through them.
 Appropriate buildings and guest houses were needed to temporarily provide accommodation for those who came to cities for other business purposes.
  They usually belonged to the rich people of the city.
  In this respect, the capital of Bagratunyats was especially present to foreign visitors with its hospitality and luxury.
  Not far from the Church of the Apostles in 1908 Remains of a city hotel have been opened.
 The entrances stood out with a certain luxury, which, with their external architectural solution, replicated the entrances of the palaces of the rich people of Ani6.
The study of urban caravanserais and guesthouses suggests that if caravans built on roads served both people and animals, urban guesthouses probably served only people with separate "rooms".
 Next to them is the ershuka, and in the external architecture they bore the architectural influence of the luxurious dwellings belonging to the rich people of Ani7.
For the sake of the development and trade relations of the city, many bridges were built, which were monuments of material culture, through which one can get an idea of ​​the engineering thought of Armenia, in particular the construction of bridges.
 The largest of them were located in Akhuryan gorge8.
The cross carved above the leopard (in some sources, a lion) on the coat of arms of Ani testifies to the close connection between the church and the state.
  The description of Ani as a city of a thousand and one churches is not accidental.
  The construction of churches was mainly "ordered"; in some cases it was delayed in order to honor the "I" and to win the favor of caring fathers.
  Naturally, the abundance of churches shows the church-state friendly relations.
Ani Palace Church, which was considered the oldest church structure in the Citadel. Abikh calls it "Ani precious stone".
  The lithographic inscription on this church is one of the oldest lithographic inscriptions in Mesopotamian letters in Armenian history, which N. Mar dates back to 622.
The pastor's church with its solutions of plan, dimensional and decorative compositions T. Toramanyan described it as an "Architectural gem" 10.
The Church of the Apostles also has a special place in the architecture of Ani, taking into account its architectural solutions, it can be assumed that it must have been built after the first quarter of the 11th century11.
 Considering the existence of statutory inscriptions on the walls of the Apostles' Church, they consider that it played a great role in the life of the capital. Եւ The inscriptions show that the church was connected with the Pahlavuni dynasty, to which 1 Leo, Ani. Impressions, memories, the past and the rest, Yerevan, 1963, page 31.
2 Hakobyan T., History of Ani, Yerevan, 1980, p. 245.
3 Nalbandyan H., Arab Sources on the Neighboring Countries of Armenia, Yerevan, 1965, p. 78.
4 Mar N., Ani, Yerevan, 2011, p. 57.
5 Hakobyan T., pp. 285-289.
6 Harutyunyan V., Caravans and bridges of medieval Armenia, Yerevan, 1960, p. 99.
7 Ibid., P. 68.
8 Ibid., P. 77.
9 Hakobyan T ․, page 41.
10 Haykazun-Grigoryan A., The compositional-symbolic peculiarities of Ani Pastor Church, Shirak Center for Armenological Studies of the National Academy of Sciences of Armenia, Scientific Works XVII, Gyumri 2014, p. 26.
belonged to the bishops of Ani.
1 Leon considers the Church of the Apostles "a kind of administrative office", where, according to him, the people gathered not only to discuss ecclesiastical, but also administrative, even political issues.
 Notable clergymen and laymen were buried in the vestibules of the Church of the Apostles.
The stone statue of Gagik I, discovered during the excavations of Gagkashen Church, with a model of the temple he built in his hand, is significant in that it shows the existence of a statue in Armenianness in the 10th-11th centuries3.
Ani Surb Astvatsatsin Church or Ani Mother Cathedral, the main church of Ani city, was built in 989-1001. Architect Trdat, on the initiative of the Armenian King Smbat II, is one of the best Armenian architectural designs in the world.
 It is a four-domed structure with a monumental shape and rich decoration.
The Cathedral, with its sculptures and unique architectural style, has become a unique symbol of Ani, which has left its influence on the international architectural style.
  And it is not for nothing that one of the authors who visited Ani considered the Mother Cathedral "the best ornament of the Caucasus".
 Extensive literature 4 was dedicated to him.
The English explorers who visited Ani mentioned in their memoirs that the niches of the church, which cut the outer surface of the walls in several places, were beautiful not only with their tasteful goggles, but also with their beautiful, winding ornaments.
 These niches are a very characteristic feature of Ani's architecture և, in their opinion, wherever such lines are noticed, one should believe that it is either a building of Anetsi or an imitation taken from Ani5.
The Turkish website 360tr.com referred to the architecture of the Cathedral by presenting a 3D exhibition of the cathedral, which is included in the virtual exhibitions of Turkey's historical and cultural heritage.
 It is noteworthy that the authors of the website consider the Mother Cathedral an Armenian structure.
  The 3D display was created by combining photographs taken from inside and outside the temple from 9 perspectives6.
The style and composition of the above-mentioned architectural structures speak about the fact that the Ani-School of Architecture was formed on the basis of the classical architectural heritage of the previous times, which in its turn began to influence the architectural art developing in different parts of the country in general7.
Ani's architecture was closely related to painting, as artifacts found in the ruins of the city show that many of Ani's architectural masterpieces were decorated with frescoes.
Trdat, who brought Ani to architectural perfection, was the greatest architect of his time, whom scholars called "the discoverer of the path to the Gothic style", "senior architect" and others.
  Trdat Anetsi marked a whole stage of medieval Armenian architecture with his works.
  This was facilitated by his living and working in Ani, which became the cradle of the Armenian Renaissance9.
Turkish statesmen are well aware of the role of Ani and seek to profit from the fragments of the mythical Armenian capital.
"On Tert.am website on 02.03.2015. An article was published in the Turkish "Hurriyet" periodical stating that the Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism is continuing its efforts to make the city of Ani a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
A corresponding proposal to UNESCO will be made in 2016 in Oslo.
 It is envisaged that before 1 Hakobyan T., History of Ani, Yerevan, 1980, page 314.
2 Leo, Ani, Yerevan, 1963, page 45.
3 Hakobyan T., page 307.
4 Ibid., P. 296; 5 Leo, p. 159.
6 360tr.com (Turkish Historical and Cultural Heritage Virtual Exhibition Website), see https!
//www.360tr.com/search.php?keywords=Ani%20Ermeni%20Katedralı7 Hasratyan M., Trdat as Ani St. Architect of Prkich Church, Shirak Center for Armenian Studies of NAS RA, Scientific Works XVII, Gyumri 2014, page 8.
 Hakobyan T., page 236.
9 Hasratyan M., page 8.
That 2015-2016 will be declared the year of the ruins of Kars և Ani.
 The source says about the city that Ani is one of the main tourist attractions for the tourists of that region, that the Ani School of Architecture has had a great influence in the region and beyond.
  It is a unique example of Armenian culture, art and architecture, urban planning, as well as military-defense architecture.
  You can even find many Byzantine churches, which were influenced by the planning of Ani churches1.
The website www.ancient-origins.net, which specializes in covering the latest archeological discoveries, has published an interesting article about Ani.
  In the article, Anin is considered a city with a history of five thousand years, with a beautiful underground world.
 "Underground Ani" was first discovered in 1880.
 Secret water lines, monks' cells, prayer rooms, huge corridors, a network of tunnels, snares և were found in dead ends under the ruins of the Armenian city of Ani.
  According to the website, researches describing the underground world of the city were discussed during the symposium entitled "Ani Underground Secrets" in Kars.
 It is said here that "Underground Ani" was mentioned in ancient manuscripts as the location of an ancient Mesopotamian secret school.
  The discoveries of "George Gurdjieff" made 135 years ago about the existence of this secret (esoteric) school in Mesopotamia were not confirmed until the 1915 excavations.
"Years later, a group of Italian archaeologists confirmed that there was a monastic complex there," said historian Sezai Yazici, who spoke at a symposium in Kars.
 Since then, new layers of Ani underground areas have been discovered.
  Yazici says that among the most important structures on earth are the tunnel called "Giden Gelmez", the Ani Underground և The Secret Door.
  In total, 823 underground structures have been discovered in Ani so far, including apartments, warehouses, grocery stores, monasteries, chapels, flour mills, stables, reservoirs.
  Yazici insists that it is time to seriously study the underground world of Ani,, it is necessary to organize further studies in that place.
  The website mentions that Ani was the most famous of the capitals of Armenia.
  It was famous for its majestic and imposing appearance, it was famous as a city of one thousand and one churches and forty gates.
 In his best days, Ani competed with Constantinople, Baghdad and Cairo with 2 influences.
As we have seen, the architects and dwellers of Ani cared about the churches and houses, the fences and bridges, the hotel-caravans and markets, and the "Underground Ani".
 In addition to serving their purpose, they were distinguished by beautiful architectural compositions and sensible solutions.
  It is thanks to these architectural monuments that it has become possible to partially restore the history of our "cosmopolitan" capital.
The fact that Ani was the masterpiece of the Armenian architectural thought is proved as follows ․1. Ani plays an important role in the context of both Armenian and world history 3, 2. Ani is in the center of tourists' attention along with Persepolis, Pompeii, Babylon, Machu Picchu and several other cities4.
The "Trdatyan" stylistic direction was formed in Ani5.
  Nowadays, the "royal" period of Ani continues to be preserved under the name "Golden Age" 6.
Ani has been praised by distinguished scientists, in addition, an application has been submitted to include Ani in the UNESCO World Heritage List.
  The studies and coverage of architect-scientists on urban-architectural structures do not stop.
 "Underground Ani" is of great interest and needs serious study.
1 See http!
//www.tert.am/en/news/2015/03/02/work-ongoing-to-put-ani-on-unesco-heritage-list/1605794.
2 See http!
//www.ancient-origins.net/news-history-archaeology/secret-underground-tunnels-ancient-mesopotamian-cult-under-ani-ruins002010.
3 Margaryan E., Ani is a king city.
 A dream city.
 City myth.
 City utopia, Shirak Center for Armenian Studies of NAS RA, Scientific works, XVII, Gyumri 2014, page 37.
4 Ani և other Korusian cities that can be visited today. Daily Mail reference, Tert.am, 19.03.2015, http.
//www.tert.am/en/news/2015/03/19/The-lost-cities-visit/1622596.
5 Hasratyan M., page 8.
6 In the same place.
To Tamara Karapetyan - CENTER OF ARMENIAN ARCHITECTURE Keywords: architecture, tourism, UNESCO, fences, caravanserais, bridges, churches, castles, "Ani precious stone", "Jewel of the Caucasus", "City".
