ARMENIAN-CHINESE INTERSTATE TRADE AND ECONOMIC RELATIONS AND THEIR PERSPECTIVES The beginning of the Armenian-Chinese relations dates back to before our era, when the Armenians traded not only with their neighboring countries, but also sailed to China.
  1991 is considered to be the beginning of state relations between the Republic of Armenia and the People's Republic of China. December 27, when the PRC officially recognized the Republic of Armenia.
 Diplomatic relations between the two countries were established in 1992. on April 6.
 1996 The Embassy of the Republic of Armenia was opened in Beijing on August 10, 2008. Armen Sargsyan has been the Ambassador of the Republic of Armenia to the People's Republic of China since 2008.
  1992 The Chinese embassy was opened in Yerevan in July 2010. Tian Changchun has been the ambassador since 2010.
 The trade representative office of the People's Republic of China has been operating in Yerevan since 19921.
At present, there are tendencies to develop close economic relations, there are programs in the fields of chemical industry, energy, mining, processing industry, agriculture, in particular, seed and livestock.
  Chinese companies are involved in molybdenum enrichment, as well as in the reconstruction of power plants.
  2010 The Shanxi-Nairit Rubber Plant, located in Danton, Shanxi Province, China, was commissioned in May of this year with an annual profit of $ 100 million.
 Armenia has a 40% share, the rest belongs to China.
  Armenia has supported the introduction of the third production line of the Nairit plant with technologies for the production of chloroprene rubber 2.
  In addition to this sphere, Armenia and China also cooperate in scientific, technical, humanitarian, educational and cultural spheres.
  The only one in the region, the Confucius Institute, has been operating since 2009, which is a very important center for the spread of Chinese culture and language, which is already of great interest in Armenia.
Armenia exports to China mainly minerals (marble, copper concentrate, tuff, ores), Armenian brandy, and goods imported from China are more diverse: electrical equipment, computer equipment, mechanical and chemical products, equipment, construction materials, household goods, metal structures. cars, polymers, clothes, shoes, food, etc.
  The chart below shows the volume of trade turnover between Armenia and China 1 Bilateral relations: Armenia-China, RA MFA website, see http.
//www.mfa.am/en/countryby-country/cn/,16.03.12.
2 Armenia-China.
  "Joint rubber production makes unlikely match a reality", http.
//www.armenianow.com/econo for a decade.
 China has significantly increased its share in Armenia's foreign trade, improving its position from 22nd to 2nd place, yielding only to Russia 1.
 According to the RA NSS, in 2000 China accounted for only 0.8% of the total trade turnover of Armenia, in 2007 - 4.6%, in 2008 - about 7%, and in 2010 - 9.1% (434.82 million US dollars).
 Exports from Armenia to China in 2009 The import increased by 73.6% to 30.8 million dollars, and the import increased by 42.6% to 404.02 million dollars.
  2012 year. compared to 2013 Exports increased by 120.1% ման Imports decreased by 3.4%.
Figure 1. Volumes of trade turnover between Armenia and China (thousand US dollars) 2 If we compare 2011 The data of the Republic of Armenia with the corresponding indicators of the neighboring countries, then we have the following picture. 2011 Georgia's trade with China amounted to 554 million dollars, exports and imports (according to the country of origin) - 29,525 million 3, respectively, and Azerbaijan's trade volume in the same year - 628 million dollars, almost one and a half times higher than Armenia.
  Of course, there are explanations for this difference in volumes. Armenia is under a land blockade, besides, the fact that the political borders are not fully opened is a serious obstacle.
  Armenia does not have the energy resources that Azerbaijan has, just as Armenia lags behind Georgia in terms of economic and social reforms.
Nevertheless, the growing trade between Armenia and China inspires hope, and the Armenian government is interested in closer relations between Yerevan and Beijing.
Proof of this are the mutual visits of high-ranking men of the two countries. 30 reciprocal visits were made, as a result of which 2 See NSS RA website: http.
//armstat.am/.
http:
//www.geostat.ge/index.php?action=page&p_id=137&lang=eng. A number of intergovernmental agreements in the economic, trade, cultural, tourism and other spheres.
 One of the important components of China's policy towards Armenia is financial and technical assistance.
 2013 The Government of the People's Republic of China has provided a grant of about $ 11 million to the Republic of Armenia within the framework of a technical assistance program.
 The main part of that money was allocated for the construction of a school with advanced Chinese language teaching in Yerevan, and the other part was purchased by Armenia for the customs service.
 An agreement was signed during the meeting of former Prime Minister Tigran Sargsyan and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang in Dalyan on September 10 of the same year, according to which an additional 100 million yuan (about $ 16 million) will be provided to Armenia.
 An important step in strengthening economic ties is the agreement on the development of trade and economic ties signed by the parties, which envisages the establishment of an intergovernmental commission on economic cooperation1.
Since the establishment of interstate relations between the Republic of Armenia and the People's Republic of Armenia, a number of agreements on trade and economic issues have been initiated: on capital investment promotion, mutual protection, state loan for import of goods, military-industrial cooperation, standardization, metrology, certification, agriculture, etc.
21st century China has become a country that has taken its rightful place in world politics, in international politics, and is considered one of the world's power burdens, which is taken into account both in the West and in the East.
  According to many experts, China will surpass the United States in terms of economic potential in the next 20 years, which is now considered to be the second largest economy in the world in terms of GDP.
 Of course, it is not considered a developing country, it focuses on industrial development, it does not have a competitive technology production system, such as the United States, Germany, Japan, it has not yet solved the problems of urbanization, internal migration, emancipation, it does not have the capabilities of the US military. It is obvious that the current pace of Chinese development will inevitably lead to the transformation of China into a superpower.
Experts no longer discuss China becoming a superpower, they only try to predict when it will happen.
 The International Monetary Fund և Goldman Sachs, a large investment bank, is proposing two terms: 2016 և 2030, respectively.
  According to IMF forecasts, in 2016 China's GDP, according to purchasing power parity, will be $ 18.976 trillion, while the US GDP will be $ 18.807 trillion2.
  According to Goldman Sachs forecasts, in 2030 China's GDP will be $ 25,610 trillion, and the US - 22,817 trillion3.
After the economic boom of recent decades, China has made multibillion-dollar investments in Africa, Latin America, Europe, a number of CIS countries - Russia, Belarus, Ukraine.
 2008 As of January-June, China's direct investments in other countries amounted to 25.71 See http: // www.
//www.aravot.am/2013/09/10/383990/.
billion dollars 1, while Armenia in 1991-2010. It was able to receive only $ 1.4 million from those investments, of which $ 1.3 million in the form of direct investments, in 2011 - $ 2.7 million 2, which is almost twice as much as in the previous 20 years.
  For comparison, investments by Russia in the same period amounted to $ 2.8 billion.
 Taking into account these circumstances, it is necessary to work to direct Chinese investments and capital to the Republic of Armenia.
  The Chinese side, which is one of the main creditors of the Asian Development Bank, needs to involve Armenia-Iran in the construction of the railway, which will ensure China's long-term presence in the region, strengthen China-China ties with Iran, from which it goes to Beijing.
  The Armenian market can give wide opportunities to Chinese companies in the sense that Armenia is a member of the WTO, national legislation in the field of trade is liberalized and meets international standards.
 Besides, the Armenian market can be a platform for entering the Iranian Հ CIS market.
 Armenia could be even more interested in the Chinese side if it agrees to trade in the Chinese renminbi currency, which China is trying to establish as a stable circulating currency, such as the euro, dollar and yen.
  Currently, there are 41 Armenian-Chinese joint ventures in Armenia, which operate in the field of food, beverages, tobacco, textiles, wholesale of footwear, restaurant business, and production of household electrical appliances.
  There are Chinese network companies that carry out retail trade of medicines, medical products, cosmetics and accessories (Tianshi, Meytan, etc.).
Looking at the relations between China and its foreign investors, we can see that they are aimed at uniting cooperating companies, which is aimed at maximizing the usefulness of using each other's staff.
  One of the features of this action is the increase of scaling results.
  The combination of a relatively well-educated, disciplined, cheap Chinese workforce with the manufacturing, management, and marketing experience and skills of the investing countries has yielded an indisputable positive result.
 The same can be applied in the case of Armenian-Chinese cooperation, considering Armenia as a less developed country.
  The exchange of personnel, experience, technologies can lead to significant progress, especially for Armenia.
Armenia should try to attract Chinese investors to the production of goods that are expensive, but due to below-average transportation costs, their total price will be low, for example, the production of information technology.
  However, this will not be an easy task, as China's investment in this area in 2006-2010. amounted to 1.5 billion dollars from its 216 billion dollars of foreign investments.
  Meanwhile, if we compare, China has made $ 100 billion in foreign investment in the energy sector in the same years3.
  In the field of information, there are two well-known Chinese companies in Armenia: ZTE (Zhong Xing1 Xinhua Agency, see http).
//russian.people.com.cn/31518/6496012.html.
2 China hopes to increase the volume of large investments in Armenia; http:
//arminfo.am/russian/finance/article/12 Telecommunication Equipment Co.Ldt) և Huawei Technologies Co. Ldt.:
  The latter is considered a supplier of equipment for the construction of the third generation mobile network.
  Huawei has won a tender that allows it to supply base stations և third generation (3G) controllers to K-telecom (VivaCell-MTC) 1.
  According to the contract, the specialists of the Chinese company must build and put into operation the network, integrating it into the already existing GSM network.
  And ZTE company was the first of the two that in 2006 has been cooperating with ArmenTel mobile operator since 2007, providing the latter with its own CDMA450 wireless local nodes.
  Due to the continuous cooperation, the infrastructures of the information network will be developed in the country.
The Armenian authorities are trying to build effective relations with China, but the case is still not going from theoretical to practical level.
  The authorities realize that closer economic relations with China and the entry of Armenian goods into the Chinese market have brought very serious economic development to Armenia, but it is problematic that China, which is growing stronger day by day, considers Turkey a threat to Armenia's national security.
 The Turks, like the Chinese, have a problem strengthening their position in Central Asia, and the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of China, inhabited by a Turkic Uyghur tribe, threatens China's territorial integrity, and these concerns are partly provoked by Turkey.
  The prevention of Turkish programs stems from the Armenian-Chinese strategic interests and the logic of national security.
 Armenia, colliding with the anti-Armenian policy of the Turkish-Azerbaijani tandem in the South Caucasus, may become a Beijing strategic ally in the region, which will curb the Pan-Turkic wave.
  And if Armenia is weak, that wave, including the Central Asian region, will reach the Turkish-populated regions of northwestern China.
 As one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council with a veto, Beijing can become a new ally for Yerevan in the UN, along with Moscow, in terms of blocking such resolutions to veto anti-Armenian resolutions.
The continued growth of China's economy և political positions requires that Yerevan be more proactive, initiating to interest Beijing not only politically but also economically.
 The statesmen of the Republic of Armenia must be more active and resilient if they want to turn the Armenian-Chinese relations into a more serious and stable cooperation, despite certain geopolitical, economic obstacles and restrictions.
Thus, the best preconditions for the deepening of the Armenian-Chinese relations can be used to provide a basis for China to become a superpower, its strategic allies and influence on different continents, the search for suitable markets for direct investments and the pan-Turkic threat.
  It is in the interests of the Republic of Armenia to strengthen relations with the existing and perspective centers of power, as it will make the diplomacy of the Republic of Armenia more flexible.
1 Armenian MTS dropped 3G; http:
//www.comnews.ru/node/19430: Lusine Aleksanyan ARMENIAN-CHINESE INTERGOVERNMENTAL TRADE AND ECONOMIC RELATIONS Keywords: Armenian-Chinese relations, trade-economic relations, interstate economic relations, non-state economic relations
