OBJECTIVES TO RELEASE CONDITIONAL FROM BEING PUNISHED The response to crime is carried out with the help of social, political, economic and legal means.
  The most common and effective means of social control are punishment and prevention.
  Punishment by its social significance is the most effective means of protection in case of violation of the normal living conditions of the society, the essence of which is to impose certain restrictions and deprivations on the perpetrators of the crime, on the one hand, and to achieve a useful result in the public interest.
However, it should be noted that the response to the crime is not limited to punishment, and in some cases it is inexpedient or impossible to carry out the further part of the punishment, that is why the legislator, based on the requirements of the principle of humanity, included the institution of release from punishment.
The current Criminal Code provides for release from parole, such as parole, replacement of the unserved part of the sentence with a milder sentence, release due to a serious illness, release due to the expiration of the statute of limitations, etc.
  In these cases, the court acquits persons convicted of a crime not because the act has lost its character and the perpetrator is no longer dangerous to the public, but because the purpose of the sentence has been achieved or there is no further punishment to achieve those goals. the need to serve or there are circumstances that hinder or complicate the execution of the sentence.
The types of release from punishment have different legislative formulations, different grounds and conditions of application.
  However, it is advisable to classify them into two groups: conditional և non-conditional1.
 This type of classification is based on a certain condition presented to the released person, the non-fulfillment of which causes the execution of the unserved part (whole) of the sentence.
When discussing the types of release from punishment, it is necessary to refer to the institute of "parole", which is envisaged not only in the Republic of Armenia but also under different names: "parole", "parole", "parole" - a number of in the legislation of foreign countries, in particular Russia, USA, Great Britain, France, Austria, Germany, Japan, etc.
The RA Criminal Code stipulates that "a person serving a sentence of imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion may be released on parole if the court finds that he does not need to serve the remainder of the sentence," refraining from exposing the role of this institution. Leaving it to the discretion of theorists.
  That is why even today there is no unanimity about this institute, whether it is a means of encouragement or a convict's right or a part of punishment.
  However, in order to address in detail the nature of early release in this case, we find that it can be defined as a criminal mechanism that ensures the reintegration of the convict into society, being a stimulus for the latter to exhibit law-abiding behavior. Convicted convicts with a low probability of committing a crime, provided that they do not serve the sentence in case of illegal behavior during the probation period.
The disputed type of release is used in the presence of three interrelated grounds, which in the theory of criminal and penitentiary law are classified into three types: legal, material and procedural 2.
 Moreover, the legal basis is 1 See RA criminal law. common part.
 YSU Publishing House Yerevan 2012, page 483.
2 See Anisimkov V. М., Капункин С. Л., Рыбак М. С. Performance law. Course / Sub. В. М. Anisimkova., Saratov.
 SGAP, 2001. Page 223, Evtushenko I. И. Decree. соч.55 և 77 pages, Малин П.М. Decree. soch .. pages 42-50, Course of Rights. General part. T.2. Learn page 220, Performance Law, Textbook for Erid. Вузов А.С. Михлин, П. G.Ponomarev, V. И. Селиверстов, И. В. Шмаров; Under. OK. В. И. Seliverstova, Moscow, 2000, p. 246.
The type of punishment in disan և is the period of its actual serving, the material - the degree of correction of the convict, and the procedural is the procedural regulation of submitting the parole.
It should be noted that there are views in the literature3 that only the degree of correction of the convict is the basis for the application of this institution, and the type of punishment և its actual period of service are only a condition.
We think that such an opinion should not be considered justified, the requirement that a convict has served a part of the sentence also pursues the goals of the sentence, besides, the court cannot release a convict with the most positive behavior, which follows Article 76 of the Criminal Code.
According to Part 1 of Article 76 of the RA Criminal Code, "a person serving a sentence of imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion may be released on parole if the court finds that he needs to serve the rest of the sentence imposed for correction."
  From this it becomes clear that the legislator has provided early release for only two types of punishment, including life imprisonment, ignoring the other types of punishment4.
The probationary condition for parole is the fact that the convict has served the actual part of the sentence prescribed by law.
 Part 3 of Article 76 of the Criminal Code stipulates that: "Parole can be applied only if the convict has actually served: 1) not less than one third of the sentence for a minor or medium-gravity crime.3 See Barsukova S. P., Decree Soc. Pages 31-32, Куцева Э. F., Fulfillment objected. Moscow1960, page 18; Ignatov A. N., Krasikov Gj. A., Course of Russian Conventional Rights.
  В 2 т. T. 1. General part. Moscow.
 Izd-vo NORMA, 2001, 488-489 pages Комментарий к Уголовному кодексуРоссийской Федерации Ю. И. Скуратова, В. М. Lebedeva, Moscow, 1999 p. 166 KomKadnikova, Moscow, 2008, p. 178, Rule of Law of the Russian Federation. Publication section, Textbook Under order. B. В. Здравомыслова, Москва, 1999, pp. 420-421.
4 We believe that the legislator should rule out the exclusion of such punishable punishments as public works սահմանափ restriction of military service.
  First, they are more severe in their punitive nature than imprisonment and detention in a disciplinary battalion.
  Second, in the case of these types of punishments, there is no isolation of the convicts from the society.
2) not less than half of the sentence imposed for a serious crime. not less than two.4) according to the second part of Article 104, the second part of Article 132, the third part, the second and third parts of Article 132.2, the third part of Article 138, the third part of Article 139, 175- Article 3, part 3, Article 217, second-third parts, Article 218, part 3, Article 221, second-third parts, Article 222, part 1, Article 266, part 3, Article 269, part three;Article 299 (1), Article 305 (2), Article 384 (2), Article 387 (2), Article 388 (2), Article 389, Article 390 (1), (3) not less than three-quarters of the sentence imposed for the crimes provided for in Articles 392, 393 and 394. ”
Moreover, Part 4 of Article 76 of the Criminal Code stipulates that "the term of imprisonment actually served by imprisonment in a disciplinary battalion may not be less than three months."
In fact, the legislator bases the separation of the terms of compulsory serving of the sentence on the nature of the crime committed and the public danger, ignoring the person of the perpetrator կոնկրետ the specific type of crime committed.
  We are talking about the convicts against whom early release was previously applied, but was eliminated by Article 76, Part 6.
  The Court of Cassation referred to the issue under discussion with its precedent decision EKD / ​​0057/12/08, only stating that the fact that parole had been applied in the past did not constitute an obstacle for the convict to be released on parole again.
  In such cases, our current code does not introduce any distinction, setting the same conditions for early release.
  A certain regulation related to this issue is envisaged both in the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, 5 and in the draft of the new RA Criminal Code (hereinafter referred to as 5 See Article 79 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, Part c), 24.05.1996.
Project) 6.
  In particular, Russian law provides that a convict who has previously been granted parole but subsequently revoked may be released on parole again if he has served two-thirds of the sentence imposed by the court, but such an arrangement cannot be considered complete as cases are possible. When the convict commits a particularly serious crime, in which case he can be released early if he serves three-quarters of the sentence, and in this case it turns out that the RF legislator provides more favorable conditions for such a category of convicts.
  To avoid this situation, the draft envisages a stricter regulation, setting a three-quarter term of actual serving of the sentence, which should be considered fair in the sense that the same conditions of early release should not be provided for convicts who have already proved that they have not lost to society. public danger.
As we have seen, the legislator did not clearly differentiate between the term of actual punishment in the case of serious, especially serious crimes, and did not show the same approach for minor, medium-gravity crimes, setting a total term of not less than one-third of the sentence.
 Such a regulation should be considered wrong, contrary to the principle of individualization of justice և responsibility7.
  The presented principle is aimed at ensuring the fairness of the punishment applied to the person who committed the crime, strictly matching the gravity of the crime, the circumstances of its commission, the personality of the perpetrator, which must be necessary and sufficient to correct the perpetrator to prevent a new crime.
 In the case of such a settlement, it will hardly be possible to implement the provisions of that principle and achieve its goals.
  This issue has been resolved in the Draft, but by settling in a different way, based not on the type of crime but on the sentence imposed by the court, we believe that such a settlement is one of the best, which is able to solve the problem presented below.
At present, the question of how much of the punishment should be served to the convict turtle, for whom the criminal has been sentenced 6 See the draft of the RA Criminal Code, Article 96, Part 4, 06.08. 2015.
7 See RA Criminal Code, Article 10, April 18, 2003.
8 See RA Criminal Law, general part, YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2012, p. 25.
by a combination of conditions or judgments.
 There are a number of disagreements in the theoretical literature related to the problem, offering different solutions.
R. A. Dyachenko և D. A. Sherba states that "in such a case it is necessary to proceed from the general term of the sentence imposed by the court" 9.
  The next point is that the issue should be resolved based on a serious crime in the community10.
In one of the decisions of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, a similar view was expressed, stating that "courts, in case of parole in case of a combination of crimes, should take into account the term of punishment for the most serious crime in the community" 11 We believe that in the current legislation there is no other option This view is more acceptable, although the rights of convicts are unreasonably restricted.
The draft on the subject matter, as already mentioned above, based on a specific court decision, provided for another regulation. "A convict may be released on parole if he has served: 1) not less than one third of the sentence of imprisonment for a maximum of five years, 2) not less than half of the sentence of imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years, 3) a maximum of thirty not less than two thirds of the sentence of imprisonment for a term of one year; 4) less than half of the sentence imposed for keeping in a disciplinary battalion. ”
However, the regulation envisaged by the draft is not perfect either, it does not make a distinction in the disciplinary battalion 9 See Кулиев Р. I., Decree. soch., p. 15, Щерба Д. A., Decree. соч., 12 և 24 pages.
10 See Russian Conventional Law, Vol. 1. Public part / Under order. L.V. Иногамовой-Хегай, BCКомиссарова, А. И. Рарога, Москва, 2003, էջ 541, Российское уголовное право.
 в 2 т. T.1. Общая часть.
 learn / Г. Н. Borzenkov (et al.); in order. Л. В. Inogamovoy-Hegay, BC Komisarova, A. И. Рарога, Москва, 2006, pp. 439-440. Российское уголовное право, Общая часть, Под ре.BC Комиссарова, Санкт Петербург, 2005, էջ 431, Улицкий С. ,., Conditional-completion of the exemption from correctional facilities, Educational qualification. Vladivostok, 2002, pages 7576.
11 See В п. 2 positions of the Plenum of the Supreme Court from 21.04.2009, № 8 "On the fateful practice there is a great kind of punishment".
In terms of the terms of the actual serving of the sentence for the early release of convicted convicts, but a general rule of not less than half of the sentence shall be established.
 We think that in this case it is necessary to re-edit Article 96, Part 2, Clause 4 of the Draft, based on the type of crime. 4) not less than one third of the sentence imposed for keeping a minor crime in a disciplinary battalion, 5) not less than half of the sentence imposed for holding a disciplinary battalion for a minor crime ”Of particular interest is the clarification of the question whether the institution in question How should the period of compulsory serving of the sentence prescribed by law be calculated for the application, when after the convict has served a certain part of the sentence, the sentence imposed by the court is reduced as a result of the amnesty?
  Should it be calculated from the sentence changed as a result of the amnesty act or from the one appointed by the verdict?
The answer to the question was given by the Court of Cassation, stating in one of the precedent decisions, 12 that the sentence is a measure of coercion imposed on behalf of the state by a court decision, the term of which can be changed on the basis of an amnesty act.
 Based on this, the Court of Cassation states its position that in case the sentence is changed by the amnesty act, the early release should be carried out on the basis of the term extended by the amnesty act as a result of the reduction of the unserved part of the sentence.
  Agreeing with the position of the Court of Cassation, it should be noted that it is a logical continuation of the humanitarian approach taken by the state, as the reduction of the sentence by amnesty results in favorable consequences for the convict in the form of early release.
The next issue we would like to address is related to the minimum term of actual serving of the sentence set by the legislator.
Point 4 of Article 76 of the current Code states: "The actual sentence of imprisonment in a disciplinary battalion may not be less than three months."
 Յ. Մ. Tkachsky claims that "it is not possible to find out the correction of the convict in a shorter period of time. 12 See EED / 0026/12/12 A. of the RA Court of Cassation of August 24, 2012. Sulyan's decision.
the fact that he is standing in the way ”13 S. concludes with that thought. G. Barsukova 14 և I. Յ. Kozachenko 15.
  We also consider it necessary to reveal the significance of that minimum term from the psychological point of view.
  According to some psychologists, the second stage of adaptation ends in the first six months of being in correctional facilities, as a result of which the convict's personal development acquires either a positive or a negative direction16.
However, the regulation provided by our Criminal Code does not allow us to achieve these goals, as the investigation of criminal cases can take months, and if detention is imposed as a precautionary measure against the convict, the term of which is later in Article 69 (3) of the Criminal Code. Article 87 (3) will be calculated by force with the sentence of imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion, then a situation will arise when the convict, not having a minimum period of actual serving of the sentence, may be released early.
According to Article 62 of the RA Penitentiary Code, "the correctional facility provides for the execution of a term of imprisonment or life imprisonment", and the places of detention of detainees are not part of the correctional facilities17.
  The same can be said about keeping in a disciplinary battalion, the implementation of which is ensured by the disciplinary battalion operating in the system of the authorized body for the management of the defense sphere.
  It is noteworthy that the person against whom the detention was applied as a measure of restraint has another judicial status (suspect or accused), which changes only from the moment the court verdict enters into force, therefore it should not be considered that the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment or in the form of being kept in a disciplinary battalion.
There is a similar problem in the draft, despite the fact that here they are separated for two types of punishments before 13 See Ткачевский Ю Ю. М., Условно-досрочное освобождение от отбывания наказания, ВестникМосковского университета, Серия 11. Право, 1997, № 2. էջ 1714 See Барсукова С. G., Decree. soch. pages 18-19, 65-66.
15 See Rule of Law. General part. Textbook for air conditioning I.G. Kozachenko, 3. A. Neznamovoy, Moscow, 1999, p. 453.
16 See Vasilyev V. L., Decree. soch. С. 618; Шиханцов Г. G., диridic psychology.
  Учебникдля вузов.
From OK. В. А. Tomsinov, Moscow, 1998, pp. 313-314.
17 See RA Penitentiary Law, H. Մ. Khachikyan educational manual, YSU Press, 2011, pages 95-102.
the minimum deadlines seen.
  Six months for imprisonment and three months for keeping a horse in a disciplinary battalion.
  This separation is not an end in itself, as it is due to differences in both the severity and the punitive policy of these two types of punishment, which, unfortunately, is missing in the provisions of the current Code.
Therefore, taking into account the linguistic analysis of the actual word. 1) We believe that the calculation of the minimum period of early release should be made from the moment the convict actually enters a correctional facility, allowing the penitentiary administration to review the decision impartially. make a decision on the early release of the convict.
Summing up the above, we find that Part 4 of Article 76 of the Criminal Code should be re-edited as follows: “3. The actual term of imprisonment in a correctional facility may not be less than six months.
In the disciplinary battalion, the actual term of the sentence cannot be less than three months. ”
As for the material basis of early release, such is the correction of the convict.
  Part 1 of Article 76 of the Criminal Code stipulates: "A person serving a sentence of imprisonment in a custodial or disciplinary battalion may be released on parole if the court finds that he does not need to serve the remainder of the sentence imposed for correction."
It should be noted that Article 16 of the Penitentiary Code defines "correction" as "the formation of a convict's respectful attitude towards the rules of man, society, coexistence and traditions, as well as the promotion of law-abiding behavior for the convict to develop a healthy lifestyle". .
 The list of correctional criteria is presented in Part 2 of Article 17: "Correction measures are applied taking into account the type of punishment, the convict's behavior, the nature of the crime committed and the degree of public danger, the convict's attitude to the crime committed, the punishment term, 18 See Aghayan E. B., "Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian", volumes 1 և 2, Yerevan, 1976, page 1514.
the type of correctional facility, as well as other circumstances conditioned by the principle of individualizing the execution of the sentence. ”
Such criteria are based on the provisions of the Recommendation adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, according to which prisoners sentenced long before their release should be assisted with special procedures and programs that will enable them to move from prison to a law-abiding society. It is envisaged that in the case of prisoners serving longer sentences, steps should be taken to ensure their gradual return to society.
The latter can be implemented through pre-release programs through prison programs, or under partial parole under supervision, combined with social assistance19.
  It is noteworthy that the penitentiary code, when applying correctional measures, stipulates that the type of correctional facility should be taken into account.
 Such a requirement is, in essence, due to the fact that the type of correctional facility, the regime established there, and the various measures of influence applied there, including the work with convicts, aiming to place the convict in a less severe penitentiary as soon as possible. in case of early release.
 Such a requirement is also enshrined in the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, which provides that penitentiary services should, as often as possible, use some form of imprisonment, such as open regime or out of prison to prepare for the social rehabilitation of persons deprived of their liberty.
  We believe that such gradual changes made to the convicts give them the opportunity to be convinced once again about the lower risk of committing a crime, in fact, they are a guarantee of proper conduct.
Introducing the criteria for correction provided for in the Penitentiary Code, it should be noted that they are not exhaustive.
20 See Recommendation No. Rec (2003) 22 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on parole, paragraph 13.
In the current conditions, it is supplemented by 21 orders of the RA Minister of Justice.
The view has been expressed in the legal literature that when assessing the degree of correction of a son-in-law, it is necessary to pay attention to the fact that the convict has compensated the victim.
  That view is also enshrined in the criminal-penitentiary codes.
 According to Article 76, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code, "when applying parole, the court shall take into account the fact that the convict inflicts damage on the victim", and the second paragraph of Article 114, Part 1 of the Penitentiary Code stipulates "Conditional serving of the sentence". "Early release or replacement of the unserved part of the sentence shall not be applied with a milder form of punishment, when the crime has caused damage to human health or caused the death of a person, ը the convict has not fully reimbursed the damage caused to the victim."
Therefore, the question arises what to do in case the convict does not have the means to compensate the damage?
 We are talking about the convicts who are serving their sentences in correctional institutions, where there are not enough conditions for work, have all the preconditions for early release, but their material means are not enough to compensate the damage provided by Article 114 of the Penitentiary Code.
 The RA Court of Cassation, by its decision VB-179/07 of 26.09.2007, referred to this issue, literally commenting on Article 114, Part 1 of the Penitentiary Code, came to the conclusion that the lower court's findings were not substantiated on the grounds that the legal successor of the victim 800,000 Only 15,000 AMD was paid from the compensation amount.
In this case, it is difficult to misinterpret the legal position of the Court of Cassation, based on the current legislation.
  In fact, there is a situation when the rights of convicts are unnecessarily restricted due to their civil obligations.
  While in freedom, they will have an even greater chance of getting a job and compensating for the damage done.
 Such a policy is not justified. See May 30, 2008 on the approval of the order of the Minister of Armenia "Activities of structural subdivisions carrying out social, psychological and legal work with detainees" with convicts. N-44 order.
The Republic of Justice suspends the goals of early release.
 It is not for nothing that according to point 8 of Recommendation No. 22 adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on September 24, 2003, "in order to reduce the risk of re-offending by parolees, it should be possible to impose such conditions on convicts, such as "Compensation to the victims or otherwise compensation."
From this provision it can be assumed that reparation for the damage caused to the victim may be one of the conditions for parole after release, and not one of the criteria for determining the issue of release.
 In other words, all the convicts, whose prognosis for further behavior is positive, should be released, regardless of the fact whether they repaired the damage caused to the victim while being kept in the penitentiary or not.
However, the current legislation concludes that compensation for the damage caused to the victim is presented as a basis for early release.
  Meanwhile, in our opinion, it should be considered as a criterion for assessing the degree of "correction" of the convict - a condition of early release, which should be compensated in all cases, taking into account the convict's social, marital status, age, ability to work, the real opportunity to repair the damage.
 A similar regulation is envisaged in France 22 in a number of other European countries.
Thus, we believe that in such a case, Article 114 of the Penitentiary Code needs to be revised, which is a direct prohibition on the application of the institution of parole when the convict has not fully remedied the damage caused to the victim in case of damage to human health or death.
Garik Abelyan CONDITIONAL EARLY RELEASE FROM SENTENCE Keywords: Draft of the new RA Criminal Code, punishment, release from punishment, convict, minimum term of serving the sentence, "correction" of the convict.
