THE ROLE OF TANSAR (TOSAR) AND KARTIR CRIORS IN SASANYANIRAN'S PUBLIC-POLITICAL LIFE At different periods of Iran's history, religious beliefs and denominations have usually been considered as a means of substantiating the legitimacy of the government.
  Sasanyan wealth was no exception.
  Coming to power, the Sasanians set themselves the goal of creating a strong centralized state, the cornerstone of which was Zoroastrianism.
 Back in the Parthian era, Zoroastrianism had a large following in Iran, especially in Persia, but it was obvious that the Parthian kings were not particularly jealous of the Persian features and the pure preservation of the religion.
 As a result, Greek civilization entered Persia and its neighboring countries with a large stream.
  This situation changed when power passed to the Sasanians in Persia, during which Zoroastrianism became the state religion.
Few contradictory information has been preserved about Zarathustra, the founder of Zoroastrianism or, as the Greeks called him, Zoroaster.
 According to Mary Boyce, Zarathustra must have lived in BC. 1200 in the period after 1.
 Its literal meaning literally means "he who leads camels" 2.
  We know from the holy book of Zoroastrians, "Avesta", that Zarathustra came from the tribe of Spitam.
  According to tradition, the text of the "Avesta" was written in golden letters on the skins of twelve thousand cows. It was kept in the three towers of Jalaye-Ishari (Ieshari fortress).
 During the conquest of the Achaemenid state by Alexander the Great, the sacred book of the Zoroastrians was burned.
  In addition to religion, the "Avesta" included astronomical, cosmological, legal, moral and other texts.
  The ancient language of the Avesta was incomprehensible to the majority of the population during the Sassanid period, which is why later commentaries were formed, which were called Zend ("Zend-Avesta").
Tansar (Tosar) և Carter priests played an irreplaceable role in the completion and coordination of the Zoroastrian teaching3.
 It is clear from the letter left by Tansar that he held the position of the supreme priest, "Mobedan Mobedi", during the reign of Artashir I (226-241) 4.
 He bore the title of "Hirbad" 5.
 Important information about Tansar's activities has been preserved in his letter to Gushnasp, a vassal of the Parthian Arshakuni.
 Gushnasp was the ruler of Tabaristan, a difficult region in northern Iran.
  In this letter written on behalf of Shahnshah, Tansar tried to persuade Gushnasp to voluntarily recognize the supremacy of the newly created state6.
  The texts of "Avesta" are collected and edited under his leadership.
  These works are completed during the reign of Shapuh I.
 This is probably the time when the traditional alphabet was created.
  The need for the alphabet stemmed from the religious demands of the time.
 It is thought to have been used only when writing religious texts, but the newcomer could not replace the not-so-perfect Parthian script.
The name of the priest Carter was unknown in history until the writings left by him were found.
 One of them is engraved on Kaaba (cube) and Zardusht (Zarathustra) at the bottom of the trilingual inscription left by Shapuh I.
  We learn from the letter left by Cartier that this structure was called "the house of foundations", that is, the place where state documents and religious provisions were kept.
The area where Kaaba was built was also called the "Mountain of Scriptures" because the Avesta inscriptions were kept there.
  In the first line of his essay, Carter reports that he interpreted the Avesta եղել and was the caring leader of all the priests for 80 years.
 The following inscriptions have been preserved in Nakhsh-e Rustam, on a mountain with the Kaaba-e Zardusht, in Nakhsh-e Rajab, in Sar Mashhad.
  Սրավոք սրտի, 4 Book of the Deeds of Ardeshir, Son of Papak (نا (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) کباب شدرایر ه (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) (cid.
1127) Manrak) http.
//www.cais5 Boys M., ref. p. 125. The inscriptions left in Nakhsh-e Rustam և Sar Mashhad are well preserved, հատված many passages are illegible today.
During the reign of Shapuh I, Carter held the position of "hirbad" or "mobedanmobed", which speaks of the existence of a hierarchical hierarchy.
  However, it should be emphasized that in the early years of the Sasanian rule, the careful hierarchy had not yet been fully formed.
 At this time a new religious doctrine began in the country, Manichaeism, founded by the former Zoroastrian priest Mani (Manikeos).
 He considered himself the last of the prophets.
 In fact, the syncretic teachings of Manichaeism include the principles of Zoroastrianism, Christianity, and Judaism.
 Mann added to them's Buddhism, the doctrine of the transformation of souls.
  This movement, presented under the guise of religion, was in fact social in nature.
  The ideas they preached about social equality quickly spread among the general public.
 Several works of Mani have been preserved: "Kefalia", "Shapuhakan", "Book of Confessions", etc.
Shapuh I tried to use this new ideological weapon in order to expand his social support.
 After ascending the throne, Shapuh I received Mani in the court as a prophet of a new faith7.
  Allowing the propaganda of Manichaeism, Shapuh pursued a dual goal. First, by turning Manichaeism into a state religion, it would become an ideological doctrine dependent on Shahnshah, which would provide him with a new, effective way of influencing the masses.
  Second, he hoped to establish the religious unity of all his subjects, including Christians.
 And finally, a devastating blow could be dealt to the Zoroastrian clergy, who had gained great influence in the country, as well as to the old tribal aristocracy.
 However, Manichaeism was not destined to become the ideological basis of the Sasanian state.
  There was too much pessimism in him և tangled, intricate philosophical ideas.
  But the most important drawback is that Mani's teaching was full of ideas of democracy that could not serve as a support for the Sassanid state, which aspired to centralization.
The nobility ագույն the high priesthood showed such resolute resistance to the religious policy of Shapuhi 7 Бойс М., op. work., p. 138. 8 Fray R., ref. op. cit., p. 304. He was forced to renounce all contact with the Manichaeans.
  Mani had to leave the borders of his homeland.
After returning to Iran, he was accused of heresy, arrested and handed over to magicians.
After the movement was extinguished, most of his followers moved to Armenia and Georgia.
 Later this movement left its influence on the ideology of the Pavlik, Tondrak movements9.
Carter succeeded in restoring the position of Zoroastrianism within the country.
  During the reign of Ormizd-Artashir (272-273), Carthage held the title of "Ahuramazda Mobeda" (it is very likely that he was the first to bear this title) 10.
  Cartier's influence in the socio-political life of the country continued during the reign of Varahran II (276-293), during which Cartier was the religious educator of the Young Shah, and later he was able to expand his influence in the governance of the state.
  In addition, he was granted the position of chief overseer of the temple of the goddess Anahit in the city of Iստահtrրr, which gave him immense authority, as the goddess Anahit was considered the guardian of the Sasanian wealth.
 Carter considered himself a prophet, the only interpreter of the "will of the gods."
 He was subject to the scattering of corpses throughout the country; besides, Carter had at his disposal huge sums of money;
 Finally, Carter became the Chief Justice of the state.
 According to the concept of the "ideal king", the king had to be religious, completely under the influence of his religious educator, and think in accordance with the principles of religion.
  According to Carter, the state should have been theocratic.
We do not know anything about Carter's future and his death.
  He is last mentioned in a huge inscription left by Nerses (293-302) near the Paikul mountain pass.
For some reason, his name disappears from the pages of Sasanian official chronicles and religious books.
 It is supposed that the old man was killed during another coup d'etat12.
10 http.
//www.britannica.com/topic/Zoroastrianism. 11 Fray R., ref. work., pp. 299- 305.12 Boyce M., ref. op. cit., pp. 133-142. By the way, today some historians try to identify the Tansar-Cartir priests, who left a great mark in the history of Sasanian Iran13.
Karine YeranosyanTANSAR (TOSAR) AND THE ROLE OF KARTIR CRIORS IN SASANIAN IRANIAN SOCIAL-POLITICAL LIFE Keywords: Sasanian Iran, Zoroastrianism, Tansar (Tosar), Carter, Manichaeism
