Sci. Head: Candidate of Technical Sciences, Assoc. Մ. The formation of the Tavadian legal framework is a precondition for the promotion of innovative activities, as the effective legal regulation of the sector, creating effective economic conditions, contributes to the solution of a number of problems in the sector.
 Due to that, the success of the innovation activity is largely conditioned by the state policy of creating the innovation environment, and the latter is implemented through the legislative normative-legal field regulating the innovation activity.
It should be noted that a corresponding legislative field has been created in the Republic of Armenia, using the role of science and education in the development of the economy and society.
 Evidence of this is the fact that Articles 38-43 of the RA Constitution define "Everyone has the right to education" 4 և "Freedom of creation" 5.
However, it should be noted that a serious step was taken to develop innovative activities in Armenia only in 2000, when the Law on Scientific and Scientific Activities was adopted, which regulates the relations of scientific and technical subjects, state bodies, as well as users of scientific results. սկզբունք Principles of formation and implementation of state policy in the field of scientific and technical activity 6.
 And already in November 2001, the Government of the Republic of Armenia adopted “4 Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia on the Basic Financing of Scientific and Scientific-Technical Activities, adopted on December 6, 2015, Article 38.
5 Amendments to the RA Constitution, adopted on 06.12.2015, Article 43.
6 RA Law on Scientific and Scientific-Technical Activities, adopted on 05.12.2000.
To approve the order "On approving the order in the Republic of Armenia" (17.11.2001, N 1121), "On approving the procedure of contractual (thematic) financing of scientific and technical activities" (17.11.2001, N 1122); 17.11.2001, N 1123) decisions.
  The Concept of Innovation Activities was approved by the Government ", and on September 28 of the same year the Government approved the" Program for the Systematization of Armenia for 2005-2010 "and the" List of Measures for the Implementation of the Program for the Innovation of the System for 2010-2010 ".
2005-2010 The state innovation policy program continued և 2006 In May, the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia adopted a law "On the basis of state support and innovation activities for innovation activities, this law defines the legal bases for the implementation and implementation of the RA state innovation policy, types of innovation activities, subjects, purpose of state support activities", main directions7.
Continuously in 2006-2007. A number of normative legal acts were adopted, in particular, “Innovation of the Government of the Republic of Armenia on 07.09.2006. Decision N1252-A, "On defining the priorities of the development of the innovation sphere" of the RA Government on 19.10.2006 Decision N1466-N, "On approving the procedure for holding and financing tenders for innovation projects" of the Government of the Republic of Armenia dated 02.08.2007. N878- Renovation, և “Annual Program for Support of Innovation Activities of the Government 02.08.2007 Decision N877-N.
7 Law of the Republic of Armenia on State Support to Innovation Activities, adopted on 23.05.2006, approving the implementation procedure "as well as the recognition of the Innovation Authority".
On February 17, 2011, the Government of the Republic of Armenia approved the "Concept of the Start-up Strategy for Innovation Economy Development", which is called to present the vision of the Innovation Assistance Strategy Development Strategy in Armenia, the main strategic initiatives of the first stage, the support tools 8.
  It should be noted that it was implemented on the basis of the system-building initiatives implemented by the RA Ministry of Economy, the legal framework ensuring the formation of the national innovation system, business opportunities, other projects aimed at the development and reform of the innovation-financial infrastructure.
The concept contains the principles of innovation system formation, the assessment of the current situation, the strategic horizons of national innovation system formation, the national innovation system, as well as the system-building initiatives with the participation of the Ministry of Economy, the establishment of a national scientific laboratory, the establishment of a national scientific laboratory. Establishment of Gyumri Technopark and establishment of a venture fund Gyle.
The development and implementation of various programs are used in state policy.
  By the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia in October 2010, the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Armenia Alikhanyan 8 Innovative Economy Development Strategy Concept, RA Government 2011 Protocol decision N 6 of the February 17 sitting.
Initiative of laboratories ("Arabkir", "Candle" program, joint overcoming of the ICT Foundation, the reform of the Armenian Innovation activity, the complex of zones, the period from the center of the National Scientific Laboratory
  And in October 2011, by the decision of the CIS Council of Heads of Government, the "Interstate Program for Cooperation in the Innovation Sphere of the CIS Member States until 2020" was approved.
The Enterprise Incubator Fund, established under the World Bank Enterprise Incubator Program, supports the growth of the ICT sector in Armenia, as it creates a favorable environment for innovation, technology development, and the expansion of companies.
 It is noteworthy that the largest fund is technology, one of the consulting companies of which covers every sphere of development of the sphere: implementation of government programs, process of legal, business and educational reforms, provision of services to start-up companies9.
 The Intellectual Property Agency of the Republic of Armenia, which has been a part of the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Armenia since 2002, and currently has the status of a separate investment subdivision of the Republic of Armenia.
The main goals and objectives of the Agency are: implementation of actions defined by the RA legislation related to the legal protection of intellectual property objects, intellectual participation within the Ministry of Individual Regional Business.
//www.eif.am/arm/about/.
Providing information in the field of protection property, ensuring the fulfillment of the obligations undertaken by the Republic of Armenia under international agreements in the field, training of personnel, as well as assistance in replenishing the state patent resources of the Republic of Armenia10.
The National Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship also has branches in Gyumri, Vanadzor, Hrazdan and Kapan.
 The Center was established on April 23, 2009 by the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia. Implements the process of development of innovations, innovative ideas, supporting the necessary work for the preparation of their commercialization, providing scientific, technical, information and library services11.
The purpose of the Russian-Armenian Cooperation Innovation Center is to strengthen the innovation component and to support the integration processes of the two economic and economic cooperation.
Thus, the study shows that in order to improve the investment environment in Armenia, the state, by providing economic, legal and political conditions, implements a state innovation policy aimed at the development of activities, which in its essence is an integral part of ensuring the country's economic growth.
10 RA Ministry of Economic Development ՀՀ Investments of the main economy and innovative countries, official property https.
//www.aipa.am/u_files/file/canonadrutyun_new.pdf11 NDZAK official website: http.
//www.innovcentre.am/en/innovation/index Agency Website: Mariana Kocharyan ANALYSIS OF THE REGULATORY OF NORMATIVE ACTIVITIES OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: activity, innovation
