THE RIGHT TO INSPECT THE CASE IN A REASONABLE TIME AS AN EXPLANATORY OF THE RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATION The administration in modern science of administration is
 From the point of view of the concept of the rule of law, respect for human rights in the field of administration, including the guarantee of timely adoption of decisions concerning individuals and legal entities, contributes to raising the standard of living of public authority, protection of fundamental human rights and the rule of law.
That is why in 2015 According to the amendments, Article 50 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia [1], enshrining the right of proper administration as a human right, singled out among its elements the principle of reasonable consideration of cases related to individuals and legal entities by the administrative bodies, which the RA main law considered a constitutional human right.
 Ensuring the right under discussion և practical realization is one of the qualitative features of the effective organization և activity of public power.
 The principle of hearing the case within a reasonable time, as a legal guarantee, is aimed at protecting the participants of the administrative proceedings from unnecessary delays in the procedure "from the moment of initiating the administrative proceedings until the final settlement of the case".
The right to have his case heard within a reasonable time, also known as the principles of "reasonable limitation of proceedings" or "reasonable speed of proceedings", "prompt examination of the case", "timely action", "examination of the case without delay or undue delay" It is guaranteed by the vast majority of states with developed legal systems.
A study of the experience of European countries shows that these countries have adopted different approaches to the issue of administrative proceedings.
  Thus, if in some European countries the principle of examination within a reasonable period of time is enshrined in the constitutional level. For example, according to Article 21 of the Constitution of Finland, everyone has the right to have their case examined by the public without undue delay [3], then in other European countries, such as Slovenia, the principle under discussion is not reflected in the basic law. by acts.
 In a number of European countries, such as Latvia or Sweden, the law in question is not enshrined in normative legal acts և it follows from the legal practice of those countries.
  In addition, European countries have set general time limits for the duration of administrative proceedings at the level of national legislation. In countries where there is such a time limit, the average period for the examination of an administrative case is one month, which is calculated from the moment of initiating administrative proceedings, in cases "in the manner prescribed by law" and may be extended.
 In countries where there are no general deadlines for administrative proceedings, special legislation usually sets separate deadlines for an administrative body to make a decision in a specific area of ​​public law.
Despite differences in the substance and substance of the case within a reasonable time, all Council of Europe member states have recognized that the principle under consideration is one of the fundamental principles for proper administration. [5]
At present, the approach is accepted in jurisprudence that the reasonableness and justice of this or that legal characteristic in any case should be conditioned by the specific factual circumstances of that particular case.
 Similarly, the reasonableness of legal proceedings, including the length of administrative proceedings, must be assessed in the light of the factual circumstances of the case or the specifics of that case.
 That is why the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe 11.03.1980 Point 5 of Recommendation No. R (80) 2 on the exercise of discretionary powers by administrative bodies emphasizes that the administrative body should make a decision within a reasonable time, taking into account the issue under consideration in this case.
 In other words, the prolongation of the examination of the case can be considered lawful only in the presence of special circumstances; on the contrary, the postponement of the examination of the case in the absence of such circumstances indicates the improper administration.
Thus, it is necessary to keep in mind that there are no common criteria for assessing the reasonableness of administrative proceedings; an individual approach must be taken to determine a reasonable timeframe for this or that case.
  Nevertheless, within the framework of the right to a fair trial under Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court) elaborated in general terms. refer to the legality of the time limits for the examination of court cases.
 Thus, according to the case law of the European Court, the reasonableness of the trial period is conditioned by the specifics of a particular case, which are mainly determined by the following factors: 1) the complexity of the case, 2) the applicant's conduct, 3) the public authority, 4) the applicability of the case to the applicant ական for [6].
The first factor in assessing a reasonable timeframe, the complexity of the case, may be due to a number of factors, such as the amount of evidence [7], the need to obtain expert data [8], the number of participants or questions to be addressed, the need to obtain evidence from abroad; the complexity of the legal issues related to the resolution of the case [9].
According to the second factor in assessing reasonable time, the State is not liable for any delays in the proceedings which have arisen as a result of the applicant's conduct, ie his / her exercise of procedural rights (change of representatives, reference to new evidence, appeal, etc.) [10].
The third factor in assessing reasonable time means that the state is responsible for delays in proceedings that may be attributed to public authorities. Such are, for example, delays resulting from the competent authorities' final decisions being made available to the applicant late, the necessary evidence not being provided in a timely manner by the State [12], improper co-operation of administrative bodies [13], etc.
With regard to the fourth factor of reasonable time assessment, the European Court has singled out a certain category of cases, which have a major impact on the "interests" of the rights of individuals and legal entities, and therefore require wider guarantees of their resolution within a reasonable time.
  These are matters that require special diligence, such as the applicant's employment [14], education [15], health [16], property [17], honor [17], and other tangible and intangible assets.
Thus, the above criteria allow us to assess the issue of compliance with the reasonable time, based on the specifics of each specific case.
 However, there is one criterion for assessing the circumstance under discussion, which comes down to the following: According to the European Court, the state is obliged to organize its judicial system in such a way that orphanages have the opportunity to comply with practically all the requirements of the Convention, including the examination of their cases within a reasonable time.
 Consequently, the state is responsible not only for any delays resulting from the failure to expedite the investigation of a particular case, but also for the improper fulfillment of the obligation to take the necessary measures to prevent the backlog of cases and to eliminate the structural deficiencies caused by the delays.
The above-mentioned criteria developed by the European Court are equally applicable to the assessment of the reasonableness of the terms of administration, as these criteria are "legally significant universal factors" in legal practice, which can be used to assess not only the proceedings but the entire legal process, including the administration.
Summing up the above, it can be argued that the principle of reasonableness of administrative procedures means that administrative bodies are obliged to make their decisions with external influence within a reasonable time.
 And in case of not setting precise terms for the investigation և solution of this or that case, the reasonableness of its duration is subject to evaluation in each specific case, based on a number of criteria.
 Such criteria may be based on factors such as the content of the case law, the specifics of the case, the complexity, the complexity of the decision, the conduct of the proceedings and the conduct of the public authority, and the nature of the relationship.
  Moreover, administrative error, organizational problems or overcrowding of administrative bodies can not be a basis for lawful consideration of administrative delays. [21]
At the same time, according to the European Court, a remedy must be "effective" not only in theory but also in practice: "an effective remedy must be capable of preventing the alleged or continuing violation of a human right or of providing adequate compensation for a violation of the right" [22].
 Therefore, the responsibility of administrative bodies to act within a reasonable time should be in line with the principle of effective protection of rights in the sense that procedural rules should ensure the implementation of substantive law, and legislative provisions limiting administrative proceedings should be formulated sufficiently to formulate their rights and responsibilities [23].
In the legal system of the Republic of Armenia, the general legislative regulations on the requirement of timely examination of cases of administrative bodies related to individuals և legal entities have been reflected in the normative legal act defining the procedure of administrative proceedings, such as the RA Law on Administrative Proceedings. 24].
Thus, in Article 36 of the mentioned law, the legislator defined the obligation of the administrative bodies to act quickly, which first of all means that the administrative proceedings should be carried out as soon as possible, to carry out actions that are not necessary to clarify the factual circumstances of the case.
Moreover, by virtue of the provisions stipulated in the mentioned article, the administrative bodies are obliged to adopt an administrative act within a reasonable period of time, without waiting for the expiration of the term established for the given administrative proceeding, if there are necessary factual grounds for adopting a relevant administrative act.
On the other hand, according to Article 46 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings", the legislator has regulated the relations related to the maximum term of administrative proceedings, stipulating that according to the general rule, that term is 30 days.
  This general rule allowed some exceptions to be made, as provided for in Articles 47-49 of the said law (stipulating the grounds for extension, suspension) of administrative proceedings, as well as in the laws governing the specifics of certain types of administrative proceedings, which may Longer-term shorter periods different from the general term.
The above-mentioned testifies that the legislator, when regulating the issue of the terms of the administrative proceedings, considered the administrative proceedings as a single process, defining the allowable period from the initiation of the administrative case to the adoption of the administrative act.
 However, the administrative proceedings are first and foremost a sequence of certain interrelated stages; it is necessary to find out how much this or that stage of the administrative proceedings can serve as a specific general purpose;
Thus, as a rule, the administrative proceedings consist of successive, ongoing, final stages of initiating an administrative case.
After studying the content of Chapter 5 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administrative Proceedings" entitled "Stage of Initiation of Administrative Proceedings", it follows that the stage of initiating an administrative case to be initiated on the basis of an application of natural or legal persons may not exceed three days.
 Thus, according to Article 33 of the mentioned law, the administrative body can make a two-part decision after receiving the application. (a) to redirect the application; (b) to return the application.
  Moreover, the administrative body is given only three days to make the mentioned decisions, and in case of not making any of the above-mentioned decisions within that period, the administrative proceedings are considered initiated on the day of receiving the application of the natural and legal persons.
  As for the length of the initiation stage of the administrative proceedings to be initiated by the administrative body, this circumstance has no practical significance, as in this case the initiation stage is limited only to the day of commencing the action aimed at the adoption of the administrative act.
After finding out the issue of accepting the application of natural and legal persons or taking an action aimed at the adoption of an administrative act on its own initiative, the administrative proceeding enters the main, current stage.
 Following the study of the legal norms related to the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administrative Proceedings", the legislator did not set a maximum term for the current final stages of the administrative proceedings as a separate administrative procedure.
That is, the legislator did not set a maximum time limit for obtaining evidence, assessing evidence, discussing the factual circumstances of the case (current stage), and adopting an administrative act (final stage), which in turn means that the current stage of administrative proceedings is limited to the total maximum time for administrative proceedings. և The administrative body may complete that stage on the day of the administrative act.
 In other words, in the conditions of such legislative regulations, in a law enforcement practice, a situation may arise when the administrative body completes the discussion of the factual circumstances of the case and adopts a relevant administrative act on the same day.
However, such an approach does not comply with the constitutional principle of reasonable administrative proceedings, as the absence of maximum deadlines for the current stage of administrative proceedings may unnecessarily shorten the time allotted to the final stage of administrative proceedings. completion until the day of adoption of the administrative act.
 If the discussion of the factual circumstances of the case can continue until the end of the maximum term of the administrative proceedings, then it is logical that until that moment the participants of the proceedings can present evidence և positions influencing the outcome of the proceedings, and the administrative body is obliged to take them into account.
 Being constrained by the maximum term of the administrative proceedings, the administrative body has to adopt the relevant administrative act before the end of that term, so the administrative body may not be able to ensure its full and comprehensive discussion of the factual circumstances of the case if those factual circumstances are presented at the deadline.
 This can lead to the adoption of an administrative act with serious qualitative deficiencies, as on the one hand the administrative body is obliged to consider the data submitted even on the last day of the general term of the proceedings, and on the other hand, constrained by that period, is obliged to adopt the administrative act before its expiration. not to significantly affect the administrative justification to be adopted.
In other words, in the absence of certain restrictions on the duration of the current and final stages of administrative proceedings, a situation may arise where the administrative body has virtually no reasonable time to draw up a substantiated administrative act reflecting all the factual circumstances.
 In this regard, it is noteworthy that, for example, the procedural legislation sets a certain deadline for filing a judicial decision resolving the case, during which the trial is over, and the court is in a deliberation room (Article 124 of the RA Civil Procedure Code [25], Article 114 of the RA Code of Administrative Procedure [26], Articles 356 և 369 of the RA Code of Criminal Procedure [27]).
 The existence of the mentioned period is considered to be one of the guarantees necessary for the formation of a well-grounded judicial act resolving the case correctly.
Thus, in order for the administrative bodies to fully "comprehensively discuss" the factual circumstances of the administrative case, it is necessary to provide separate maximum deadlines for the current and final stages of the administrative proceedings, which together with the general term of the general administrative proceedings can provide a full Guaranteed realization of the right.
  In order to achieve the mentioned goal, it can be legislated that the administrative body is obliged to adopt the administrative act concluding the administrative proceedings after completing the discussion of the administrative factual circumstances, within a certain period of time (for example, within three days).
As with any constitutional right, the existence of legal remedies for the guaranteed examination of cases related to a person by the administrative bodies within a reasonable period of time is especially necessary, the study of which is of practical-scientific interest.
In the legal system of the Republic of Armenia, the legal protection of the right to examine an administrative case within a reasonable period of time is also organized through the introduction of a structure for the adoption of an administrative act after the administrative act is not adopted within the period defined by law.
 Thus, the legislator has defined the general legal regulations related to the non-adoption of an administrative act within the period defined by law by the 48th article of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration", which provides for the legal possibility of an administrative act not adopted by an administrative body to be considered legal.
 That is, the administrative act adopted by the administrative body may in some cases be considered adopted by the force of the mentioned legislation, to cause all the legal consequences typical of that administrative act.
 In this case, as a result of the administrative proceedings initiated on the basis of the application, in case of violation of the term defined by the law on adoption of the administrative act, the legal fiction that the required administrative favorable act is considered adopted is valid; և
The RA Court of Cassation, referring to the interpretation of the legal regulation defined by Article 48 of the RA Law on Administrative Proceedings of Administrative Principles, expressed the legal position that “(...) the above-mentioned provision of the law cannot be interpreted as a norm confirming the admissibility of any requested act.
 The requested administrative act, as well as the requested right, must be based on law, not violate the rights and freedoms of others.
 Therefore, part of the content of the mentioned norm should be the legality of the requested administrative act, the existence of which will be confirmed only after the existence of the right of the administrative act arising on its basis ... ”[28].
Comparing the above-mentioned legal positions of the RA Court of Cassation with the logic of Article 48 of the RA Law on the Principles of Administration's administrative practice on the issue under discussion, it can be argued that the RA Court of Cassation has undermined the scope of application of the legal institution under discussion.
 Thus, due to the non-adoption of an administrative act within the period defined by law, the structure does not even mention the legality of the requested administrative act as a necessary precondition for the operation of the given legal fiction.
On the contrary, after the content of Part 1 of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration", it follows that the fact that the administrative body authorized to adopt an administrative act within the period prescribed by law as a result of the administrative proceedings on the basis of an application is already sufficient. because the silence of the administrative body was considered by the legislator as a sign of consent (silentium videtur confessio).
 At the same time, it should be noted that the legal consequence of the inaction of the administrative body defined by the mentioned article can be achieved only if the application is submitted to it in accordance with the law, the content of the application, as well as all the requirements of the attached documents.
 In other words, as a result of the administrative proceedings initiated on the basis of the application, the administrative body authorized to adopt an administrative act within the period defined by law, in case of non-acceptance of that act, the administrative act is considered accepted if the application satisfies the requirements
In fact, according to the legislative regulation under discussion, the legal structure of being considered an administrative act adopted by law operates in case of simultaneous existence of the following conditions: 1) the person applied to the administrative body requesting the adoption of a certain favorable administrative act, ie the administrative proceeding was initiated on the basis of the person's application, 2) the application submitted to the administrative body satisfies its "content" as well as the requirements of the attached documents; 3) the adoption of the administrative act the administrative body conducting the administrative proceeding is endowed with the right to adopt that administrative act; 4) the administrative body conducting the administrative proceeding has rendered unlawful inaction within the period defined by law;
Thus, in case of all the above conditions, the favorable administrative act not adopted by the administrative body is considered adopted, անձ the person who applied to the administrative body for the adoption of the administrative act may undertake the exercise of the relevant right to be provided by that administrative act.
  Moreover, the requested administrative act or the circumstance of not violating the rights of others by that administrative act can not have any significance for the emergence of the legal fiction in question, as the administrative act adopted by Article 48 of the RA Law on Administrative Proceedings is not considered to have a different legal effect. ից may be revoked from an administrative act adopted in a timely manner in the presence of the same preconditions provided by law for the repeal of administrative acts adopted in the usual manner. [29]
On the other hand, it is necessary to take into account the fact that in case of being considered an administrative act within the framework of the legal structure provided for in Article 48 of the RA Law on Fundamentals of Administration, the addressee can effectively exercise the rights deriving from that administrative act if the relevant administrative act is provided. .
 In case of non-adoption of an administrative act within the established period, the relevant document envisaged by law shall be made available to the interested person (as a rule, the addressee of the administrative act). To achieve the realization of the rights deriving from the administrative act within the framework of the legal structure envisaged by Article 48 of the RA Law on “Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings”.
Thus, due to the non-adoption of an administrative act within the timeframe established by law, due to the legal structure of the legal structure, which is considered to be adopted in the administrative act. In case of violation of these restrictions, providing legal benefits for individuals and legal entities.
 As for the protection of the right of a person to be examined within a reasonable time in an administrative case aimed at adopting an interfering administrative act, if the interfering administrative act is adopted in violation of the statutory term, it shall be subject to administrative or judicial annulment on the grounds of violation of the law. "Administrative proceedings" (Article 63 (1) (a) of the RA Law).
Summarizing the above, the following generalizations can be made: 1) the right to hear a case within a reasonable time is included in the constitutional law of proper human administration From the criteria set by the court, such as the specifics of the case, the complexity, the validity of the decision to be made for the person concerned, the conduct of the persons involved in the proceedings and the public authority, the nature of the relationship;which may facilitate the full and comprehensive discussion of the administrative factual circumstances by the administrative bodies as soon as possible and the issuance of an administratively grounded act. a) operates under certain conditions provided by law, b) is not conditioned by the legality of the requested favorable administrative act, c) is guaranteed by a special claim provided for in the law of administrative proceedings.4) An effective means of legal protection of the right of a person to investigate an administrative case within a reasonable time is the legal fiction of the administrative act being adopted due to non-adoption of the administrative act defined by law, which: a) operates under certain conditions provided by law; ) is guaranteed by a special claim provided for in the law of administrative proceedings.4) An effective means of legal protection of the right of a person to investigate an administrative case within a reasonable time is the legal fiction of the administrative act being adopted due to non-adoption of an administrative act defined by law, which: a) operates under certain conditions provided by law, b) is not conditioned by legality ) is guaranteed by a special claim provided for in the law of administrative proceedings.c) is guaranteed by a special claim provided for in the law of administrative proceedings.c) is guaranteed by a special claim provided for in the law of administrative proceedings.
LITERATURE (Accessed.
http:
//www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kaannokset/1999/en19990731.pdf[1] ՀՀՊՏ 2015.12.21, special issue, article 1118.
URL.
(Statskontorent, 2005).
4), pp. 31-34.
[5] 11.03.1980 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe Point 5 of Recommendation No. R (80) 2 on the use of discretionary powers by administrative bodies, URL.
 https:
//rm.coe.int/16804f22ae (Accessed.
 06.08.2017).
[6] Buchholz v. Germany (7759/77) in the case of the ECHR on 06.05.1981 judgment (pp. 51, 61, 63).
[7] Eckle v. In the case of Germany (8130/78) of the ECHR 15.07.1988 resolution.
[8] Wemhoff v. In the case of Germany (2122/64) of the ECHR 27.06.1968 resolution.
[9] Neumeister v. In the case of Austria (1936/63) of the ECHR 27.06.1968 resolution.
[10] König v. In the case of Germany (6232/73) of the ECHR 28.06.1978 resolution.
[11] Somjee v. In the case of The United Kingdom (42116/98) of the ECHR 15.10.2002 resolution.
[12] H. v. In the case of The United Kingdom (9580/81) of the ECHR on 08.07.1987 resolution.
[13] Wiesinger v. In the case of Austria (11796/85) of the ECHR 30.10.1991 resolution.
[14] Svetlana Orlova v. In the case of Russia (4487/04) of the ECHR 30.07.2009 resolution.
[15] Oršuš and others v. In the case of Croatia (15766/03) of the ECHR 16.03.2010 resolution.
[16] Gheorghe v. In the case of Romania (19215/04) of the ECHR 15.03.2007 resolution.
[17] Hentrich v. In the case of France (13616/88) of the ECHR 22.09.1994 resolution.
[18] Pieniążek v. In the case of Poland (62179/00) of the ECHR 28.09.2004 resolution.
[19] Süssmann v. Judgment of the ECHR in the case of Germany (20024/92) dated 16.09.1996.
[20] Harris, O'Boyle, and Warbrick.
 Law of the European Convention on Human Rights, [22] hanlhan v. In the case of Turkey (22277/93) of the European Court on 27.06.2000 resolution.
[24] ARPA 2004.03.31 / 18 (317) Article 413.
[25] HHPT 1998.09.09 / 20 (53).
[26] ARPA 2013.12.28 / 73 (1013) .1 Article 1186.1.
[27] HHPT 1998.09.21 / 22 (55).
[28] Sergey Gasparyan v. Administrative Case No. VD / 5557/05/08 of the Municipality of Yerevan, 17.04.2009 decision.
[29] General Administrative Law of the Republic of Armenia, edited by Tovmasyan H., Lukhterhandt O., Muradyan G., Poghosyan V., Reimers V., Rubel R., Yerjan, Bavigh, 2011, pp. 305-306.
Hakobyan KARENOGHASHIMT THE RIGHT TO EXAMINE THE CASE AS AN EXPLANATORY OF THE RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATION Keywords: fundamental human rights, proper administration, standards, legal fiction.
