TEMPORARY MEASUREMENT OF PERSONAL MEANINGS Problems of personal meaning have now become more complex և, at the same time, more urgent.
  Having multiple occupations, a person today lives in an accelerated, "slippery" time.
 He seems to measure his every minute, but seldom manages to reflect at least part of that flow as a lived, contemplated, meaningful time.
 Thus, it is a paradoxical situation, where, on the one hand, the vital time is full of covenants, on the other hand, there is a danger of being deprived of content, the issues of acute-sense crises in modern man.
 And so, in this article, attempts are made to outline the relations of the meaning of life։.
The notion of man as an active being, who has a picture of the past, lives in the present, creates a future, in other words, has his own narrative 1, is impossible without observing his semantic orientations.
 In its turn, the observation of meanings is incomplete, without the phenomenon of time.
 Given that the meanings of modern man are sometimes mutually exclusive, it can be assumed that it is the category of time that ensures the union of different meanings in a system of vital coordinates.
 Meaning is the systemic quality of an individual's living space, conditioning the phenomenon of his person և life.
One of the criteria for organizing the semantic system is the cognitive complexity of the relationship with the human being in the surrounding reality. After all, it is the cognitive processes that determine the adequacy of human perception, allow meaningful interaction with objective reality, describe the content and boundaries of subjective reality.
  By cognitive complexity, we mean individual semantic field differentiation, where meanings are in mutual agreement.
 The level of cognitive complexity reflects the content of the individual semantic systems, which a person creates ստեղծthen ությամբ interacts with the objective reality with their help2.
According to the nature of human relations with objective reality, the level structure of the semantic system can be described.
  The first level of such a system is the level of biologically conditioned meanings.
 They arise on the basis of emotions և condition the functioning of the organism նրա its reactions to the physical influence of the surrounding reality.
 Here the meanings are presented as unconscious mediators of the organism's biological adaptation to changes in the environment.
 Undoubtedly, this level of meaning cannot be called personal, as they are conditioned not by the person, but by the nature of the whole animal life.
  Besides, in this case it is impossible to speak of any basis of cognitive complexity, and consequently of the temporal perspective.
 The body's reactions to the stimuli of the surrounding reality take place only "here".
 They have no conscious experience և goals.
  If they are conscious, then it happens "later" at the highest level; their consciousness is more of a nature of interpretation than of meaning.
 One can agree with Bratus, who has a biologically conditioned meaning 1 Narrative - story, story.
 It is a key term in post-classical psychology, which means the story of life վող reproduced by a person, an episode of history where the exact chronology, sequence of events of non-preserved life is secondary, instead expressing their significance and meaning for the person.
2 See Sery A., цницкий М., Transformations of systems of personal constructs as a mechanism of dynamics of actual semantic expressions in the course of psychological training, Polzunovski newspaper, №3, 2004.
attributes to the pre-personal level 1.
  Rather, they are preconceptions, a constructive material on the basis of which the sense of reality arises.
At the second level, the meanings are individual և reflect the personal sphere.
 They are still weakly realized formations, which express the relation of motivation with the goal.
 The goals that motivate this relationship are the desires, the elements of the material world, the limitations of the social environment.
  Relationships to the elements of reality are built on certain knowledge, which is of the nature of ideas.
 These levels of meaning are characterized by low cognitive complexity.
 According to what has been said, the meanings are exclusively situational in nature, as they reflect the satisfaction of needs.
The boundaries of time are determined by the context of the situation, the meanings are localized either in the "present" or in the "not so distant past".
 Due to this, the main function of meanings at this level is the individual's adaptation to the conditions of social reality.
The third level is personal meanings.
  They are stable personal formations that mediate human life.
  At this level, meanings act as value guides for a person, whose main function is the integration of a person into the conditions of social life.
 The time perspective at this level includes long-term planning based on personal experience and the semantic relationship with objective reality.
 Such a level of cognitive complexity allows for a flexible approach to solving vital problems.
The fourth level of the system of personal meanings reflects the meaningful relations of a person towards himself, the world and other people.
 It is the complete perception of a person by his life.
 The time perspective covers a wide range of past, present and future events2.
Any element of objective reality acquires its semantic content due to the fact that it is given meaning or the meaning of the object is revealed.
 Due to the act of transmitting meaning, a person connects the perceived object with his subjective reality.
 The process of understanding a certain phenomenon or object is realized as a result of synchronization of different time loci (past, present, future).
Adequate understanding of reality is possible now as a result of understanding past experience և relatively individual goal (ie future).
 As a result of the synchronization of semantic loci, the boundaries of subjective reality expand, that is, the integration of the person in the new conditions of life.
 A necessary condition for individual productive life is the synchronization of the temporal loci of meaning.
  The process of synchronization of time loci can be described as a special state of a person - a current semantic state, which regulates the process of integration of the person և the surrounding reality.
The course of time is constructed in the irreversible sequence of the past, present and future, each of which lives in a completely different way.
 Moreover, a person's attitude to the events of the past and the future is accompanied by a certain emotional context.
In a crisis situation, when it is impossible to make sense of any object of reality, the internal tension intensifies, which is maintained until the situation is included in a wider range of consciousness, in a wider time perspective.
 If a person is unable to derive meaning from the situation or to make sense of it, he simply attributes the meaning to one of the time loci, which leads to fixation in the given time locus, and consequently to a special "semantic temporalization".
  In the extreme case, a person can "fly out" of all time loci.
  In the case of semantic de-temporalization, a person perceives reality either through a past experience or through the prism of his ideas attributed to the future, or his behavior becomes situational.
Naturally, this factor can not but affect the peculiarities of a person's past, present, future-subjective perception.
 Thus, the experience of time is a unique state, which expresses the attitude of the individual to the meanings of the past, present and future.
2 For details, see Structural-Content Characteristics of Personal Sense Systems (available at http: // www.
//hpsy.ru/public/x2628.htm link).
towards.
 Undoubtedly, this situation is possible only in the present, but what is valuable for a person in the past, remains a reality for him or in other words, "embedded" in his autobiographical history (narrative).
 Similarly, in the subjective reality of man there are certain expectations և plans.
 The existence of a free construction of the temporal aspects of the subjective reality at the moment testifies to the integrity of the person living in that state1.
In Griffy's nominated time-regularization, a one-year-old is currently living; at three, the child is oriented for hours; at four, he or she feels the concept of "today," and at six, the domain of yesterday-today-tomorrow is revealed.
 An eight-year-old child orients in weeks.
 At the age of 15, the month becomes a unit of time, and a 40-year-old person counts years and decades.
 Ellinberg rightly points out that people are interested in their past and future in different ways2.
  This fact is largely conditioned by the semantic saturation of time.
Thus, it can be concluded that the efficiency of a person's functioning is largely conditioned by the extent to which a person is able to synchronize the meaning of each moment of his life in his present, "here and now".
Ani Grigoryan TIME MEASUREMENT OF PERSONAL MEANINGS Keywords: vital time, system of personal meanings, actual semantic state, cognitive complexity, time locus.
