COMPARISON AS A RELEASE OF HAKOBPARONYAN WITH THE MAKING OF SONG The least common of the means of literary imagery is comparison.
 It often becomes the basis for the creation of an artistic image.
 "Comparison is a combination of two objects or phenomena, which is done to make the description clearer and more vivid.
The basis of comparison is usually the similarity between the two phenomena, or the generality of the author's approach to them, due to which a connection is made between them, with the help of one the other is revealed and described "[1].
 The choice of the edges of comparison is often the result not only of the similarity between the two subjects, but also of the author's attitude: "Comparison reveals not only the general features of the subjects, but also the author's attitude, his emotional assessment.
  It usually puts forward, emphasizes one of the various features of the story, the most important in this case. "[1]
Comparisons are frequent in both verse and prose.
 Extensive comparisons are sometimes found in prose.
 There are poems that are completely constructed as an extensive comparison.
 One term of comparison becomes the basis through which the whole poem is constructed (for example, Vahan Tekeyan's poems "I ruled over Eserazis", Zahrat's poems "Karkin").
The satirical works are also rich in comparisons.
 In particular, they play an important role in Hakob Paronyan's works. They often provide satirical wood, becoming a unique way of creating satire.
  The purpose of studying the comparisons in Hakob Paronyan's works is to find out how much they contribute to the expression of satire, as the author often mocks and mocks through comparisons.
Paronyan already makes a uniform comparison in the preface of "National Joggers".
 Speaking about the fact that he presents people as they are, so he is not responsible for the difficult points encountered by the reader in some places, Paronyan adds. "Which mirror will the dwarf Achilles turn to? Which mountain does the holy devil repeat?" [2]
  Although the comparison is not made directly here, but the feature of the mirror-mountain reaction, the accurate reproduction of the reality, becomes the general term through which Paronyan compares them with his writing, thus proving that it corresponds to the reality of what he is saying.
In satirical portraits, too, Paronyan sometimes makes comparisons.
  To mock the fact that Khoren Galfayan's satirical portrayal has many nicknames, Paronyan writes: to rob "[2].
 In the satirical portrait of Hovhannes Teroyents, Paronyan writes about his appearance. "The voice was as loud as its style, as sweet as its articles, as thin as the paper of" Yerևakin "." [2]
  The edges of the sound-style, voice-articles chosen to describe the sound are random.
 In these comparisons, Paronyan's satirical approach to Teroyents ոճ's articles is felt.
 "Comparisons usually consist of three components: the object being compared (comparable), the object with which it is being compared (comparable), հատկ the attribute on which the comparison is made (in this case, the basis of the comparison)" [3].
  It follows that in comparisons, the second component of the comparison (the comparison) is usually used to give an accurate, pictorial description of the first component of the comparison (comparable).
  However, in Paronyan's comparisons, the first component (comparable) often becomes an occasion to hint at something about the second component (comparable).
 In "A Tour in the Districts of Istanbul", for example, Paronyan, while describing the Midagyugh district, mentions: "First of all, it is necessary to know how many difficulties there are to enter this village, I mean for honorable people, not thieves, and the difficulties for getting out of there are greater" [4] 1.
  Then he adds: "It is a village built with the problematic horse" (vol. 3, p. 105).
  Why does Paronyan mention the Eastern problem to describe the difficulties of entering and leaving Mijagyugh?
  The aim here is not to accurately describe the difficulties of entering and leaving the Middle East through the Eastern problem.
The description of the inter-village is a good opportunity to emphasize the fact that the eastern problem is difficult to enter and impossible to get out of.
 In this comparison, the layer of his political satire penetrates into Paronyan's social satire.
1 և page ներին will be attached to further citations from this collection.
In "Ksmits" Paronyan addresses the Eastern problem again through comparison. "This Eastern problem became a sword game played by a boy, and everyone was looking to steal a handkerchief" (vol. 4, p. 230).
  Here the Eastern problem is already the first component of the comparison (comparable).
  The game of Tura Bishti (lakhti) is compared with the Eastern problem to hint that each of the powers seeks to take a handkerchief from the Eastern problem.
 In this case, by saying handkerchief we should understand their interest.
 In the same two, Paronyan writes again about the Eastern problem. "As much as I want my balto wide, you want your cookie narrow, someone else wants it long, someone else wants it short, so the government wants this eastern balto to be wide, narrow, short, and quite long." . 4, p. 289).
Comparing the Eastern problem with the inter-village, the game, the coat to be sewn, Paronyan reveals it to the reader from different angles.
Paronyan's comparisons are various and multi-layered.
 From everyday situations to political events, from ancient philosophers to literary figures, from mythological stories to biblical traditions, they become the edge of comparison.
"In his satires," writes Sergey Sarinyan, "culture also appears as the original in a single measure."
 From this point of view, special importance should be given to the ancient Greco-Roman culture (mythology, literature, art, rhetoric, philosophy), which was a real arsenal for Paronyan's creative ideas, ostensibly as a worldview. "[5]
 This feature of Paronyan's prose requires a certain amount of knowledge from the reader.
  Some of the comparisons are annotated, in order to understand them the reader needs to refer to the footnotes of the file.
In comparisons, Paronyan makes smooth, unusual comparisons.
 Where there is a description of the everyday situation, the political one is smoothly combined.
 For example, in one of his everyday satires he writes about the question "should we settle or not?" "Here is a problem that has become a problem of the youth, which is waiting for its solution like the problem of Izmir" (vol. 6, p. 213).
Biblical traditions and figures often serve as a basis for Paronyan to make comparisons.
 For example, in "Hoshosidzeratret" Paronyan writes: "Like the Apostle Thomas, although" I have not pushed my finger on the side of the Anglo-Saxon government, I still believe that the powers do not care about the Alpine Union or the Trinity "have decided to order the problems of Greece, Karatagh and Armenia" (vol. 4, p. 435).
In "Smile" Paronyan also sometimes refers to religious traditions, for example, "If women looking back, like Lotta's wife, would say that we would buy salt very cheaply in Constantinople, or that we would have made more progress in art" (vol. 5, p. 104). ).
 The purpose of the comparison with Lot's wife is to ridicule the habit of constantly looking back at the women of Constantinople.
On the other hand, there is a hint of their beauty.
To hint at the disunity of Ketik Pasha residents in "A Tour in the Districts of Istanbul", Paronyan again turns to religious tradition. "Just as the builders of the tower could not finish building the tower because they did not understand each other's language, so they have not yet been able to finish building their school" (vol. 3, p. 168).
In his satires, Paronyan often makes comparisons with the corresponding character in Moliere's comedy "Involuntary Doctor".
 On various occasions, he compares himself or his characters to Molierecama's doctor, for example, "A man wants to hit a diary, let that man be, let it be. This is exactly the style of governing the country that he has used in Russia.
"I have to heal a patient, you have to find that patient, or whatever you find, know that I will heal you in his place" (vol. 8, p. 376).
For Paronyan, even the work in which he makes the given comparison becomes an edge of comparison.
  Paronyan writes about Kartal district in "A tour in the districts of Istanbul". "The fever of my village became very severe. He catches it once every three days, like my Voyage, which is published once every three days ... ”(vol. 3, p. 236).
 Once every three days, the hallmark becomes the general term that compares the countryside and the song "A Tour in the Districts of Istanbul" to imply that the latter, with its satirical accents, can also cause headaches for some.
There are repetitive, stable edges in Paronyan's comparisons.
  For example, in the two "A Tour in the Districts of Constantinople", the weather of the district is twice compared to describe the character of the residents.
The changes of the latter suppose a change in the character of the people of the district. "The climate of my village is neutral. neither good nor evil works, the inhabitants are like their climate ”(vol. 3, p. 110).
 "The air is soft, like a buried character. and when the south wind blows, the sea is buried, and when it is buried, it loses its calm character with the sea, and it rages like the waves ”(vol. 3, p. 240).
In Khachatur Misakyan's satirical portrayal, Paronyan compares him to Epimenides in order to mock the latter's desire to become a big name by doing nothing. "He would have grown so fast with a cross body that the time of three months was not enough for one crib.
  The child was deceived into thinking that a man's name could be as easily grown as his body ք, having slept for fifty-seven years like Epimenides, to have a great name. "[6]
Elsewhere, Paronyan uses the comparison with Epimenides to ridicule Masis' inaction and unprincipledness. "Needless to say, the principle depends on the principle of each individual in our nation, whether he sleeps or not. The boys should have had little principle, if they did not continue to sleep or not. Masis would have had a principle if he had not slept for a long time like Epimenides ”(vol. 6, p. 47).
  It is not only here that Paronyan chooses "Masis" as a comparison.
 In his works, he refers to this or that feature of "Masis" newspaper on various occasions to mock it.
  For example, in describing the face of Manuk Agha's wife in the novel "Honorable Beggars", Paronyan writes: "As soon as the porters knocked on the door, the door opened. A red-faced woman appeared to them. »[6].
For Paronyan, the verbal coincidence becomes a reason for comparison.
  Paronyan uses the coincidence of names to compare two things ելու to reveal the features of the other through the features of one. "This beautiful church, named after the Holy King, will be a big celebration on the day of the Holy Mother of God. It is a place of pilgrimage and receives a lot of money from the pilgrims."
  This king also had enough income from other kings, but he did not know how to use it, because he did not have elm-savvy districts.
 If the money received from the pilgrims was well supplied, we would have a happy holy King, and his school would always be in good condition ”(vol. 3, p. 145).
The "Smile Opinions" section of the "Smile" allegorical work is mostly constructed through comparisons.
  Through accurate and satirical comparisons, Paronyan vividly describes various phenomena, such as "Giving a beautiful idiot girl is like planting a rose on a pumpkin, do not catch it" (vol. 5, p. 112).
Not all of Paronyan's comparisons are satirical.
 Comparisons that have an aphoristic nature.
 For example, "Many times judgment can help to find a truth, but could not be the truth, just as a lamp can help to find a lost gold, but it can not be" (vol. 8, p. 374).
Thus, the comparison of literary imagery is active in creating Hakob Paronyan's satire.
 There are repetitive edges in Paronyan's comparisons.
  They sometimes appear as comparable, sometimes as comparable.
 This helps to identify the phenomenon from different angles.
 Through comparisons, Paronyan makes substantive generalizations and expresses a critical attitude.
 Paronyan does not make comparisons that serve as a figurative description.
  Paronyan's comparisons contain a certain hint or criticism of any event.
 Sometimes the two sides of a story, which are criticized by the writer, become edges of comparison, as a result of which the other is revealed through one, and one becomes an occasion to hint at the other.
 Paronyan's comparisons include different cultural layers. For comparison, biblical figures, legends, mythological figures, the names of ancient philosophers, newspapers and periodicals become synonymous.
 Everything that has been the target of Paronian satire, by making comparisons, is constantly revealed to the reader.
 Paronyan's ironic, critical attitude towards any song is not limited to just one work.
  It is manifested through comparisons in different works, regardless of the nature of the given work.
 Through comparisons, a connection is created between Paronyan's different works. In social satire the layer of political satire penetrates, in political satire the layer of social satire penetrates.
LITERATURE [1] Jrbashyan E., Theory of Literature, Yerevan, 1967, pp. 217, 218.
[2] Paronyan H., Works, Yerevan, 1979, pp. 3, 9, 31.
[3] Yezekyan L., Stylistics of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 2006, p. 341.
[4] Paronyan H., Collection of works in ten volumes, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1964, page 105.
[5] Sarinyan S., Paronyan's philosophy of laughter, Journal of Social Sciences of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia, N 4, Yerevan, 1993, p. 41.
[6] Paronyan H., Works, Yerevan, 1979, pp. 99, 222.
Naroyan Galoyan COMPARISON AS HAKOBPARONYAN'S RELEASE BY MAKING SONG Keywords: Hakob Paronyan prose, comparable, comparative, basis for comparison, satire, satirical approach.
