TURKEY'S FOREIGN POLICY IN THE SOUTH CAUCASUS AFTER THE COLLAPSE OF THE USSR The beginning of the 1990s was marked by significant geopolitical changes.
  As a result, Turkey's policy towards the South Caucasus became active again.
 Turkey has always shown great interest in the region, but after the establishment of Soviet rule, it had to put aside its ambitions.
  Still in 1921. The Soviet-Kars treaty clarified the Soviet-Turkish border, which ensured 70 years of stability1.
  During the Cold War, when the West was fighting against the Soviet Union, Turkey was involved in that struggle and was considered the strongest stronghold in the region.
  This was exacerbated when Turkey finally turned to the West in 1952. Becoming a member of NATO on April 2.
  Under such conditions, Turkey played an exceptionally important role for the West, preventing the Soviet Union from entering the Mediterranean-Middle East, thus implementing the alliance's "restraint strategy" 3.
However, the situation changed when the USSR collapsed, as a result of which Turkey lost some of its importance for the West.
 In particular, by the US Congress in 1990. According to the decision made in 1989, the amount of economic and military aid provided to Turkey was reduced. The European Community rejected Turkey's membership.
 Based on those conditions, Turkey took steps to restore its former positions.
1991 After the failed coup attempt in the USSR in August, separatist processes accelerated, and Turkey 1 Arshakyan G., Turkey's policy in the South Caucasus 1991-2001, Yerevan 2009, p. 51.
2 Minasyan N., Turkey's policy in Central Asia 1991-2007, Yerevan 2013, page 23.
3 Hovsepyan L., Turkish Policy in Central Asia in the 1990s as a Key Direction of Eurasian Policy, Achievement or Failure, Turkish-Ottoman Studies V, Yerevan. 2008, p. 158.
had the opportunity to intensify its policy in the South Caucasus and Central Asia.
 It seemed to Turkey that the time had come when it would be possible to create the Great Turan State, which would stretch from the Adriatic Sea to China.
 These territories would include Central Asia, the Balkans և the Caucasus4.
 A situation was created which was described by the Western analysts of the time as a situation full of "unprecedented opportunities and risks" for Turkey5.
The Turkish government in 1991 In September, he sent two delegations to the post-Soviet region.
  One of them was headed by diplomat-historian Bilal Shimshir, who visited Soviet Turkic-speaking countries.
 The other delegation, led by former Ambassador to the USSR Ismet Birsel, visited post-Soviet Christian republics, including Armenia.
  The main task of these delegations was to find out where the countries will be oriented after independence, Turkey or Iran?
 However, later it became clear that such an attitude towards Iran was exaggerated, as the United States created an unfavorable situation for Iran, subjecting it to political and economic isolation6.
The visit showed that in 1991 The leaders of the countries of Central Asia and the South Caucasus, which followed the path of independence, paid great attention to Turkey.
 Thus, Turkey in the 90s. It reconsidered its regional priorities, seeking to penetrate the South Caucasus and Central Asia.
 The visit showed that the Turkic-speaking countries in particular showed more interest in Turkey.
  In addition, Turkey was an alternative country for the post-Soviet countries with which it was possible to establish multilateral relations, through which those countries could restore their economy in the person of Turkey, they could have a military ally, which in some countries was based on national security.
 Therefore, Turkey started pursuing a more active policy.
  And finally the University of the South Caucasus նոր Central Asia, Press 1996, http.
//poli.vub.ac.be/publi/ContBorders/eng/ch0801.htm 5 Safrastyan R., Russia և Turkey in the South Caucasus.
  Geostrategic ceasefire? 21st CENTURY, No. 4 (10), 2005, p. 35.
6 Hovhannisyan N., Armenia, a factor of the Transcaucasian-Middle East geopolitical region, peoples of the Middle East, volume XVIII, Yerevan. 1999, page 20.
Depending on its influence over the Turkic-speaking republics, Turkey wanted not only to restore its strategic strength for the West, but also to use that factor in its eventual accession to the European Community.
 The South Caucasus "Central Asia was also of economic importance for Turkey." The newly independent Islamic republics were a new market for Turkish exports, as well as a source of new gas and oil resources that Turkey desperately needed.
 From a political point of view, after the well-known rejection of Turkey's membership by the European Union in 1989, the possible new role of Turkey as the head of the community of the Turkic republics would significantly increase the fear of its isolation.
Thus, in the current political conditions, Turkey had to make a certain turn in its foreign policy, trying to clarify its place and role.
  This led to serious discussions within the Turkish leadership as well as in the socio-political circles, raising the issue of the need to develop a new foreign policy.
  However, in this process, Turkey faced certain problems.
 There were serious discussions in Turkey on the issue of determining foreign policy priorities, there were different positions on Turkey's role in the new world order.
Turkey, being in the process of choosing its foreign policy priorities, singled out three sides of foreign policy. Proponents of modernization wanted Turkey to be a European state, so they looked to the West, extremist Islamists tended to the Middle East, so they looked to the South, and nationalists, citing history, saw the new role of the Turkic peoples in the Caspian, Central Asia and Central Asia. to the East.
 The clashes between the supporters of these three directions led to some mistrust in the issue of Turkey's regional role7.
In the process of elaborating new priorities of Turkey's foreign policy in the early 90s, the supporters of the "Eurasian" direction became more active. beginning 7 Minasyan N., note work., page 28.
The "Eurasian Strategy", which was considered one of the main strategies expressing Turkey's geopolitical strategy, its international relations and national security, played an important role in the political discussions of the country.
However, the term "Eurasia" was largely politicized, scientifically defined indefinitely.
  Some political scientists and scholars considered Eurasia to be a region inhabited mainly by Turkic peoples, which included Turkey, part of the Balkans and the Caucasus, the former Soviet republics of Central Asia, the Volga region of Russia, and northern Afghanistan.
In the political and ideological discussions of modern Turkey, the term "Eurasia" is given a political rather than a clear scientific meaning.
 For example, President Suleyman Demirel considered the Balkans, the Caucasus, Central Asia, the Middle East, Turkey, Iran and Iraq to be part of this region, and former Prime Minister եք Dlek Bahçeli, the leader of the Pan-Turkic National Movement party, included the Balkans, Merkov .
Turkish analysts and researchers, using the geopolitical approaches of Western authors on Eurasia, tried to formulate their own strategy.
  In particular, Ramzan Ozei, a professor at Marmara University, developed the concept of central Turkish sovereignty, according to which Anatolia was considered the fortress of the world, so Turkey, possessing Anatolia, had the opportunity to control the Balkans - Europe 9.
The collapse of the USSR գալ The emergence of sovereign states in the South Caucasus fundamentally changed Turkey's Eurasian policy.
 The South Caucasus was of great importance for Turkey in terms of geoeconomic and strategic security.
  Therefore, Turkey began to take active steps to penetrate the South Caucasus.
  One of the first steps in that direction was the policy of establishing close relations with Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia.
In the South Caucasus region, Turkey's geo-economic interests were largely conditioned by Turkey's aspirations, not only to achieve 8 Hovsepyan L., op. work., page 162.
9 Minasyan N., ref. work page 29.
to bring new industrial markets to the export of industrial goods, but to meet its growing energy demand at the expense of oil and gas reserves of the Caspian-Central Asian region.
 The creation of transit routes for energy in the above-mentioned region through Europe increased Turkey's strategic importance as a bridge between the West and the "Caspian-Euphrates region".
 As the road from the Caspian Sea to Central Asia lay through the South Caucasus, Turkey was interested in the political stability of those regions and considered regional integrity as one of its strategic goals.
  In this context, from a security point of view, the threat posed to Turkey by the Soviet superpower had disappeared, however, the inter-ethnic conflict in the South Caucasus posed a serious threat in terms of creating long-term instability in the region.
  This, of course, was undesirable not only for Turkey but also for its Western partners.
In pursuing its policy in the South Caucasus and Central Asia, Turkey received the support of the West, as evidenced by the 1992 In November, the US media reported that Turkey was trying to help the new Muslim countries become secular states by acting as a bridge between the West and the "Middle East" of the Balkans.
  "In a region with deep ethnic divisions and animosity, friendship with Turkey is vital to the West."
  The growing geopolitical and strategic importance of Turkey in the post-Soviet period and the acceptance of this fact by the West were decisive factors in shaping Turkey's foreign policy.
  Taking advantage of Russia's "weakening influence" after the collapse of the Soviet Union, with the support of the West, Turkish leaders began to make ambitious statements that a new Turkic world with a population of 120 million Turkic-speaking people would be created under Turkish leadership.
  In particular, Turkish President Turgut Ozal has declared to the whole world that the 21st century will be a "Turkish century" 11.
10 Arshakyan G., ref. work., page 20.
11 Hovsepyan L., note work p. 162.
In the context of some geopolitical changes, Turkey made great use of the fact that instead of the Soviet Union, three newly independent republics appeared in the South Caucasus: Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan, and in Central Asia, five Muslim republics: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.
  Turkey had ethnic, religious, linguistic, historical and genealogical ties with the five post-Soviet republics: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan.
After the collapse of the USSR, there was a political situation in those territories.
 In the 90s, serious competition was going on between Turkey and Iran to fill that vacuum.
 In that struggle, the West provided significant support to Turkey, as the West feared that the newly independent Islamic countries might fall under the influence of the Iranian Islamist regime.
 Therefore, the "Turkish model" was put forward by the United States as a counterbalance to the Iranian religion.
  The "Turkish model" would, in fact, be a predominantly Muslim population, a secular state with a democratic system, which would work closely with the West12.
Promoting the idea of ​​a "Turkish model", the United States wanted to not only eliminate the Iranian threat in the post-Soviet region with the help of one of its most trusted allies, Turkey, but also use Turkey to achieve one of its main goals of weakening Russia's influence in the fledgling CIS.
 The interests of Turkey and the United States coincided on this issue, as Turkey was not only significantly interested in strengthening its position in the South Caucasus, in Central Asia, but also acting as a counterweight to Russia in the post-Soviet region.
  Therefore, Turkey welcomed the position of the West, which gave it an opportunity to strengthen its position on the international stage, in particular in the regional competition with Russia and Iran.
 The idea of ​​a "Turkish model" was put forward by US Secretary of State James Becker.
  He was born in 1992. During his visit to Central Asia in the beginning of the 19th century, he advised the leaders of the newly independent republics to use the "Turkish model" for the political and economic development of their countries.
  However, "Sword 12 Hovsepyan L., ref. work p. 160.
The author of the "model" strategy is actually one of the leading specialists of the American RAND Analytical Center, Prof. It was Graham Fuller.
  Soon, other high-ranking American and European officials will express their support for the "Turkish model".
Turkey was taking practical steps to develop its relations with the newly independent Turkic-speaking republics.
 In particular, in 1991 A special unit of the Turkish Foreign Ministry was set up in October 1945 to deal with relations with the newly independent Turkic-speaking republics13.
 1992 At the beginning of the 19th century, Turkey established the Turkish Cooperation and Development Agency14, which aimed to improve relations with the Turkic-speaking republics, which would help strengthen relations in the economic, cultural and telecommunications sectors.
By pursuing an active policy in the post-Soviet region, Turkey sought to act as a bridge between the West, the South Caucasus and Central Asia, which was one of the most prominent manifestations of Turkish President Suleyman Demirel's statement that Turkey was a servant of the CIS Turkic-speaking world. ».
Turkey was very interested in developing economic relations with the Turkic-speaking countries of the CIS.
  Thus, in the first years of the collapse of the USSR, Turkey, taking advantage of the favorable conditions, had some success in developing relations with the newly independent Turkic-speaking republics of the South Caucasus and Central Asia.
Another possible goal of the "Turkish model" was to weaken Russia's influence in the post-Soviet region.
 Therefore, Turkey's active policy in the post-Soviet republics caused serious concern to Russia, which led to tensions in Russian-Turkish relations.
Russia's active involvement in the whole CIS region led to the weakening of Turkey's position.
  Thus, the presence of Russian troops in Georgia, Armenia and Tajikistan, powerful 13 Arshakyan G., note. work., page 24.
14 Onis Ziya, Turkey and Past-Sovet States.
 Potential and limits of regional power influebce. MiddleEast Review of International Affairs, Vol. 5. No 2 (Summer 2001), p. 67, http.
//edoc.bibliothek.uni economic levers - gas - energy, և its ability to control regional conflicts - made the leaders of the region pay attention to Russia's wishes.
One of the important components of Turkey's policy in the South Caucasus in the early 1990s was the teaching of the ideology of Pan-Turkism, which began in Turkey with a new impetus after the collapse of the USSR.
  In the early 1990s, a number of Turkish scholars, political scientists, and officials began to declare the need for a policy of pan-Turkism.
 Turkish diplomatic circles cautiously formulated the revival of the Pan-Turkic concept, describing it not as a closely intertwined Turkish political union, but as a group of Turkic countries in which Turkey would play an economic, political, and leading role.
 The publications of the Turkish extreme nationalists, the Pan-Turkists, contained more radical shades, according to which, as a result of the collapse of the USSR, the plans for the unification of the "Turkish world" had received real prospects.
  Particularly important in the implementation of the policy of Pan-Turkism were the autonomous Muslim republics that are part of Russia.
  Some circles in Turkey took active steps to strengthen their influence in the Muslim regions of Russia, in particular in Tatarstan, Bashkortostan, Yakutia, and especially in the North Caucasus republics15.
  In particular, the Turkish special services and pan-Turkic organizations made great efforts to implement various regional integration projects - "Caucasus Union", "Caucasus Islamic Confederation", "Caucasus House", the main goal of which was to create a North Caucasus Confederation or Union outside Russia16.
 Apart from Russia, Turkey considered Armenia to be the main obstacle to the implementation of its policy of pan-Turkism in the South Caucasus17.
  Turkey had the task of penetrating Central Asia by strengthening its position in the South Caucasus, using Azerbaijan as a springboard, the economic situation of the Turkic-speaking republics, 15 Arshakyan G., op. work., page 29.
16 Arshakyan G., note work., page 11.
17 Demoyan G., note. work page 29.
for the long-term purpose of political and cultural development.
 Therefore, the Republic of Armenia was considered an obstacle to its long-term interests.
  Thus, by its very existence, the Republic of Armenia was an obstacle to the unification of the Turkic-speaking peoples with the Turkish mood.
 However, the issue here was not only the separation of the Turks from the Azeris, but also the American plans for the weakening of Russia in the South Caucasus, in the implementation of which Turkey had expressed great readiness.
On the eve of the collapse of the USSR, Turkey had quite serious concerns about the possible consequences of Armenia's independence.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that in 1990 At the beginning of the 19th century, the well-known Turkish publicist Ilham Selçuk wrote that the independence of fraternal Azerbaijan was a wonderful goal18.
 However, such a goal meant to encourage Armenia on the path to independence.
  In case of the latter's independence, Turkey would inevitably find itself in the grip of Greece-Armenia19.
  The latter had claims to Anatolia.
 Ilham Selçuk's fears in those days were particularly shared by the Turkish government. Foreign Minister Mesut Yilmaz announced on Turkish television. "God forbid" The Soviet Union collapses.
  It is preferable for us to have a superpower in Turkey with a stable political status, rather than a few independent but unstable republics. ”20
 However, the President of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia Leon Ter-Petrosyan made a statement, which allayed the fears of Turkey.
  He particularly mentioned that Armenia should establish relations worthy of a civilized country with all its neighbors, including Turkey.
  As Armenia lost its Soviet defense shield after the collapse of the USSR, after gaining independence Armenia faced the task of restoring its security on its own, so it was a sensible decision to "establish good-neighborly relations with all its citizens, including Turkey."
 Turkey 18 Chakryan H., The Karabakh issue in the context of Armenian-Turkish relations, Yer. 1998, page 12.
19 Ibid.
20 Chakryan H., The Karabakh issue in the context of Armenian-Turkish relations, Yer. 1998, page 11.
21 Chakryan H., Armenian-Turkish Relations in the Context of Middle East Political Developments, 21st Century, No. 1, 2003, p. 101.
21 Pictorial history, Armenia-Turkey.
 Big debate, Yer. 2009, page 6.
President Turgut Ozal responded positively to Levon Ter-Petrosyan's statement, particularly noting that Turkey plans to establish economic relations with Armenia.
  In this case, Turkey was not guided by economic interests.
  All the same, trade with Armenia was to be a small part of its total trade turnover.
 With the readiness to establish trade and economic ties with Armenia, he tried to win the sympathy of the international community, to achieve the suspension of work for the international recognition of the Armenian Genocide, to neutralize the "anti-Turkish" activities of the Diaspora through the Armenian authorities.
  Of course, L. Ter-Petrosyan's statement could have had a positive effect on the Armenian-Turkish relations, but Turkey still had a clear position towards Armenia.
 In order to partially clarify the position towards Armenia, in 1991 Turkish Ambassador to the USSR Volkan Vural paid a three-day official visit to Armenia in April.
 During the meeting with Vural, Leon Ter-Petrosyan announced. "Armenia is changing, in this new world we must be neighboring countries in terms of worldview.
  We want to be friends.
 We are ready for any mutually beneficial cooperation that has no territorial requirements. ”22
During this meeting, the differences between the priorities of the two countries in developing relations were predetermined.
If the issues related to the development of economic relations were a priority for Armenia on the agenda of bilateral relations, the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and the recognition of the existing Armenian-Turkish border were of particular importance to the Turkish side.
 However, serious disagreements soon appeared in the Armenian-Turkish relations.
 1991 Levon Ter-Petrosyan's interview was published in the "Arguments and Facts" daily on May 11, 2012, where he, referring to the Armenian-Turkish relations, mentioned that in Europe in 1920-1921. After the failure of the idea of ​​a lasting revolution, Soviet Russia turned its attention to the East, seeking the sympathy of the Muslim peoples of Turkey.
 In order to achieve that goal, Armenia was dismembered.
 Russia ceded the Kars region to Turkey, and Nagorno-Karabakh to Azerbaijan.
  These comments caused serious dissatisfaction in Turkish circles.
 A qualitatively new stage in the relations between Turkey and Armenia began after the declaration of Armenia's independence.
  1991 The independence referendum was held in Armenia on September 21, 1945, which was followed by the declaration of independence by the Supreme Soviet.
  1991 By the decision of December 16, the Turkish government recognized the independence of the Republic of Armenia, but did not establish diplomatic relations.
  Besides, Turkey considered that Armenia was more interested in establishing relations with it, because Armenia had no access to the sea, was in hostilities with Azerbaijan, suffering significant economic difficulties.
On December 24, Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel addressed a message to RA President Levon Ter-Petrosyan wishing him progress and a prosperous future23.
  Although Turkey recognized the independence of the Republic of Armenia, it did not establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Armenia, citing the territorial claims of the Republic of Armenia.
 With such preconditions, Turkey was trying to make Armenia a vassal, to dictate its will to the Armenians of Artsakh and the Armenian Diaspora.
 With this step, Turkey was gaining not only a strategic advantage. The establishment of diplomatic relations, subject to the fulfillment of certain preconditions, enabled it to establish and maintain "non-treaty relations" with Armenia at various levels, including the highest, using them ultimately to influence it at various levels24.
 Thus, we can conclude that in the issue of establishing diplomatic relations with Armenia, the Turkish side considered a necessary precondition for Armenia's official renunciation of territorial claims to Turkey, or L. In fact, Ter-Petrosyan refused to put pressure on Artsakh to stop the struggle, to accept Azerbaijan's supremacy and territorial integrity.
 At the same time, he demanded guarantees that Armenia would refrain from actions contrary to Turkey's interests and would neutralize the "anti-Turkish" activities of the Armenian lobby in the Diaspora.
 In this regard, "Hurriyet" writes: "These are the preconditions, the imposition of which, if not today, then 23 Chakryan H., The Karabakh issue in the context of Armenian-Turkish relations, Yerevan, 1998, p. 14.
24 Safrastyan R., It is impossible to create barriers between neighbors in the 21st century, Yerevan, 2003, p. 36.
Tomorrow will be completely impossible.
 Turkey does not need to establish good-neighborly relations with Armenia.
  On the contrary, it is the Armenians who have such a problem.
  Moreover, Turkey's support is a vital necessity for Armenia. ”25
  Or Turkey refused to establish diplomatic relations with Armenia, but at the same time sought to establish certain relations with Armenia, particularly in the economic sphere.
 1992 In November 1945, an agreement was signed between Turkey and Armenia, according to which Turkey was to provide 300 km / h of poor electricity to Armenia, which was necessary for Armenia at that time.
 This caused great dissatisfaction in Turkey.
 This step of Turkey raised a wave of discontent in Azerbaijan, and was canceled due to the intervention of Azerbaijan.
 If that deal became a reality, Azerbaijan's intention to impose an economic blockade on Armenia would be nullified.
Azerbaijan even stated that Turkey declares itself a brother of Azerbaijan, but gives bread to our enemies26.
 Despite the tensions between the Turkish "Republic of Armenia", a number of meetings took place later between the "officials of the Republic of Armenia" in Turkey, and the demands already made for the establishment of Turkish-diplomatic relations were once again raised.
 The first period of post-Soviet Armenian-Turkish relations ended in 1994. The ceasefire was signed in Nagorno-Karabakh on May 12, 2012, with the mediation of Russia.
  And thus, Moscow's influence in the South Caucasus intensified.
In pursuing its policy of strengthening its position in the South Caucasus in the early 1990s, Turkey emphasized Georgia's geographical location, which was the only bridge over the transfer of energy resources, as the other possible bridge, the territory of the Republic of Armenia, was excluded from Turkish foreign policy.
  Therefore, from the very beginning, Turkey began to follow with special interest the processes taking place in Georgia, especially the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict.
  Georgia recognized Georgia's independence in 1991. 25 Chakryan H., The Karabakh Issue in the Context of Armenian-Turkish Relations, Yerevan, 1998, p. 15.
26 Cornell Svante E., Turkey and the conflict in Nagorno Kharabagh.
 A delicate balance, MiddelEastern Studies, vol 34, N1, London, Frank Cass Publishers, January, 1998, p. 67.
established scientific relations only in 1992. After the recognition of Georgia's independence by the United States in May, the first president of Georgia Z. From the overthrow of Gamsakhurdia և E. After Shardnadze returned to Georgia27.
  The problem is that before that there was a civil war in Georgia, only after the coup, when in 1992. In March, a State Council was established in Georgia, and E. was invited to lead it. Shardnadze, stability was established in the country.
The Georgian side viewed the issue of Turkey's activation in two dimensions. First, increasing the role of the Turkish factor in the region would weaken Russia's position in the South Caucasus; second, Georgia considered Turkey an important ally in the region; it wanted to provide more markets and sources of investment that could counteract Russia's influence on the Georgian economy.
  Besides, Georgia wanted to develop relations with NATO by strengthening relations with Turkey.
 Georgia considered that the strengthening of relations with Turkey would have a significant impact on the development of relations between Georgia and NATO.
  Taking into account the latter two realities, he is the President of Georgia. Shardnadze in 1992 After his visit to Ankara in March 2007, he stated that "Georgian-Turkish relations are close to being strategic."
  Seeing that stability is gradually being established in Georgia, Turkey took concrete steps to implement its programs.
  1992 The last Prime Minister of Turkey S. Demirel arrived in Georgia on an official visit.
 Ս. Demirel's visit was the first official visit to Georgia after the latter's independence.
  This fact showed that Georgia was important for Turkey.
  During the visit he և E. Shardnadze signed a friendship-cooperation agreement.
  1992 In December, Turkey provided a $ 50 million loan to Georgia to purchase wheat and other products. 27 Kylov Alexander, Georgian-Abkazian conflict http.
//www.kapba.de/TheGeorgianAbkhazianConflict.html.
28 Arshakyan G., Yeghiazaryan A. Turkish-Georgian relations in the context of Turkey's regional policy 1991-2001, 21st century, No. 2 (48), 2013, p. 44.
p. 33.
number 29.
  In this way, Turkey aimed to stimulate private Turkish-Turkish investments in Georgia.
Whether Turkey was using Georgia's geographical location in its regional programs, Turkish-Georgian relations were initially tense.
  Turkey was in no hurry to strengthen ties with Georgia, waiting for Georgia in 1992. conflict resolution.
 Besides, the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, which started in 1992. With the invasion of Abkhazia by Georgian troops on August 14, 1945, Turkey's foreign policy posed a possible dilemma.
1993 Recently, Turkey's attention to Georgia has increased due to Russia's activity in re-establishing its dominant position in the Caucasus.
 With serious concern about the developments around Georgia, Turkey is trying to transfer Azerbaijani energy resources through its territory to Georgia.
  Therefore, Turkey began to take steps to improve Turkish-Georgian relations, which had become significantly colder due to the above-mentioned ferment in Turkey.
1994 In January, the President of Georgia E. Shardnadze arrived in Turkey on an official visit.
  During the visit, he met with Turkish President S. Demirel signed a declaration in Ankara reaffirming their commitment to "support independence, peace, stability and democracy."
  The two leaders announced that their cooperation will be aimed at stabilizing the Transcaucasian region.
  In addition, a number of trade and economic agreements were signed30.
It can be stated that, despite the propaganda of some Turkish national minorities in favor of Abkhazia, Turkey officially recognized Georgia's territorial integrity, which was dictated by the desire to transfer Azerbaijani energy resources to Georgia, as well as the need to oppose Russia's progress. in the case that in 1994 On February 3, 1945, Georgia and Russia signed a military friendship. 29 Veranyan K., Abkhazia at the Crossroads of Geopolitical Interests, 21st Century, No. 4 (10), 2005, p.
30 Arshakyan G., Yeghiazaryan A., ref. work., page 47.
cooperation agreement, as well as 24 other agreements.
  According to the agreements, Russian peacekeeping troops would be deployed in Abkhazia, Russian border troops would be deployed on the Turkish-Georgian border, and Russian military bases would be deployed in different regions of Georgia.
 Georgia also had to join the CIS.
After assuming the role of a vital ally for Georgia, Turkey began to overestimate their potential for Georgia.
  Turkish researchers have even begun to argue that Georgia owes its independence to Turkey, as their very existence allowed Georgia to overcome the effects of the collapse of its former trading system by establishing new economic ties.
  According to them, in 1988 The crossing of the Turkish-Georgian border in Sarpi-Batumi had a huge impact on Georgia's foreign economic relations.
  In the conditions of the ongoing conflicts with Turkey, these other border points became a window to the outside world for Georgia.
 "All this corresponded to some extent to reality, but in return, Turkey, seeking to establish close relations with Azerbaijan, in the absence of a direct border with the latter, faced the need to establish friendly relations with" intermediate "Georgia."
Thus, by improving relations with Georgia, Turkey expected to strengthen its influence in the entire South Caucasus region.
  The latter developed this policy especially after the end of the Georgian-Abkhazian war.
After the independence of the three republics in the South Caucasus, Turkey gave preference to Azerbaijan from the very beginning.
Turkey recognized Azerbaijan's independence in 1991. on November 9.
In order to increase its influence in Azerbaijan, Turkey is trying to use the fact that both countries have common linguistic and cultural features.
 It should be noted that during the presidency of the first President of Azerbaijan Ayaz Mutalibov (1990-1992) Turkish-Azerbaijani relations were not so smooth.
  During A. Mutalibov's presidency, Turkey supported Azerbaijan during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, but was dissatisfied with its foreign policy, in particular, its pro-Russian position.
  A. Under Mutalibov, Russian-Azerbaijani relations were quite warm, which caused serious concern to Turkey.
  1992 A serious anti-government movement started in Azerbaijan on February 25, as a result of which A. Mutalibov in 1992 He was forced to resign on May 14, 1931.
An important factor for the expansion and strengthening of Turkish-Azerbaijani relations in Azerbaijan in 1992 was The coming to power of the National Front led by Abulfas Elchibey in June.
  During his time, an agreement in principle was reached between Turkey and Azerbaijan on the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan oil pipeline.
 After being elected president, A. Elchibey began to pursue a strongly pro-Turkish, pronounced anti-Russian policy, perhaps that policy was aimed at whetting Ankara's appetite.
  During this period, the provision "two states, one people" was formed32.
  His anti-Russian attitude significantly contributed to the strengthening of Turkey's influence in Azerbaijan.
  1991-1994 was crucial in Turkish-Azerbaijani relations. The ongoing conflict in Artsakh.
  Turkey unconditionally supported Azerbaijan in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, providing not only diplomatic, political, financial, but also serious military assistance to Azerbaijan.
On June 4, 1993, a coup took place in Azerbaijan.
 As a result of the uprising led by Suret Huseynov in Ganja, A. Elchibey's rule failed in Azerbaijan.
 The troops led by Colonel S. Huseynov moved to Baku, forced A. Elchibey's resignation, as a result of which Abulfas Elchibey was replaced by Heydar Ali, the chairman of the Nakhchivan Mejlis and former secretary of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan.
 Ali's coming to power in Turkey was seen as a victory for Russia.
 According to a number of Turkish analysts and political scientists, the removal of Elchibey from power in Azerbaijan was not only a serious victory for Russia in the Russian-Turkish rivalry, but also a multifaceted diplomatic retreat of Turkey.
  One of the reasons for the tension in Turkish-Azerbaijani relations was that Ali was initially seen in Turkey as a pro-Russian figure, due to which Ali's high positions 31 Arshakyan G., Yeghiazaryan A. work page 36.
32 Rohozinski Jerzy, Azerbaijan and Turkey.
  the light and shade of '' Turkish '' broderhood, CESReport, Warsaw, July, 2008, p. 10.
They were in the USSR during Azerbaijan's accession to the CIS.
 H. During Ali's rule, some adjustments were made to the overly one-sided foreign policy, ending the implementation of a series of oil contracts in which Western oil companies dominated.
 This eased tensions in Baku-Moscow relations.
 At the same time, Turkey's interference in Azerbaijan's internal life weakened.
1993 On June 23, 2006, all oil contracts previously signed by the Azerbaijani government, the Baku-Ceyhan International Consortium, were annulled by Ali's order.
 1993 In September 2007, Ali rescinded a number of "Turkey" agreements signed by the Elchibey administration, granted visas to Turkish nationalists to enter Azerbaijan, and fired about 1,600 Turkish military experts working in Azerbaijan, who were training the Azerbaijani army.
  Ali started negotiations with Russia to involve the Russian "Lukoil" oil company in the project of the Azerbaijani International Oil Company, which operates the Caspian oil, according to which in 1994. In March, Baku sold 10% of its shares to Russia34.
 Arrests of members of the National People's Front led by Elchibey began in Azerbaijan.
  Such a drastic change in events caused great anger in Turkey.
  In this connection, in 1993 Turkish First Deputy Foreign Minister Ozdem Sanberk arrived in Azerbaijan on July 21, 2010 to hand over a letter from Turkish President Suleyman Demirel to Heydar Ali.
 The letter handed to the new authorities of Azerbaijan read as follows: "Let us rely on democracy, avoid actions that contradict the laws, rights and human freedoms, come to an internal agreement, unite and fight against a common external enemy."
1993 Azerbaijani Foreign Minister Hasan Hasanov visited Turkey on December 28-29.
 Both sides of this meeting agreed to use force to change the border of Azerbaijan with Nakhichevan, which in 1921. The Treaty of Kars 36.
 Based on this situation, Turkey reconsidered its position on providing military assistance to Azerbaijan 33 Arshakya G., Yeghiazaryan A., op. work page 39.
34 Arshakya G., Yeghiazaryan A., ref. work, page 40.
35 Ibid.
36 DePauw Freddy, note. work.
in the matter of mating 37.
  Turkey stopped supplying arms to Azerbaijan through donations, and instead decided to provide loans to Azerbaijan.
 Their total volume was 30 million US dollars.
  However, in order to use the loans, the following preconditions were set for the Azerbaijani authorities: to exclude the scattering of Turkish military aid, to ensure the active participation of Turkish military parliaments in the formation of the national army in Azerbaijan.
  According to Hurriyet, the imposition of preconditions is explained by the irresponsible attitude of the Azerbaijani authorities towards the Turkish military aid.
 According to Hurriyet, if the previous authorities in Azerbaijan ignored weapons and ammunition from Turkey, which resulted in the disintegration of military units, the newly elected authorities simply ignored more than 150 Turkish military advisers sent to Azerbaijan with the help of the Turkish state.
 The facts of dusting of weapons and ammunition in Azerbaijan were unacceptable from the Turkish point of view.
  But it was more unacceptable to ignore the Turkish advisers, when the same authorities consistently encouraged the activities of advisers invited from Russia, Afghanistan and other countries.
  The Turkish government had reliable facts about the abuse of military aid at its disposal, warning Baku that it could not tolerate its recurrence by imposing preconditions.
 Azerbaijan accepted Turkey's preconditions.
  The inflow of Turkish military aid to Azerbaijan resumed.
 1994 February 8-9 H. Ali visited Turkey!
 President Demirel stated that Turkey will continue to support Azerbaijan.
 Demirel condemned the actions of Armenians in Artsakh, stated. "To help our Azeri brothers in their seventy years of efforts to rebuild a civilized democracy," 39 during which the two leaders used the "one people, two states" 37 The Treaty of Kars was signed in 1921. October 13 between Kemalist Turkey and "Soviet Russia".
38 Chakryan H., The Karabakh Issue in the Context of Armenian-Turkish Relations, Yerevan, 1998, p. 28.
39 DePauw Freddy, op. work.
Revelation 40.
 During this meeting, Ali stated that he wants to return the lost territories, will try to get support from Turkey, the United States and Russia to resolve the Karabakh issue peacefully.
 "Azerbaijan continues to live only with its troops, I will continue to do so. I have said this again to our brother Turkey, our brother," there should be no doubt that this will always be the case regardless of the circumstances, Azerbaijan's independence will not be violated. "
1994 On May 5, Ali visited Turkey.
 Earlier, on May 4, Azerbaijan signed an agreement in Brussels to become a member of the Partnership for Peace to discuss further political and military relations, according to Turkish media.
  The press service of the Turkish President stated that during the meeting the parties decided to review the relations and their views on regional issues.
  During this meeting, Demirel again referred to Armenia and condemned its actions.
 However, Turkey's efforts to help Azerbaijan clashed with the Russian factor, and their effectiveness was questioned.
Thus, we can conclude that Turkey could not establish full influence in the South Caucasus.
  Armenia is the only country in the South Caucasus that does not have diplomatic relations with Turkey, but it should be noted that it was Turkey that closed its doors to Armenia, setting preconditions and closing the border.
We have already mentioned that Armenia has repeatedly expressed readiness to normalize relations with Turkey, but has always faced the preconditions set by Turkey.
 The Turkish-style position presupposes that Armenia needs Turkey to transfer the energy resources it needs, in order to keep Armenia in the center of its influence, and finally to get rid of the "Armenian flaw" that was on the way to implementing Turkey's pan-Turkist programs. The name "cursed wedge" given to Armenia by Demirel, to achieve that the policy on the Great Genocide be stopped.
  To date, no diplomatic relations have been established between Armenia and Turkey, and the border remains closed.
 As for Azerbaijan, it seems that Turkey is with this country, which has no problems and 40 Rohozinski-Jerzy, mentioned. work., page 10.
41 DePauw Freddy, op. work.
because they both had cultural and linguistic commonalities.
  Azerbaijan's independence was strengthened in Turkey, in addition, Turkey began to actively interfere in the internal life of Azerbaijan, began to show great military-diplomatic support in the Artsakh issue, but, as we have seen, Azerbaijan's orientation towards Turkey changed several times, which questioned Turkey's aspirations in the South Caucasus.
 As we have seen, after the defeat in the Karabakh war, Azerbaijan reconsidered its foreign policy and eventually returned to a unilateral pro-Turkish policy, which meant moving west to NATO.
 As for Georgia, we can see that the latter's orientation towards Turkey was clearer than that of Azerbaijan.
  This was due to the fact that for Georgia independence meant independence from Russia, և Turkey was a country for Georgia that would become a reliable ally.
 Besides, Georgia had an western orientation; Turkey was an ideal option in that issue, because in Georgia Turkey was perceived as the West.
 But to say that the relations between Georgia and Turkey have always been smooth would be wrong, because in connection with the events in Abkhazia, there was some tension in bilateral relations, but both sides were able to overcome these differences; today Georgia and Turkey cooperate in many areas.
Larisa Tadjosyan TURKISH FOREIGN POLICY AFTER THE COLLAPSE OF THE USSR IN THE SOUTH CAUCASUS Keywords: South Caucasus, USSR, Turkey, Armenia, Georgia,
Azerbaijan, a new political course, Artsakh խ Abkhazian conflicts.
