SEND PHILOLOGICAL DISPUTES ON SYUNETS BIOGRAPHY The centuries have stood out in the life of the Armenian people with their tragedy and cruelty.
  It was during these centuries that Armenia was constantly subjected to raids.
  The invaders were savage tribes rushing from the east, longing for war and blood.
Thousands of testimonies have been left by the writers and pens of the time about the stormy events of the time.
Sargis, the writer of Grigor Tatatsi's "Book of Inquiries" in 1401 ․ In his memoirs, he writes: We can write something on a card or in a card, but we can only grieve and sigh when we see my parents crying and saying, "Blessed are you who do not give birth to bloodshed, who are not fed."
Arakel Syunetsi, one of the prominent figures of medieval Armenian culture, lived and created such a cruel period.
  The latter witnessed the Lenk-Temuriyya uprisings and wrote about it in one of his memoirs: "He was paralyzed and weak. He had an army of eight hundred thousand. My world was strong, No one was against him.
He took many countries captive for a month.
They stayed away from the world, and did not see their homeland.
But even in such nightmarish days it was necessary to live.
It was necessary to live a nation in which the memory of its own state was still fresh, who continued to dream of returning that statehood.
Arshak Madoyan makes a legal judgment in this issue, noting. "But more than the glorious past, the people were surrounded by the rich bibliography of their ancestors, especially the patriotic poem created in the Cilician period, the poetic heritage of Nerses Shnorhali" 3.
If the restoration of statehood was not easy, then the creative Armenian people should have applied the balm they had tried for a long time, to revive the people with the magic power of writing and literature, to inspire faith in the people in their own strength.
  And here is the biggest survivor on the horizon, Arakel Syunetsi.
We have poor information about the biography of the most educated poet, theologian-philosopher, musician-composer, grammarian Arakel Syunetsi.
M. is right. Poturyan's anger. "Arakel Syunetsi, as much as he is a famous high-ranking ecclesiastical sinner and a prolific chronicler and writer, is not represented in some of his faces, neither in our century nor in the previous ones."
1 Khachikyan L., Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts of the 17th Century, Part A, Yerevan, 1955, page 5.
2 Matenadaran after Mesrop Mashtots, manuscript 83, 99a.
3 Madoyan A., The poet Arakel Syunetsi, Yerevan, 1987, p. 20.
4 Potourian M., Arakel Syunetsi and his poems, Venice, 1914, page E.
We do not even know the exact time of Syunetsi's birth or death.
  Let's try to restore the biography of the poet-philosopher according to Arakel's memoirs.
  Thus, it becomes known from the "Book of Adam" authored by Syunetsi that his father was David, his mother was Melik, his grandmother was Mariam, his brother was Barsegh. "I beg you, holy reader. And envious examples, Remember my father David, In your holy prayer with your tears.
But also my brother Barsegh, Holy priest and genius, For he died innocent, Remember my prayer in tears.
But also my sister-in-law, Melchizedek, and Mary, for my good. The bereaved and the living, Remember your precious prayers.
From the same memoir we understand that the man from Syunik was a student of Grigor Tatatsi, studying at Tat University: "The great vardapet was my classmate, Grigor called me a reason. Remember my prayers to God, to your people and to your blood relatives" 2.
This Grigory Syunetsi describes him as "bright-minded", "genius", "keeping a watchful tears", "pure in spirit", "innocent by nature", "the great orator is delicious in everything" 3.
It is noteworthy that in another memoir, Syunetsi mentions that the manuscript of "Adamgirq" was given to him by Tatatsin: "The overseer according to my soul, And at the body of my relative, He commanded me to write, my God-given according to the advice.
He told me to write according to the order, to remember the ancestors of Yaghag. Because of Adam and Eve, In the face of the serpent and the devil.
Rabbi, very glorious, grant me a volume from the meaning of the sea. What I received from the same grace, I wrote down my God. ”4
This is a confession that raises the type of Syunik man without underestimating the value of his work.
It is also clear from the testimonies of the grateful scientist and philosopher Grigor Tatatsu University that the Apostle of Syunik was one of his close relatives:
Here, in front of philology, another question arises. How to understand the word "cousin" - cousin or niece?
  We are interested in this question, because based on this, we should try to find out the approximate date of Syunetsi's birth.
  Thus, Armenologist M. Poturyan, based on the available materials, writes about Syunetsi. "It is supposed to be a child of a noble family. His father, David, must have been from the province of Vayots Dzor in the Sisak world, because A. Syunetsi A., Adamgirq, published M. Potourian, Venice, 1907, p. 229.
2 In the same place.
3 See ibid., P. 230.
4 See ibid., P. 324.
5 Khachikyan L., page 73.
because he is married to Grigor Tatevatsi Melik sister. And we know from Grigor's behavior that when Sarkis Archesh emigrated, he came to Vayots Dzor and lived there, where he and his daughter Melik were born, who would later marry David, who would be the birthplace of Arakel.
Մ. Ormanyan considers it more probable that Arakel will be the son of Tatatsi's uncle.
From these two points of view, we tend to trust the first, because it is based on facts. It is mentioned in the memoir that Tatatsin has a sister named Melik.
  The second view is scientifically unacceptable, as it is based only on assumption.
Believing Poturyan, let's continue to follow in his footsteps.
  The latter, in order to determine the approximate date of the birth of Syunets, takes into account the approximate birth of Grigor Tatatsi in 1340 (it is supposed that Tatatsatsi was born in the middle of the 1940s), and comes to the following conclusion. "Naturally, Arakel, being a student of Grigor, should have been at least ten years old, so we can not consider his birth before 1350." 3
Thus, we consider the approximate date of Syunetsi's birth to be 1350.
Now let's try to find out when the Syunik man was ordained a bishop.
 As we have seen, in the above-mentioned memoir, Grigor Tatatsi considers his cousin Syunik, that is, the metropolitan archbishop.
 That memoir was written in 1407.
 Based on that, J. Alishan counts becoming Archbishop from 1407.
However, Alishan ignored two facts.
  The first is that when in 1401-1403 Syunetsi was writing "Adamgirq", he already called himself "Ter Arakel".
  From Batsidran in 1403 The shepherd of Syunik, as the shepherd of Syunik, asks God:
These facts seem to give grounds to suppose that Syunetsi in 1401 ․ He was already a bishop, but L. Khachikyan, studying the life of Tatatsi, thinks that he could have been a bishop of Syunik not earlier than in 1408, after Grigor Tatatsi left for Metsopa monastery6.
Here L. comes to our aid again. Khachikyan, who mentions that the bishops of Syunik often had "substitute bishops" during their lifetime7.
Thus, it can be concluded from the mentioned facts that in 1401-1407 Syunik was a "deputy bishop", and from 1408 he became a bishop.
We have no other biographical facts about Syunik.
 As M. says. Poturyan. "Other histories and memoirs are silent for us; this" holy philosopher "bishop of Syunik dies in silence."
When did the end come? Js Poturyan is silent about this.
  It is only known to the latter that in 1422 Syunik was no longer on the episcopal throne. "Where, he died, it is not unknown.
  "Since not a single one bearing the name of this famous person has been found near the tombs of many of the same notable leaders in Tato Noravan or elsewhere in the Sisak world," 9 he's exiled.
Arsen Ghazikyan, who knew where Syunik was buried, is coming to fill Poturyan's gap.
 The people of Syunik did not pay attention to the fact that "Adamgrq" 1717. In the publication, which was edited by Baghdasar Dpir, the publisher, correcting the mistake of the title page, states: , but: 1Botourian M., page T.
2 Ormanyan M., In Azgapatum, volume B, part A, Beirut, 1960, page 2080.
3 Botourian M., Arakel Syunetsi and his stripes, Venice, 1914, page 14.
4 See Jond Alishan, Sisak, Venice, 1893, p. 21.
5 Syunetsi A., p. 271.
6 See Banber Matenadaran, volume 9, Yerevan, 1969, page 194.
7 See ibid.
8 Bodurian M., page 17.
9 Ibid., P.
The people of Syunik, who is the cousin of the holy son Grigor Tatatsu.
  Whose holy tomb is now in the wilderness of the Most High to be glorified in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ ”1.
From here we can assume that the place of Syunetsi's burial is not unknown to us at all. He must have been buried in the porch of Shativank, where today, unfortunately, nothing is noticeable due to being filled with soil.
Ն. Ter-Nersesyan, studying Yerevan The memoir of 3713 manuscripts mentions that the people of Syunik in 1422 ․ was in the desert of Angeghakot, where he copied the Gospel and signed it. "Lord Arakel of Syunik" 2.
The philologist presents us with another remarkable fact.
 It is about one of the memoirs of imitation in Dzagavank, where the death of Arakel Syunetsi is mentioned. "Now, I beseech you all, that you meet by reading or copying this, to remember the holy and in pure purity of your blessed rabbi called Lord Arakel, the late Christ, who with a lot of work created the memorable Grammar, in memory of him."
Unfortunately, this memoir is innumerable, but Khachikyan put it in the list of 1945 with a memoir that reached us again by the same pen in 1425 ․.
From here N. Ter-Nersesyan comes to the following conclusion. "Then we will put the death of Arakel in the period of 1422-1425, at the age of about 70" 4.
Maybe we would have ended the discussion of this issue here as well, if we had not accidentally touched the 15th volume of "Banber Matenadaran" magazine, which comes to refute all these opinions about the time of Syunetsumah.
  Vrezh Nersisyan, studying the manuscripts of the library of the Welcom Institute in London, finds 15 Armenian manuscripts there.
  Among these manuscripts we find a collection, which contains a praise written by a man from Syunik, entitled "Praise to the Virgin Mary, the spiritual master of the Apostolic Bishop of Syunik and the gifted priest" 5.
Attached to the above case is a memorandum with the following content: "My speech was adapted to the birth of our God Christ and the Savior of Revelation, Jesus, and to the praiseworthy Holy Mother of God, to the multi-faceted Apostle, to the newly built desert, to the Holy Mother of God and to John Garabed, to the Armenian Church."
  The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ our God, who is blessed for ever and ever, has spoken. ”6
Here is this memoir that proves that in 1431 ․ The people of Syunik were still alive and creating.
So much for the biography of Syunik!
  Let us just remember that in the beneficial article "The Burtelyan branch of the Syunik Orbelyans" L. Summarizing the available facts, Khachikyan concludes that like the other metropolitans of Syunik 14th-17th centuries, Arakel Syunetsi was related to the Orbelyan-Burtelyans7.
With this L. Khachikyan seems to confirm the assumption mentioned above that Poturyan was "a child of a noble family" from Syunik.
Hasmik Sargsyan PHILOLOGICAL DISPUTES ON SYUNETS BIOGRAPHY Keywords: theologian-philosopher, poet, grammar, Tat University, cousin, cousin or nephew, archbishop?
