US, EU AND RUSSIA IN THE PROCESS OF SETTLEMENT OF THE SOUTH CAUCASUS CONFLICTS After the collapse of the USSR, conflicts arose in different parts of the great power, which were mainly of an ethnic nature.
 The South Caucasus was no exception.
 The conflicts that existed there historically, according to the leaders of the Soviet Union, were settled with the creation of that state.
  However, after the collapse of the USSR, those conflicts flared up again, as there was no radical solution to the problem.
 In this article, we consider it expedient to study the involvement of the USA, Russia and the EU in the settlement of the conflicts in the South Caucasus, as these three energy centers pursue an active policy in the region.
Three ethno-political conflicts have taken place in the South Caucasus, two of which are in Georgia and one in Azerbaijan.
 The common denominator of these conflicts is that the Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh, the Abkhazians and Ossetians living in Georgia, having territorial autonomous units, decided to self-determine and gain independence.
 The difference was that the Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh sought to unite with their motherland, Armenia, and the goal of the Abkhazians was to create independent states.
 Unlike other post-Soviet conflicts, which gradually subsided over time, the conflicts in the South Caucasus did not subside, but simply their activity decreased.
It should be noted that the "Nagorno Karabakh", "Georgian-Abkhazian" and "Georgian-South Ossetian" conflicts are interethnic in nature, but have certain differences.1. In Georgia, the monitoring was attended by several UN agencies, including the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and Human Rights 1.
In contrast, the UN had no representatives in Nagorno Karabakh.
2. In the case of Georgia, Russian troops were deployed under the mandate of the CIS peacekeeping forces in the conflict zone, while there are no similarities in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict zone; the parties mainly manage to maintain the ceasefire regime.
At the beginning of the study we would like to present the policy pursued by the United States and Russia towards the conflicts in Georgia *.
From the very first days of the conflict, Russia sought to take the initiative by "acting as a mediator between the conflicting parties."
1992 On September 3, 1945, the first ceasefire agreement was signed between Georgia and Abkhazia2 in Moscow2, which, however, was soon violated; hostilities resumed with renewed vigor.
  A year later, Russia made another attempt to sign a ceasefire between the conflicting parties.
 1993 The second ceasefire agreement was signed between Georgia and Abkhazia in Sochi on July 27, 2006.
 To monitor the implementation of this agreement, 1993 The UN Security Council adopted Resolution 858, on the basis of which the UN Monitoring Mission in Georgia was established4.
Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
  grades феffectiveness, Journal of the Nizhny Novgorod University. Н. И. Lobochevskogo, №5 * The EU only joined this process much later.
http:
//ria.ru/spravka/20061229/58076287.html․http.
//ria.ru/spravka/20080701/112698696.html ․ question ”, RIA Novosti, 29.12.2006 available: conflict.
Russia was very active in the settlement of the Georgian-South Ossetian conflict.
 1992 An agreement on the principles of conflict settlement was signed between South Ossetia and Georgia on June 24 in Dogomis. A dividing line was drawn between Georgia and South Ossetia1.
It should be noted that until the 1990s. In the first half, the United States, while recognizing Georgia's independence, almost did not intervene in this conflict.
 According to most scholars, the South Caucasus was of interest to the United States only in economic terms, and in foreign policy, the United States acted through its NATO ally Turkey.
1990s In the second half, the United States became more active in the region.
The Bill Clinton administration began to support economic programs, one of which is the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline.
  1997 In February, the US administration declared that the countries of the South Caucasus and Central Asia were vital to the United States.
  At the same time, the post of Special Adviser for the Caspian Region was established in the US administration2.
Hundreds of employees of the President's Office and other departments of the Congress are involved in the development of the official Washington Caspian Strategy.
  With their participation, various conferences and seminars are held, the main goal of which was to find new, more effective ways to implement this policy in the region.
 It should be noted that the geopolitical interests of the United States play a major role in the implementation of such a policy3.
During the presidency of President George W. Bush, the military component of US policy in the region began to outpace diplomacy and economics.
Azerbaijan և Georgia, seeking to resolve the South Caucasus ethno-political conflicts in their favor through the United States, established warmer relations with official Washington.
Time has shown that the United States had far-reaching plans for Georgia.
  Using the 2003 The dissatisfaction of the masses of the people with the results of the parliamentary elections: the Georgian opposition, with the active support of the American side, carried out a coup d'etat in the country, which went down in history as the "Rose Revolution".
  The opposition came to power with anti-Russian rhetoric, promising to return Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
2005 On May 9, US President George W. Bush arrived in Georgia on an official visit.
  With this step, the United States wanted to show that Georgia is the main partner in the South Caucasus for official Washington.
  In our opinion, the main mistake of the United States in Georgia was that it tried to resolve the conflicts there alone, without Russia's participation.
  The Georgian leadership was reminded that the US support և the large number of weapons available in the country are enough to resolve the conflicts by military means.
 We think that some advisers to Mikheil Saakashvili on the other side of the ocean assured him that in case of resumption of the war, Russia would not intervene and would be satisfied only with condemning statements.
 The result is visible for all of us.
 After a short war, Russia officially recognized the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
 The recognition statement said that this step would ensure the security of the Abkhaz peoples, as well as contribute to the development of the region4.
During these events, Russia unexpectedly showed that it does not intend to leave the region.
 Russian President V. Putin simply announced 2013 During his state visit to Armenia on December 2 5.
The West hastened to criticize Russia for recognizing the independence of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, blamed it on the territorial integrity of Georgia 21/09/2005, available at http: // www.
//www.apsny.ge/notes/1127333974.php ․ 2 See Gadzhiev K., The Great Game of the Caucasus, Yesterday, Today, The Day After, Moscow, 2012, p. 169.3 See ibid., P. 170.
российско-армянских переговоров, 2 December 2013, Yerevan, available at http: // www.
//www.cis.minsk.by/news.php?id=2377 ․ in violation.
 In response to this, the Russian side mentioned that, surprisingly, in the case of Kosovo, the principle of self-determination of nations was adopted, and in this case, the principle of Georgia's territorial integrity is considered dominant.
It should be noted that at the time V. Putin had warned the West not to recognize Kosovo, as it would have undesirable consequences all over the world.
 2008 On February 23, during the informal summit of the CIS leaders, Putin announced: "The precedent of Kosovo is terrible.
 It, in fact, breaks the system of international relations, not for decades, but even for centuries.
 And it can bring with it a whole chain of unpredictable consequences. ”1
Opponents of Russia's Caucasus policy have accused him of using military force against Russia for the first time in the CIS, and Russia has said that for the first time Russia has proved that it can defend its national interests not by words but by deeds. they began to reckon with him.
1990s The United States was not active in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 Even the Bishkek protocols on the ceasefire were signed with the active mediation of Russia.
 The United States welcomed them and was satisfied with that.
 We think that the fact that the United States wanted to pursue a balanced policy towards Azerbaijan and Armenia was of great importance here.
 1992-2005 The United States provided $ 500 million to Azerbaijan and $ 115 million in non-military goods from US Department of Defense stockpiles.
  During the same period, $ 1.3 billion, or $ 218 million worth of non-military goods were provided to Armenia *.
After the coming to power of Heydar Ali, the economic relations between the USA and Azerbaijan became significantly more active. On September 20, the two countries signed an oil agreement, which theorists signed under the name "Treaty of the Century" 3.
1990s From the second half of the 19th century, there was some activity on the part of the United States. In 1997, the OSCE Minsk Group was established, which included the United States, France, and Russia.
 Russia had to agree to such a measure, as it alone was not able to resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
2001 After the events of September 11, 1945, the military component of US foreign policy began to grow.
  The United States became especially active when the so-called "Greater Middle East" program was adopted, which included the South Caucasus.
 This circumstance could not but disturb Russia.
2006 On December 20, 2006, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov met with representatives of the media. foreign policy.
 Touching upon the settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, Lavrov noted that there is no need to make predictions in this issue.
 In his words, Russia, together with the United States and France, are co-chairing states; their main task is to ensure direct contact between the conflicting parties.
  By this, Russia wanted to make it clear to the United States that it does not welcome unilateral intervention in the settlement of the conflict.
2007 During the meeting of the OSCE Foreign Ministers in Madrid in November 2007, the Minsk Group presented a document on the settlement of the conflict, the so-called "Madrid Principles", which was to be put on the negotiating table.
 On November 29, the document was handed over to the Foreign Ministers of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
is a "terrible precedent", 23-02-2008, available at http.
//lenta.ru/news/2008/02/23/putin ․ 2 See Baranovski V., System of International Relations.
  the formation of new realities.
  Global reorganization, in order. * We believe that the difference between the numbers is due to the fact that the administration of George W. Bush in 1992. In the summer of 1918, it adopted the 907th amendment to the Freedom Support Act, which prohibited aid to Azerbaijan until the latter lifted the blockade of Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia.
  The role of the influential Armenian lobby in making this decision.
 It should be noted that later this decision was constantly amended, but now it has almost lost its significance.
3 Халилов Дж., Помощь США can not demonstrate the correctness of Azerbaijan…, 29.10.2012, available at http.
//www.gumilev-center.az/pomoshh-ssha-ne-mozhet-okazyvatsya-pravitelstvu-azerbajdzhana/ / Russian diplomacy in 2006, available at http: // www.
//civilg8.ru/6900.php ․ After the Madrid meeting, Russia took steps to take the initiative in the negotiation process.
 2008 The meeting of the Presidents of Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan took place on October 2, 2012 on the initiative of the Russian side near Meindorf Castle near Moscow, as a result of which the Meindorf Declaration was signed.
 This document was the first document signed after the Bishkek protocols, by which the parties agreed to settle the conflict in an absolutely political way1.
  However, Russia's efforts were thwarted, as the situation on the line of contact escalated due to Azerbaijan.
 Some experts believe that this provocation could not have been carried out without the knowledge of the West. By this, the West wanted to show Russia that the latter is not able to resolve the conflict alone.
2008 After the presidential election, changes were made in the US foreign policy.
  This was especially evident in the US position on political processes in the CIS countries.
  The impression was created that the United States had handed over the decisive role to the political processes in the post-Soviet space to Russia.
 These thoughts became stronger when in 2009 After the meeting of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov on November 9, 2012, it was announced that the "resumption" of bilateral relations2.
2009 In connection with the Georgian issue, the United States began to gradually ease tensions in relations with Russia, realizing that the restoration of Georgia's territorial integrity is not possible in the near future after Russia's recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
  In fact, across the ocean, they overestimated the importance of Georgia in the priorities of US foreign policy.
 2010 During a visit to Tbilisi in July 2007, Hillary Clinton stated that the United States had two reasons for supporting Georgia.
 The first reason was that the ideas of the "Rose Revolution" mainly corresponded to the so-called "American ideals".
 The second reason was that with the help of the United States, democratic institutions developed in Georgia, which in turn contributed to the development of the country's economy3.
2009 During the G8 summit in L'Aquila, Italy in July 2007, the leaders of the Minsk Group co-chairing countries, Sarkozy and Obama, issued a joint statement in which Medvedev called on the "Azerbaijani presidents" to resolve the conflict peacefully.
  On December 1-2, the same year, during the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the OSCE member states in Athens, a joint statement on the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict was adopted, emphasizing the importance of the principles of self-determination of nations - non-use of force or threat of force.
2011 The summit of the OSCE Co-Chair countries took place on June 24 in Kazan.
 The presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan were also present at the meeting.
 A document on the agenda, which was previously agreed with the co-chairs4.
  However, due to Azerbaijan's destructive position, progress was not made.
Despite the fact that the United States attaches great importance to Russia's relations, it can not allow the latter to increase its influence in the post-Soviet space.
  This was stated in an interview with APA by former US Ambassador to NATO, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Walker.
  In his opinion, the United States և Russia should look for cooperation in the South Caucasus ․ "Russia thinks it has the right to control the Caucasus region.
  The United States respects the rights of the peoples of the Caucasus, the states, and does not agree with Russia's ambitions. ”5
We would like to present separately what kind of diplomatic activity the EU carried out in 2008. during the August events.
 From the very beginning, the EU has been quite active. 1 "Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan met in the land of Mayndorf", RIA Novosti, November 2, 2008, available at:
//ria.ru/politics/20081102/154308118.html ․ 11.03.2009, available at http:
//www.rg.ru/2009/03/11/knopka.html ․ 3 See Contemporary International Relations, ed. A.V. Torkunova, Moscow, 2014, p. 143.24.06.2011, available at http:
//www.rbc.ru/rbcfreenews/20110624212217.shtml ․ 5 The USSR does not agree with the claims of Russia on the "sphere of influence" in the Caucasus - Walker, 10.09.2011, available at http: // www.
//news.am/rus/news/73754.html ․ France was especially prominent among the countries.
 There were several reasons for this.
 First, France was the country holding the EU presidency at that time.
  The other reason was that with this Sarkozy wanted to show the whole world that France was able to stop the hostilities.
  Apart from France, Germany and Italy were also very active.
On the evening of August 8, on the initiative of the German side, a telephone conversation took place between Russian President Medvedev and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
 During the conversation, Medvedev described the actions of the Georgian army as aggression and stated that Russia would make every effort to ensure the security of the people of South Ossetia, especially since most of them were Russian citizens.
  Merkel "expressed concern over the current situation" and noted that the German side is ready to make efforts for a peaceful settlement of the issue1.
  Two days later, Medvedev և Nicolas Sarkozy had a telephone conversation.
  The official message mentioned the following: "Nicolas Sarkozy, as the head of the EU presidency, stressed that the task of the Europeans is to contribute to the cessation of hostilities and the improvement of the situation in the region.
  Medvedev, in turn, stressed that in order to resolve these issues, it is necessary to immediately withdraw the Georgian armed forces from South Ossetia, as well as to sign an agreement between Georgia and South Ossetia on the renunciation of the use of force.
  "Besides, the Georgian side must do all this without preconditions."
It should be noted that unlike the leaders of other states, Sarkozy was more active.
  Two days later, on August 12, Sarkozy met with Dmitry Medvedev in the Kremlin and negotiated a joint document known as the Medvedev-Sarkozy Plan.
 It consisted of 6 points, the first of which was that the Georgian troops had to return to military units.
 The Russian troops had to retreat to the positions they occupied before the war.
 Issues related to the future status of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as well as ways to ensure security, should be the subject of international discussion3.
On the same day, Sarkozy left for Tbilisi. After "long" negotiations, Mikheil Saakashvili agreed to sign the "Medvedev-Sarkozy plan".
2008 Ronald Asmus, the former Assistant Secretary of State for Bill Clinton, described the events of August in detail in his book.
 The book is called "A little War thatShook the World."
 Georgia, Russia and the Future of the West "(" Small war that shook the world. Georgia, Russia ապ the future of the West ").
 According to the American diplomat, on the evening of August 12, hundreds of thousands of Georgian citizens gathered in front of the Georgian parliament, chanting the name of the French president.
  Under those conditions, Sarkozy handed over the plan to Saakashvili, insisting that he would not get anything better4.
In the last part of our study, we would like to present the current US-Russian positions on the conflicts in the South Caucasus.
  In fact, Russia's recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, their interest in them, seems to have been pushed to the background.
  The Georgian authorities are fully aware that at least in the near future they will not be able to "bring back" the so-called lost territories.
 We think that they understand this well from the other side of the ocean, because the US interest in these conflicts has kind of frozen, which cannot be said about the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
2014 On May 7, 1994, US Co-Chair of the Minsk Group James Warlick proposed a six-point document on the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which states what was proposed in 1994. starting with the interim status for Nagorno-Karabakh, the creation of the Lachin corridor, the return of 7 regions to Azerbaijan, etc.
 At the same time, Warlick clarified that this is a US proposal made separately from the other co-chairs.
 This step, in our opinion 1 "Dmitry Medvedev's telephone conversation with the Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany Angel Merkel" has been made available, is available at http: // www.
//archive.kremlin.ru/events/chron/2008/08/205061.shtml ․ 2 "Dmitry Medvedev's telephone conversation with French President Nicolas Sarkozy" was made available at http: // www.
//archive.kremlin.ru/events/chron/2008/08/205061.shtml ․ http:
//ria.ru/world/20080823/150623160.html#ixzz3I5c96kzh/․4 "Georgia saves Sarkozy", available at http:
//forum.nvrsk.ru/index.php?showtopic=158661 ․ войск ”, 23.08.2008, available to you, is very dangerous, as it shows that there are some contradictions between the co-chairs, which in turn can not contribute to the settlement of the conflict.
 A few days later, on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the signing of the ceasefire, the Co-Chairs issued a statement reiterating their common position on a peaceful settlement of the conflict1.
The essential difference between these statements is that Warlick does not specify which principle of international law should apply to the settlement of the conflict, and the Co-Chairs' statement states that the principles of non-use of territorial integrity, national self-determination, force or threat must be at the heart of the settlement.
2014 At the beginning of August, the situation on the line of contact between the Karabakh and Azerbaijani armed forces on the Armenian-Azerbaijani border became very tense, and even the sides began to openly talk about the resumption of the war.
  The resumption of the war in the Caucasus was not in the interests of Russia, the EU or the United States.
 The Co-Chairs began to consider holding a meeting between the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in order to ease tensions.
 At first it was planned to be held in Paris, but then it was decided to organize a trilateral meeting of the presidents of Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
  The meeting took place in 2014. August 10 at the residence of Vladimir Putin in the city of Sochi 2.
 As a result of this meeting, the tension at the border eased and the fire was stopped.
  This can be considered a diplomatic victory of Russia over the United States and France.
  By this, the latter showed that he was able to influence the conflicting parties.
 It was not in Russia's interest to launch military operations parallel to its western borders near its southern borders.
Unlike Russia, the United States has a more flexible position on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 Every year, by the decision of the US Congress, financial assistance is provided to Nagorno Karabakh in a separate item.
  Besides, unlike the deputies of the Russian State Duma, the US congressmen have visited Artsakh many times.
 Recently, the US has shifted its position in the South Caucasus to the EU, paying more attention to other regions.
It should be noted that Russia's policy in the South Caucasus is not unequivocally accepted by the countries of the region.
 On the one hand, Russia declares that Armenia is a strategic ally, but on the other hand, it sells arms to a country that is at war with a CSTO member state against Armenia.
 Some circles in Russia describe this step as business, but neither the United States nor France sell arms to the conflicting parties.
 Let's bring a fresh example ․ 2014 On August 18, the Azerbaijani APA news agency issued a statement that the United States had refused to sell military equipment exported from Afghanistan to Azerbaijan.
 Washington has interpreted this in such a way that it is forbidden for them to sell weapons to the conflicting countries3.
In conclusion, it should be noted that the US, Russia, the EU continue to use the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict for their vital interests in the South Caucasus, and maintaining the status quo is in their interest.
 At the same time, the unresolved conflict is dangerous for the whole region, it will continue until the conflicting parties sign the peace agreement.
Grigor Balasanyan US, EU AND RUSSIA PROCESS OF SETTLEMENT OF SOUTH CAUCASUS CONFLICTS Keywords: Russian Federation, USA, European Union, ethno-political conflict, South Caucasus, South Karabakh, Nagorno-Karabakh, Nagorno-Karabakh, Nagorno-Karabakh.
