DYNAMICS OF THE ECOLOGICAL SITUATION OF LAKE SEVAN The issue of Lake Tsana has long been a priority issue for the Republic of Armenia, which makes the topic under study urgent.
  We have made an attempt to remove the wide range of issues related to the current ecological condition of Lake Sanaa, which will give a comprehensive and complete picture of the problem.
High mountain Lake Sana is considered to be one of the unique water basins in the world.
 Prior to the artificial lowering of the lake level, Lake Sanaa was known for its incredible water purity, high quality and transparency.
  If before the leveling it was a typical oligotrophic lake, now, due to the lowering of the level, it has turned into a mesotrophic lake (the number of algae has increased sharply).
  The artificial lowering of the level of Lake Sanaa was accompanied by changes in thermal, hydrobiological and hydrochemical regimes.
  Currently, there is faster water heating in spring and summer, and faster cooling in autumn.
 Large changes in temperature regime, associated with the reduction of the volume of the lake, took place in the deep layers.
 Due to the lowering of the lake level, the changes in the temperature regime in the Great Scan are more significant than in the Small Scan.
 We can say that Lake Sanaa, previously filled with deep cold water, has been transformed into a shallow, warming lake, where high surface temperatures reach the bottom of the lake and are of great importance for the lake's vital processes.
Due to the lowering of the lake level, the water-biological regime of the lake was violated, the lake passed to a new ecological state.
 Both structural and functional changes have taken place in the phytoplankton combination.
 Diatomaceous, greenish-bluish-green algae have reached their maximum development, among which there are toxic species.
  The increase in the biomass of phytoplankton characterizes the process of eutrophication of the lake.
 A possible biological consequence of the lowering of the level is the formation of the so-called "colored waters" in the lake, which is conditioned by the massive growth of these algae.
Opportunities for the development of "coloring" took place in the lake when most of the floor of the Great Sea began to heat up intensively, as a result of which the processes of decomposition of organic matter in the bottom accelerated, there was a lack of oxygen.
 Ammonia, which is toxic to aquatic organisms and hydrogen sulfide, has begun to form in the lower middle layers of the lake, contributing to the lake's swamping and accelerating the lake's aging.
  Due to the eutrophication of the lake, the pollution of the lake increased sharply.
  The flow of organic matter to the bottom of the lake increased significantly.
In connection with the lake water intake, profound changes took place in both the hydrobiological and hydrochemical regime of the lake.
 The direction of all the changes towards the eutrophication of the lake became obvious.
 The content of bio-elements increased in the water.
 The composition of the ward was changed.
 The value of biological oxygen demand (CPI 5) approached the limit of MAC, nitrite և nitrates, some metals (iron, magnesium, copper) and petroleum products.
 Prior to depletion, Cyan was characterized by the absence of year-round biomaterials in the water other than phosphorus at 0.3 mg / L.
 Speaking of the hydrochemical regime, we can not but refer to the oxygen regime, the changes associated with the lowering of the level of Lake Sanaa.
 Prior to the lowering of the lake level, the amount of oxygen in the groundwater of the Great San was not less than 7-8 mg / l.
  In the initial period of level reduction, until 1950. Finally, no significant changes in the oxygen regime were observed in the waters of the Sun.
  Instead, there was some instability in the oxygen content, as well as small temporary reductions in the number of coastal mudflats washed up.
 Significant deterioration of the oxygen regime of Lake Sanaa was observed in 1960. և is manifested by an increasing lack of oxygen in the deep layers.
In summer, the oxygen content in the lower layers was 1-2 mg / l, which is absolutely insufficient for the oxidation processes of the lake համար for deadly fish.
 In some parts of the lake there is no oxygen at all.
 Such a sharp drop in oxygen content in the lower reaches of the river is due to a reduction in the volume of water in the lake, as well as pollution of the lake by industry, utilities and agriculture.
 The main feature of the chemical composition of the water of Lake Sanaa is a certain reduction in the amount of mineralization.
 It has been slowly declining from 718 mg / L (1930) to 660 mg / L (1990) over 60 years.
Taking into account the urgency of the issue under discussion, we aim to analyze the changes in the ecological condition of the lake during the last few years.
 2007-2013 of the Armecommonitoring Center of the Ministry of Nature Protection Based on the reference data, we have compiled relevant graphs (Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4), the analysis of which showed that in 2007-2013. In the samples taken from 17 observation points of Lake Sanaa, the content of a number of elements in the water exceeded the permissible limit norm.
Figure 1. Dynamics of exceeding the MACs of several chemical elements in 2007-2013. (3.5 km east of the peninsula, observation point N 115) Dynamics, as can be seen from the picture above, in the samples taken from 17 observation points of Lake Syana in 2007, the permissible limit limit of magnesium ion was exceeded 1.2-1.4 times.
 The other determined indicators were observed within the norms [2].
Figure 2. Dynamics of exceeding the MACs of several chemical elements in 2007-2013. (From the observation point located on the peninsula with 70 0 azimuth, observation point N 116) From 17 observation points of Lake Syana in 2008. The average annual concentrations of the indicators determined in the 26 samples taken exceeded the maximum allowable norms. Magnesium - 1.4-1.9, sodium - 1.1-1.5, vanadium - 5.0-6.0, selenium - 2.0, bromine - 1.9-2.3, in the lake - chromium - 2.0-6.0, copper - 2.0 times.
 The contents of the other determined indicators were considered within the allowable norms [2].
Figure 3. Dynamics of exceedance of MACs of several chemical elements in 2007-2013. (Observatory N 117 located on the surface of Dzknaget estuary) Out of 17 surface և 9 deep observation points of Lake Sana in 2009. The average annual concentrations of the indicators determined in the samples taken exceeded the maximum permissible norms. Magnesium is 1.1-1.4, vanadium is 5.0-7.0, chromium is 2.0-3.0, bromine is 1.8-2.1, selenium is 3.0-4.0, in some parts of the lake copper is 2.0-3.0 times.
 The contents of the other determined indicators were considered within the allowable norms [2].
According to the received data, in 2010 During this period, the oxygen regime of Lake Sanaa was sufficient for the natural life of the lake, being observed within all observation points within the allowable norm.
 2010 In the samples taken from Lake Sanaa, the average annual concentration of magnesium exceeded the permissible norm by 1.2-1.3, vanadium - 5.0, bromine - 2.3-2.7, selenium - chromium - 2.0 times.
The hydrochemical studies of the lake have shown that in some parts, in some months, the chemical demand for oxygen (TCP) was exceeded 1.1-1.3 times, as well as the limit values ​​for copper by 2.0-3.0 times.
 In general, the content of phosphorus in Shanalj has not increased significantly, remaining within the permissible limit norm.
 The contents of the other determined indicators were considered within the allowable norms [2].
According to the received data, in 2011 During this period, the oxygen regime of Lake Sanaa was sufficient for the natural life of the lake, being observed in all observation points within the permissible norms.
 During the mentioned period, the average annual magnesium concentration in the lake exceeded the permissible limit limit of fishery by 1.1 times.
 From Lake Sanaa in 2011 In the samples taken, the average annual concentration of vanadium exceeded the permissible norm by 5.0, bromine - by 1.9-2.0, selenium - chromium - by 2.0 times.
The hydrochemical studies of the lake have shown that in some parts in some months (especially February, March, April) they also exceeded the permissible limit value of և 2.0-3.0 copper 1. 1.1-1.5 times, in August 1.1-1.9 times.
 The contents of the other determined indicators were considered within the allowable norms [2].
Figure 4. Dynamics of exceeding the MACs of several chemical elements in 2007-2013. (2 km from Artanish with an altitude of 135 km 0, from a depth of 20 m - N 119 observation point) From 53 observation points of Lake Shana in 2012. 163 samples were taken during the year.
  According to the agreed data, the oxygen regime of Lake Shana was sufficient for the natural activity of the lake, being observed in all observation points within the permissible norm.
According to the assessment of fishery norms, the permissible limit norm is 1.1-1.2 times higher than the average annual concentration of magnesium.
From Lake Shana in 2012 In the samples taken, the average annual concentration of vanadium exceeded the permissible norm by 6.2-6.4, selenium by 2.1-2.6 times.
  The hydrochemical studies of the lake showed that the maximum permissible limit of copper was exceeded 2.1 times in the Great Sea.
  The contents of the other determined indicators were observed within the permissible norms.
2012 year. Only the general description of Small and Large Cells is given in the reference.
 According to multi-year monitoring observations, the water quality of the lake has not changed significantly in almost all observation points.
 Since 2012 The number of observation points was large, that is why they are not given separately in the reference.
 That is the reason why the schedule for 2012 Data missing [2].
2013 for the hydrochemical studies of Lake Sanaa. 167 samples were taken from the lake.
  The samples were taken from the surface of the lake, from sections of different depths of the lake.
According to the information received, the oxygen regime of Lake Shana was sufficient for the natural life of the lake, considered within the permissible norm.
 In the samples taken from Lake Sanaa, according to the assessment of fishery norms, the maximum allowable norms exceeded the average annual concentrations of magnesium, vanadium, chromium-selenium.
The average annual concentration of magnesium exceeded the limit limit by 1.1-1.2 times, vanadium - 5.0-5.7 times.
 Based on the data of many years of studies on the chemical quality of lake water, such an amount of vanadium և magnesium is a lake feature և is not considered pollution [2].
In some parts of Lake Sanaa, the average annual concentrations of chromium-selenium above the permissible limit values ​​were observed.
 Chromium exceeded the permissible norm by 1.8 times, selenium - 2.5 times.
  The contents of the other determined indicators were observed within the permissible norms [2].
Summarizing the above, we have reached the following conclusions.1. Pre-existing deep-water Canaan Lake has been transformed into a deep, warm lake, where high surface temperatures reach the bottom of the lake and are of great importance for the lake's vital processes. Opportunities for the development of "staining" in the lake occurred when most of the bottom of the Great Seagull began to heat up intensively, as a result of which the processes of decomposition of organic matter in the bottom accelerated, there was a lack of oxygen. There were profound changes in the lake's water biology and hydrochemical regime.
  The direction of all the changes towards the eutrophication of the lake became obvious, 4. The hydrochemical studies of the lake showed that in 2010 In some parts of the lake, in some months of the year, the chemical oxygen demand (TCP) values ​​of TP5 1. were 1.1-1.3 times higher than the MAC. 5. Hydrochemical studies of the lake showed that in 2010 և 2012. The limit value of copper was exceeded 2.0-3.0 times (2010) and 2.1 times (2012), respectively.
Literature 1. Vardanyan T., On some issues of the ionic composition of the water mineralization of Lake Sanaa.
YSU Scientific Bulletin, N1 (172), Yerevan 1990, pp. 140-145.
2. Reference on the results of ecological monitoring of the RA environment.
 Environmental Impact Monitoring Center of the Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014.
Emma SukiasyanDYNAMICS OF THE ECOLOGICAL SITUATION OF LAKE SEVAN Keywords: level reduction, pollution, permissible limit norm, ecosystem dynamics, anthropogenic load, eutrophication of the lake, colored waters.
