CHARACTERISTICS OF CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT IN MUKHTAR AUEZOV'S STORY "DIFFICULT YEARS" Mukhtar Auezov is one of the brightest representatives of the newly formed Kazakh intelligentsia at the beginning of the 20th century.
  In this article we have referred to 1928. Written in the novel "Difficult years" ("Soviets", "Difficult years") 1, in particular, the history of its creation, the characters, the main features of the work of art.
It is known that the beginning of Mukhtar Auezov's creative life (early 1920s) coincided with the great social and historical changes in the life of the Kazakh people, of which he was the author.
  The examination of his works of the 1920s մասնավորապես, in particular, the novel "Difficult Times" is an opportunity to redefine not only his creative way, but also his work in 1916. The revolt against the tsarist rule started among the Kazakhs.
In general, the beginning of the 20th century was a turning point for the Kazakh people.
 On the one hand, the customs of the feudal-patriarchal nature still ingrained among the Kazakhs, on the other hand, the policy pursued by the tsarist government, as well as the economic difficulties caused by the First World War, had created a chaotic situation in the country.
  The representatives of the nascent Kazakh intelligentsia were still talking about the need for a national liberation struggle.
  The issue of getting rid of colonial dependence becomes imperative, first of all, on a careful level.
 Due to the efforts of progressive Kazakh thinkers, the first Kazakh textbooks were published, and the main goal of those engaged in literature and science became the creation and development of a national ideology2.
 The aspirations for the freedom of the newly formed Kazakh intellectuals seemed to coincide with 1917. with the ideas of the October Revolution.
In general, historical themes prevailed in Russian literature in the 1920s, which was typical of post-revolutionary societies. After all, these societies needed to reinterpret their own history, to create new historical heroes who would be the bearers of new ideas.
  Driven by the wave of these changes, young Auezov writes the novel "Difficult Times" based on historical events.
It is obvious on the ideological message of the novel that 1917 The ideological influence of the revolution. After all, the revolution was trying to overthrow the old, the tsarist, to create a new society, the main values ​​of which should be freedom and peace.
 In this respect, the story completely coincided with the revolutionary ideology. After all, Vipak represented the struggle of the representatives of the Kazakh people against the existing one, after all, it was an old call to choose the path of change.
1 Most experts suggest using the term story instead of the term novel.
 The main reason for such disagreement is that at that time literary genres in Kazakh literature were not yet fully established, there were some difficulties in classification.
  Besides, the borders of the story are quite conditional, it is impossible to draw a stable border between genres.
 In our opinion, this work occupies an intermediate place in the "story" of the novel, both terms are acceptable.
 Remaining faithful to the Armenian translation of the work, we find it expedient to use the novel version.
 For more information on this, see Jrbashyan E., Introduction to Literature, Yerevan, 1996, p. 283, Adilbaev M., On the Poetry of the History of Iraskazov by M.O. Auzova, Two Years, autograph, Alma-Ata, 1987, p.
Speaking about the novel, especially the Kazakh specialists of the period of independence, with almost no exception (R. Berdibay, R. Nurgali, R. Tursunbek, T. Tsurtbay, etc.), described in the work of 1916. They call these events a part of the national liberation struggle of the Kazakh people.
 We will refrain from such an assessment because in order to consider these or those events as a national-liberation struggle, a comprehensive study of historical facts is needed և a final assessment.
 The national liberation struggle presupposes the pursuit of freedom at the state, management levels, the creation of an independent statehood. Whereas in the novel the revolt of the heroes had an exclusively social basis, and as if there were aspirations to get rid of the ruling government, there was no question of creating a national state or a further goal.
  Besides, the experts present an argument to consider the events described in the novel as a liberation struggle. The published novel was considered "full of nationalist, anti-state ideas"; it was banned as early as 1930, being republished only after forty years, in 1972.1.
As we have already mentioned, the novel describes 1916. In particular, the revolt of the Albanian tribe living in the southern Asian country of Asi against the Tsarist government.
 As history proves, the reason for the revolt was 1916. The tsarist decree of June 25, 1945, stated that "foreign" (non-Russian) men aged 19-43 were subject to conscription for rear work 2.
Quite accurate information has been preserved about the history of the creation of the novel.
 It is known that in the 1920s ․ In the second half of the 19th century, Auezov studied at the Department of Language and Literature, Faculty of Social Sciences, Leningrad State University.
  As his wife, Valentina Auezova, later recalls, in 1927, Auezov traveled with a university expedition to the southern part of Kazakhstan, to the Seven Seas 4 to collect folklore material.
  This fact explains the fact that the other works on historical themes, such as "Shooting in the Mountain Pass" (1927), "Kene Khan" (March 1928), were written during this period.
 This trip was even written about in "Tilchi" (1927) newspaper5.
  According to contemporaries, he not only recorded the facts of the uprising, but also rode on horseback to the settlement of Asi, reached the Saritau Mountains, Ghanalash Jaylau, etc. along the Chilik River, wrote down the names in detail, talked for hours about their immediate involvement in the uprising, opinions and descriptions 6.
 All this, of course, increases the source significance of the novel, which is one of the main features of the latter. Almost all the actions, heroes, their actions, geographical names and place names presented in the novel can be confirmed by historical documents.
Referring to the main features of the characters, it should be emphasized that the heroes are historical figures.
 The author collected accurate information about them during the field work.
 In particular, in the novel, the old Batir Uzak, representing the common people, was Uzak Saurukov, who actually existed, and Jameke Mambetov, an exile.
  A study of historical documents showed that Gorshabash (Kazakh version: Ақжелке), representing the interests of the government, was in fact an existing person with the surname Podporkov.
 Moreover, the author has portrayed his image in great detail.
  In fact, the existing characters were the translations of the greedy ակատար verb R. Mamrba և O. Beymurinov 7.
The other feature of the heroes of the novel is the representation of the latter.
 Unlike the works written later, the author did not absolutize the heroes of this novel.
 For example, if in the 1930s ․ Work written in socialist realism 1 Secretary of the Communist Party of the USSR of Kazakhstan F. I. During Goloshyokin's rule (1924-1933) the pressure on politicians and public figures increased in the country.
 The large-scale operation to "cleanse" the society had started, the "Little October" known in history.
2 For more details see Жұртбай Т., Алаш қозғалысы, т. 3, Almaty, 2011.
5 See http.
//idea.pushkinlibrary.kz/text/lihaya.html.
7 Ibid., P.
In the scenes ("Hetqer", "Narrow Gorge", "Ususi", "The Hunter and the Eagle") he presented the main characters in an exclusively positive light, endowing them with the best features of all the positive features, condensing them into one image, then in this novel դրական positive Negative heroes are collective characters.
 The author tried to create a common image by completing, avoiding presenting all the positive qualities in one image.
  In other words, the heroes complement each other.
The author's approach to presenting young and old characters is also interesting.
In general, Auezov, almost without exception, presents young people in his works in a positive light (Kokbay, Janseid, Jumatay, Bekey, Serikbay, Aipay, Torligozha, etc.), endowing them with education, courage, justice and a strong desire to fight.
  For Auezov, young people are the symbol of a bright future, who embody the new, are free from the shackles of the past, have the opportunity to think freely, are ready to fight for the new to the end (Auezov uses this contradiction almost without exception in other works. In the relationship of Aba և's father).
  In "Difficult Years", the elderly are the embodiment of the old, they present themselves to us as smart, but desperate, depressed, with little desire to fight, while the young characters are full of anger and resentment.
  One of the most typical examples of this is Bekey, a young, educated girl from Wazak Uzak, who appeared to discuss important issues and always came up with bold ideas and thoughts.
The author presents the collective image of a merchant in an interesting way. that he does not become a direct participant in the actions of the merchant, but the reader has the description of his image, due in particular to the description of the market.
 The merchants are presented as vowers, intelligent but clever, flattering, greedy and eloquent.
  Such negative connotations are presented by the translators (Ospan, Jebirba), who were cut off from their own people, fulfilling the wishes of the people only for their own benefit.
The positive characters of Auezov (Serikbay, Turligozha, Aipay, Kokbay, Janseid, Jumatay, etc.) are endowed with great pride typical of the steppe. Crying, shedding tears is a disgrace for them. "Such was the batir.
 Կես Half of his soul was dying, and without that he would not live և the other half of him… his condition is bad… But he, like a wolf, will not make a sound, will not cry, even if you kill him, burn him, even if you kill him… »1.
 To further emphasize their pride, the author takes another step. One of the reasons for the revolt is that the tsar had ordered the forcible recruitment of foreigners, not directly to take part in hostilities, but simply to take part in rear operations.
 This is very good during the interrogation of the leaders of the rebellion. "... the idiots should go, but not to work.
  Let them be recruited for military service.
 ... Let them become real soldiers.
 ... We are the same kind of people as your idiots.
  ... We want to die for our land, but ... Take our soldiers, send them to the front ”2.
Another characteristic of positive heroes is the pursuit of freedom such as steppe infinity and infinity, which is reflected in the words of individual characters. "… Give us a higher sky, a wider field, a freer life", "It will not be possible to put a horse on the steppe վր" 3.
When talking about the fiction of the novel, one should pay attention to several circumstances.
 The author managed to create complete images thanks to separate descriptions.
 This refers to the formation of a collective image of the Albanian tribe by the example of individuals, as well as the formation of a collective image of the Kazakh people by the example of Albanians.
The description of nature is more successful in the novel, which becomes complete due to the direct connection of the heroes ներքին with the inner world.
  The inner world of the heroes is given to the reader by the description of the images of nature.
 The harmonious connection of the heroes և by nature, which is conditioned mostly by the heroes with a nomadic lifestyle 2 Auezov M., Shooting in the mountain pass, Yerevan, 1988, p. 123.
3 Ibid., P.
with the description of which is seen as another way of portraying the hero.
 Due to adjectives, metaphors, other forms of imagery, nature seems to become a participant in actions.
 In addition, the author was able to skillfully present the Karkaraishishuka with its daily life, merchants and market-typical noise.
 Located on the border with China, the Karkara market attracted traders from Iran, Kashgari, Tibet, Afghanistan and India.
  The description of the market is completed by the typical traditions of the Eastern market: cockfighting, Eastern martial arts games, songs, dances. A clear, pronounced negative image of Tsartrak.
  In general, the market in the East has a great socio-political and social significance.
  It is not accidental that the work begins with the description of Karkara market.
 The latter seems to be acting as a protagonist in the novel. changes according to the actions of the heroes. If at first it is described as a noisy, lively gathering place, where the "nine roads from all over the world" intersect, then at the beginning of the uprising it seems to become a clash of views and thoughts, and finally after the end of the uprising, it becomes deserted.
  The Karkara market is an indirect participant in the popular unrest.
According to Chingiz Aytmatov, the description of the market was so masterfully made that this part of the novel could even be compared to the style of the French Renaissance writer François Rabelais1.
Later, in 1934. Auezov wrote the play "Sparks" (also known as "Night Thunder") based on the novel "Difficult Times".
 Let's look at some of the differences between the novel and the play.
In the novel, the author had the opportunity to present the life, traditions and worldview of the Albanians in parallel with the socio-political life of the time through descriptions, while in the play Auezov had to condense the colors, depict the struggle of the characters mainly through specific episodes through the psychology of heroes.
  If in the novel the social basis and motive of the heroes' actions were emphasized, then in the play their ideological message was emphasized.
 This can be understood if we take into account that over time Auezov probably analyzed the 1916 events. They try to present the ideological significance of the uprising in parallel with the social problems.
  It is not by chance that experts consider this play Auezov's most serious work written in socialist realism2.
It is known from history that in 1916 Rebellion is completely suppressed.
 And despite this fact, it has its own impact not only on the historical events that determine the future life of the entire Albanian people, but also on the entire Kazakh people.
  Auezov was really aware of the essence and consequences of the uprising. He fully understood the pain and suffering of the desperate people.
  Due to this circumstance, the author was able to present in a wonderful way the disappointed Albanians who left the mountain pastures of Alatau, which ends the work. "The white tsar is behind, the liberation from slavery is ahead ... Despair was driving, hope was driving.
  They were walking along the steppe to the darkness, to the unknown.
  They were looking for liberation, but they gave in to the will and whim of the unknown. ”
In conclusion, we can say that in the 1920s, huge ideological and social changes took place in the life of the Kazakh people, in which Mukhtar Auezov was a direct participant.
 1928 In the novel "Difficult years" written in 1916, he tried to depict not only 1916. historical events. Following the example of the peaceful Albanian uprising in the south of the country, the author tried to show his contemporaries the way to point out the way of struggle.
 But for the sake of justice, it should be noted that he conditioned the actions of the heroes not on the ideological basis of the latter, but on the basis of social problems.
  In other words, the reason for the heroes' actions and revolt was the severe social problems existing among the Albanians.
 On the other hand, this was a unique analysis for the author of the contradiction that existed between the "working masses" of the ruling class.
 Auezov played the role of insurgency in the history of the Kazakh people, which is evidenced by the fact that later, in 1934. He writes the play "Sparks" with the same plot, but with different accents.
1 Айтматов Ч., Вместо predсловия, Новый мир, 1972, №6.
2 Karatayev M., Mukhtar Auzov.
 Notes on Creativity, Alma-Ata, 1967, p. 26. This work written on a historical theme also has great sourceological significance. The author personally traveled to the Yotgenia region, strolled through the settlement of Asi, spoke with the participants of the uprising and their relatives, wrote information about the leaders and rulers of the uprising, separate descriptions, toponyms and various geographical names, which were later changed.
  Apart from the sourceological significance, the novel has a great artistic significance.
  From the point of view of artistic depiction, the most successful is the description of the famous և Karkara market.
 Due to the separate, general descriptions, the reader has a general picture of the market with the characteristics of the Eastern market.
  The harmony of the inner world and nature of the heroes gives a special artistic value to the novel.
 This is best reflected in the description of desperate Albanians fleeing the mountain pastures of Alatau after the uprising, which is accompanied by a desolate, bonfire market and images of nature around it.
 When presenting the characters, in contrast to the works written later, Auezov avoided absolutizing them. The "positive" and "negative" heroes are collective characters, they complement each other, they are endowed with all the features typical of Albanians - pride, eloquence, naivety, he - flattery and greed.
Thus, the novel "Difficult Years" was Auezov's first step in creating a historical theme, it can be stated that this step was taken responsibly, it was crowned with success.
Shushan Khachatryan FEATURES OF CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT MUKHTAR AUEZOV'S "DIFFICULT YEARS" STORY Keywords: Mukhtar Auezov, "Difficult years", novel, rebellion, Albanian tribe.
