Sci. Head: Doctor of Technical Sciences, Prof. A. MarkosyanBefore the 1970s. The development priorities of the countries were anchored around the ideas of "growth" and "development".
  It was believed that economic growth at the global level would sooner or later lead to the growth of weakly developed countries and the reduction of ethnic inequalities.
  However, the global challenges of the 20th century, such as poverty, growing inequality, and deteriorating environments, have prompted the international community to take action to address them.
As such, in the 1970s. The idea of ​​"sustainable development" began to be circulated from the beginning of 1972, which was first discussed in the international arena in 1972. In the framework of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm, emphasizing the need to preserve a healthy, vibrant environment.
  It was based on the vision that not only economic but also ecological laws should be taken into account during economic activities1.
Further developments, in particular, the continuing deterioration of the state of the natural resources բաց the negative impact on socio-economic development, demonstrated the need to be consistent արկել to take continuous action to address the current situation.
In that sense, 1987 can be considered a turning point. The work of the International Commission on Environment և Development, whose document, the Brundtley Report, marks the most relevant definition of "sustainable development" 2, is defined as sustainable development that allows current needs to be met without compromising future generations. such an opportunity.
  The latter was the basis for the further institutionalization of the ideology of sustainable development.
  In particular, in 1992 The Rio Earth Summit adopted a 21st Century Environmental Development Agenda called Agenda 21, which has already proclaimed the universal understanding that environmental issues are of a global nature and that a concerted effort is needed to address them.
 Thus, it was agreed that each country should adopt and be guided by a sustainable development strategy, which would be the guideline for their development1.
  It was envisaged to harmonize the policies implemented in the direction of economic development, social justice and protection of the environment.
 Time has shown that such a policy is much more difficult to implement in practice, no real progress has been made globally, as the goal of ensuring high rates of economic growth at the national level is far more important than the efforts to ensure the other two components.
As a result, if in 1992 compared to 2014 2 growth of about 68% of the global economy was registered, on the other hand, an unprecedented 7.26 billion 3 growth of the population in 2014. 1992 Compared to 5.5 billion, the operating models continued to pose a greater threat to the environment.
 1970 compared to 2008 Global biodiversity has shrunk by about 28% 4, and about 2/3 of the ecosystem services needed by humanity are in decline.
 Carbon dioxide emissions in 2011 1990 increased by 56.1% compared to 6.
 All this increases the risks of climate change with all the possible negative consequences.
Such statistics as in 2008-2010. The financial and economic crisis forced the international community to resume discussions on changing the modern economic paradigm.
One of the most frequently discussed topics was the introduction of the principles of "green" economy by countries as a means of reducing resources and combating climate change, ie, the need to use economic tools to overcome the existing problems was emphasized.
http:
//data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD/countries. 3 World Development Indicators.
 Population dynamics 2.1, The World Bank, 2015, http.
//wdi.worldbank.org/table/2.1.Resilient Planet.
 A future worth choosing ”. NY.
 United Nations, 2012, p. 19.6 World Development Indicators.
  Trends in greenhouse gas emissions 3.9, The World Bank, 2015, http.
//wdi.worldbank.org/table/3.9. On the global platform, this idea was first discussed at the intergovernmental level in 2005. In the 5th Ministerial Conference on Environment և Development.
Later, in 2012, in the UN Rio + 20 Sustainable Development Summit Declaration 1, it was already clearly stated that the "green" economy is a path based on actions leading to sustainable development.
  In other words, one of the cornerstones of the new paradigm of global development in the international arena is the transition to a "green" economy as a way to solve growing environmental problems and harmonious economic growth.
According to the United Nations Environment Program Report 2, the "green" economy is an economic system that leads to increased human well-being, social justice, while significantly reducing environmental risks and resource scarcity.
Economic entities are guided by the following principles when making investment decisions within this system.1. Reduction of carbon emissions 2. pollution, 2. Expansion of energy և resource efficiency, 3. loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services.
From the study of numerous publications, it can be concluded that in the conditions of "green" economy, investment priority is given to the following sectors: technologies և industrial processes, բարել improved waste management,։ improved water supply.
These investments should be accompanied by public spending support that will stimulate investment in these areas, thus creating a favorable environment.
  That is, environmental or framework policy measures should target, in particular, "green" innovations, public procurement, and tax system reforms.
  And Reform ”, UNEP, 2010, p. 3, դիտարկում Author's observations. whereas, this process should be accompanied by the introduction of appropriate standards ողական control system և raising awareness among consumers և Producers.
Accordingly, the scope of the "green" economy can be schematically represented by the following diagram: "Green" investments Sectors: Renewable energy, Low carbon transport, Energy efficient structures, Ecotourism, Sustainable, prosperous, green Consumers և Producers  Green's jobs  Green's Commodity Agriculture և Forest management  Sustainable fish farming  Clean technologies և Industrial processes բարել Improved waste management  Improved water supply 1 The left-hand side presents the directions of environmental-creating or framework policy;
  As a result, "green" jobs will be created in the economy, "green" products will be produced.
 Moreover, in this context, the concepts or types of activities characterized by the "green" feature lead to carbon emissions, pollution reduction, energy "expansion of resource efficiency", biodiversity, as well as the prevention of loss of ecosystem services.
As a result of the analysis of the program-legal field of the Republic of Armenia, we can conclude that the elements of the "green" economy are included in a number of sectoral strategic-program documents - in the legal acts. in particular, in comprehensive planning documents, such as the 2014 perspective development plan of the Republic of Armenia. Strategic program, RA Government 2014-2017 the program.
 Among the sectoral documents are the concept of creating innovative financial and economic mechanisms in the field of nature protection (2013), the RA Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (Expertise) (2014), the RA National Energy Saving և National Renewable Energy Program (2007) and a number of others. industry documents.
At the same time, with the support of various international development organizations in Armenia, a number of programs are being implemented in the mentioned spheres.
  We can mention the EU Eastern Partnership program, numerous sectoral investment programs of the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The analysis of the experience of the countries shows that the process of introducing the principles of "green" economy is characterized by a number of problems and obstacles in different spheres.
From the point of view of the general policy, the existence of political will is considered a necessary condition for such reforms in order to ensure the continuity of the initiated processes and to make them successful.
  Moreover, different dimensions of cooperation with international organizations, as well as scientific research can be a catalyst in advancing these processes.
  It is very important to provide ecological education from an early age in order to develop responsible consumer-production behavior among the population.
The analysis of the legislative field in the Republic of Armenia shows that the modernization of environmental legislation is extremely important, including through the legal framework of the Strategic Environmental Assessment, environmental use, revision of environmental fees, introduction of ecosystem service fee systems, etc.
  The review of environmentally inefficient subsidies provided by the state, the introduction of a "green" public procurement and eco-labeling system are also considered to be components of the system.
In terms of the economy, there are a number of difficulties in combining the priority of economic development on the one hand, and the mining industry և pure agricultural tourism on the other.
 It is still necessary to take steps to introduce the principles of "green" transport, to regulate the spheres of fish farming, seed import, use of pesticides, to develop, to adopt standards promoting the introduction of "green" technologies, and technical regulations.
In order to ensure the implementation of such reforms, it is necessary to identify financial needs through sectoral research.
Currently, the main programs in the field are implemented in cooperation with international donor organizations.
In this regard, taking into account the large role of the private sector in these processes, as most investments must be made by private organizations, it is necessary to use lending schemes to finance private investment, financing mechanisms that will allow combining economic benefits with environmental considerations. .
Thus, it can be concluded that Armenia is already involved in international development processes; the country is undergoing reforms in relevant directions, but the priority directions, especially in terms of environmental policy-making at the program level, review the relevant legislative framework, as well as identify relevant priorities and provide targeted assistance. To conduct relevant studies, to assess the potential of the country, and then, based on the needs of the given stage of development, to define the country's priorities for the implementation of the principles of "green" economy in the relevant strategic or conceptual document.
TRANSITION OF "GREEN" ECONOMY AS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTLusine Harutyunyan PRECONDITION Keywords: sustainable development, "green" economy, framework policy, investments.
