STUDY OF ARAGATS MOUNTAIN PALEORELIEF AND GROUNDWATER DISTRIBUTION
  Despite the considerable volume of scientific and production work carried out in the area, many problems, such as the Selavmastara floodplain on the left bank of the Akhuryan River, remain unresolved and need further study.
  These relate to the concentration of groundwater flows (ancient sites), their spatial location, the determination of the main directions of flow, the cost ratio, the correlation between modern և old (buried) watersheds, and finally the impact of new water intakes as well as existing water intakes [1].
Taking into account the results of new scientific-research studies, the data of previously made hydrogeological (mainly drilling), geophysical-hydrological materials were processed and generalized.
 A map of regional water-repellent layer (paleorelief) has been constructed for the Aragats massif (Fig. 1).
 Based on the obtained results, groundwater flows have been expressed, which are unloaded, especially in the upper reaches, and will play an important role in the water supply of the mentioned regions [2].
Based on the decoding of the materials of the aerial-space photography, the separate volcanic faults and streams of the hydro-geological conditions of the basin were studied.
  Based on the analysis of the preliminary data of the materials, separate hydro-geological sections were made (Figure 1), which made it possible to find out the typical characteristics for the discovery of the groundwater of the area.
The main volume of field work is geophysical studies.
Given the properties of the hydro-geological structure of the site, the geophysical surveys for the mapping of the terrain were carried out by electro-exploratory method, using a variety of vertical electro-probing (UEZ).
Pt = f (h) curves measured in field conditions describe the change in the electrical resistance of rocks according to depth.
1. Regional water-repellent relief lines in absolute marks, 2. The main ways of movement of centralized groundwater flows (ancient), 3. modern surface watershed, 4. regional buried watershed, 5. buried (catchment) pool, 6. submersible contact of water-repellent rocks, 7. sources, 8. Hydrogeological և geophysical section route (profile), 9. an area where the inversion of modern buried terrain is determined.
Map 1. Aragats Regional Water Basin Relief (2013) Quantitative elaboration of field graphs with the help of theoretical curves made it possible to determine the spatial distribution of rocks և in particular, the depth of the aquifer և the structure of its relief.
If we take into account the fact that similar work has been done on the slopes of Aragats massif by Armenology in the past, then the data processing Ջ generalizations make up a considerable volume in the studies.
According to the preliminary results of the studies, work has been done to adjust the boundaries of the main directions of the cracks in the volcanic rocks ընդ the boundaries of the expansion sections of the watercourses.
Mathematical modeling is designed to address the impact of different expected (projected) water intake costs (concentrations) on centralized sources or existing water intakes, to identify other groundwater dynamics issues [3].
Based on complex studies: a) the sites that are hydrogeologically promising in terms of search for concentrated groundwater flows have been identified, b) 1 has been built.
A map of the 50,000-scale regional aquifer (paleorelief) to determine the depth flow distribution of the study area. for the purpose of decision) [4].
1. glacial formations, 2. robbery occurrences, 3. different lava flows, 4. lavas, porous water pipes, 5. regional water repellent relief 6. Specific electrical resistance of rocks according to UEZ (Ohm.m), 7. UEZ points, 8. Surface water movement route (profile), Karkachun river basinFigure 1. Lithological-geological section in A-A 'section, scale 1.
75000, 2013Airospace geophysical surveys carried out on the western and southern slopes of the Aragats massif by electro-exploration methods have led to the following conclusions: on hydroelectric reconnaissance to solve electro-reconnaissance methods (electrically electrified) The map of the ancient relief of the studied area (1).
50,000 scale), which coincides with the regional water-repellent layer of the area.
  Therefore, the obtained results allow to make conclusions about the spatial distribution of groundwater in the area (according to the depth և surface), - ancient sites have been identified, which are promising sites for groundwater detection, particularly through boreholes, - the areas where The modern ջր old watersheds do not coincide with each other, the groundwater in these areas has different geographical distribution, which can be used for the correct design of exploration works.
Literature геологии Арм. USSR, Yerevan, 1956.
2. Minasyan R., Study of underground volcanic areas geophysical methods. Moscow, 1989.
Nagori Armenia, Yerevan, 2003.
(according to the current geophysical studies), student records EGU, № 2, Yerevan, 1999, p. 98-104.
Argine Babajanyan ARAGATS MOUNTAIN PALEORELIEF AND GROUNDWATER DISTRIBUTION STUDY AEROSPERATIC AND AGRICULTURAL HYDROGENICS
