OPERATIONAL-INVESTIGATIVE MEASURES AND FIXING PROBLEMS OF THEIR RESULTS Operative-intelligence activities 3
According to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the investigative body takes appropriate operative-investigative-criminal measures in order to identify the perpetrators of the crime, to prevent the crime, and the investigator is authorized to receive information on the criminal case with the materials prepared within his competence. as well as to give mandatory written instructions to the criminal investigation body on conducting operative-investigative measures with the materials prepared by him.
  This proves its important role in the investigation and detection of crimes.
The following measures may be taken during the operative-investigative activity: acquisition of operative information in the operative inquiry, external viewing, control of correspondence, postal, telegraphic և other messages, identification of the person, etc.
According to Article 34 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, by court decision internal monitoring, correspondence, postal, telegraphic և other programs, control of telephone conversations, provision of access to financial data, imitation of receiving or giving bribes, external inspection are operative. reconnaissance measures.
 The inclusion of the mentioned measures in the sphere of judicial control derives from the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, as well as from the international treaties ratified by the Republic of Armenia, which protect a person's personal and family life.
The court examines motions to apply investigative, operative-investigative actions ատիվ the application of coercive measures restricting the constitutional rights of a person, as well as appeals not only to the bodies of the investigating bodies, the investigator-prosecutor, but also to the decisions of the bodies carrying out operative-investigative actions.
  Moreover, not only judicial control but also prosecutorial control is exercised over operative-investigative activities, in particular, according to Part 2 of Article 35 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, the heads of operative-investigative bodies are obliged at the request of the prosecutor. provide him with the documents that are the basis for these events և other necessary information.
  However, it should be noted that after the first part of the mentioned article of the same law, it follows that the methods of organizing and carrying out operative-investigative actions are outside the sphere of prosecutorial control.
  We believe that the fact that the operative-investigative activity is in the sphere of "judicial" and "prosecutorial" control is a real guarantee for the protection of constitutional human rights.
The RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, which regulates the procedure for carrying out measures, does not contain structures for the protection of human rights, does not comply with international standards, as a result of which the rights of individuals are violated during the implementation of appropriate measures.
The European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court) has emphasized in its case law: "Legislation governing confidential means of surveillance must be clearly worded enough to properly guide citizens on the circumstances under which public authorities have the right to exercise confidential, potentially dangerous interference with their privacy and correspondence." means "1.
1 http:
//hudoc.echr.coe.int. The European Court of Human Rights has stated in its judgment: "The Court has improved the following minimum safeguards in its case-law on secret control measures, which must be laid down in law to prevent abuse of power: The nature of the crimes that can be used as a basis for obtaining an insect permit, the identification of the categories of persons whose telephone communication can be monitored, the limitation of the scope of telephone communication control, the existence of a mandatory process for examining, using or storing the received data;
 The RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities does not contain some of the above-mentioned guarantees.
 Let's look at each of them separately. According to Article 31 of the mentioned law, internal monitoring, correspondence, postal, telegraphic և control of other messages, control of telephone conversations, provision of access to financial data գաղտն secret control of financial transactions can be held only if the person: on whom they are to be conducted, is suspected of committing a serious, especially serious crime; if there is solid evidence, it is impossible to obtain the necessary information to carry out the operative-investigative measure in order to carry out the tasks assigned to him by the body.
 However, this statement is not clear in our opinion, as the circle of persons against whom operative-investigative measures can be carried out is not mentioned.
The new draft criminal procedure law has filled that gap. Pursuant to Article 250 2 2, secret internal investigations, external surveillance, surveillance of correspondence այլ other non-digital communications, digital surveillance, including telephone communications, may be carried out: 1) to a person about whom there is evidence of an alleged crime.2) to the accused.3) to a person about whom there is a reasonable suspicion that he or she has regularly or directly communicated with the accused .
4) in respect of a legal entity in respect of which there is a reasonable presumption that its activities may be wholly or partly managed, supervised or actually directed by the persons referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Part.
In some cases, the time limit for operative-investigative measures will not be clearly regulated by the legislation.
 According to Article 284 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the term of validity of a court decision is calculated from the date of its establishment; it cannot exceed six months, unless otherwise provided by the decision.
 And according to Article 39 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activity, the calculation of the term of the decision on holding an operative-investigative measure starts from the day of its adoption; it cannot be more than 2 months.
 Internal monitoring, external inspection, control of correspondence, postal, telegraphic և other messages, control of telephone conversations, provision of access to financial data գաղտն secret control of financial transactions The total period of implementation of operative-investigative measures may not exceed 12 months.
  The term of the decision may be extended in accordance with the procedure established by law for the adoption of a decision on conducting an operative-investigative measure.
The current Code does not define the total period of validity of the decision, in which case a problem will arise if the court, based on Article 284, Part 7 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, sets the period of execution of measures for more than 12 months.
The issue of limiting the time of events, such as court control over the execution of events, regular review of measures has been regulated by the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, according to Article 250 of which the total period of secret investigation against the same person may not exceed twelve months. may even extend the permit for a period not exceeding three months2.
If the term of the current legislation is decided by the court at its discretion (since the law only stipulates that it should not exceed one month, unless otherwise provided by the decision), the draft specifies the term, which can be given to the RA Criminal Procedure Code. A collection of scientific articles dedicated to the issues of the project.
 "RA Bar Association", 2014, page 134.
no longer than.
  By setting a total term of twelve months, it is possible to consider the rationale for continuing to take action when considering each motion for extension.
The next issue, which, in our opinion, is urgent, concerns the fixing of the results of operative-investigative measures.
  According to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the data obtained as a result of operative-investigative measures are not evidence.
 They can be used as evidence only after being checked in accordance with the rules established by the Criminal Procedure Code.
According to Article 40 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activity, the results of operative-investigative activity, which were obtained in the manner prescribed by law, are evidence.
 There is a contradiction between the two laws. "
 According to Part 6 of Article 9 of the RA Law on Legal Acts, all other laws of the Republic of Armenia in the field of legal relations of code regulation must comply with the codes.
  In this case, the Code of Procedure will apply.
  In case of non-evidence of the results of operative-investigative activity (as they are evidence together with other documents) it is necessary to carry out additional investigative-judicial actions in order to obtain the same data, which not only lead to excessive resource expenditure, but in many cases They are ineffective.
  The data obtained as a result of secret investigative actions under the draft have probative value in criminal proceedings.
In connection with the justification for considering the results of the action as evidence, we can propose the following justifications.1. Judicial control is exercised over operative-investigative activities և Prosecutorial control.
  According to Article 189 of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, the investigation is carried out with the written consent of the investigator.
 The investigative body is authorized to carry out only the secret investigative actions mentioned in the assignment.
  The amendment envisaged by the Code ensures the control over the operative-investigative activity of the prosecutor.
 Both judicial and prosecutorial oversight guarantee the protection of human rights, legitimate interests, as well as the results of operational and investigative measures as evidence.
2. The next possible preconditions are defined by the draft, in particular they are the clarification of the circle of persons against whom the operative-investigative activity can be carried out, the limitation of the terms of their implementation.
3. In our view, a possible precondition is the fact that the draft defines the possibility for the court to continue the regular monitoring activities by extending the period of implementation of the measures.
During the operative-investigative actions, the rights of individuals are restricted; the relevant measures are carried out in secret, which deprives the citizens of the opportunity to independently assess the grounds for restricting their rights and freedoms in cases when they were not informed by operative or investigative bodies. to make a decision about them.
According to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, appeals against the decisions of the bodies carrying out operative-investigative actions օրին legal և unreasonable actions can be submitted to the court by the suspect, the accused, the lawyer, the victim, the participants of the criminal proceedings, other persons whose rights and legal interests have been violated by those decisions. and actions, նրանց if their complaints were not upheld by the prosecutor.
 The existence of an appeals institute is a guarantee for the protection of human rights and the legality of operative-investigative actions.
According to Article 40 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Operative-Investigative Activities", if during the implementation of operative-investigative measures are obtained such information, materials, documents, which do not refer to the person against whom those measures are carried out, they are not evidence; they are subject to destruction, unless: 1) the operative-investigative bodies acted in good faith, և 2) the information received contains information on a serious or particularly serious crime or its preparation, և 3) that information For this purpose, this law allows the implementation of operative-investigative measures3.
We believe that in case of envisaged exceptions, there are no necessary guarantees for the protection of human rights and interests.
  In particular, it is possible that in order to obtain such information, operative measures provided by law are carried out, for which a court permission is required.
  And in the case defined by law, the information concerning another person is obtained within the limits of the permission given in another case, which limits the possibility of protection of the rights of the person about whom information was obtained, as no separate permission is given for these events.
  The person is deprived of his right to appeal the court decision on holding operative measures.
  Also, the data obtained during the events turn into inadmissible evidence.
The Spanish Criminal Procedure Code provided the following solution to this problem. In case of finding relevant information, the body conducting the event submits a petition to the court for permission to conduct secret investigative actions in connection with a newly discovered or planned crime.
In our opinion, the issue of conscientious action of the operative-investigative bodies gives rise to controversy, as the operative-investigative actions are secret;
  In this case, it is difficult to find out whether the bodies are honest or not.
Summing up the work, we offer: 1. To consider the results of the operative-investigative measures carried out after the initiation of the criminal case as evidence, for the conduct of which the court has given permission, that is, there are sufficient guarantees.
2. In case of obtaining information about another person during the events carried out with the permission of the court, apply to the court: 3 RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, adopted or adopted on October 22, 2007.
To obtain a permit to carry out operative-investigative measures in connection with crimes, 3. Clarify the circle of persons against whom the measures can be taken.
  Pursuant to Article 31 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, internal monitoring, correspondence, postal, telegraphic և control of other programs, control of telephone conversations, provision of access to financial data գ secret control of financial transactions can be carried out only if the person They are suspected of committing a serious, especially serious crime. If there is solid evidence that it is impossible to obtain the information necessary for the implementation of the tasks assigned to it by the body in another way.
  The lack of a clear circle of persons can in many cases lead to the fact that operative-investigative measures are carried out against the person without necessity, the registration does not imply any specific judicial status of the person.
Tiruhi Vardanyan PROBLEMS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF OPERATIVE-INVESTIGATIVE MEASURES AND FIXING OF RESULTS Keywords: operative-investigative measures, time limit, definition of human rights, definition of human rights.
