WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION IN 1871 THE COMMUNITY OF PARIS The Western's Soviet historiography on the creation, activity and significance of the Paris Commune has left many studies as a legacy.
  Their authors mainly used the participation and role of the Paris labor.
  The issue of women's involvement in this historic event has been relatively little covered.
  Many scholars view the participation of women in the Paris Commune as a feminist movement, a liberation struggle for the right to vote, for social and legal equality.
In the second half of the 1860s, the new impetus for the workers' movement in France, apart from many social factors, was due to political circumstances, including the formation of a number of secret organizations, the First International, which plunged the Second Empire into crisis.
In order to stabilize the internal situation in the country, Napoleon III և his government launched a war against Prussia, thus trying to strengthen their position և to prevent the impending revolution.
  However, the basis for the creation of the Paris Commune was not only the Franco-Prussian War, but also, on the one hand, the escalation of the contradictions between the workers and, on the other hand, the spread of the ideas of the First International.
The leaders of the Paris Commune were intellectuals and politicians with revolutionary moods, and the driving force was workers and craftsmen.
  In the struggle against the Versailles revolutionaries, women actively supported them.
The year 1871 was a precedent for the Paris Commune. The events of March 18, 1945, when women's childhood was a turning point in ensuring the victory of the workers.
 On that day, at the behest of Prime Minister Thierry, troops's troops and police marched on the workers' hilltop town of Montmartre in Paris.
 At dawn the workers noticed the soldiers, and soon the people, the majority of whom were women and children, closed all the roads leading to Montmartre.
  The women surrounded the soldiers of the 88th Infantry Regiment, urging them to join the workers.
 After a moment's hesitation, the soldiers agreed, and when General Leconte ordered several times to fire on the crowd, they refused to obey.
 The people greeted them with shouts of "Long live the ordinary people", "Long live the rear", and the soldiers of the National Guard arrested Generals Leconte and Clement Toma and shot them.
 On March 19, the people raised the Red Flag over the Ratouche in Paris as a sign of victory, as the Thierry government had fled Paris.
  Thus began the Paris Commune.
On this occasion, Lissagare noted that women spoke for the first time, as in the days of the Great Revolution.
  Later, one of the female figures of the Commune, L. Michelle noted. "They covered the money of the cannons with their breasts" 2.
1871 Emphasizing the peculiarity of the March 18 events, one of the far-sighted figures of the time, Elise Reclu, wrote in a letter to one of her friends on March 27: "It seems to me that March 18 is the most important year in the history of France - 1792. starting from August 10.
  In addition to ensuring the victory of the workers of the Republic, it was also the basis for the formation of the Commune ”1.
In the Paris Commune, women were involved in cooperative workshops, in which the future commune Sophie Poirier was active.
  Under his leadership, 75-80 women were employed in the Montmartre workshop.
  Later, Louisa Michelle took over the management of these workshops.
Despite the scarcity of our information about women's unions, it is known that in Paris they had a great reputation and influence.
  Due to the discussion of issues of vital importance in these companies, women not only became skilled in the political arena, but also renounced their conciliatory position and utopian views.
After the siege, the women learned to work together.
 Lucia Michelle used to say: "People get only what they take" 2.
The Montmartre Committee of Women Citizens became the center of women's struggle, demanding more active military action, decisive action against speculators, and even searches of their homes.
  The National Guard և 11th District Police Department received an order to "arrest all the women who were doing their shameful craft in the city streets" 3.
The women submitted petitions and petitions to the government, waiting for universal social changes.
In the Commune, they demanded the opening of specialized women's schools, the release of working-class families from church patronage, and the release of nuns from hospitals and prisons.
 By the decision of the commune, the first school of applied arts for girls was opened, the church was separated from the state, the school from the church, the church property was declared national property.
The commune undertook measures such as postponing the rent, vacating vacant apartments after the Versailles bombing, handing over food to families who had lost their bread, returning pledged goods, opening public canteens, re-establishing extramarital affairs, and forcing children born out of wedlock to be born out of wedlock. Opening of kindergartens for children led by women.
The proclamation of the commune caused great excitement among the women, nevertheless, the petty bourgeoisie, a day after the Versailles bombing, turned to the women, offering to go to Versailles so as not to miss the last chance for reconciliation.
 The next day, the 10,000-pound women in parliament in Ratusha announced their intention to go to Versailles.
 In contrast to 1879 The armed women who invaded Versailles on October 5-6, these times were unarmed.
  On the afternoon of April 4, the women demanded that the government "no longer supply explosives", in response to which the Versailles explosives forced them to disperse.
According to the April 6 issue of "La Social" newspaper, one of the leaders of the women's struggle announced that about 700 women citizens are going to leave the Square of the Agreement to fight in the ranks of men.
  On April 8, the Women's Union called for a struggle, announcing: "Citizens, the situation is thrown, we need to win or die."
  This statement was followed by the creation of the Women's Union for the Protection of Paris and the Care of Patients4.
The initiator of the first women's union was Jules Allix.
  This union, headed by 12 women, was under the auspices of an organization called the Social Commune.
The Central Committee of the Second Women's Union included only E. from the members of the previous union. Dmitry!
  The latter was joined by real workers, who were also members of the International.
 They were Natalie Lemmel, Alina Jacqueline և Octavia Tardiff.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P.
The program of the Women's Union reflected the views of the International, pursuing two main goals: 1. The fight against Versailles, 2. The establishment of a new social class.
The charter adopted by the founding assembly of the Women's Union on April 11 provided for the convening of daily meetings, a report on the work done, and the mobilization of all members of the union at any time of the day or night, all members of which were required to wear a red scarf.
The program of the Women's Union was a program of struggle, it was formulated as follows: "Assist in the work of governmental commissions in the maintenance of hospitals, the organization of canteens, and the protection of barricades."
 For that purpose, the charter of the union envisaged raising funds for the purchase of oil, recruiting sisters of charity, women fighters, and, if necessary, providing weapons by drawing lots.
In fact, the military program, no matter how important it may be, was only a part of the political struggle of the Women's Union.
An explosion at the Gro-Cayu gunpowder plant on May 1 necessitated dressing the victims and providing housing for the homeless, and the Committee Secretary, Water, was assigned to seize the apartments of police officers who had fled to Versailles.
 This fact suggests that the Commune appreciated, supported the struggle of the Women's Union, worked closely with them, which was mentioned in the statement issued on April 14. "A serious organization of these revolutionary elements (women) is able to provide effective and magical support to the Paris Commune, which is not possible without the help and support of the Commune."
  The commune provided facilities to the citizens, gave them the opportunity to occupy halls for the holding of meetings, and financed the printing of posters.
 Then, for the first time, women began to formally exercise the powers of municipal councilors.
  They also guaranteed the citizens for the fulfillment of various tasks and responsibilities.
  Women helped seize abandoned workshops and vacant apartments, carried out formal assignments, applied for admission benefits, distributed money, provided information on the morals of women who wanted to become nurses, and so on.
Taking advantage of the temporary political passivity of women, the bourgeoisie declared on May 3 that "the women of Paris are demanding peace for the sake of the homeland, for the sake of honor," but on May 6 the women denied that claim, declaring: "No, it is not the workers of Paris who demand peace, but war until the end. Paris will not retreat as long as the flag of the future is in its hands."
The Women's Union was full of courage, convinced that the Commune, being the bearer of the revolutionary-international principles of the nations, kept the embryo of the social revolution.
 The women emphasized that they would prove to France, to the whole world, that in the conditions of extreme danger in the barricades and fortresses of Paris, in case of the invasion of the city of Versailles, they, following the example of their brothers, would give their lives for the protection of the Commune.
 They urged each other not to lose vigilance against the hostages of the Commune, and the women of Montmartre offered to execute the Archbishop of Paris while Auguste Blanc was in prison.
 The women demanded the arrest of the women of the rioting police in Versailles and Paris, calling for a struggle against the bourgeois newspapers that demoralized public opinion.
The Labor Production և Exchange Commission was flooded with women's demands, which clarified the issues of raising the prices of their own products and the employment of 340 women in the fifth district.
  The commune, taking part, organized cooperative workshops, taking steps to hand over the management to women.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
The Women's Union sought to ensure wider rights for women citizens, who believed that capitalist exploitation would disappear along with the widespread use of cooperative workshops.
  Elizaveta Dmitryna noted that social progress is not possible without a political revolution, for which the political organizations of the workers, that is, the International, serve as a weapon.
  Therefore, the organization of cooperative workshops run by the Women's Union was just the beginning.
  In a letter to the Labor Committee, Elizaveta Dmitrana warned that the threatening rise in prices and the closure of jobs for no apparent reason could lead to the resumption of women's former passivity, which would be disastrous for the revolution.
  This letter envisaged the involvement of women workers in the ranks of the International through the mediation of the Women's Union.
  However, this program remained on paper.
On May 21, Natalie Lemmel, Alina Jacqueline, Blanche Leffer, Elizabeth Dmitry, and others urged women workers to come to the Fourth District to establish federal workers' institutions.
  On the same day, however, the counter-revolutionaries of Versailles entered Paris, with whom the women fought back to back.
  The number of women who wanted to fight against the enemy was so large that the commander of the 12th Legion had to form the first platoon of women.
The editor of "La Wenger" newspaper told. "I have lived through three revolutions, but for the first time I witnessed a revolution in which women and children fought so bravely.
  You feel that this revolution is really their revolution, by defending it, they are defending their own future ”1.
Following the development of the "Bloody Week" events, we see how actively women participated in the armed struggle, and most importantly, how severely they were punished for that.
After the barricade battles, the soldiers of Versailles took very cruel revenge on all the participants of the battle, promising "to spare no one, no women, no children, no old men, because in Paris only the vile ones remained and it was necessary to cleanse them from the French."
  Everywhere the "trial" was limited to the identification of the accused, it was not allowed to have a defendant.
  The accused were directly classified, divided into "ordinary people" who were sent to the Versailles prison, and "convicts" who were shot on the spot.
The big bourgeoisie sentenced about 13,700 communists, including 1,051 women, to torture, exile, imprisonment, and forced labor.
 Louisa Michelle came to the court with a proud attitude, announcing: "I do not want to defend myself, I do not want to be defended. If you are not a coward, kill me."
 The "cowardly" judges, however, did not show the courage to execute him, only to deport him.
Natalie Lemmel and Marie Leroy were exiled.
  Anna Korvin-Krukovskaya was sentenced in absentia.
  Anna Pustovoitavan was released from prison only through the mediation of the International Red Cross.
After serving their sentences, however, the Communards did not give up their principles and beliefs, returning, they continued their political struggle in the International և labor movement.
1 Brja Gj., Dotri Gj., Tersena Gj., S. 211-212.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Baha I.A., Paris Commune 1871.
 Время, события, люди., Москва, 1981, с. 75. Nelli Baghdasaryan WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION IN 1871 PARIS COMMUNE Keywords: Paris Commune, women's political struggle, workers, labor movement, International.
