FEATURES OF ACTIVITIES OF REGIONAL JOURNALISTS (on the example of Lori marz) For the media.
Journalists who report only to the republican mass media.
Only the number of correspondents from the Lori region to the republican mass media is not large.
  They cooperate with the information agencies of the republic or correspond to several mass media of the republic.
  They prepare mainly event, rarely publicist or analytical materials, which are mainly about some cultural events.
Journalists who simultaneously cooperate with և´ local and և´ republican media.
In addition to working for the local media, they mainly act as their own correspondents for some republican media outlet.
 The role of regional journalists is very important in providing regional media in the republican news. "The institute of its own correspondents is very important and necessary, which allows providing a wide geography of information in the publications.
  As a rule, reporters should be more experienced, well-developed, have mastered various topics, as they should in principle be able to cover any topic that will interest the TV company, from music to politics.
In the field of information, in addition to its own correspondents, the work of special correspondents is also highly valued.
  Special correspondents can work both abroad and in the country 1 Yeritsyan S., Television specialties. From Education to Mastery, Yerevan, 2007, p. 97.
in different regions.
 Some media outlets send special correspondents to this or that place to cover an article.
Unlike their own correspondents, there are no special correspondents in Lorumarz.
Compared to their own correspondents, special correspondents have certain peculiarities.
  Their own correspondents are journalists who are familiar with the environment, the events that take place, the problems, who are close to them and are constantly related to them, while the special correspondents are "fresh-eyed". They may immediately notice new topics, issues, faces worthy of coverage, or events that may have seemed normal to their correspondent.
  In addition, it is very likely that a journalist working in a small region will be constrained for some reason, unwilling to cover a topic or raise a problem (everyone in a small region knows everyone's some kind of self-interested, friendly or otherwise dependent on each other) Avoiding encountering any obstacles.
  My special correspondent is the most "released".
 He can easily come and cover any topic without being afraid of possible "dangers".
Of course, it is not necessary for the special correspondent to come from another place to another region to prepare material.
 It is possible that the special correspondent lives in the given settlement.
 In this case, he differs from his correspondent by the choice of topics, the content of the materials.
 He more often presents analyzes, investigations, follows in the footsteps of serious problems and topics.
3. Journalists who work only for local media.
 They work in the media of both the regional center and various sports communities.
  Some of them, in addition to their media, report to the Vanadzor media, some work only for their media outlet.
The journalists of the region, who are also their own correspondents of the republican mass media, have a wider range of content. Their work is more in line with the journalistic laws developed by theorists, they are more in-depth and comprehensive, thematic, problematic materials predominate.
  In these respects, they are inferior to the works of the second group of journalists.
It can be noticed that the information provided by the media of the region is not diverse and diverse.
  This is often explained by the fact that the events taking place in a relatively small region are not many, they appear in the center of attention of almost all local media at the same time.
 In these conditions, the work of the periodical press of the region becomes more difficult in terms of efficiency, as the frequency of their publication does not allow them to be the first to present this or that event.
  Here, the trump card of the newspapers becomes only the analysis of the events already known to the audience, drawing new conclusions, finding causal connections, etc.
 However, the newspapers of the region do not stand out.
 The less in-depth analyzes in the pages of the newspapers, compared to the other media, are dominated by problematic or thematic materials.
  However, they are mostly not reassuring and credible. "Examining the ten names of the press published today in Vanadzor, it is not difficult to see that in the newspapers of a news nature the dry information prevails, the topics are molded."
  Most of the information provided by the TV companies contains local event news or thematic materials and analyzes.
  Against the background of general uniformity and coverage of the same events, the materials provided by the TV companies may differ slightly by their own choice of different problems and topics, by the way they are presented and analyzed.
  Here, however, journalistic work is lagging behind emotionally.
 The reasons for the uniformity of information and the lack of material become more excuses for journalists.
The raw materials for the analysis or preparation of a thematic material become topics and problems that have been beaten and discussed many times (in order to notice them, it is not necessary to have a journalist's eye and smell, for example, environmental pollution, dilapidated roads, etc.).
 Moreover, the analyzes of these topics are also incomplete, incomplete and comprehensive.
 The journalist is satisfied only with the preparation of a specific material, presents several opinions and is limited to that.
  It is still unknown what happens to the problem after the publication of the material.
The so-called sharp eye of a journalist is either absent or rarely encountered.
  The journalist must be constantly vigilant, in addition to the obvious and the usual, he must be able to see the deepest, the footnote.
  A journalist who feels a lack of material can never be justified. material and spectacular topic can be found everywhere.
2 Only "Lori Marz" newspaper is published twice a week.
3 Interview with journalist Hovhannes Sardaryan.
The biggest shortcoming of many of the regional journalists currently operating in the regions (and not only) is the lack of literacy, intellect, and a broad horizon, which is the main shortcoming of the professional sphere.
  Most of the journalists working in the local media did not receive relevant professional education.
 Some educated journalists have the impression that they have forgotten about constant reading, development, improvement, walking with time.
 The problem is that the specialists with low salaries, narrow job opportunities and stagnation in the field are leaving the region.
 Given all this, it is safe to say that local media would provide more valuable information, analysis, and other types of investigative materials.
Little attention is paid to some events taking place in the region, which deserve media attention.
  For example, there is little material in the local news about the scientific achievements of the region's scientists (with the exception of "Lori Marz" և "Vanadzor State University" (formerly "Apaga Pedaghazh") newspapers).
Large-scale events are not localized.
  These can be the most important events in the world or in the republic: the adoption or amendment of laws, the signing of international treaties, spreading diseases, epidemics.
 Combining the opinions of specialists and their own analysis on all this, it is possible to make predictions, conclusions, which will be more interesting and valuable than constantly raising a few beaten issues of everyday life.
Consider, for example, one of the current and much discussed international issues, the Russia-Turkey disagreements.
 The conflict is maturing day by day, new events are recorded every day, along with the problem, the names of Armenia and the Armenian army are regularly mentioned in all Russian media.
  The local media of the region is not interested in this at all.
 What danger can be posed to the region if hostilities start, how likely is the start of hostilities, what can (or can not) Armenia do, how will all this affect the country's economy, security, a few months? How will Russia use the agreement on the establishment of a common air defense system signed with Armenia before, will we once again become a toy in the hands of the great powers, etc.?
 Thousands of questions arise, the answers to which would be desirable to find in the local media.
Interviewing more than 10 journalists operating in Lori region, we tried to single out the peculiarities of local media, regional journalism, development tendencies, the reasons for the shortcomings of journalistic work, etc.
 The opinions of the journalists coincided in some places, there were opposite opinions, different views.
Some of the journalists considered the first feature of the local media to be the much smaller and limited audience compared to the republican media.
 This circumstance has "positive" and "negative" sides.
 This allows you to more easily recognize the audience, find out their interests and requirements.
People living in a small region are mostly faced with the same problems, they are of general interest to the audience.
  The work of the republican media is a bit more complicated in this respect, as it deals with people living in different regions, mainly with different problems, requirements, habits and interests.
 The Republican media have a serious task to meet the demands of all people living in different parts of the country as much as possible.
On the other hand, there are few topics in the small region, although Sergo Yeritsyan rightly notes that where there is human life, there can be no public information 4.
 In fact, the topics are everywhere և constantly.
 Here, the journalist's work is more emphasized by the fact that his eye must be able to find, notice and raise this or that topic in a small region, which is urgent and significant.
Journalist Nelli Davtyan, who has worked for many years in various local and national media, mentioned this. "In my opinion, there is no news that is not interesting, the possible thing is to find words to present that news, to arouse interest.
  My teacher, uncle Hamlet Davtyan, told me that the report should be so interesting that the housewife who was doing the dishes in the kitchen, hearing the first words of the report, would come from the kitchen to the living room and forget to watch the video without sitting on the sofa. From the first word to the last, 4 See Yeritsyan S., Television specialties. From Education to Mastery, Yerevan, 2007, p. 96.
To be absorbing and interesting, the reader must know about all the things he has forgotten while reading the material.
 The journalist should write material when he really has something to say ”5.
Local media are wonderful schools for a journalist to learn.
 This is proved by almost all the journalists who will work in them.
  They started their way in the local media, then worked in various republican media outlets (H1 TV, Azatutyun RC, Shant TV, Kentron TV, Aravot, Asparez newspapers, etc.) .
The experience of the local media is very valuable, especially if the journalist is taking his first steps.
 This is a good platform to apply theoretical knowledge in practice.
  He has to find interesting topics, bright heroes, communicate with people, gather information, think about interesting methods and ways to provide that information in an interesting way.
 The first steps are possible not only from the content point of view, but also from the technical point of view. How to work with the camera, how to catch the microphone, choose the right shots, edit them, process the recording, choose the right and perceptible means of expression, spell, process the text, etc.
 The journalist learns to work in a team.
The journalist working in the media of the region is starting to master several new professions.
  After graduating from this school, it becomes quite easy for regional journalists to integrate into the work of the media with a larger audience.
  Nare Stepanyan, currently working for RFE / RL, is one of many journalists who began their careers in the local media. "Since I started my first TV steps in Vanadzor" MIG "TV company, I can clearly say that it was really a big school for me, where I learned the simplest things.
  Having worked for a local TV company for about 6 months, I gained a lot of experience and confidence to work in the republican media. ”6
Comparing the activities carried out in the local and republican mass media, the obstacles encountered, Nare Stepanyan mentioned:
  The reason was probably that I mainly covered event topics.
  I can not say the same about working for "Liberty" radio station, as 5 Interviews with journalist Nelli Davtyan.
6 Interview with journalist Nare Stepanyan.
that the regional event topics that will be of interest to my media are not so many, I mainly prepare author's materials, sometimes investigative.
  In the latter case, sometimes there are obstacles.
  As an example I can mention the case of Vanadzor Kimprom. The factory workers did not receive their salaries for months, they protested many times, while the factory management refused to meet with the media or comment.
  I have tried to get a comment from the management many times, but only once.
  What I have said proves that sometimes the relevant bodies are reluctant to give interviews, because I am referring to painful issues that they would not like to raise. ”7
It cannot be said that the information provided by the republican media shines with the variety of topics and issues raised, with impartiality.
  Journalist, TV commentator Lusine Sargsyan voiced such an opinion. "There are definitely many differences in the activities of regional and republican journalists -" complications, nuances ".
  In my opinion, the journalist working in the region is more free in choosing the topic and covering them.
Journalists working in the republican media, in my opinion, are more focused on the event materials.
 This, of course, is bad in the sense that the journalist mechanically focuses only on the upcoming events, forgets to "work his own brain".
  The republican mass media is not interested in the problems existing in the regions.
  Only in Vanadzor there are serious problems, which are beyond the scope of interest of the republican media ”8.
Many journalists mentioned that there is a constraint on providing information in the regions.
 There can be different reasons for this: indifference, fear, ignorance, etc. "Working in the capital in 1996-1998 և 2003-2005, I was in the" foundations "of Armenian journalism.
 Those were the times when the residents were still constrained, did not answer the journalists' questions, were not demanding in terms of protection of their rights.
  In this respect, the work of the republican media used to be even more complicated.
  Gradually the picture softened.
 Until now, however, in many regions (if not all) the atmosphere is the same due to fear and constraint.
  Some are afraid because of ignorance, they will not rule 7 In the same place.
8 Interview with journalist Lusine Sargsyan.
There is a new kind of fear formed in recent years, not to harm a relative working in the state, a relative or a relative. ”9
In small regions, the problems arising from "friendly" circles are more pronounced.
 The smaller the area, the more likely it is that everyone knows everyone.
  There are journalists who claim that they persistently try to ignore all possible acquaintances and friendships and provide as much objectivity as possible, however, this factor is a big obstacle, even if only in the way of gathering information.
 A large group of people are just afraid to talk about a problem, they can talk to the journalist with some juicy details and evidence on the topic, but only if the recorder is turned off.
 When it comes to shouting, people are just scared.
 Of course, there is no denying that there are people who are useful for speaking ((they may not always say what is needed և should be used to cover the subject, but it should be remembered that no information is ever superfluous) They are an inexhaustible source.
  It is natural that the larger the population, the more likely it is that there will be more "talking" people.
From another point of view, this can be an obstacle not only to the way of gathering information, depending on its providers, but also the journalist will be constrained by the thought of harming someone, try to avoid looking at reality with open eyes and asking the necessary questions or publishing the information gathered.
Some journalists put forward the opposite opinion that when everyone is familiar, it becomes easier to get information.
 Familiar people, already knowing the qualities of a journalist, trust him և provide the necessary information (if, of course, the qualities of a journalist are really inspiring).
The truth of these two opinions is not unambiguous; it can depend on different circumstances: the nature of the necessary information, the public position of the person providing that information, his mentality, temperament, the qualities of a journalist, the authority of the media outlet represented by the journalist, etc.
There is no need to talk about the objectivity of journalistic work for another obvious reason - sponsorship.
 It is clear that "you will not cut off the hand that feeds you."
  In the case of the region, the people responsible for the incidents and the causes of the problems are often identified 9 Interview with journalist Nelli Davtyan.
ները Media sponsorship sources, so instead of solving problems and exposing illegalities, the media often undertake the mission of uniform praise, open propaganda and dissemination of advertisements. "A regional journalist can freely choose a topic and cover it as objectively as possible only if he works in a media outlet that is not under its auspices, in our modern colloquial language, in many words, has no roof, does not represent the interests of any political force."
Summing up, let us mention that the peculiarities of the activity of the journalists of the region are conditioned by several objective and subjective reasons. It is more difficult to work with a small audience in a small region, the work of journalists hinders the constraints of the region to provide information, there are not many events in the region, so it becomes much more necessary to do your own analysis, new topics
  Local media is an irreplaceable journalism school for journalists.
Yana Yeghshatyan FEATURES OF ACTIVITIES OF REGIONAL JOURNALISTS Keywords: regional journalism, regional (local) media, own և special correspondents, small audience, objectivity, efficiency, professional education Summary.
