THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL ADAPTATION FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF PSYCHOLOGY Adaptation is a powerful characteristic of the biological system.
 It is represented at both phylogenetic and ontogenetic levels of development.
 Adaptation is the post-organic unity of the environment and the information coordination that facilitated the transition of ancient humanoids to a new level of development, Homo Sapiens adaptabilis, which և revealed the peculiarity of the development of civilization, the patterns of human socio-cultural, socio-political, economic strategies.
On the other hand, from the moment of birth, a person begins to adapt to the external environment, objects, people, changes in the outside world.
  The process of socialization accompanied by adaptation lasts from birth to death.
  It means that adaptation is an inseparable companion of his life.
The term adaptation is translated from Latin (adaptatio) և means adaptation.
 It was first used in the biological sciences, then in sociology, and at the end of the 19th century it was used in psychology.
  Man lives in three parallel, natural, social, caring environments, which forces him to adapt to those environments separately, and then to adapt to those adaptations.
 The scientific adaptation was first introduced and used by the German physiologist Aubert, who aimed to detect changes in the skin due to changes in the effect of external stimuli.
French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck explained adaptation from an evolutionary point of view.
 He distinguished three ways of adaptation. Direct adaptation of the organism (plants, lower animals), 2. Indirect adaptation of the organism (high-class animals), 3. With the inner aspiration created by the society, improvement of one's own organism (all animals).
According to Lamarck, all transformations are strengthened and passed down from generation to generation.
 That is, adaptation is understood as a process of adaptation of the organism to the conditions of the new environment.
Social adaptation as a sociological term was used in the works of the French lawyer Gabriel Tard.
 In the late 19th century, Tard singled out social adaptation as one of the most important factors in sociological theories.
Let's look at some of the existing approaches to adaptation. A cultural approach to adaptation.
  The focus is on the hidden goals, conflicts, worries, and expectations of the mental body, which give rise to specific means of adaptation in the social environment.
 One of the advantages of the cultural approach is the release of the next generation from repeating the process of adaptation of the previous generation.
 In other words, the new generation does not follow the path of the previous generation, but inherits the qualities acquired by it.
  The socio-cultural-adaptive environment becomes a tool of self-development.
The systematic approach to adaptation is based on the notion that all processes, objects, and relationships can be viewed as the bearers of a particular structure.
s.
 It follows from the methodological system approaches that the adaptive system always belongs to the class of open, functional, self-governing systems.
The adaptation information approach is based on the premise that all types of self-managed cyber systems are self-governing systems based on the processing of technical, biological and social information.
Another view is expressed by Emil Durkheim in the 19th century in his "Social Division of Labor".
 He derives social life from a dual source, from consciousness in general, from the social division of labor.
 According to him, in the first case, a person is socialized because, not having his own personality, he merges with others, in the second case, having a unique image, a peculiarity of being different from others, a person depends on others as much as he differs from them.
 We said backwards that it depends on the society.
 Summing up Durkheim's point of view, we can say that in any case the individual is connected to the society1.
The representatives of different psychological schools, referring to the problem of adaptation, interpreted it in a different way.
 Behaviorism և Representatives of neo-behaviorism, including Beres Skinner, Edward Thorndike, Albert Bandura, John Watson, and others, have described socialization as a process of social learning related to a person's response to a stimulus.
In contrast, proponents of symbolic interactionism, such as Mead, Bloomer, Khorke, Kohlberg, Shibutani, and others, described socialization as a subjective, intersubjective result of personal impulses.
Representatives of the humanities: Allport, Maslow, Rogers, Goldsteinstein understood this social-psychological phenomenon as self-actualization of the person.
In contrast to the humanistic direction, the representatives of the sociolinguistic direction - Sepir, Warf, McIntyre, Bernstein - interpreted socialization as a way to be included in society, to enter into its adaptation to different socio-cultural conditions, such as "verbal codes" 2.
According to Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, man is anti-social from the beginning.
 The society should educate him, allow him to satisfy his biological requirements, but the main task of the society is to purify the unchanging human impulses.
As a result of the suppression of these impulses, the following happens: Suppressed tendencies become aspirations that have cultural value, thus becoming the basis of culture.
 This strange transition from a state of oppression to a state of civilization, Freud called "sublimation."
 If the degree of that pressure is stronger than the sublimation, then people become erotic.
According to Freud, a person's relationship with society is static in nature. The person remains the same, changing only to the extent that society increases the pressure on his natural inclinations (thus forcing more sublimation), or causes more complete satisfaction (thus sacrificing culture).
Freud's concept of human relations, by its very nature, mimics the system of economic relations.
 The person presents himself as a biological collection of needs that must be met.
 In order to be satisfied, he must establish relationships with others.
  Thus, others are a means to an end.
According to Freud, human relations are reminiscent of trade, it is revealed by the exchange of satisfaction of biological needs.
  At the same time, connecting with other people is a means to an end, not a goal.
Thus we can say that all theoretical concepts are in fact based on two bases: a) Society plays a decisive role in the social development of a person, b) Everyone becomes a person as a result of adaptation in society.
Based on the importance of the individual in the process of socialization, two main theoretical approaches are formed in science: 1 See Durkheim J., On the division of public labor, Moscow, 1996.
2 See Severtsov A., Theory of Evolution, Moscow, 2005.
3 See Freud Z., Psychoanalytic Studies, Minsk, 2010.
1. Subject-object - passive position of a person (society is a subject of activity, individuality-object), 2. Subject-subjective - active role of the person (the person purposefully adapts by changing not only the unfavorable social situation, but also himself) 1.
To find the best approach to an effective sociological analysis of the problem of adaptation, it is necessary to understand the definition of "adaptation" and "social adaptation".
The general scientific idea of ​​"adaptation" gives different explanations: a) As the organism adapts to changes in the environment, b) The և environment հ homeostatic, dynamic balance of the organism, c) The optimal interaction of the organism և environment2.
To interpret the adjustment process, it is advisable to distinguish between "static" and "dynamic" adjustments.
We call static the adaptation during which a person's character remains unchanged, only new habits emerge.
 For example, switching from Chinese sticks to eating with a European fork and knife.
 When the Chinese come to the USA, he adapts to the knife and fork, but such an adjustment will hardly lead to his personal, character changes, new goals.
An example of dynamic adaptation can be used when a child obeys a very cruel father, is very afraid of the father to do something, and becomes a "listener".
 As he adjusts to the inevitable situation, something changes in him.
 Intense hostility may be formed towards the father, which he will suppress, even if his realization is considered very dangerous for him.
 This suppressed hostility, although in no way manifested, becomes a dynamic factor.
It can increase the child's fear of the father, thereby intensifying the obedience, it can cause a rebellion, not against anyone in particular, but with life in general.
 As in the first case, the person is considered to the external conditions, but such adaptation changes him, new aspirations and new anxieties arise in him.
  Any day is the result of such an adaptation, which is irrational for a person, especially in early childhood3.
According to another point of view, one of the most important problems for each person is the ability to find a place in this life, to find an acceptable place in the socio-cultural society, to become a professional, to pass on self-constructive experience to children.
  Self-realization requires purposefulness և Adaptive behavior associated with adequate world acceptance.
The concept of "social adaptation" is difficult to interpret, as individual aspects of the adaptation process take on different meanings depending on the social context and time requirements.
  At present, social adaptation is defined as the result of a person adapting to changing social environments;
  Here, the impact is two-way, but the beginning of the adaptive process requires the adaptation of cooperation with the initiating entity.
By the logic of what has been said, one can be considered a person who achieves balance with his inner self, the external socio-cultural environment.
According to another author, Rosum's approach, as a result of that imbalance, the subject becomes incapable of self-realization and providing himself with acceptable living conditions, establishing positive interpersonal relationships, and regaining somatic and mental health.
 The selection and evaluation of the social environment is considered a component of socio-cultural adaptation.
  This choice may be conscious or unconscious, but if a person accepts his environment regardless of its quality և does not consider his potential to be in another group, then it is in turn considered a unique choice.
 Thus, Rosum argued that adaptation was individual, relative, "eternal."
1 Romm V., Adaptation of personalities in society, Novosibirsk, 2002.
2 Симаева И., Психология адации субьекта к изменениям жизнедеятельности., Калининград, 2006.
3 Fromm Zh., Escape from Freedom, Moscow, 2009.
4 See Rosum S., Psychology of Socialization and Social Adaptations of Man, St. Petersburg, 2006.
Thus, being one of the most important conditions for the development of mankind, adaptation implies that a person should not only belong to or be able to classify himself as part of a system that will guide him, give meaning to his life, but also have opportunities to establish interpersonal relationships and communication.
Based on the studied literature, we can claim that the civilizational peculiarities of the adaptation process have not been completely solved yet. There are no multi-level strategies, simplicity of perception, there are obstacles in the process of adaptation of the person in the society.
 The struggle for successful adaptation is one of the main laws of life.
Anahit Khachatryan THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL ADAPTATION FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF PSYCHOLOGY Keywords: adaptation, socialization, interpersonal relations, orientation, demand.
