LUDWIG ERHARD'S SOCIAL MARKET ECONOMY IN GERMAN ECONOMY Back in the 1990s, the concept of "social market economy" aroused great interest in countries undergoing systemic change.
 This term is used in both political and economic discussions as a model for an economy that is undergoing radical market changes.
 However, this concept continues to be attractive not only to Eastern but also to Western European countries.
 This is evidenced by the fact that the 2003 proposal of the European Union. In the draft constitution of June, the basis of the main order of the EU economy is the social market economy.
 Six years ago, the Constitution of the Republic of Poland declared the country's economy a social market economy, in particular Article 20 states that "Poland's social market economy is based on free market activity, private property, solidarity with social partners, dialogue and cooperation" [1] .
It is not accidental that the social market economy is quite attractive.
  After World War II, its influence became known in West Germany.
  The beginning of the formation of social economic policy in this country became in 1948. Other monetary and economic reforms that transformed Germany from a post-war country into one of the 10 most economically developed countries in the world. The founder of these reforms was Ludwig Erhard.
The founders of the idea of ​​a social market economy expected to improve the material living conditions of the people, at the same time protecting them from the significant income inequality inherent in the free market economy.
In the 90s, a number of circumstances increased the interest of the social market economy in the German concept.
First of all, Germany occupied a leading position in the internal trade of post-Soviet countries. It accounted for 30% of the domestic trade turnover of Central European countries.
  Second, interest in the German economy as its largest trading partner also increased after a number of post-Soviet countries joined the European Union, as it pursued a policy close to the social economy.
  Third, a wide range of interpretations contributes to the popularization of this concept.
 Friedrich Augustfon Hayek used the word "ear-pleasing" for this concept, describing it as "far from the principle of economic liberalism" according to the Socialists.
The interpretation of the concept of "social market economy" caused controversy among the post-Soviet countries "Germany".
To avoid all this, the interpretation of the economic policy concept is presented below.
 In order to better understand what a social market economy is, it can be briefly described as the ultimate goal of systemic change in those countries.
The definition of a social market economy is given in the theories of other representatives of economic reasoning at the Lևhudwig Erhard's liberal-liberal school, in particular Walter Eiken.
The concept of social market economy.
  The main idea of ​​the concept of social market economy is the rejection of Marxist historical materialism and the laws of its development.
It is based on the principles of human individual freedom and responsibility, and the latter on European Christian traditions.
 The rejection of KarlMax's thesis by Ludwig Erhard և Walter Eiken on the controversy over economic freedom, social equality and justice was of great importance for the establishment of the concept of a social market economy.
 Erhrd, Oiken and other theorists have repeatedly stated that such a contradiction does not necessarily arise.
 On the contrary, they believed that economic freedom, the market coordination of the activities of free economic entities, could serve the idea of ​​social equality.
The founders of this concept did not agree with the views of the classical liberals of economic policy, from Adam Smith to F. Von Hayekom, in the sense that, according to them, trade mechanisms should be fully self-regulating.
 Erhard և Oiken predicted the spontaneous development of capitalism on the principle of the free market typical of the 19th century, which in many countries would lead to the formation of a monopoly, an oligopoly, an increase in state participation in the economy.
  Oykan noted in this connection. "The application of the free market principle automatically leads to its destruction."
In the history of Germany from 1871-1945 it becomes clear that the famous sociologist-economist Alfred Müller-Armak gave "formulas of the world" in the social market economy, which is not typical for the terminology of economics.
 The social market economy perfectly comprises not only economic freedom և social equality, but also difficult combinations or opposites of public thinking [4].
Erhard agreed with Vershofen.
  As the future Federal Minister of Economy, he has repeatedly stressed that the main task of any market economy everywhere, at all times, must be the maximum satisfaction of consumer needs.
 Erhard was greatly influenced by Franz Oppenheim, his supervisor.
 The latter considered that private property through the means of production տնտեսական the activity of economic entities coordinating the market typical of competitive relations is carried out to solve problems aimed at the welfare of society as a whole [5].
 Thus, Oppenheimer was looking for a "third way" between growing social inequality, "conflict-free capitalism", "socialism that rejects it, and severely restricts people's freedom."
  Oppenheim considered himself a "liberal socialist", and Erhard described his economic policies as "social liberal" on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of his teacher at the University of Berlin.
The social market economy can be described in the comparison between free market capitalism and Marxist socialism, which is presented in Table 1.
Types of structuresFree market capitalismPersonalitySociety:
Country:
IndividualSocial:
inequality of freedom
The state in the economy
performs the role of "follower"
Social:
The state is shaping
Marxist:
սոցիEsocial regulation տնտեսականeconomic order ևJust regulates economic freedom processesSocial MarketEconomySocial
Inequality Freedom Justice State:
is limited to the issue of economic regulation Table 1. Comparative characteristics of capitalism, socialism ները social market economy Principles of the concept of "social market economy"'s freedom of will և responsibility as well as social equality և justice are close to 1789 to the French Revolution.
  In this sense, Alfred Müller-Armak briefly described the social market economy as a "synthesis of economic freedom և social equality."
 However, Erhard accepted Müller's statement with reservations, proposing to add the following: "Social market economy is a synthesis of economic freedom, responsibility of economic entities, social equality."
  As Federal Minister of Economy, Erhard believed that the responsibility of economic entities և for economic freedom երկու were's two sides of the coin to society.
  In his opinion, freedom does not have the right to live long without responsibility, as it leads to various kinds of deviations in the economy - anarchy.
  And in order for the society to be able to get out of that situation, it is necessary to carry out radical actions of the authorities, aimed at restricting the freedom that endangers the further existence of the society.
 Erhard cites the example of the Weimar Republic, where the elite հանուր lack of public accountability became a complete loss of freedom ան the period of the National Socialist rule (1933-1945).
He noted that individual responsibility is the opposite of freedom, as: • A market economy requires a willingness of economic actors to operate economically to manage risks.
  Every business entity must be ready to act to meet the needs of anonymous customers.
  It is often unknown whether the consumer of the product or service will be found, whether the means of further production will be created.
• The motivation for economic activity is weakened due to the correction of the distribution of income received in the market, which is aimed at maintaining the principle of social equality and justice.
  On the one hand, those who have to pay taxes on their income, other payments, the motivation and the opportunities to operate economically decrease.
  On the other hand, social benefits tend to become permanent, օգտthe users of them want to be in the program all the time և to be included in և programs for other needs.
• The correction of the market distribution of income also causes a decrease in the incentives of economic entities, willingness to engage in economic activities, risk forecasting [6].
The main principles of social market economy. The concept of competitive economic order was quite useful in the light of Erhard's social policy issues.
  Oiken considered that the main problem of the capitalist market economy since 1914 was the misuse of the post-commodity price-production system.
 It was clear to Erhard that the absolute price-competition system would be conducive to the transmission of signals from households.
  Therefore, the production will be directed to the demand presented by them first.
 In the event that a process of economic growth starts in a highly competitive economy, it will be possible to think about a structure of production that corresponds to the structure of consumer demand - the growth of public welfare.
Oiken's concept of competitive economy was presented in the later book, Principles of Economic Policy (Grundsatze der Wirtschaftspolitik).
 The core of this concept was the "basic" և "regulatory" principles of the competitive economy (Table 1).
As the author of the "Competitive Order" concept, Oykan emphasized that his principles were not deduced from arbitrarily accepted axioms, but were derived from the analysis of the experience of the last 150 years of economic history.
 At that time, there were different forms of competitive economic order in different parts of the world, which allowed to draw conclusions from the existing mechanism, to formulate the necessary principles in favor of the coordination of individual actions of economic policy.
  As well-known theorists point out, if an economic political scientist wants to build a "house" of a competitive order, he should study these principles like an architect և start building a house knowing the principles of stability (staticization).
L. was such an art master of the implementation of economic policy. Erhard.
 F. von Hayelk, being known as a critic of his colleagues, L. He said about Erhard. "After the war, the Germans were fortunate to have one of the most important economic positions in" innate talent. "
 Among the economists I have met in my lifetime have been the most interesting, but I have not seen anyone like him have such a well-developed instinct for right choice as Ludwig Erhardin.
  Erhard, in my opinion, is more important in building a free society in Germany than is ascribed to him in Germany… "[8].
The practical implementation of the concept of a social market economy in Germany can be divided into several stages (Table 3).
Basic principles:
Regulatory principles
1. In case of local և natural monopoly2. when there is a difference in income, which is against the principle of social justice3. If the enterprise financial և
economic calculation does not take into account external factors4. Especially in the field of supply
In case of anomaly defect in case of job offer1. Absolute competition in price
The system that performs the function of resource and product limitation indicator 2. Stabilization of money purchasing power 3. Open Markets 4. By means of private property production 5. Among economic entities
Freedom to sign contracts 6. To harm others
Assumption of material responsibility by economic entities 7. Economic policy
stability և backwardness Table 2. Principles of social market economy Main problem 1948-66.
1967-82
From 1982-98 to 1998
Economic stability, not economic growth
by stimulating demand and demandEconomic growth through the implementation of supply-side economic policyLegislative Competition
The Law of Restrictions (1957) The Law of Economic Growth (1967) Leading Carl Schiller և
Representative Ludwig Erhardelk Walter Oyk, Joyn Maynard
Otto vonLambsdorf և othersM. Thatcher, R. Reagan և M. Gans Eichel, WolfgangClement
InspirersInspiratorsLudwig Erhard Gill ortholiberals Keynes և Walter EucanFriedmanTable 3. Stages of conceptualizing a social market economy in GermanyGelmour Kolya's rise to power in 1982 It practically did not mean a return to the social market economy, despite the announcement of the new Chancellor։ Minister.
  Germany's economic policy was influenced by the policies of Margaret Thatcher, who ruled England a few years ago, and Ronald Reagan, who led the United States to increase economic growth by creating more favorable conditions for production.
The orientation of Gerard Schroeder economic policy in 1998 had a social-democratic orientation.
  He pragmatically tried to combine elements of Keynesian policy, announcing that he intends to return to the original concept of a social market economy.
The achievements of the first stage of German economic policy, which focuses on the concept of a social market economy, is called the "economic miracle".
 Horst-Friedrich Wünschen sums up the results of this period as the "German economic miracle" (for almost 20 years).
 During those two decades, the basic principles of economic policy were emphasized, regardless of the pressure of the problems of that moment.
He claims that Erhard has achieved such economic growth rates that no one has achieved before, he has ensured a very high level of price stability, which he has achieved through a consistent socio-economic policy.
  The combination of full employment contributed to the high level of economic growth and stability, in which the income of each resident increased in a short period of time.
  The "economic miracle" also became the "miracle of public tranquility".
After Erhard's departure from political life, the German economy slowly shifted to a state-sponsored economy.
 Gradual departure from social economy to economic policy began.
 The synthesis of the society of freedom is transformed into the re-socialization of the economy, with all its consequences, which both Erhard and the ortho-liberals warned about.
  The movement towards the "trusteeship" economy was strengthened by the systemic transformation of the unification of Germany into East Germany (formerly Germany).
It should be noted that the German economy has retained some structural features typical of a competitive economic system.
 We managed to maintain the stability of both the mark and the dram value of the euro.
Markets remain free, and private property is backed by guarantees in the constitution and in the judiciary.
  Business entities can, except in very few cases, freely sign contracts.
  One of the shortcomings of the field of application of the principles of competition is the progressive concentration of products in the German markets, in the European Union, which was also facilitated by the processes of globalization.
  Especially the big players or, so to speak, global players (globalplayers) manage in many cases to leave that responsibility to the society or the taxpayer.
  The high level of mass unemployment and the state budget deficit is an example that does not follow the competitive economic order.
 However, the transition from a social market economy to a new German economy did not make the model of that country a model of a "rich state".
    One of the reasons why Germany did not fully accept the Scandinavian experience is that the social market economy, despite the many deviations from this model in everyday life, continues to be the officially announced concept of economic policy.
 This allows orthodox economists to be reminded of their principles, the requirements of their observance, which forces political scientists and economists to partially observe them.
  The departure from the principles of competition could not ensure a long process, therefore, it was especially noticeable in the aspects of the principle of competition, stable money, private ownership of the means of production.
  In recent years, the desire to return to the concept of Erhard's social market economy has become more frequent in Germany.
Referring to the 1950s և 1960s. According to the conceptual sources of the German "economic miracle", they are considered as a means of solving today's problems, such as long-term economic stagnation and mass unemployment.
LITERATURE URL:
 http:
//www.sejm.gov.pl/prawo/konst/angielski/kon1.htm (Accessed.
 24.02.2018). [4] Soziale Marktwirtschaft.
  Geistige Grundlagen, ethischer Anspruch, historische Mkrtchyan LianaLUDWIG ERHARD - SOCIAL MARKET ECONOMY IN GERMAN ECONOMY Keywords: social market economy, principle free market economy, social economy
