IN SEARCH OF THE ROMAN RESURRECTION. DIOCLETIANOS The changes that took place in the central government of the Roman Empire from Diocletian in the late 3rd and early 4th centuries were the logical end of a long process that spanned the first three centuries of its existence, which eventually led to radical changes.
The crisis situation in the period covering exactly the middle of the 3rd century (235-284) made imperative the implementation of transformations in the empire.
  Under these conditions, the emperor-reformers had to appear, who had to replace the Principate, which had been consumed for centuries, with a new system of Dominance.
During the three centuries, the political system of the Principality, founded by Augustus, which centralized both the new monarchical and the old republican governments, was getting closer to the victory of absolute monarchy;
  At the end of the third century, the republican names even turned into mere's, which the emperors relying on the legion had long since stopped paying attention to.
  Emperor Gallienus had already forbidden the Senate to mint even copper coins, and Aurelian ordered him to be called "Emperor Dominus et Deus" և, wearing a golden hat, demanding the obedience of his subjects3.
 This was a possible prototype for the future Dominat.
The reign of Diocletian in 284 ․ It immediately revealed the political evolution of imperial power.
  The long-weakened Principate perished in the very first years of his reign.
  Absolute monarchy is becoming a reality at the official level.
  He is no longer a princeps or a republican magistrate, he is now not the first among equals, but a lord, dominus "by divine mercy", "citizens" become subjects "4.
Diocletian is not like his predecessors, as his contemporaries saw it.
 For example, there is evidence from Eutropius that "Diocletian ordered him to bow before him", while before him all emperors were simply greeted. about "5.
 A similar testimony is found in Aurelius Victor6.
 The latter especially emphasizes the reality of the deification of the monarch, which was the essence of the new system.
  Now it is not just the desire of a single monarch, as in the time of Caligula ոմ Dometianus, but the cornerstone of Dominat.
Diocletian's activity should not be seen as a whim or a quest for the ambitions of the glorious leader.
  The restoration of the vast Roman Empire, the fight against barbaric attacks, the lower strata of society (columns և 2 Ibid., P. 41).
Frequent revolts could only be suppressed only by a rigid and independent state power capable of uniting all the forces of the imperial ruling class and directing them to overcome the most difficult times of the crisis.
It is very remarkable that we have received the title of Diocletian, which was found in the area of ​​the Roman city of Augustus Wendelikov.
  It is an inscription of 290 in which Diocletian is presented as the Prince, Lord, Peacemaker, Invincible Augustus, the Great Pontiff, the greatest of the Germans, and so on.
Both the deification of the head of state and the new royal rites, which were very similar to the Sassanid court of Persia2, were aimed at creating a new legal status for the emperor, which was to determine "the attitude of his subjects to other governing bodies in general" 3. Reserving its creation to a divine origin.
As for the Persian traditions adopted during the reign of Diocletian, it was not accidental.
  The problem is that the ideological basis of the Sasanian state was the Zoroastrian religion, which was transformed as much as possible in favor of despotism.
 The cult of fire was of paramount importance.
  According to that, the cult of the Sasanian emperor was formed4.
 This last circumstance was to be applied by Diocletian.
The Eastern influence on Rome began with its very first contacts with the Hellenistic East.
  Hence the gradual transformation of the Roman Principality into a theocratic monarchy, where the emperor became the link between God and the world, and the state became the earthly reflection of the heavenly laws.
  The cult of invincibility, which Aurelianus had made a governmental religion as early as the middle of the third century, was closely linked to this new religious concept of the empire. The emperor on earth is the same as the man in heaven.
The monarch is separated from ordinary mortals, he is "sacred", therefore, everything around him is sacred5.
In fact, using the experience of the East, especially Persia, Diocletian was able to introduce the practice of imperial sanctification into Roman imperial reality, which led to the isolation of the citizens of the empire, deprived them of any kind of participation in political life.
  The elimination of civic sentiment among Roman citizens meant the gradual decline of ancient civilization7.
The establishment of an absolute monarchy in the empire was a necessary precondition for Diocletian to carry out his transformations.
 Only in that case could the emperor act as a person above the law, even as the embodiment of the law, having the opportunity to personally resolve the difficulties facing the Roman Empire.
  The establishment of absolute monarchy was the last stage of the consolidation of imperial power in the field of development of pre-Roman civilization.
For the victory of absolutism, Diocletian had to first transform the state system.
 For that very purpose, first the institutions of diarrhea and then the tetrarchy were created.
  Reforms were implemented in the legislative, financial, administrative systems, in the military sphere, about which it has been written many times, therefore, we do not consider it necessary to present them in this work.
Diocletian's religious policy is very important.
 It was strongly conservative and anti-Christian.
 That is why the cruel persecution of Christians was restored.
  However, Christianity was to become one of the dominant components in the future, to which we will return in later works.
2 Grant M., The Climax of Rome.
 The Final Achievements of the Ancient World, Weidenfeld, 1993, p. 7. Nina Hayrapetyan IN THE RESEARCH OF THE ROMAN REVIVAL. Diocletian Keywords: Diocletian, Crisis of Principality, Dominate,
Establishment of absolute monarchy, sanctification of the emperor
.
