FUNDAMENTALS OF PERSONS SELF-SELF-DETERMINATION AND PROPERTIES IN PROFESSIONALISM
 Self-realization is a question that concerns every person, regardless of the period, which has been talked about by a number of representatives of different fields of psychology, interpreting the problem in a different way.
  It is the balanced, harmonious discovery, preservation and development of all aspects of it.
Today the issue of self-realization is especially relevant in professional activity.
 It is connected with the fact that nowadays people strive to be more independent, to improve, to discover their own abilities and to realize them, ամենը all this is expressed especially in professional activity.
 Professional development is a complex "long" process, during which obstacles appear, the overcoming of which promotes not only professional, but also personal growth, promotes self-realization.
In this work the peculiarities of self-realization are studied, the factors contributing to it և the nature and content of the process of self-realization in professional activity.
The aim of the work is to study the nature of the self-realization process, the peculiarities of self-realization in professional activity.
The problem of self-realization was addressed by the philosophers of the East-West of ancient times.
 The doctrine of self-realization in the West originated with Aristotle.
  This question was addressed by Plato himself, making not only theoretical analyzes, but also practical ways of self-realization.
 Aristotle և his followers believed that the qualities of man that make up his nature are subject to self-realization.
According to the psychological-psychoanalytic dictionary, "Balanced և harmonious discovery of all aspects of self-realization is the development of genetic և personal capabilities."
 It is a conscious theoretical activity, it is a precondition for self-actualization2.
Self-actualization is a practical activity that has a material effect.
  That is, it is aimed at the implementation of life plans, problem solving3.
The scientific approaches to the problem of self-realization date back to the second half of the 19th century, when the central issue of philosophy was the study of human life.
 The founders of the new directions of human study are S. Kierkegaard, A. Schopenhauer, F. Nietzsche և others4.
  The formal beginning of existential psychology (1834) is connected with S. Kierkegaard.
 The term "self-actualization" as one of the postulates of organism theory was introduced by Kurt Goldstein in 1939 in "Organism".
  In the first phase of clinical practice, Goldstein, by self-actualization, meant the activation of some internal resources of the organism, which arise due to injury.
In the second stage, Goldstein philosophically presents self-actualization as a universal principle of life, writing about "higher self-realization".
 He views the organism as a whole, that is, the change of part affects the whole organism.
 According to Goldstein, self-actualization is the main motivation of human life, it is an action aimed at satisfying needs.
 Self-actualization can have positive or negative consequences for the organism.
 It never happens without a struggle with the outside world.
 Self-realization is realized only as a result of concession of one of the parties5.
Goldstein's concepts then contributed to the emergence and development of psychological theories of self-realization.
 It developed especially in the humanistic direction, which arose in the 1960s.
  The roots of humanistic psychology begin with 1 Amiryan S., The problems of personal self-realization.
  Educational support manual, -Yer.
  YSU Press, 2011,102 pages.
2 See ibid., P.
3 Vakhromov E., Psychological concepts of human development.
 theory of self-actualization, -M.
Егорьвеск.
 Московский государственный гуманитарных университет, 2004, pp.32-395 Vakhromov E., Psychological concepts of human development.
 theory of self-actualization, -M.
In existential psychology, the main idea that the humanities have borrowed from this direction is the concept of establishment.
 Man is never stable, but is always in the process of formation.
K. Rogers formulated his theory in the humanities 6.
  According to Rogers և Goldstein, the organism is a biological whole, which tends to increase tension.
  In this way Rogers-Goldstein opposes homeostatic theories.
  In addition, they believe that self-actualization is the only motivational tendency of the organism, that is, they reject the existence of separate motivations7.
  Rogers, by saying self-actualization, means to discover, develop և maintain the best qualities of a person.
  It is an active process that ensures the body's aspiration to various goals, as it leads a person to achieve autonomy, self-sufficiency.
  Rogers argued that this was a constructive biological tendency specific not only to humans but to the entire animal kingdom.
 From a personal point of view, the tendency to self-actualize is a process that takes place throughout a person's life, the goal of which is to realize one's potential, to become a fully functioning person8.
  Sometimes the realization of the organism և person goes in different ways or even is contradictory (non-competitive), which becomes a cause of neurosis as a result of the conflict.
A. Goldstein's ideas also had a special influence on the development of Maslow's theory (he was a representative of the humanities).
  Maslow believed that everyone has innate potential for positive growth and improvement.
  He focused more on a mentally healthy person than on a pathological one, that is, mental illnesses could not be explained if we did not first understand mental health, and self-realization is considered a characteristic of a healthy person.
The self-actualizing person fully strives for improvement, self-realization, abilities, discovery of talents, development, so to say, fulfillment of his mission, aspiration for personal integration, integration.
  This is a continuous գործընթաց dynamic process of development of potentials, which leads to personal growth.
6 Hell L., Ziegler D., Theories of personalities.
 СПб.:
 Peter Press, 1997, 608 p.7 Leontiev D., Contemporary Psychology of Motivation.
 М., Смысл 2002-343 с.8 Rogers C., Client-centered therapy.
 Its current practice, implications and theory. Boston.
 Houghton9 Vakhromov E., The concept of "self-actualization" in psychology.
 Paper.-M., 2000, 282 p. According to Maslow, the demands have a hierarchical structure.
  He proposed a pyramid of demands, which consists of several levels according to the principle of dominance.
  The most prevalent requirements are at the bottom of the pyramid. they are typical of animals.
 The needs proposed by Maslow are the physiological needs, the demands of security, belonging, love, self-esteem, the need for self-actualization at the top of the pyramid.
 Maslow believed that the higher the needs of a person, the healthier he's, the more his personality is expressed.
  As a result of his observations, Maslow singled out a number of features that are common to all self-actualized people, but he noted that such people also have shortcomings, they can exhibit non-constructive behavior10.
Representatives of the school of psychoanalysis, such as K., spoke about self-realization. Jung, A. Adler և others.
In contrast to the humanistic propositions of self-realization, where self-realization is the main tendency and driving force of development, in psychoanalytic directions this phenomenon is mostly mentioned as a consequence of certain processes.
According to K. The goal of Jung's development is self-realization, that is, the complete realization of the self.
  It means the most complete, complete version of all aspects of a person և complete combination.
  Each person's development is unique, continues throughout life և includes the concept of "individualization".
 Personalization is a dynamic, evolving process of integration of opposing personal forces, tendencies, which is not easy to achieve.
  Personalization in its final forms presupposes the conscious development and expression of all the elements of the person.
 It turns out that Jung called the realization of individualization self-realization.
  He noted that this final stage of development is specific only to the gifted "highly developed" 11.
A. Adler connects self-realization with the pursuit of compensation for the inferiority complex և excellence.
 According to his theory, man has a feeling of inferiority, which he tries to compensate by constantly striving for perfection, growth, development.
  A person can be considered complete only when he is constantly striving to achieve his goals, and the life goals that people choose և the way in which they strive to achieve them, determine what their meaning is 10 Maslow A., Motivation and personality, SPb.
 Eurasia, 1999, 479 p.11 Yang K., Structure and dynamics of psychics, Per. с англ, -М .`
 "Kogito-Center", 2016, 480 p. plan their lives.
 Adler introduced the idea of ​​a creative self that seeks, interprets,'s meaning the experience of the organism, which will contribute to the realization of a person's lifestyle.
 If it is not possible to find it, I try to create it12.
In psychoanalysis, a person is mostly conditioned by his past, needs, biological, social limitations, it turns out that self-realization is due to some factor.
 That is, in the mentioned theories, in one case, self-realization is a result of development, in the other case, compensation for the inferiority complex.
  Humanists, on the other hand, view it as an innate need, a motivation that guides a person's behavior.
Researchers generally tend to study self-realization independently of any activity, but such generalization leads to a decrease in the practical applicability of such research.
One of the main activities of human life is the professional field, therefore it is very possible to consider the issue of human self-realization within the framework of the profession.
  Profession is not only a means of meeting material needs, but also related to higher disciplinary requirements.
 This is evidenced by the fact that when choosing a profession, people usually take into account their own interests և opportunities13.
Maslow notes that a person can be self-actualized by doing his job best.
 At the same time, a self-actualizing person can achieve a certain "transcendental" level of professional success, unlike an employee who simply does his job well.
 Another no less important criterion is job satisfaction հնարավոր the ability to identify potentials14.
Professional activity is one of the spheres of human life, which covers a long period of time, for the most convenient studies.
  B. conducted studies on professional self-realization. Գ. Annan!
  He laid the methodological basis for the study of self-realization in the field of humanities.
  In Anan's teaching, man is complete, developing, active.
 He pays special attention to development.
 According to Annan, a person is the result of individual-psychological development.
 Considering the issue of human self-realization in the field of vital activity 12 Adler A., ​​The practice and theory of individual psychology. New York, NY.
 Routledge, 2014, 352 p. In this field, he especially emphasizes the role of self-development.
 Speaking about that, it is necessary to use the role of the vital path in the self-realization of the person, because the vital path is connected with the environment, the period in which the person lives.
  Anna believes that one of the main characteristics of a person is the vital direction, which is expressed in "vital goals", the "actions performed", which express the style of action.
 That is, a person, being complete և having goals, realizes them և implements them in practice.
  This is exactly the process of self-actualization15.
A number of subjective-objective factors influence the content and dynamics of the process of human self-realization.
  Subjective factors depend on the person.
 These include value orientations, a person's desire and ability to work with himself, moral qualities, will, etc.
 Other factors, which depend on the person, are considered objective factors, such as the socio-economic conditions of the country, material security, the influence of the mass media, etc.
 It is very important to have a sense of one's own involvement in society, to have a harmonious relationship with others and with nature.
  In order to be self-sufficient, a person must have certain knowledge, skills, abilities, which contribute to the implementation of activities that facilitate the establishment of relationships between people16.
The self-realization of a person in professional activity depends on the extent to which a person accepts his professional activity as a condition for the development of a person.
  Positive self-esteem կապված in connection with a person's motivation և behavior in work activities has a significant impact on self-esteem, awareness of one's own qualities, opportunities, abilities.
  People with low self-esteem pay more attention to their shortcomings, weaknesses, negative qualities.
A. Cormana proposed a model according to which the efficiency of work և the presence of internal satisfaction are the functions of self-esteem of the employee.
 Employees with high self-esteem are more likely to do their job better, as their motivation is internal: 15 Ананьев Б., Человек как предмет насния. СПб.:
 Peter, 2011, 288 p. Unlike people with low self-esteem.
  The process of self-actualization can be viewed in terms of a person's attitude towards various activities.
  For example, according to A. K. According to Markova, the self-actualization of a person in the profession is possible through the realization of professional norms by the realization of one's own abilities, individual opportunities for performance of activities, conscious strengthening of personal qualities, strengthening of individual style, maximum realization of one's own abilities17.
The main condition of self-realization is the developed self-consciousness and reflection, with the help of which a person is able to realize the world around him, the real potential abilities and capacities, interests and values, the prospects of personal and professional growth.
Professional activity can provide three aspects of professional self-realization: psychological, instrumental, socio-cultural.
  The psychological side presupposes the realization and expression of personal opportunities in professional activity.
  The instrumental side implies the use of potentials, resources, abilities, skills, abilities, and socio-cultural self-realization refers to the realization and expression of one's own mission by a person, which is manifested through professional activities towards other people, society, humanity.
It is possible that these are the ones that contribute to a person's professional self-realization18.
The general intellectual development of a person is also very important, which also stimulates the increase of the level of professional activity.
 It has a positive effect on the formation of motivation, interests, needs, which contribute to the development of new skills, abilities, the growth of professionalism 19.
L. A. Korastilyova distinguishes several stages of professional self-realization, which have their own peculiarities.
  The first stage is professional self-determination, where the "I want" block predominates, because only in this way, through motivational-semantic-value connections, it is possible to realize a person's professional perspective / http.
//econf.rae.ru/pdf/2010/11/1595af6435.pdf.19 Amiryan S., The problems of personal self-realization.
 Educational support manual.
  -S..
 YSU Press, 2011, 102 pages.
construction.
 The second stage is the stage of professional development, when the profession has already been chosen, the methods of the profession have been mastered, by which skills are acquired.
  The "I can" block dominates here.
 The third is the stage of professional growth and competence development, in which the "should" bloc prevails20.
 The mentioned stages are conditionally separated, their duration differs in different people.
 A person's specialization covers the whole working period of a person's life ունի at each stage has its own motivations և values.
  Along with specialization, the role of inner motivation related to self-esteem increases, which comes from accepting oneself as a professional 21.
Obstacles may be encountered in the mentioned stages of professional activity.
 These include lack of involvement in active life, severe cultural limitations, underdevelopment of consciousness, narrow pragmatic value system, drug addiction, alcoholism, as well as improper choice of profession, etc. 22.
In conclusion, there are many theories of self-realization that have much in common, but are nevertheless explained differently by different authors, depending on their approaches and the ideas of the schools to which they belong.
  In all cases, we can say that self-realization is the discovery of a person's capabilities, development, the achievement of integrity և harmony, which contributes to personal growth.
 The differences between theories are mainly related to the mechanisms of self-realization, but they are similar in content.
Self-realization in the professional sphere, as a process և result, is connected with the circumstances of being useful for one's society, loving one's own work, being fully involved in it, having maximum achievements in professional activity, which contribute to a person feeling full, satisfied and harmonious.
 Self-realization in the professional sphere is a factor of both professional growth and personal growth.
Thus, a person's professional self-realization depends on a number of factors.
 In general, we can say that these are the high level of development of self-consciousness, inner motivation to 20 Korostyleva L., Psychology of self-realization of persons.
  Rehabilitation in the professional sphere - STD.
Published in "Word", 2005-222 p. Stability, high self-esteem, awareness of one's own capabilities, abilities and their application in practical activities, such as material security, socio-economic conditions of the country, etc.
  The process of self-realization in the professional sphere of a person is conventionally divided into stages.
 Self-realization takes place only when man lives in harmony with society և nature և realizes the need for it.
  How to achieve self-realization, one must have goals, overcome difficulties, see meaning in it.
Ani Karakyan THE FOUNDATIONS AND PERSONALITIES OF SELF-SELF-SELF-DETERMINATION IN PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITY Keywords: self-realization, self-actualization, theories of self-realization, professional activity, self-realization in professional activity
