LATEST CHANGES IN THE PRESS The vocabulary of the Armenian language has come a long way during its centuries-long development.
  It reflects the ties and relations of the Armenian people with other peoples.
 The language has constantly enriched, enriched and improved its vocabulary in different periods.
 One of the ways to improve is to replace Armenian words with borrowed words.
  Such borrowings contribute to the use of the word-formation possibilities of our language.
  One of the principles of vocabulary enrichment is that loans should be used as needed, but this does not mean that borrowing every foreign word is encouraged.
 However, the basic vocabulary of a language changes much more slowly than the word structure.
  According to the genealogical classification, we divide the Armenian vocabulary into several groups.
  Such classifications were made by A. Sukiasyan, Al. Margaryan 1, and Ed. Aghayan's point of view differs from these two. The latter calls the words of vital necessity the main vocabulary and gives their main features2.
Al. Margaryan divides the vocabulary into three groups according to origin.1. Words that originate from the Indo-European base language բն are called in native Armenian, for example, river, wolf, door, etc.2. words that have not yet been verified are called derivative words, such as bread, fool, etc. 3. Words that have been borrowed from different languages ​​at different times are called borrowed words, such as laurel, psalm, balsam, etc.
A. Sukiasyan also divides the Armenian vocabulary into three groups according to origin, but in his work he speaks more extensively about two, slightly ignoring the third, the derived or inherited words4.
 In the study we are guided by the divisions of the last two authors և we carry out the study accordingly.
Loans are part of our vocabulary.
  These are the result of economic, political, cultural and other ties with different peoples, as a result of which the words that signify them enter the language with new concepts.
Borrowings are made in two ways: in writing and orally.
 Oral borrowing is done through outreach to foreign-speaking communities or individuals.
Written loans are made thanks to scientific, socio-political, artistic, as well as the press.
 Unlike verbal borrowing, these in their phonetic composition և remain close to the borrowing language.
  Modern Armenian has made these two ways of borrowing at all stages of its historical development, it is done in modern Armenian.
  A word is considered mastered if it acquires a complete phonetic, grammatical adaptation in the given language, enters into constant use, participates in word formation.
Borrowings contribute to the natural development of language, to the enrichment of vocabulary.
 "In this respect, too, it is necessary to distinguish between necessary and unnecessary loans" 5.
1 See A. Sukiasyan, Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2008, pp. 183-196.
 Margaryan Al., Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1993, pp. 136-147.
2 See Aghayan Ed., Fundamentals of Linguistics, Yerevan, 1987, pp. 384-387.
3 See Margaryan Al., P. 136.
4 See Sukiasyan A., p. 183.
5 See ibid., P. 192.
Political, economic, sports, technical, scientific Other types of verbal borrowings are considered necessary, which, as if new concepts, enrich the word structure of the language.
Borrowings are not necessary, the demand for which is not felt in the language, they are not the bearers of new concepts, they have their full equivalents in the borrowed language, they do not enrich the vocabulary of the language at all.
Loans are a type of borrowing: direct and indirect borrowed words.
 Direct borrowing from any language directly, without mediation, and mediated borrowing from any third language are called direct1.
The Armenian language has made such borrowings in the Old Armenian language, in the world language, it does today!
 For example, the word "diaphragm", which means "muscular septum separating the thoracic and abdominal cavities", was borrowed from Armenian in Russian (диафрагма), and the latter from European languages ​​(this word is of Greek origin - diaphragma).
From the chronological point of view, we divide the loans into old and old, new and new borrowed groups.
Before moving on to the latest loans, let's talk about the above groups.
  The ancient borrowings are those that refer to the pre-Armenian period of Armenian, and the ancient ones are those that were borrowed later և are related to Old Armenian or Middle Armenian.
 Among the ancient Armenian borrowings, first of all, the Persian "Assyrian borrowings" occupy a large place, which, on the one hand, make the connections and relations between the Armenian and Persian-Assyrian peoples, on the other hand, the Armenian, Persian and Assyrian languages.
 Borrowings from Hittite, Khurian, Urartian, and other extinct languages ​​are by definition descriptive, as the peoples who speak those languages ​​have left the historical arena since the formation of Grabar.
Using Hr. Acharyan, Ed. Aghayan, G. Jahukyan, Gr. According to Ghapantsyan, A. Sukiasyan divides the borrowed words that have passed into Armenian through Old Armenian, Middle Armenian առ dialects.
  Among them are Assyrian, Hittite, Urartian-Khurian, Persian, Iranian, ancient Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, Georgian, Turkish borrowings2.
In this classification he also performs: Al. Margaryan, adding European loans only in his classification3.
Let's talk about new loans.
 As we have seen, the ancient և old borrowings refer to the pre-world period, and the new and modern borrowed words, which are absent in the earlier stages of the language, are used only in Norwegian.
  "Relatively borrowed words are called new, and relatively borrowed words are called new borrowings."
Borrowings from European languages ​​(French, Italian, Greek, English, etc.) are words directly or indirectly passed on to Armenian.
He borrowed them in the new Armenian language mainly through literature.
  In addition to European loans, there are Russian loans that have been transferred directly from Russian or through it from other languages ​​to Armenian.
 At different stages of its development, the Armenian language has borrowed from Russian, both in writing and orally, the number of which is innumerable.
  Armenian borrows from many languages ​​of the world through Russian.
From this point of view, the role of Russian as a mediating language in enriching the Armenian vocabulary has been great for the last two hundred years.
 Now that role is gradually shifting to English.
Our goal is to study the latest loans in the Armenian press, to find out the way of their loan և to classify them according to semantic groups.
 The borrowed words are mainly nouns, and in the case of other parts of speech, the belonging to the word part will be indicated.
 Let us present the latest loans of the Armenian press, let us mention that we conducted the study using the following newspapers: "Hraparak", "Haykakan Zhamanak", "Zhoghovurd", "Chorrord Ishkhanutyun", "Zhamanak", "Irates", "Aravot" and the electronic press The addresses will be listed on the last page of the job.
1 See Margaryan Al., P. 149.
2 See Sukiasyan A., pp. 195-206.
3 See Margaryan Al., P. 163.
4 Ibid., P. 164.
Loans related to the political sphere.
  The study showed that the most common of the loans in the press are politicians.
  Let's bring examples: 1. Lobbing <lobbing <English. lobbing - the application of various pressures on the legislature to expect a profitable decision.
  "... The concert was postponed at the last moment, in Jlobbing" (www.aravot.am, "Is Russia lobbying pro-Armenian or pro-Azerbaijani?").
Many Armenians blamed Russia for being pro-Azerbaijani2. Concession - adjective, meaning specific to the concession, borrowed from the noun concession, which ed. In Aghayan's dictionary it has the following meaning: a contract by which the land belonging to the state, the wealth of the subsoil, the enterprise is handed over to the exploitation of the capitalists.
 The adjective is found in the press. "We do not want to blame the owners of the buildings, but it remains unclear how the concession management department gave permission for the construction" (Hraparak, 159,12 / 09/2014, p. 6).
3. Pressing - pressure.
  "Similar pressure was exerted with Azerbaijan on the borders of Karabakh and Armenia in the summer" (Irates, 63,14-16 / 10.2014, p. 5).
Medical loans.
1. Hematoma <hematoma <Greek. haima + oma suffix meaning tumor. A blood clot caused by damage to blood vessels.
  "Hematoma can be caused by hormonal disorders, infectious inflammatory diseases, sexual intercourse, etc." (www.sotskiy.am, 07/04/2014, "Uterine hematoma during pregnancy").
2. Precursor - a prelude, "The precursor is neither a drug nor a psychotropic substance" (Hraparak 159, 12/09/2014, page 4).
3. Drug dispensary - a medical institution for drug addicts, which deals with the treatment and prevention of the disease through permanent medical supervision.
  Dispensary <Dispenser <France. diapensaire <dispenser - to release, and drug <Greek. narke- anesthesia, intoxication.
  "In Avanarkod dispensary H. Karapetyan is undergoing a narcological examination ”(Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, page 7).
4. Addiction - drug-specific, borrowed. narco-logic <Greek. narke- numbness, numbness + logos - science. Department of Medicine, which studies the effects of drugs on the body, methods of treatment of addiction.
 "During the preparation of the materials, Karen Poghosyan undergoes a narcological examination" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, page 7).
5. Dietology <dietology <diet + Greek. logos - science-medicine department, which deals with the organization of patients' food.
  "European scientists in the field of nutrition have found out which women gain weight" (www.media-inform.com, 15/11/2013).
6. Obsessive-compulsive, obsessive-compulsive. a disease that afflicts gambling addicts.
 "Հարցը This issue is debatable, because the behavior is not compulsive either in its essence or in its obsessive generality" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, p. 14).
7. Compulsive - adjective, compulsion specific, compulsion. Defensive action to fight obsessions.
 "This disease is called compulsive gambling participation" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, p. 14).
8. Diaphragm <diaphragm <Greek. diaphragma - septum - 1. The muscular septum separating the thoracic and abdominal cavities - the membrane.
  2. An opaque barrier restricting light beams in the optical system, the size and position of which determine the brightness and quality of the image.
  3. A part of a microphone that receives or emits sound waves.
  4. A layer that forms a thin layer on the surface of something.
  5. Indication of the size of the aperture of the camera lens.
 The last meaning is used in the example. "Two features are controlled at once by the aperture of the camera.
 It describes the size of the hole diameter of the object "(www.iphoto.am).
Loans related to the financial sector.
1. Transfer - fr. Transfert - financial assistance - "Remittances from Russia have decreased compared to last year" (Haykakan Zhamanak, 155/3539, 12/09/14, p. 2).
2. State Department - Ed. Aghayan has the word department, which means an administrative unit in a bank.
  The word means Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
"US President B. Obama, as US Ambassador to Azerbaijan, presented to the Congress the Special Representative of the US Department of State for Eurasian Affairs Richard Tech "(Zhamanak 75, 28/09/2012, page 1).
3. Audit - audit <English. audit - auditing - financial audit of the organization.
"This is what the 2012 report on the process of passing the mandatory external audit of large organizations published by the RA Ministry of Finance last week. The results ”(www.banks.am- Armenian Grand Quartet).
4. Audit - Auditor-specific, borrowed. auditor <English - auditor - a proxy who is engaged in auditing the financial and economic sphere of the firm.
 "It is no less remarkable to see which auditing companies have served large organizations" (www.banks.am - Armenian Big Four).
5. Dividend - dividend <lat. dividendus - dividend - dividend, pkhb. profit received from the orphan.
  "We must win a political dividend, at least at the expense of Shant and his friends" (Irates, 57, 23-25 ​​/ 09/2014, p. 3).
6. Venture - Venture-specific, venture capital investor for start-up companies competing in the market.
 "There are no active active productions in Chvenchura funds" (Irates, 56, 19-22 / 09/2014, p. 3).
Loans related to the technical field.
1. Excavator - скакскаватор <English excavator <Latin excavare (dig) - a self-propelled excavator to dig the ground, move soil and stones լց to fill the body of a transport vehicle, excavator.
  "Three citizens of Armenia stole an excavator worth one ruble" (www.armlur.am).
2. Browser - an electronic program that allows you to receive various types of information.
  "Mail.ru has released a new browser for social network users" (www.168.am, 28/09/2012).
3. Facebook <English facebook - social network, created in 2004 ․ By Mark Zuckerberg. It helps people to connect with the person they need.
 "T. Kocharyan considers that in case of war in Armenia it is necessary to turn off the Facebook social network for a few days "(www.aravot.am, 20/11/2014).
4. Blogger - 1. A blogging system that allows you to create and maintain a blog without programming knowledge.
  2. Webmasters of a site containing various information.
  "The list includes ninety-eight names, including human rights activists, opposition representatives, journalists and bloggers" (Zhamanak, 75, 28/09/2012, p. 4).
Sports loans.
1. Futsal <futsal <English foot + salle-hall - mini, mini-football in a football gym.
  The 2014-2015 season of RA futsal starts on November 22. "Championship", "The championship will be held in a persistent and spectacular struggle" (www.168.am, 20/11/2014).
2. Bodybuilding <bodybuilding <English. body-body + building-type-gymnastics, bodybuilding.
 "The top bodybuilding coach offers his services" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, page 15).
3. Training <training <English training - training mode.
 "The bodybuilding coach also offers psychological training" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, page 15).
General loans.
  In addition to the above types, we find it expedient to single out also special type loans, where the placed examples do not refer to only one sector, they serve several sectors at the same time.
 The number of these examples is not so much, the meaning they express is more specific in the context.
To give examples: 1. Latent - this word is used in "politics" in medicine, it means hidden.
 "We are just talking about an honorable latent retreat, just an obvious defeat" (Zhamanak, 75, 28/09/2012, page 3).
 There may be potential trafficking.
2. Voyage <voyage <French voyage - to travel, to travel.
 "Visits to Strasbourg are another opportunity for more voyages and shopping" (Chorrord Ishkhanutyun, 264, 27/09/2010, p. 3).
3. Shopping.
  "The shopping festival expected by many will take place in Dubai from January 1" (www.hotelnews.am, 12/15/2014).
4. Monitoring <English monitoring, Greek monitor - environmental condition control, pollution detection, prediction of the basic quality of the natural landscape.
  The economic situation of the society is studied in a fixed period.
 "The first draft was sent to the monitoring commission, which means that there can be no legal backlash" (Zhoghovurd, 161, 18/09/2014, page 1).
5. Reserve - Ed. Aghayan comments on this word: 1. New forces to raise funds, to get a source, a warehouse.
  2. Resource of something.
  In the present sense, however, the word reserve means to allocate a place, to keep.
 "They reserved a room for two people in the hotel" (Zhoghovurd, 159, 16/09/2014, page 6).
6. Corporation - enterprise.
 "As for Mika Corporation, one billion drams was paid in the first half of 2010" (Aravot, 206/3808, 29/10/2010, page 5).
7. Rating - rating <English reting - rating, rating.
  "It is true that the rating of the Qatar-Russia match three days later was the lowest in the national history" (www.a1plus.am).
Most of the loans are made in Russian (moreover, Russian was the intermediary language).
 Many times the same word has been borrowed from our two languages ​​at the same time, ագրական spelling և phonetic differences have been obtained.
  For example, English. The name of the genre Fantasy was borrowed from Armenian at the same time from "Russian" to English, the proof of which is the parallel use of "fantasy" and "fantasy".
  We have noticed that there were English-mediated loans in the press, such as the words bodybuilding and training, which have arisen due to current technical and scientific developments.
Ed. Comparing with the data of Aghayan's "Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian" we noticed that there are quite a lot of medical loans in the press, the existence of which is the result of new devices, scientific development, improvement of equipment.
It should be noted that sports loans are the smallest in number.
Tatik Sargsyan LATEST LOANS IN THE PRESS Keywords: modern loans, Armenian press, vocabulary, vocabulary classifications, vocabulary, written-oral, necessary-unnecessary, direct-mediated loans, old and old, modern and new interlocutors
