FEATURES OF INTERMEDIATE DIALOGUE The motivation for writing this work is conditioned by the increase of the role of religion in the world geopolitical processes in recent years and the development of modern tendencies of religious dialogue, which is considered very modern.
 Originating in the heart of Protestantism, within a century the ecumenical movement has been able to attract not only the attention of the Orthodox և Catholic Church, but also very soon become an expression of interfaith tolerance and love.
 In order to achieve its goals, the supporters of the ecumenical movement, sparing no effort, organize numerous conferences, during which they discuss the events taking place, develop a further strategy for development and cooperation.
As a result, religious dialogue is gradually becoming one of the hallmarks of the modern age.
  Nevertheless, despite all the demand, the phenomenon of religious dialogue remains one of the least studied areas.
Modern religious dialogue is divided into three main types: • Interreligious dialogue, which takes place between representatives of different religious denominations.
 To put it bluntly, this is not about dialogue, but about polylogy, which brings to the fore common social and religious problems (terrorism, environmental issues, cultural and moral upbringing, religious extremism, religious and sectarian destructive organizations, as well as anti-sectarian destructive organizations). the search for solutions.
 The goal of interfaith dialogue is to overcome the confrontation between faith-based communities, to build tolerant relations, such as the peaceful coexistence of religion and religious associations, and, ideally, to "organize good cooperation to address various issues of public concern, including one of the most important issues in the world." cross-cultural formation ”[1].
• Dialogue between different communities based on the same faith, aimed at resolving existing issues between groups of different denominations included in the same religion.
 An example of this dialogue is the dialogue between the Orthodox and non-Chalcedonian churches (primarily the Armenian Apostolic Church).
 Thus, for centuries, orthodox debaters have assumed that the Armenian Church does not accept the divine, inseparable, untroubled nature of the Savior.
 However, due to the debates, it turned out that it was just a confusion, the problem was in the language and not in the doctrine.
• Secular dialogue, which includes the scientific elite - theologians, theologians, sociologists, political scientists, representatives of state and international organizations.
 This type of dialogue is devoted to the problems of the study of religion, its history, changes in development, the development of the methodology of religious studies and the laws of functional cooperation.
Of course, it must be admitted that the presented division is quite relative, as the types of dialogues are often mixed during joint conferences.
  In addition, religious conventions are generally held without representatives of theology or religion.
 Theorists are never invited to the international conferences of the Association for the History of Religion, but in the second half of the XX century first-class "brilliant" theorists appeared in the West: K. Raner, B. Lonergan, I. B. Metz, W. Panenberg և others.
 The Theory և Theories և Arguments are not accepted in the same way among religious people.
 However, it should be noted that theorists also prefer to participate in theoretical conferences rather than religious և to be published in theory journals.
It is appropriate to remember that P. became a serious impetus for the development of inter-religious dialogue. Abelard.
 He used his dialectic as a revelation of the truth through conflicting opinions and debates during church dogmas.
 In his work "Yes" no, Abelard contrasts biblical passages, quoting from supposed conflicts. "Considering the enlightened consciousness a supreme judge, the thinker tried to strengthen the principle of tolerance in inter-religious relations."
  In "The Debate between the Philosopher and the Jew" in Christianity, he created theoretical preconditions for interfaith cultural dialogue.
 Ն. Kuzansky եգ Ioan of Segovia assured that war does not resolve religious disputes, that is, it makes no sense to convert Muslims to Christianity.
 It is necessary to reveal և find common and real differences.
  To that end, they developed the idea of ​​a debate, a counter-conference.
  In addition, Kuzansky wanted to bring together merchants from various cities in the East to obtain first-hand information about Islam, and then planned to send specially trained men to Muslim lands, where they would prepare the ground for a conference.
Finally, the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (1962-1965) was a turning point in religious dialogue.
 For the first time in the history of Christianity, the issue of attitudes towards non-Christian churches was reconsidered on a doctrinal level.
  A special declaration "On Relations with Non-Christian Churches" was dedicated to the settlement of the issue, which clearly states: "The Church does not reject in all religions what is true և holy.
  It reveals with sincere respect the images of life, of the laws and teachings, which in many respects differ from Christianity, yet they are the true light that illuminates people. ”
One of the features of a religious dialogue is that it includes representatives of various religious denominations, which is reflected in the formation of a special, united ideological system.
 Thus, in the proclamation of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Nostraaetate, which had a profound effect on the attitude of Roman Catholic churches toward non-Christian churches, referred to Jews, Christians, and Muslims as "Christians who professed the faith of Abraham."
 Islam introduces Christians as "People of Scripture" and, for a deeper understanding of Abraham's followers, suggests that the Qur'an be viewed as the "Third Testament."
 For Muslims, the Qur'an is more than enough; it does not need new interpretations, but during special religious debates it is considered the "Third Testament".
  The Holy Trinity, the Old Testament, the New Testament, and the Third Testament, the Qur'an, allow us to emphasize the general nature of the divine books and to take an adequate approach to the metaphysics of the Qur'an among non-Muslims.
However, taking into account the above, we must state that the multifaceted relations and constant cooperation between faith-based communities, especially at the level of leaders, are not possible.
 There is also no consensus that religious dialogue is effective, despite the fact that, according to researchers, interfaith dialogue is an integral part of world development; it is not only possible but necessary.
  However, there are many who oppose inter-religious dialogue.
  Thus, U. McBright sees religion as "a dead end that poses a final, insurmountable obstacle, which, however, will remain even when all other obstacles to the development of intercultural dialogue are neutralized."
 This is explained in particular by the fact that there are small differences in the question of what the two different people with the same religion mean by that religion.
In the context of revealing the nature of modern ecumenism և ecumenical movement, we believe that the primary task is to consider ecumenism as a "concept" ideology.
  Such an approach allows us to better understand the nature of the various conceptions of ecumenism in the field, to give objective assessments to the factors that hinder or contribute to the union of churches.
Not being a new reality in the context of the history of the Christian Church, ecumenism undoubtedly became very urgent during the twentieth century, gaining qualitatively new emphases.
 Describing from this point of view the nature of the so-called "modern ecumenism" և its modern dimension, it must be said that ecumenism is not a mere mechanical reproduction of the ancient concept of reunification of the Christian Church, but an entirely new concept of "alienation" .
 The idea of ​​ecumenism has not undergone a qualitative or extraordinary transformation in general, but has changed in terms of modernization; it has become more flexible and dynamic in terms of the ideology of the "Christian ideal".
  It should be noted that, in contrast to the notions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, whose core belief was that the ecumenical movement could take place only in the realm of doctrinal-religious field, in modern ecumenism it is clearly understood that the unity of the churches can be excluded. Beyond the discussion of doctrinal issues, giving priority to the path of rapprochement and dialogue on the broader issues that contribute to cooperation.
 From this point of view, ecumenism tends to expand, to penetrate the sphere of "intercultural dialogue", which gives it wider opportunities, especially since ecumenism in recent decades has been trying to include more "space" programs, that is, to expand the policy of interfaith dialogue.
  By the way, the strategic line clearly observed in that process is manifested to such an extent that inter-religious ecumenical activity and its manifestations, as a rule, do not go beyond the scope of public-charitable activity.
It is obvious that although the ideological basis of "modern ecumenism" is genetically derived from the liberal mindset of the Protestant environment, it has been substantially reformed by the traditional mindset, that is, in the ecumenical movement the principle It becomes an absolute value for any participating church in the movement.
  This is the reason for the great success of the ideological union of Christianity, because in the circle of ordinary believers, the belief that "Christians unite in Christ becomes one church, which exists everywhere, every hour."
However, on the other hand, the natural sense of belonging to a particular church tradition plays a key role in shaping ecumenical perspectives, he said, adding that worldviews inevitably lead to conceptual differences.
From this point of view, the discussion of the conceptual differences between the Christian West and the East is of special scientific and historical interest.
The point is that the ideologues of the ecumenical movement, especially Western (Protestant) theorists, argue that the union of churches can only become real if the traditions of individual churches are "renewed."
 However, they do not answer the question on what basis this "renewal" should be done, or whether it is the same in practice whether it is possible to change the church traditions rooted over the centuries.
 It is well known in the system of theoretical theology that the following components are specific to Protestant ideas about ecumenism within the framework of the issue under discussion. The church is a "living organism" և must include and process all the diversity of the various extensions of the modern world.
 And since, according to them, the church is not a foreign and abstract structure, but a super-sensitive organism consisting of "individuals", so it must respond to modern challenges through modern "tools".
 In other words, the church must be transformed into a powerful cell operating in public life, which can also meet the demands of a "public person".
In contrast to the liberal position of Protestantism, the orthodox on the issue in question held unchanged from the principled position that the church, which is considered the "body of Christ", is by nature indestructible.
  From these positions, the existence of Protestant churches was even interpreted by the vast majority of Orthodox churches as a split of the Christian universal church.
 Moreover, many orthodox people are convinced that Protestantism has become an organism that contains many elements alienated from the "apostolic traditions".
In general, in modern ecumenism, the path to union cannot be built on the basis of a unique concept; it must develop a comprehensive and universal approach that harmoniously incorporates all the basic views on the issue at hand.
 It is this principle that orthodox authors use to criticize the use of the model of Western ecumenism in the traditional Eastern ecclesiastical environment.
 Orthodox author A. Schmemann criticizes both the negative manifestations of Western ecumenism and the policy of coercion against the Orthodox.
 In this regard, he writes: "One of the characteristic features of the Orthodox in participating in the ecumenical movement is that the Orthodox have not been given a choice, for them the ecumenical movement has been defined from the beginning to perform a certain function." [10]
 Developing his conceptual approaches to ecumenism, A. Schmemann points to backwardness. "The questions that the West has posed to the Orthodox are formulated in Western terms, expressing the unique experience and direction of Western development.
 The answers of the Orthodox are constructed within the categories that are understandable to the West, but hardly correspond to Orthodoxy. "[11]
In general, such assessments of ecumenism are often voiced by the representatives of the Orthodox world, giving the impression that, so to speak, "Western ecumenism" is indeed obligatory.
 In our opinion, these accusations are not fully justified.
The point is that Western Christianity is so diverse in its content, full of logical "dry" components, that its mechanical transfer to the Orthodox world gives rise to extreme assessments.
In any case, Orthodox thinkers are constantly trying to list and classify all the features which, in their opinion, can reveal the serious ideological differences between these two worlds.
 From that point of view, V. can be considered more typical. Lossky's view, which opposes Eastern conservatism to the aspirations of "Western unification" and claims: "The Aryan tradition has never separated mysticism from theology, as well as the individual experience of theology from the dogmas established by the church."
 At the same time, the theologian considers certain principles of modern-day thinking to be acceptable.
 V. Lossky pays special attention to K. According to Bart, "the church is not created, but discovered."
 We think V. Lossky thus implies that the union of the church does exist, that it should not be sought in the possibility of future compromises.
In his assessments, another prominent representative of orthodox theology and philosophy, N. Berdya, who, we think, has a broader position on the issue of the separation of Christendom.
 For the sake of truth, it should be noted that both the other representatives of Orthodoxy and N. Berdya, while addressing the appreciation of Western understandings of ecumenism, seeks to demonstrate the advantages of Orthodox tradition. [15]
From that point of view, it should be considered significant that N. Berdya's Protestantism "does not consider a church" in the real sense.
 Moreover, on the basis of comparative analysis, he argues that the Catholic Church is by nature "a freer structure" than, say, the Lutheran Church.
 And despite that, Berdya criticizes the historically negative statements of the Catholic Church.
 On that occasion he writes: "The Catholic Church, falling into the sin of pride and self-affirmation, considers itself the content of the cosmic church, rejecting Eastern Christianity."
 Ն. Berdya claims that the Orthodox Church, in contrast to Catholicism, first of all acts as a "church of tradition".
 According to him, orthodoxy is strongly opposed to the "tradition" of the Catholic Church, which is "oversaturated with authoritarian elements", and in the Protestant environment, according to him, the emphasis is on personal faith.
 Hence the theologian's founding conclusion that historically only the Orthodox Church relies heavily on the power of internal tradition, refraining from external authoritarianism.
A. also avoids dry definitions of the union of ecumenism and churches. Osipov, insisting that ecumenism does not presuppose a complete union of Christian churches without faith, ecclesiology, general principles of the ecclesiastical order, and a careful unity of life.
  That is, if the churches want to find a union, they must identify all the components of the Christian life.
Summarizing all this, we can conclude that the conceptual principles of theologians and philosophers who are advocates of Orthodoxy of the Church are in direct opposition to the Western concepts in the main issues. They are considered completely unacceptable by Eastern Christian standards for a number of reasons: 1. The full understanding of the unity of the Church, according to them, already exists in the traditions of Orthodoxy և mentality.
  For this reason, the aspiration of the church-structural union proposed by the Protestants is alien to the Orthodox.
 Especially since such a union exists under the auspices of the traditional Orthodox "Cosmic Church".
2. Eastern Christianity has reached such a doctrinal peak of the union that it makes superfluous any foreign or foreign spiritual experience outside.
3. Western ecumenism can not be considered valuable, practically applied in the context of Eastern Christianity, because there are serious differences between their spiritual and cultural worldviews.
A comparative analysis of the conceptual provisions of the proponents of Orthodoxy allows us to claim that they propose և substantiate a three-dimensional model of the Christian world, which presupposes the existence of three unique subjects (Catholicism, Protestantism, Orthodoxy).
 Moreover, the Orthodox consider the dialogue of these subjects practically impossible, as each of them uses a completely different categorical field in its careful evaluations.
 In this regard, they argue this heterogeneity as follows: 1. Catholicism attaches absolute importance to the ecclesiastical structure, which has its administrative components, constantly expanding but "unchanging dogma", as a result of which the careful communication between the faithful and the "church individuals" is insignificant.
 By the way, it is a fact that the Catholic Church is still not a member of the WCC, it acts as an observer inside that structure.
  Such a tactic, at least, is the Catholic Church's stable, unchanging policy. The Vatican intends to present itself to the world with its concept of a union of churches, although the Catholic elite is well aware that the WCC radically rejects the ambitions of cooperating churches. body.
2. In the context of Protestantism, the individual believer և his religious subjective self is used.
  In this case, the authoritarian elements are completely absent within the church, and the opportunity for self-expression is provided, however, the main thing is neglected - the community of believers.
3. In the mentality of Eastern Christianity, the church itself is used, the church with its inner unity, where the "caring collective" and the individual caring have the same caring needs.
Thus, comparing the ecumenical concepts of these three influential currents of Christianity, revealing the radical differences between them, it can be argued that in the age of modern ecumenism, the dialogue between Christian East and West can not take place only in the doctrinal-doctrinal context. components of civilization ”with cultural accents [6].
On this basis, the conclusion is formed that the following approaches to the unity of the Church are typical of the Orthodox way of thinking. Christian unity can not be achieved only through various external, structural and mechanical mergers of the administration; "the union of churches must be realized first within the individual religious, then" within the collective consciousness of the Christian community.
LITERATURE URL:
 http:
//rodsobr.narod.ru/79.htm (data date.
 23.05.16). [4] Журавский А. W., Christianity and Islam.
 Social problems of dialogue, Moscow, "SCIENCE", 1990, p. 36, URL.
 http:
//eastwest.rsuh.ru/binary/67097_19.1318243440.09217.pdf (data date.
 20.05.16). URL.
 http:
//religion.ng.ru/problems/2005-12-21/6_dialog.htm (03.02.16), celebration of the 75th anniversary of the foundation of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul in North Star, URL.
http:
//www.orthodox-canada.com/ru/75th-anniversary-peter-and-paul-church-in-northstar/?act=news&div=8243
 03.02.16). [10] Florovski G., On the borders of the Church, Orthodoxy and Ecumenism.
  Documents иURL.
 http:
//liv.piramidin.com/publ/berdiaiev/Berdiaiev_Sbornik_statei.htm#8 (data collection.
 03.02.16). Nazeli Hayrapetyan FEATURES OF INTERCHURCH DIALOGUE Keywords: inter-church dialogue, ecumenism, tolerance, Catholic Church, Orthodox Church, Protestantism, ideology.
