CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TORTURE This work is dedicated to revealing the essence and content of torture as a criminal law, revealing its various manifestations, international legal documents, case law of the European Court of Human Rights, criminal law analysis of some foreign countries.
  The aim of the scientific work was to identify the little-known or not-discovered sides of the given crime, to find out the compliance of the current criminal law regulations with the conventional requirements, to address the issues of precedent-setting law, as well as problems in the legal field and ways to solve them.
Torture as a criminal phenomenon, an independent crime, has been the subject of study since the 1950s.
 Legislation on this was put forward in 1950 by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the European Convention), in particular Articles 3-15.
  Article 3 of the Convention provides for the prohibition of torture. No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and this right may never be restricted (Article 15 հոդված 2).
  In other words, for the first time, torture was addressed at the international legal level, but only in general terms, which could not be sufficient to prevent it, and in the case of execution, in terms of criminal liability, which took into account other international legal acts, which reflected this crime in more detail. essence 1.
 From this point of view, it is necessary to refer to the 1984 UN Convention against Torture, Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. December 10 (hereinafter referred to as the UN Convention against Torture), which defines torture as any act by which a person intentionally inflicts severe or mental pain or suffering on him or her for extorting information or a confession or punishing an act which or the execution is suspected of intimidation or coercion, or intimidation or coercion of him or her or a third party, or for any reason based on any kind of discrimination, when such pain or suffering is caused by or with the instigation or consent of a government official or other official.
 This does not include pain or suffering arising from or specific to legal punishment.
In fact, the UN Convention against Torture gives the concept of "torture", reveals its content, from which it can be concluded that this crime is a crime against public service in the sense of the Convention, and as a mandatory feature of the subject, the goals are separated.
 The mentioned convention, in fact, indicates the conventional nature and scope of torture as a separate crime; assumes the compliance of the domestic legislation with its requirements.
The manifestations that constitute the essence of torture, such as severe physical pain or mental suffering, have been the subject of comprehensive study in the work of many theorists (Iceling Reid, Debra Long, etc.) և in various precedent decisions of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court).
The approach that the European Convention is a "living tool to be interpreted in the light of conditions" has been developed in the field of practical activity by various theorists in the professional literature.
 Prevention of Torture should not 1 See Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or PunishmentDegrading Treatment Or Punishment Strasbourg, 26/11/1987.
2 See Guide to Jurisprudence on Torture and Ill-treatment Article 3of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights by Debra Long Geneva, June 2002, p. 15, The prohibition of torture A underestimate the role and significance of other international instruments, the combination of which It also ensures the procedure and peculiarities of the criminal qualification of the mentioned crime, the requirements presented to the competent bodies during the proceedings, as well as the effective activity aimed at its prevention by various independent structures3.
  Torture is the most severe and dangerous form of cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment.
The constituent, characteristic elements of torture are distinguished: • severe physical or mental pain or suffering, • the intent of the perpetrator, • the existence of a special purpose - to punish, intimidate, obtain information, etc.5.
The European Court of Human Rights has established a case-law that in each case, the act of torture must take into account its intensity, duration, physical and / or mental impact, age, sex, health, means and methods of use6.
  As a distinguishing feature, a special place is given to the goal.
1987 Եվրոպ The European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment states the purpose of punishing, intimidating, and obtaining information;
 International legal practice has, in fact, established certain criteria by which the competent national authorities are obliged to be guided in case of qualifying the act as torture, in each case having the above-mentioned criteria as a guide.
At the same time, it should be noted that the European Court, emphasizing the need to develop a common practice, stressed that, according to Human Rights Handbooks, no. 6 page 7, Tyrer v UK Application no. 5856/72, Loizidou v TurkeyApplication No. 15318/89.
3 See the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, the 1966 UN International Covenant on Civil and Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
4 See Article 1 of Resolution 3452 (XXX) adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 9 December 1975.
5 See United Nations Convention Against Torture June 26, 1987.
6 See The prohibition of torture A guide to the implementation of Article 3of the European Conventionon Human Rights Aisling Reidy Human rights handbooks, No. 6, page 12.
Depending on the cultural, religious or other characteristics of a particular state, there may be misconceptions, but in any case, objective criteria can be set for states that have ratified the European Convention7.
 Numerous precedents suggest that torture is characterized by cruelty and harshness, and that its level should significantly exceed the same characteristics manifested in the case of cruel, inhuman treatment8.
  At the same time, in the case law of the European Court, there have been cases when a non-torture act was committed under the criminal law of a particular state, but during the examination of the case the court came to the conclusion that in that case, taking into account all the circumstances of the case, the act should be qualified as torture.
 As an example, let us mention the case of "Aydin v. Turkey" 9.
 According to the European Court, the Turkish woman was raped and raped at the police station, taking advantage of her vulnerability, breaking her resistance, causing severe physical and mental suffering.
 The court assessed the mentioned act as torture, justifying its position by the fact that the act of the state official was very cruel, caused serious psychological consequences, therefore there is a violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
The other, in our opinion, is a very important aspect related to cases of torture in the private sector, in particular, the performance of the objective side of a given crime by a private entity that is not considered a state official.
 The European Court of Justice has stated its position on this issue, noting that Member States must take all measures to ensure the protection of Article 3 of the Convention, even in the case of a private entity10.
 That is, the responsibility falls both in case of committing the mentioned crime by a special and a private subject.
 It should be noted that the countries studied by Canada (France, France, Finland, 7 See The prohibition of torture A guide to the implementation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights Aisling Reidy Human rights handbooks, No. 6, p. 11.
8 See Ilhan v Turkey Application no. 22277/93, Akkoc v Turkey Application 22947/93, Campbell andCosans v UK Application, No. 7511/76.
9 See Aydin v Turkey 57/1996/676/866.
10 See Guide to Jurisprudence on Torture and Ill-treatment Article 3of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights by Debra Long Geneva, June 2002, p. 22.
Estonia, Ukraine) criminal law provides for uniform legal provisions that reproduce the conventional norm11.
It should be noted that the Republic of Armenia has long ago ratified the above-mentioned documents, however, until 2015. Legislative amendments (09.06.15 HO-69-N) The crime of torture was envisaged by Article 119 of the RA Criminal Code, which did not reflect the conventional requirements.
 Only after the mentioned changes was the crime of torture enshrined in Article 309․1 of the RA Criminal Code, taking into account international legal standards.
  At the same time, it should be noted that in the context of legal reforms, the crime of torture proposed by the draft RA Criminal Code is almost identical to the crime of the same name envisaged by the current legislation.
It is true that the provision of the crime of torture is to some extent a step forward in the implementation of international law, but the practice shows that the body conducting the proceedings often faces problems.
The first omission refers to the fact that the crime in question is directed against the state service. Its subject is specific, the official, while analyzing the objective side of the crime of torture, it becomes obvious that the general subject can be the subject of a given crime.
 As a result, we are in contradiction with the logic of the criminal legislation, holding the general subject accountable with a crime that requires a special subject, in other words, we consider the subject of a crime against the state service to be a subject that is not an official.
 The state, by reserving state powers to officials, at the same time envisages strict measures of influence, including criminal law, therefore, in case of committing a crime committed by an "official" or a private person, it cannot be considered acceptable within the same sanction.
  We think that this type of crime needs to be reconsidered from the point of view of the differentiated responsibility of the subject staff.
  We paid special attention to Article 309 (Exercise of official powers), 309-1 (Torture) և 341 of the RA Criminal Code (testimony or explanation or false conclusion by a judge, prosecutor, investigator or investigative body. 11 See An Act respecting the Criminal Law 1985 Canada, Criminal code 1994 France, The CriminalCode of Finland 2010, Penal Code 2002 Estonia, Criminal code of Ukraine, 2001.
the issue of the correlation between the types of crimes provided for in the articles.
Let us first refer to the crimes defined by Articles 309 և 309-1.
 In the field of practical activities, when there are cases of violence by officials, which by their nature are not so dangerous as to constitute torture, the act is often qualified under Article 309, the transfer of official powers.
  However, the procedures for exercising official authority are very diverse, so it is unlikely to be acceptable, for example, to sign an official document by an unauthorized official, to identify the danger of cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment, and to impose a penalty within the same sanction.
  We think that a clear separation should be made to ensure the realization of adequate responsibility in case of actions differentiated by public danger.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the European Court, in addition to its responsibility for torture, focuses on cases of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 Theorists also give their notion12.
 Inhuman treatment or punishment is defined as a deliberate act or inaction that causes intense physical or mental suffering, and degrading treatment or punishment is an act that degrades or degrades a person's dignity, increases fear, suffering, or inferiority. Physical or mental resistance also causes considerable physical or mental suffering.
  Moreover, the European Court has singled out specific manifestations of such treatment or punishment as application techniques.
 These are deprivation of sleep, stress, deprivation of food and drink, exposure to loud noises, or suffocation with a pillow.
 However, these are not all manifestations of cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment; in each case, taking into account all the circumstances of the case, the court itself decides whether there is such a case. 12 See Guide to Jurisprudence on Torture and Ill-treatment Article 3of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights by Debra Long Geneva, June, 2002, p. 27.
death or punishment13.
  In view of the above, we believe that the fundamental value of social justice is not only the provision of the provisions of Articles 309 և 309-1, it is necessary to establish a so-called intermediate body, which will allow for a stricter liability than the one provided for in Article 309, on the other hand, a milder punishment than the one provided for in the sanction of Article 309-1.
  Therefore, in our opinion, it is expedient to envisage, separately, in a separate part of Article 309-1, liability for cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment, ensuring that the sanction complies with the above requirement.
It is also worth noting the issue of the reciprocity of the ratio of Articles 309-1 և 341, because in this case, in fact, we are dealing with the relationship of the general և part.
 Complications may arise in qualifying such offenses within the framework of existing legal regulations, especially in the case of the qualitative type of Article 341 (the same act combined with torture).
  Analyzing the above-mentioned crimes, it becomes clear that Article 341 is a private manifestation of Article 309-1 in its content, while the second part of Article 341 establishes responsibility for the same act, which was accompanied by torture.
  In other words, the qualitative type of a particular case refers to the general և at the same time defines the same sanction as Article 309-1, which in practice may cause serious obstacles to qualifying the act under Article 309-1 of the RA Criminal Code or the second part of Article 341. with.
 A situation arises when it is possible to qualify an act under two different articles at the same time, which does not correspond to the principle of legal certainty.
 The state must not only observe, apply the laws adopted by it, but also guarantee the conditions of their legal-practical application.
  It must ensure not only the existence of the law, but also the quality in line with the idea of ​​the rule of law: clarity, accessibility և predictability14.
  However, as we note, there is a vague legislative solution, in which case 13 See Tyrer v UK Application No. 5856/72.
14 See The Council of Europe and the Rule of Law-An Overview. CM Documents, CM (2008) 170, pp. 8-9.
In which case the act can be qualified at the same time by two different articles, which is inadmissible in a state governed by the rule of law, does not follow from the principle of the rule of law, causes legal uncertainty.
 We think that the solution of this problem can be ensured by eliminating Part 2 of Article 341 of the RA Criminal Code, and as an preferable option for qualifying such actions, look at Article 309-1.
States parties to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms have an obligation to ensure the rights and freedoms set out in the Convention for each person under their jurisdiction.
  This obligation includes not only the obligation of States parties to the Convention not to infringe upon the rights and freedoms set forth in the Convention, but also the positive obligation of that State to take such measures, including the adoption of relevant domestic law, to protect those rights and prevent possible infringement by third parties.
 From this point of view, we would like to point out that in many cases Member States have failed to fulfill their obligations due to inefficient and operative structures to ensure the rapid detection of torture and to achieve the goal of bringing the perpetrators to justice.
  The European Court considers it extremely important to ensure a comprehensive and effective investigation into each case of torture, as the lack of such a structure poses a serious threat to the protection of the rights guaranteed by the Convention.
  In various judgments, the European Court has emphasized the need to meet the evidentiary criteria beyond a reasonable doubt with a sufficient evidence base15, which is, of course, impracticable under imperfect legislation.
  Therefore, taking into account the international legal experience, it can be concluded that in order to realize the criminal responsibility for torture, it is first necessary to reform the domestic legislation, taking into account the above-mentioned recommendations, to put into practice the justifiably justifiable ones. 15 See Ribitsch v Austria Application no. 18896/91, Labita v Italy Application, No. 26772/95 AssenovNo. 23657/94.
tough legal structures, which will ultimately lead to torture, ostensibly to prevent an independent crime.
Karen Meliksetyan CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TORTURE Keywords: torture, convention, European Court of Human Rights, severe physical pain, severe mental suffering, official Summary.
