JUDICIAL STORAGE OF TESTIMONY In forensic science, the deposition of testimony on the initiative of a lawyer is mentioned as an independent way of prosecuting the data obtained by the Defender recently.
Thus, S. Pashinyan proposes to legislate the procedure of depositing evidence before a judge or investigating judge.
1 L.A. Voskobitova mentions the deposition of testimony in court as a way of legalizing the data obtained as a result of the inquiry by the defense attorney.
  According to the author, the judicial deposition of testimony during the preliminary investigation is expedient in situations when the defense attorney, considering the real possibility of the investigator committing illegal acts or making threats against another person, or the age of the witness, is not sure that he can summon his witness to court. him.
 The judicial deposition of testimony enables the defense attorney to obtain forensic evidence, the legalization of which does not require additional investigative actions.
2 Chapter 42 of the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) enshrines the institution of judicial deposition of testimonies.
 The introduction of this completely new procedure for the Armenian legal system was suggested by the OSCE / ODIHR in the final report of the trial monitoring program in Armenia, according to which the deposition procedure should be equally accessible to the prosecution and the defense.
3 According to Article 328 of the Draft, the judicial deposition of testimonies is carried out: 1) in order to ensure the credibility of the accused's confession, through the mediation of the investigator.1 See Pashin S. А., Судебные прения в механизме установления унисты по уголовному делу.
citizenship 12.00.09 - Corner process; M., 1988, page 8.
2 See Voskobitova L. А., Ugovolny process. Учебник для бакалавров, / M. 2015, pp. 356-358 3 See the final report of the OSCE / ODIHR Trial Monitoring Program in Armenia (April 2008 - July 2009), p. 88.
2) in case of a reasonable presumption of not being able to appear at the trial, in order to obtain credentials from any person through the mediation of the investigator or a private participant in the proceedings.
As we note, the draft allows the private participant in the criminal proceedings, including the defense counsel, to initiate the process of judicial deposition of the testimony, which is aimed at ensuring one of the main principles of criminal proceedings, the principle of equality of arms.
  The principle of equality of arms will be maintained during the preliminary investigation if the lawyer has the opportunity to gather evidence, including by depositing the testimony of a witness և expert in court.
  Judicial deposition of testimonies enables lawyers to perform the function of gathering evidence, independent of the investigative body, which is mostly aimed at adopting the position of the ombudsman's opponent.
The introduction of the institute of deposition of testimonies on the initiative of a lawyer will contribute to the strengthening of the elements of competition in pre-trial proceedings, will strengthen the ombudsman's independence in obtaining evidence, will alleviate the dependence of the defense on the investigator and the prosecutor.
  The deposition of testimony is an independent way of prosecuting the data obtained on the initiative of the defense, regardless of the discretion of the investigator and the prosecutor.
  The court is not a party to the accusation; in case of judicial deposition of testimonies, it can provide equal opportunity for the body of the criminal prosecution և defense counsel.
In case of a reasonable presumption of not being able to appear in court, the deposition of the testimony of any person, in particular a witness, is generally acceptable. Such an institution is provided by the legislation of a number of countries.
Thus, according to Article 109 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Moldova (hereinafter referred to as the CCP), if a witness is unable to attend a court hearing due to voluntary reasons for being abroad, he or she may be questioned by a prosecuting judge at the request of the prosecutor, providing the suspect, defendant, defense counsel, victim. նարավոր The opportunity for the prosecutor to ask the questioned witness questions.
  The institute of judicial deposition of witness testimony in Estonia operates in a completely different procedure.
  In particular, Article 67 of the Estonian CCP provides that a pre-trial judge, taking into account the gravity of the crime or the existence of exceptional circumstances, shall make a motion to the prosecutor's office to declare the person an anonymous witness to ensure the safety of the witness.
 The judge interrogates the witness only after, on the basis of sufficient evidence, he is convinced of the need to ensure the safety of any witness.
The Criminal Procedure Code of Ukraine regulates the procedure of interrogation of a witness-victim during the preliminary investigation.
 According to Article 225 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine, it can be done in exceptional cases in the presence of a witness վտանգ a threat to the life or health of the victim, serious illness or other circumstances that may make it impossible to interrogate them in court or affect the completeness of the testimony.
The draft OSCE / ODIHR report on the draft states that the purpose of the adoption procedure is to prevent the free reading of pre-trial testimony by law enforcement officials during the trial, which is a common practice (from a competitive point of view, including in Armenia).
4 In contrast to an investigator conducting an out-of-control interrogation in his or her office, in the case of an interrogation և depositing testimony in the courtroom's mediation, the court will provide the witness with complete information, complete record of that information, and warrant voluntary testimony.
  In the case of a testimony, the interrogation is carried out by the investigator, but it follows from the requirement of the right to a fair trial that the standard of a fair trial should be applied in this procedure, according to which the party who initiated the interrogation was the first to ask questions.
  In case of judicial deposition of testimony on the initiative of the defense counsel, the discretion of the investigator to remove the questions asked by the defense counsel and leave it unanswered is significantly limited.
  If, in case of depositing a testimony, he defends the relevance or admissibility of the question 4 See OSCE / ODIHR Conclusion on the Draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia.
  Conclusion number CRIM -ARM / 228/2013 [LH] // Warsaw, April 23, 2013 Page 45.
A dispute arises between the investigator and the ombudsman, and then the court decides on the legality of the ombudsman's inquiry.
It can be said that at the current stage of development of criminal procedure law, judicial deposition has a limited application.
It can be used only when there are grounds to believe that the victim or the victim can no longer appear in court or can exercise the right not to testify.
 Based on the summary of the practice of judicial deposition of testimonies, it will be possible in the future to refer to other manifestations of judicial deposition of evidence on the initiative of defense counsel.
 This ground for depositing testimony is intended to guarantee the defense the right to a cross-examination under Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (of the accused to question witnesses against him) when there is a reasonable presumption that the interrogator cannot be present. may lawfully refuse to testify during the trial or trial.
 The logical continuation of this regulation is Article 354, Part 1, Clause 6, according to which, upon the mediation of a party, the testimony given in court, pre-trial proceedings or in compliance with the requirements established by law, as well as the attached appendices (pictures, drawings, diagrams, photographs, recordings). , publication of videos, recordings, videos) is allowed, if in the pre-trial proceedings the testimony was deposited in accordance with the requirements of the law.
 Thus, the discussed provisions of the Draft are intended to prevent the situation when in pre-trial proceedings only the testimony of a person in the presence of an investigator, to whom the defense has not had the opportunity to ask questions directly, can be the basis of the final judicial act.
Thus, analyzing the legislative regulations of a number of foreign countries in the case of a reasonable presumption of not being able to appear in court on the institution of judicial deposition of testimonies, we can state that its enshrining in the Draft is quite a progressive step in the interests of both the Commons and justice.
  However, the same cannot be said about the second ground for the judicial deposition of testimonies, the deposition of the confession of the accused.
  There are conflicting opinions about this institute in the literature.
Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
  However, in all cases where torture or coercion may be used in person before being taken to court, reference should be made to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
 It follows that each State Party ensures that any person who claims to have been tortured in any territory under the jurisdiction of that State has the right to lodge a complaint with the competent authorities of that State and for an immediate and impartial examination of his case. .
 5 Measures shall be taken to ensure the protection of the plaintiff or witness against ill-treatment or intimidation as a result of his complaint or testimony.
 If there is an international norm, regardless of whether the suspect or accused was questioned in the presence of a judge in the pre-trial proceedings or not, if he / she declares that he / she was tortured during the trial, the competent state bodies are obliged to conduct an impartial investigation immediately.
  In this case, the legislative fixing of this institute is inexpedient.
Although the Draft sets out in detail the procedure for the judicial deposition of testimony, the requirements for the decision to file a petition, however, some issues related to the deposition of the confession of the accused remain incompletely clarified or not clarified.
 Let us turn to some of them.
Thus, the Draft does not answer the question whether the court that deposited the confession of the accused can be the court that actually resolves the case.
 After all, the latter may have a prejudiced attitude.
 According to Article 7 3 3 of the Draft, a judge must be impartial when administering justice or providing other judicial guarantees.
 See page 5 of Article 13 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
According to Article 63 of the Constitution, everyone has the right to an independent, public and reasonable hearing by an independent tribunal.
  The enactment of these provisions by law is intended to guarantee the right of every person to a fair trial by an impartial judge.
  This uncertainty created in the project can be eliminated by any of the following methods: or impose a ban on the substantive examination of the case by the court which deposited the confession, or establish the right of the defense to conduct a substantive examination of the case by the same court if there is a reasonable suspicion that the court may be prejudiced.
  In the case of a perfect legal settlement, it is assumed that we would be guided by the first option: to forbid the court itself to examine the merits of the case.
  However, taking into account the small size of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, the workload of the courts, the scarcity of resources, we think the second option is more expedient.
Pursuant to Article 331, Part 3 of the draft, the court ensures the observance of the interrogation procedure defined by this Code, as well as the exercise of the right of cross-examination during the deposition of the testimony.
  Although the participation of persons entitled to cross-examination during the testimony of testimonies is welcome, this regulation contradicts the requirements of Article 239, Part 2 of the draft, as the accused is interrogated separately from other persons.
 The investigator shall take measures to prevent the accused from communicating with another person interrogated or subject to interrogation within the framework of the given proceedings.
It is not clear from the content of the draft what powers the court has when depositing the confessions of the accused and how it should ensure the authenticity of those testimonies.
 In pre-trial proceedings, the court carries out a preliminary or subsequent review, as a result of which the legality of the decisions, actions or inaction of the criminal prosecution body is determined.
 Does the presence of a judge in the deposition of testimonies, the fixing of testimonies fit within the functions of a judge?
  Some theorists point out that the court's participation in the interrogation in order to ensure the credibility of the accused's confession is beyond judicial control.
6 Under Article 331 3 3 of the Draft, the court has no right to ask questions of merit.
 As we notice, in case of depositing the testimony of the accused, the judge has no right to ask questions about the essence of the accusation.
  The mentioned chapter of the draft does not envisage the possibility for a judge to present objections in the protocol.
  In fact, it turns out that the judge is not present at the interrogation, but is passively present at the interrogation, he has no right to prevent or respond to possible violations during the interrogation.
  Therefore, the presence of a judge in the pre-trial investigation can in no way be considered judicial control.
 It turns out that the judge, in order to ensure the reliability of the confession, is present at the interrogation and performs a special function of a notary or escort. that is, to confirm or fix the result of the investigative action carried out in his presence.
7 In order to be able to understand how effective the introduction of the institution of depositing the confession of the accused will be, we must make the following question a subject of discussion: Can the deposition of confessional testimony prevent the current vicious practice of extorting testimony from suspects or defendants through torture, beatings, or other means?
  Besides, in this way, will it be possible to finally eradicate from our legal system even during the Soviet years? Vishinsky's practice, according to him, only confessional testimony is enough to convict a person.
Inherent in the principle of the presumption of innocence is an essential guarantee not only not to testify against oneself, but also the right not to confess one's guilt.
  International norms stipulate that "in deciding the charge against a person, every person has the right to testify against himself or herself free from compulsion on the basis of full equality."
8 Another rule states that “law enforcement agencies do not improperly use the status of a detainee or a detainee to confess to him.” 6 See JL Worral, Criminal Procedure, 4th edition, New York // 2010, pp. 15-17.
7 See Ghambaryan A., Reforms of pre-trial proceedings in RA criminal proceedings.
 Scientific-practical manual, Yerevan, 2010, Pages 53-55.
8 See Article 14 (3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
in order to compel him to sin or otherwise to impersonate anyone else. ”
9 According to these համապատասխան other relevant international standards, any form of coercion, including torture and other forms of inhuman treatment, is prohibited.
  In particular, the Prosecutors' Guidelines prohibit prosecutors from using evidence if it was obtained through illicit means, which is considered a gross violation of the suspect's rights, especially if the means involved torture, cruel or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, or other human rights violations10.
UNHCR General Comment No. 20 on Admissible Evidence has taken a comprehensive approach, which includes evidence obtained through coercion, demanding that the law prohibit the use of statements or confessions obtained through torture or other prohibited treatment in court proceedings11.
Referring to the prohibition of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the European Court of Human Rights has ruled in its precedent that serious allegations of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment should be fully investigated.
  The authorities should, within their competence, take all reasonable steps to provide evidence of the incident, including eyewitness testimony, and forensic evidence12.
 In the event that a person is in good health at the time of detention but injuries are found at the time of release, the State shall be responsible for providing reliable explanations as to the causes of those injuries13.
RA Criminal trial Based on the requirements of international law, it also prohibits torture, coercion, deception, violation of the rights of a suspect or accused person. 9 See paragraph 1 of the 1991 OSCE Document in Moscow.
10 See Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors, Guide 16, adopted at the 8th UN Conference on Crime Prevention and the Treatment of Criminals, Havana, Cuba 1990 (August 27-September 7), pp. 14-16.
11 See UNHCR General Comment 20: Torture արգել prohibition of ill-treatment or punishment (para. 7) CCPR / C / GC / 20, 10 March 1992, paragraph 2.
12 See Tanrıkulu Tanrikuluv. Turkey, ECtHR judgment 8 July 1999 // paragraphs 104-106.
13 See Aksoy v. Turkey, ECtHR judgment, 18 December 1996 // paragraph 61.
the use of evidence obtained as a result of disciplinary violations.
Both international law and domestic law provide for a strict obligation for state authorities to investigate allegations of torture, and data from monitoring monitoring trials indicate that this obligation has not always been fulfilled.
  Defendants repeatedly told the court that they had been beaten by police and ill-treated while in police custody14.
The institute of depositing the confessions of the accused can be an effective tool to prevent the torture of the accused և the expression of cruel, inhuman treatment.
  However, we believe that in reality the mentioned institution cannot prevent the investigator from using pressure or torture on the same persons and then interrogating them in the presence of a judge, especially in cases when detention is used as a measure of restraint, when the person is mostly under the direct control of the criminal prosecution. , and the judge's participation in the interrogation is partial.
One of the shortcomings of the draft is that the latter does not provide for a separate basis for the judicial deposition of the testimonies of juvenile victims and witnesses.
  Meanwhile, in a number of international documents, criminal trials in individual countries provide for the possibility of judicial deposition of the testimonies of juvenile victims.
  Thus, in accordance with paragraph 26 of the Council of Europe Recommendation NR (97) 13 of 10 September 1997 on the protection of the right to protection of witnesses, vulnerable witnesses (juvenile witnesses, victims of domestic violence) must be interrogated or in the presence of the judiciary , and the defense must have ample opportunity to challenge it.
 This provision, in essence, refers to the judicial deposition of the testimony of minors in pre-trial proceedings, as the testimony of a juvenile is given during pre-trial proceedings in the presence of a court in which he or she, the defense, may participate.
  Directly in the Project 14 See Final Report of the Trial Monitoring Program in Armenia (April 2008-July 2009) Warsaw, March 8, 2010, pp. 73-79.
There is no basis for judicial deposition of the testimony of juvenile victims, but their legitimate interests զուգ In order to combine the right of counterclaim of the accused, the judicial deposition of the testimony of a juvenile victim must be carried out on the basis of Article 312 նախագծ 2 of the draft, ie the person has no opportunity to appear at trial.
  The point is that according to international legal standards, it is necessary to avoid bringing juvenile victims, especially victims of sexual exploitation, to court, to interrogate them twice in order to exclude the possibility of them becoming victims again (double victimization).
There are certain steps in our legal system, aimed at establishing a special procedure for the interrogation of juvenile victims, developing more flexible and effective structures for the protection of the interests of juvenile victims.
  In particular, Clause 50 of the RA Government Decision No. 303-N on approving the program of measures arising from the National Strategy for the Protection of Human Rights stipulates the need to provide additional legal guarantees for maintaining confidentiality in juvenile criminal cases, and Clause 51 of the same decision requires further measures. 1. to define by the Criminal Procedure Code in the special order of confrontation with the participation of a juvenile և other investigative actions, in particular,
In addition, the draft law "On Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code", which is already in circulation, also referred to the requirement of conducting an interrogation with underage delays without undue delays, in order to exclude his interrogation as much as possible in the future.
Combining the analysis of theoretical sources և the legislation of foreign countries, we find that one of the grounds for judicial deposition of testimony (in the case of a reasonable presumption of inability to appear at the trial to obtain any credible testimony, mediated by an investigator or a private participant) is justified. It is aimed at the effective conduct of the trial, and as for the deposition of the confession of the accused, some provisions of the Draft on the regulation of this institution need to be clarified.
  Thus, we propose to review the content of the norms of the RA Criminal Procedure Code regarding the institution of depositing the confession of the accused և to increase the deposition of the testimony of juveniles as a separate basis.
Arpine Arakelyan JUDICIAL DEPOSIT OF INSTRUCTIONS Keywords: judicial deposition of testimony, judicial testimony of a witness.
