THE ROLE OF ACMEBOLOGICAL CULTURE OF THE LEADER IN THE PROFESSIONAL ENVIRONMENT The issues of increasing the efficiency of the organization, its management and administration, the effective organization of the process have become very important at present.
  The current trend shows that this can be largely due to the personal background of employees և managers, as well as professional development և formation of an archeological culture, ie a high level of self-knowledge, self-realization, self-development, self-discovery և self-modernization.
The study of the mentioned problems is carried out within the framework of acmeology.
 The word "acme" comes from the Greek word "acme", which means the highest point of development of something, especially a person (ant. Marasmus) 1.
 Acmeology examines issues such as professionalism and different levels of work efficiency, as well as the psychological preconditions underlying them.
Acme is a multidimensional condition of a person, which, although it takes a long time in a person's life, but always really shows how mature the person is as a citizen, as a professional-businessman, as a rich or poor person with social ties.
 At the same time, akmen is not considered a statically stable state, but, on the contrary, differs with more or less variability և variation2.
For the development of acne, a person's capacity for self-realization is used in the following areas: self-awareness, self-determination, self-esteem, level of ambition, meaning, self-regulation, self-organization.
The self-realized specialist, the professional, cannot develop his professionalism only due to the knowledge acquired from one field.
For that, it is necessary to develop special skills, to acquire knowledge from other spheres.
  However, from an innovative point of view, it is not so much the amount of knowledge that is needed, but the ability to maintain a balance between what is known and what is not known3.
At the same time, insufficient level of professional self-awareness leads to ineffective professional activity.
  And the high level of development allows to form the strong professional qualities of a person, to evaluate the already existing qualities and achievements, to plan the directions of self-development.
Self-esteem is an important component of professional self-awareness.
 S.F. The data received by Murashko allow to conclude. The deeper a professional penetrates the depths of his profession, masters the heights of professionalism, the more adequate the ideas about his own professional self become.
 The latter, in turn, allows the subject to more precisely, accurately regulate the behavior և activities in the professional environment, taking into account the psychological possibilities4.
  Profession is not only a job or just a qualification, a society of people, but also a way of life.
One factor influences a person's self-esteem.
 Living in a social environment, a person strives to use his personal potential in that social environment, other people, which will help him to be more satisfied with his own actions, will contribute to the realization of his own significance, life satisfaction, harmonious, harmonious, state.
 This speaks of a psychologically healthy person, that is, the higher the level of psychological well-being of a person, the greater the person's desire for self-realization6.
You. Zinchenko և I. A study by Bosigina found that self-actualization of professionally healthy leaders was more effective than non-healthy ones.
 They are characterized by professional activity, independence, purposefulness, vitality, satisfaction with the profession, acceptance of the new, creativity, initiative, practice, etc.7.
 That is, the level of self-realization of the leader is affected by the level of psychological health of the leader.
As a result of the theoretical observations, it can be assumed that the level of development of the acmeological culture of the manager largely determines the quality of management, at the same time the level of self-realization of the manager is predetermined by the peculiarities of the organization.
As the function of the manager is to ensure the efficiency of the organization, which controls the instrumental (technological processes), expressive (interpersonal relationships) areas, և proper organization, so the manager must develop the ability to self-organize, which is part of the manager's self-efficacy.
The aim of this work was initially to reveal the interconnectedness of the leader ակ the organization's ecological culture, to show the ways in which this agreement can be reached.
Thus, professional self-improvement is carried out by making professionally necessary changes in the structure of requirements, motivational and value spheres.
  The realization of the potential of the latter is possible as a result of the development of a reflexive culture.
  Reflective culture presupposes readiness to "rethink" and overcome vital ագիտականprofessional problematic situations, effective resolution of internal և external conflicts, acquisition of new forces, meanings առաջ values, posing and solving unusual practical problems.
 A specialist who possesses a reflective culture is characterized by the ability to develop innovative methods based on his or her own professional "personal experience."
9.
Acme can be typical of an organization as a living organism, as it has its heyday10.
 The psychological-acmeological system underlying the work of the organization contributes to the improvement of the quality of work, the potential of the organization.
 Work of young students, 2009, p. 247-250. to increase the efficiency of life activities11.
  The ecological environment, which is created in the organization, which is an educational micro-environment, contributes to the professional development and improvement. It contributes to the achievement of personal ագիտականprofessional acne.
  That is, the concept of "ecological environment" implies constant learning and development.
 This environment gives the maximum opportunity to realize personal and professional potential.
 It "pushes" the person to use creative mechanisms, which will be aimed at self-development and self-realization12.
The conditions that improve the ecological environment և the factors ensure, of course, the professional development և the performance of the manager.
 But their effect can be negative.
 This influence is conditioned by the field created by significant conditions.
 In the same way, external factors (society, group, interpersonal relations system) can either contribute to or hinder the process of professional development13.
The acmeological development of a specialist is as effective as he is ready to go to that self-discovery, that is, self-realization և acmeological development are special independent processes և depend mainly on the specialist.
  And the readiness for self-disclosure has internal-external aspects. The processes of self-awareness take place within the person, but are manifested externally in the processes of self-presentation (self-expression և self-demonstration) 14.
Thus, the professional-ethnological competencies of the manager largely predetermine the efficiency of the manager's activity, the products of which are the formation of the organizational-ecological environment of the organization on the one hand, and on the other hand the continuous professional-professional growth of the manager և employees այդ in that environment.
  At the same time, the organization endowed with acmeological culture is characterized by long-term effective and developing operation.
THE ROLE OF ACQUAINTANCULAR CULTURE OF A LEADER PROFESSIONAL Ginya Sumbulyan ENVIRONMENT Keywords: manager, acme, acmeological culture, acmeological culture of the organization, professionalism, work efficiency.
Summary.
