THE RETURN OF CRIMINAL LAW The criminal law, the mechanism of action in time, has its roots in ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
 The retroactive force of criminal law was referred to by such authoritative jurists as orators such as Demosphenes (384-322 BC) [1] Cicero (106-43 BC) [2].
Later, particularly in the Middle Ages, the institute of retroactive force of criminal law lost its relevance.
  The situation began to change qualitatively only during the bourgeois revolutions (XVII-XVIII centuries).
 It is during this period that the problem of the operation of criminal law gradually goes beyond the realm of philosophy and begins to be viewed only from a legal point of view. European and Russian constitutions begin to enshrine the mechanism of criminal law in action over time, as well as provisions related to the retroactive effect of criminal law.
  After the October Revolution of 1917, the Soviet government actively applied the principle of retroactivity of criminal law in the case of laws that were considered to define or aggravate crime.
 Prior to 1960-1961, Soviet law established that the law abolishing the crime of committing an act or mitigating the punishment had retroactive effect, and there was no prohibition on the retroactive effect of the law defining the crime or aggravating the punishment.
  1960-1961 This prohibition was established by the codes adopted by the union republics.
However, it was generally of a declaratory nature, as in law enforcement practice, due to political will, there were numerous instances of retroactive force to the laws defining the crime of an act or toughening the punishment.
Over time, the issue of the operation of criminal law has historically evolved, evolved as a problem related to the retroactive force or action of criminal law.
 The retroactive provisions of the criminal law constitute the retroactive principle of its operation over time.
  Article 13 of the RA Criminal Code (hereinafter referred to as "criminal law") stipulates: "1. "A law that eliminates the crime of an act, mitigates the punishment or otherwise improves the condition of a person who has committed a crime shall have retroactive effect, ie it shall apply to persons who have committed the relevant act before its entry into force, including those who serve or have served a sentence but have a conviction." .
 RA criminal For example, in comparison with Article 6 of the Criminal Code of the Armenian SSR of 1961, to extend the limits of the retroactive force of the criminal law, giving retroactive force to the law that otherwise improves the condition of the person who committed the crime.
  In other words, the law that does not eliminate the crime does not mitigate the crime, does not mitigate the punishment, but creates more favorable conditions for the perpetrator in connection with the procedure and conditions of criminal liability, imposition of punishment, release from criminal liability or punishment [4].
 Situations can be varied և Relate to the various institutions of criminal law in general, in particular the sentencing regime, parole, statute of limitations, and so on.
 For example, in the 2nd և 3rd parts of Article 22 of the RA Criminal Code, norms are fixed, which refer to the correspondingly dangerous recidivism, especially dangerous recidivism.
 Article 56 of the draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia lacks the concepts of "dangerous recidivism" and "particularly dangerous recurrence".
  RA new criminal day. Article 56 of the draft law is another law that improves the condition of a person who has committed a crime, which, according to the new RA Criminal Code. day. According to Article 9, Part 2, 1 of the draft, it must have retroactive effect.
  This means that cases in which recidivism has been described as dangerous or particularly dangerous are subject to re-qualification.
  Another example. RA new criminal day. Article 51 3 3 of the draft provides: “A crime is considered to have been committed by a criminal organization if it was committed by a group of three or more stable groups created to commit one or more crimes.
 A crime is considered to have been committed by a criminal organization in the case when the crime included in the personification created or managed by it was committed directly by at least one member of the group or by the task of the group, the person who is not a member of it.
The draft of the new RA Criminal Code has united the phenomena of "organized group" and "criminal cooperation".
  For the crimes that were qualified as committed by an organized group, the new RA criminal code. Part 3 of Article 51 of the draft law will be considered as aggravating the condition of the person who committed the crime in another way։ will not have retroactive force.
  With regard to the crimes that have been qualified by criminal cooperation 1 The text refers to the article of the draft of the new RA Criminal Code, as the current Code will cease to operate after the draft enters into force.
Part 3 of Article 51 of the new draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia will in one case be considered to improve the condition of the person who committed the crime in another way; it will have retroactive effect, in another case the qualifier of the act will be changed.
 Retroactive force, as is well known from legal theory, can be simple or rational.
  In the case of simple retroactive force, the new criminal law applies only to those crimes in respect of which a legal decision on a specific case has not yet been made or has not yet entered into legal force.
  In the case of retroactive jurisdiction, the criminal law applies to relations in respect of which an indictment has already entered into force. [6]
  According to the legislative definition of the retroactive force of a criminal law, it has a "simple," rational retroactive force.
  In case of simple retroactive force, no problems arise. If there is no legally binding judgment in a particular case, the court should be guided by a milder criminal law that has entered into force.
However, many problems arise in the case of retroactive retroactive force: the court is forced to overturn the already enforced convictions within the framework of a more lenient law.
To illustrate the mechanism of the retroactive effect of criminal law, let us consider it through examples.
Article 138 of the RA Criminal Code envisages imprisonment for a term of three to six years as a sanction for rape.
  Article 193 of the draft of the new RA Criminal Code, which unites the RA criminal For example, rape (138) and sexual violence (139) provide for a sentence of two to five years in prison for the same act2.
  RA new criminal Article 193 of the draft law 2 This change, in our opinion, is not justified by the following reasoning: RA criminal On the basis of the sanction provided for in part 1 of Article 138 of the Criminal Code (three to six years of imprisonment) According to parts 3 և 4 of Article 19 of the Criminal Code, it is considered a serious crime, and on the basis of the sanction provided for in part 1 of Article 193 of the Draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia (imprisonment for two to five years), the new cr. According to Article 18, Part 3 of the draft law, it will be considered a moderate crime.
  The point is that according to Article 3 of the RA Constitution, “1. In the Republic of Armenia, a person is of the highest value.
 The inalienable dignity of man is the inseparable basis of his rights and freedoms.
 "Respect for and protection of fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms are the responsibilities of public authorities", and according to Article 31: "1. Everyone has the right to privacy, family, honor and reputation. ”
 The term "inviolability of private life" means sexual inviolability.
 Therefore, in our opinion, the sanction of Part 1 of Article 193 of the draft of the new RA Criminal Code should be made either two to six years or left in the RA Criminal Code. According to the regulation of part 1 of Article 138 of the Criminal Code, three to six years.
  In this case, it will be considered a serious crime.
is a law mitigating the punishment և, according to the new RA criminal law. Part 2 of Article 9 of the draft law should have retroactive effect.
And by what criteria should the court be guided during the reduction of the sentence?
 On the one hand, a fair punishment has already been imposed, նոր the new criminal legislator eliminates the crime of the act, and on the other hand, the previously imposed punishment cannot remain the same.
  Is the category "limits of reduction of punishment" subject to the judge's discretion, or should the limits of reduction be clearly defined?
 The judicial review of the case is not outlined by anything.
The task of the court is to impose a sentence in the reduction of the sentence that is proportionate to the new limits of the sanction reduced in such a way as to maintain the proportion of the sentence reduced within the limits of the new sanction "within the sentence imposed within the former sanction".
 Such a proportion can be represented by a mathematical formula 3.
Suppose the following range is given: [a; b], և the sentence imposed by the court for imprisonment, calculated for years, is c.
 Later, a new criminal law is adopted, which by its nature corresponds to the RA criminal code. Part 1 or 3 of Article 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
 The new criminal law defines another interval, which is [d; e].
  It is necessary to find x in the range [d; e] as a result of reducing the size of the sentence, which should correspond to the value of c.
 This problem is solved by bringing the ranges [a; b] և [d; e] to the range [0; 1], which in mathematics is called normalization.
 In this case, c և n և x must be in the range [0; 1].
  When applying the formula, the following is obtained: [a; b] -> c, [d; e] -> x => (ca) / (ba) = (xd) / (ed) => (xd) (ba) = (ed) (ca) = > xd = (ed) (ca) / (ba) => x = d + (ed) (ca) / (ba).
To get a clearer picture of the above-mentioned formula at first glance, let's look at it on an example.
 RA criminal Article 131 of the Criminal Code ("Arrest of a person"), Part 4, Clause 4 ("against a minor") envisaged imprisonment for a term of four to eight years.
 This term corresponds to the interval of the formula [a; b], that is, according to the article, the following interval is obtained: [4; 8].
 Suppose the perpetrator of this crime was imprisoned for 5 years and 6 months by a court verdict that entered into force.
 5 years 6 months, which is equal to 5.5 years, corresponds to c.
 That is, according to the article, c = 5.54.
 RA new criminal The author of the draft law on copying under Article 188 ("Arrest of a person"), Part 2, Clause 4 of the Mathematical Formula 3 is the author of the procedure for calculating by Mathematical Formula 3, Associate Professor, Department of Criminal-Criminal Law, Tomsk State University, Faculty of Law. Marat Tagiri Vale!
  See Валеев М. T., Conversion of the Law of Conversion and Concealment of Penalties, TGU Gazette, 2011, Law N 2, cc. 47-8.
4 Resolution is calculated over years.
("Against a minor") provides for imprisonment for two to six years.
  This term corresponds to the interval of the formula [d; e], it turns out: [d; e] = [2; 6].
 In these conditions, the question arises as to what extent the court should reduce the imposed punishment.
  Using the formula, we get the following: [4; 8] -> 5.5, [2; 6] -> x => (5.5-4) / (8-4) = (x-2) / (6-2) => ( x-2) (8-4) = (62) (5.5-4) => x-2 = (6-2) (5.5-4) / (8-4) => x = 2+ (6-2 ) (5.5-4) / (8-4) => x = 3.5 years, ie 3 years և 6 months.
 Therefore, if at the time of reduction of the sentence the person has served his sentence for such a period, that is, 3 years and 6 months, he is subject to release.
Another example: RA criminal Imprisonment for a maximum of four years is one of the sanctions provided for in Article 182 ("Extortion") of the Criminal Code.
 In this case, the minimum term is equal to the minimum amount defined by law for the given type of punishment.
  RA criminal According to Article 59 of the Criminal Code: “2. "Imprisonment is defined for a period of three months to twenty years."
Thus, the RA criminal The imprisonment provided for in the sanction of Article 182 of the Criminal Code may cover a period of 3 months to 5 years.
 How many formulas are calculated in years, so 3 months should be converted to years.
It turns out 0.25 years.
 Thus, the range of formula [a; b] corresponds to [0.25; 5].
 Suppose a person who has committed such a crime is sentenced to 3 years in prison by a court verdict that has entered into force.
 turns out to be c = 3.
  RA new criminal Part 1 of Article 241 of the draft law ("Extortion") envisages imprisonment for a maximum of three years for copying.
 As already mentioned above, the minimum term is equal to the minimum amount prescribed by law for this type of punishment.
 ՀՀ նորքր. Article 68 of the draft law stipulates: “2. "Imprisonment is defined for a period of three months to twenty years."
 It turns out that the new RA criminal The imprisonment provided for in the sanction of Part 1 of Article 241 of the draft law covers the period from 3 months to 3 years.
  Therefore, the interval of the formula [d; e] is equal to [0.25; 3].
 To what extent should the term set by the court be reduced?
 Using the formula, we get the following: [0,25; 5] -> 3,1,84 years, that is, 1 year 10 months և 8 days.
  Therefore, if a person has served his sentence for such a period of time, that is, 1 year, 10 months կրճատ 8 days, he is subject to release.
However, it should be noted that the resolution is applicable only in cases when the penalty calculated for years (months, days, which are calculated in years in the resolution) is reduced. It does not apply to other applicable sanctions.
Some complications arise in situations where the maximum penalty in a criminal law is increased and the minimum is reduced, or, conversely, the maximum is reduced and the minimum is increased.
 Some scholars believe that in this case the upper limit of the sanction should be established, the law where the maximum amount is reduced should be considered mitigating.
  If the new law raises the upper limit of the sanction and lowers the minimum, then such a law is considered to have no aggravating retroactive effect.
 However, in such cases, one must take into account the fact that the minimum limit of the sanction has been reduced, in which case the law can have retroactive effect.
 RA criminal According to Part 3 of Article 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, "the law that partially mitigates liability and at the same time partially tightens liability has retroactive effect only in the part that mitigates liability."
 For example, at the time of the crime, the current law provided for imprisonment for 4-7 years, and the new law provided for 3-8 years.
  In this case, retroactive effect can be given to the minimum amount of the sentence, and the court must be sentenced to 3-7 years of imprisonment.
Of particular interest is the issue of retroactive effect of the interim criminal law.
 A criminal law is an intermediate law that enters into force after a person has committed a crime, but has expired before the person can be prosecuted by a court or a court or other judicial act.
It is a situation when the act is considered criminal at the time of the commission, then it is decriminalized or the responsibility is mitigated, but after a while the act is criminalized again, or the responsibility for such an act is tightened.
RA criminal Neither Article 13 nor any other article of the Code contains norms related to the retroactivity of the interim criminal law.
 The issue of retroactivity of the interim criminal law is actively discussed by the science of criminal law.
It is possible to single out three points expressed on this issue: - the interim criminal law has no retroactive effect [8, 9], - the interim criminal law has no retroactive effect, but nevertheless leaves an impact [10], - the interim criminal law has retroactive effect if it compared to a more lenient law [11, 12, 13].
The representatives of the first point of view consider that the intermediate criminal law cannot be applied, as it did not act either at the time of the commission of the crime, or when making a decision by the law enforcement body.
  This approach, however, is not justified. International acts require something else.
 In particular, according to Article 15 of Part 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: “1. No one shall be held guilty of any penal offense on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offense, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed.
  Similarly, no more severe punishment may be imposed than that which was applicable at the time of the commission of the crime.
  If a lesser punishment is prescribed by law after the commission of a crime, that law applies to the crime. [14]
Proponents of the second view believe that the interim criminal law has no retroactive force, but has some effect. When imposing a sentence, the court may not go beyond the maximum limit provided by the interim criminal law.
  Մ. Bloom և A. Tille writes: "The crime is qualified by the law in force at the time of the commission of the crime, but at the time of sentencing it is limited to the maximum limit provided by the more lenient interim criminal law, referring to the latter" [15].
  This approach, however, is contradictory. At first they write that the intermediate criminal law no longer exists, so it is not subject to application, and in the continuation they state that the upper limit of the punishment cannot exceed the maximum amount provided by the intermediate criminal law.
Based on M. Bloom և A. Tille's view, expressed at the outset, turns out to be a reference to a non-existent law, which is illogical.
Currently, the third view is accepted by most scientists.
 Proponents of this position emphasize the need to apply any of the following laws, which are more lenient, the fate of the guilty should not depend on the "operativeness" of the activities of state authorities.
 The Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia finds that the interim criminal law in accordance with Parts 1 և 3 of Article 13 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia is subject to retroactive application [16].
 What, this issue will get its legislative solution in the new RA criminal law? After the entry into force of the draft law, Article 9 3 3 of the Constitution stipulates that "the interim law that completely or partially eliminates the crime of the act, mitigates the punishment or otherwise improves the condition of the perpetrator" shall be retroactive.
  Part 4 of the same article contains the concept of intermediate criminal law. "The interim criminal law is a criminal law that has entered into force after a person has committed a crime, but has expired before the person has been prosecuted by a competent body or another court decision has been made."
Of particular interest is the issue of retroactive application of criminal law when a normative act belonging to another branch of law is changed.
 Part 1 of Article 13 of the RA Criminal Code stipulates: “The law eliminating the crime of an act, mitigating the punishment or otherwise improving the condition of a person who has committed a crime has retroactive force, ie it applies to persons who have complied with it before its entry into force, including those who have been punished or have served it, but have a conviction. ”
  And according to Part 1 of Article 5 of the Criminal Code, "The crime of the act, its punishment, other criminal consequences are determined only by criminal law."
In the case of a literal interpretation of the Criminal Code, it turns out that the change of the normative act of another branch of law can not be a basis for criminal law application.
  However, by making a change in the normative act belonging to another branch of law, the legislator directly or indirectly solves criminal problems. After all, criminal law is an element of the legal system.
 And any change in the legal system, as it is known, leads to the change of other elements.
 Part 2 of Article 73 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, according to which "Laws improving the legal status of a person, other legal acts have retroactive force" may be of fundamental importance for the solution of this problem.
Professor Pikurov has thoroughly studied the connection between criminal law and other branches of law.
  He quite cautiously refers to the use of retroactive force in criminal law by amending normative acts in other branches of law.
  He writes: "The answer to the question of the use of retroactive force depends on the nature of the connection between these acts and the 'criminal law', as well as the legal essence of that connection.
  Thus, the peculiarity of technical-legal norms is that they have a direct activity, as a rule, they cannot have retroactive force.
  For example, a change in traffic rules does not affect the assessment of violations committed during the operation of the previous rules.
Procedural norms usually do not have retroactive effect, as they are called to regulate the behavior of legal entities within a very specific time frame.
 All other rules detailing the nature of the offense may be given retroactive effect only if it gives rise to a change in the degree of public danger or nature of the act committed.
  And if the violation of the rules has caused real damage to the interests protected by the criminal law, further changes in the rules do not reduce the degree of public danger or the nature of the act, then there is no basis for their retaliation in the process of re-qualification of crimes. [17]
RA criminal Part 1 of Article 15 of the Criminal Code stipulates that “RA citizens who have committed a crime outside the territory of the Republic of Armenia, as well as stateless persons permanently residing in the Republic of Armenia, shall be liable under the RA Criminal Code if their act is recognized as a crime. They were not convicted in another state.
  The punishment of the mentioned persons may not exceed the upper limit of the punishment provided by the law of the foreign state in the territory of which the crime was committed. ”
  In this case, the question arises: can the lowering of the upper limit of the law on the commission of a crime be a basis for reducing the sentence of a person who has been criminally prosecuted under the upper limit of the law in force at the time of the crime?
 Thus, Article 13 of the RA Criminal Code does not contain any reference to the fact that only the RA law has retroactive force, which is considered to eliminate the crime, mitigate the punishment or otherwise improve the person who committed the crime.
 There is neither international nor national legal regulation on the mentioned issue.
  However, based on the general legal logic, it can be assumed that the lowering of the upper limit of the criminal law on the place of commission of a crime may have retroactive effect on a person who has committed a crime in the Republic of Armenia and who has been criminally prosecuted in the Republic of Armenia.
RA criminal Part 2 of Article 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure enshrines the following important provision of international law, which follows from the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia: "The law defining a criminal act, aggravating the punishment or otherwise worsening the situation of a person who has committed a crime has no retroactive force."
 This can be considered, for example, the chapter "Crimes against computer information security" of the RA Criminal Code.
 For the purposes of Article 13 2 2 of the Criminal Code, a law that otherwise degrades the situation of a person who has committed a crime is one which creates unfavorable conditions for the offender in relation to the conditions of criminal liability, punishment, release from criminal liability or release from punishment. [18]
The above gives an opportunity to prove that the retroactive force of the criminal law reflects the principles of "humanity" and "justice".
Therefore, in order to exclude possible violations of the rights of the person during the retroactive effect of the criminal law, it is necessary to strictly observe the retroactive rules of the criminal law, which are present in the constitutional regulations, international legal acts, the RA Criminal Code, as well as the RA Cassation Court.
LITERATURE Moscow, 1994, p. 112-6 (cid.
0) [4] Decision of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia of October 18, 2013, in criminal case No. EED / 0008/15/13, item 19.
[14] URL.
  www.idcarmenia.am/sites/default/files/attachments/dahsnagir.pdf (Accessed.
[16] The decision of the RA Court of Cassation of July 13, 2007 in criminal case No. VB-136/07.
[18] Decision of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia of December 5, 2012 on the case EKD / ​​0030/01/12, item 17.
Barseghyan RETURN OF THE CRIMINAL LAW Keywords: criminal law, retroactive effect of criminal law, punishment, interim criminal law, retroactive criminal law retroactive, application of criminal law in case of change of normative legal acts of other branches.
