THE POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF PROTEST IN EUROPE The Roman Catholic Church over time influenced only the secular but the secular.
 16th century The unrest that began in all walks of life in Germany at the beginning of the 20th century took the form of a demand for ecclesiastical reform.
  The pope was required to renounce worldly power and to exercise secular power within the limits of ecclesiastical law.
 These demands laid the foundation for the Reformation, which was first implemented in Germany.
The beginning of the Reformation is connected with the German scientist-theologian Martin Luther (1483-1546) in 1517. with an anti-Catholic speech in which he stands at the center of public life2.
  In the conditions of the support of the favorable public opinion, the Reformation quickly spread to the masses, turning into a nationwide movement.
  Each social stratum saw the expression of its interests in the ideas of the Reformation3.
Although the monarchy viewed the Reformation negatively, as it saw in its worms a threat to its grandiose policy, the current international situation did not allow external danger to engage in current affairs.
  The absence of the emperor for a long time contributes to the further expansion of the reform movement, to its transformation into a social struggle.
Until 1526 The Reformation was more of a popular movement, but after the pressure of the Peasant War, secular rulers came to the fore, using the ideas of Lutheranism for their own interests, for the secularization of ecclesiastical lands, as well as for centralizing ecclesiastical power.
  It was Luther who saw only secular rulers as a force to be reckoned with in society.
In 1526, taking advantage of the absence of Charles V in the Imperial Reichstag, as well as the abyss created by his "grandfather", the Speer Reichstag formally repealed the Edict of Worms, deciding that all estates were allowed to act in accordance with religion. commitment.
  This indirectly recognized the legitimacy of the Reformation5.
1529 Charles V convenes a Reichstag in Speer, which is a different process.
  The majority of Catholics here, who criticize Luther's teaching, demand the implementation of the Worms Edict և Rejection of the decision of the previous Speer Reichstag in favor of the Reformation.
 On April 19, five German princes filed a written protest against Charles Luther's intention to overthrow the Reformation. 14 German cities joined them.
 They unite to express their protest against the decision of the Reichstag.
 Since then, the supporters of the Reformation have been called Protestants, and the current - Protestantism 1.
In order to give a final solution to the issue in 1530. The emperor convenes an imperial reichstag in Augsburg, to which he personally presents himself.
  On that occasion, the protesters: F. Led by Melanchthon, the Reichstag is represented by the Protestant "Religion", which coordinated the ideology of Lutheranism, the fundamental differences from Catholicism.
 It was called the "Augsburg Religion", becoming a means for the Protestants to come together on a united front against the emperor2.
Luther was then in the Coburg fortress in the far south of Saxony, following the events in Augsburg.
  It was then that the Luther seal or Luther's rose with its initials appeared as a confirmation of his authority և authority, which is explained by a brief theory of Luther's teaching.
  The rose (the cross) depicted on that seal provides a basis for further connections between Luthernik's "Rosicrucians", Vardi, the "symbol of the Brotherhood of the Cross".
1530s The forced restoration of Catholicism by the Habsburgs was quite real, which threatens the existence of Protestantism in general.
 If the emperor united his Spanish-German forces, he would easily destroy any Protestant prince.
  That is why in 1531 The Protestant rulers in Schmelkalden sign a Mutual Support and Defense Alliance3.
  It is followed by 1532. the compromise agreement between the emperor and the Protestants in Nuremberg, by which the Protestants maintained their religion, even receiving the right to convene an inter-church meeting.
  It becomes the first religious peace.
  The parties undertake not to fight over religious issues before the convening of the Reichstag4.
Thus, the Reformation movement completely surrendered to the aristocracy.
 The demand to get rid of Rome's dependence was partially met, but complete independence did not take place, as control was not handed over to the people, the members of the community, but remained dependent on external force.
1546 Carlos, seeing the danger in the strengthening of the princes for his Habsburg dictatorship, decided to attack and put an end to Lutheranism in Germany.
 It was the first religious war in Germany5.
  During the secret negotiations, the emperor managed to divide the Protestants and get the support of the Elector Joachim II of Brandenburg, Duke Maurice of Saxony.
 With the help of the Netherlands and Rome, Charles V succeeded in getting a military 1 1 Рыжов К., Рыжова Е., с. 391. Talberg N., s. 68. “One hundred people who changed the course of history.
  Martin3 In the same place.
to gain.
 1547 At the Battle of Mülberg, the Schmelkalden Union forces are defeated and the main leaders are taken prisoner.
 The Protestant Union disbanded, forcing the Lutherans to abandon their doctrinal principles, which caused serious resentment in the country.
Weakening the Protestants, the emperor set out to convert them to Catholicism.
  By his assignment in 1548 An agreed "Religion" was drawn up, which was to be accepted by both parties.
 1548 In the Augsburg Reichstag, the Protestants were forced to form a religious alliance, according to which a reformed Catholicism would spread in the territories of the Protestant princes.
1551 At the same time, France and the Ottoman Empire launched military operations against the Habsburgs, which created favorable conditions for the Protestants.
  From his mother the Saxon drastically changed his policy, becoming the head of the anti-Habsburg forces, receiving serious financial aid from France.
  1552 Protestants suddenly invade Tyrol. The emperor barely escaped captivity, and Catholic troops surrounded him.
 In NASA in 1552. The alliance signed annulled the Augsburg religious agreement և recognized Lutheranism2.
 1555 A religious alliance was signed in the Augsburg Reichstag between the "Protestant princes" of Emperor Charles V.
 The emperor was forced to accept Lutheranism not as a heresy but as an independent religion equal to that of Catholicism.
  Lutherans are given freedom of religion.
  Questions related to the faith of the subjects of the empire are given to the local princes. Each prince determines the religion of his subjects.
  The Augsburg peace was the first attempt at an inter-church agreement in the history of European civilization, but it was not possible to maintain peace forever.
As a result of the Augsburg Reconciliation, all the Habsburg hereditary lands, Bavaria, Franconia, the Rhռne's "North-West Germany" Alsace, remained in the Catholic camp of the German princes.
 The North German authorities, the Duchy of Prussia, Brandenburg, Saxony, Hesse, Braunschweig, the Upper and Lower Palatinate յուր Württemberg formed a Protestant group.
  The two groups clashed not only in the religious but also in the political sphere4.
Thus, the Reformation that began with Luther's work has far-reaching consequences, the most obvious of which are religious and political.
 The most obvious consequence was the emergence of the Protestant current, which in turn is the basis for the emergence of new Christian denominations.
Until 1517, the Roman Catholic Church was recognized as the only church, and all those who did not accept it were called heretics.
  Such an atmosphere prevented the formation of independent thinking.
  After the Reformation, there is already an opportunity to combine it with other religious directions.
The other consequence of the Reformation was that the conflict between the two religious directions began with a civil, interstate, even 2 Ibid., P. 261.
histories ”, p. 29. http:
//www.booksgid.com. Pan-European (Thirty Years' War) wars, accompanied by bloodshed, population decline, economic and financial crisis.
New Christian teachings stand out from Protestantism: Lutheranism, Zwinglianism, Calvinism, Anglicanism, Anabaptism, which are generally opposed to Catholicism, but do not assimilate, often contradict each other, preserving theological differences, the peculiarities of their churches.
Lutheranism spread during Luther's lifetime, including North Germany, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, and Sweden.
The mainstay of Protestantism in Switzerland was the Reformed Church, led by Ulrich Zwingli և Jan Calvin, whose religion spread in the form of youth.
 The Reformation, led by Wingley, underwent not only religious but also social changes.
 1522 Wingley's supporters form a special community.
 The clash between the "Catholics" and their allies started a civil war, as a result of which "Wingley" was killed.
  He is followed by the activities of Jean Calvin.
  He enforces strict ecclesiastical order in the Church, often using cruel measures.
In France, Calvinism spread during Calvin's lifetime, and his descendants were called Huguenots.
 The new doctrine finds followers among the nobles, the clergy, the common people, but is persecuted by the kings.
  They create a party to avoid persecution.
  Among the "hostile Catholic forces of the Huguenots" led by the Duke de Guise, Princess Catherine de 'Medici, an armed struggle began that lasted 36 years and ended with the bloody "Bartholomew's Night", which took place on August 23, 1572. On the night of the 24th, about 30,000 Huguenots were killed4.
In Scotland, John Knox preaches Calvinism.
  1560 Knox և his supporters seize power նում he succeeds in getting the Scottish Parliament to accept Calvinism as a state religion.
  Following Calvin's example, he established an authority in which each community was headed by an elder, who later called the Scottish Calvinists Presbyterians.
In the Netherlands, which was part of the Holy Roman Empire և belonged to the Spanish throne, Protestantism spread, despite the brutal measures used by Charles V.
 Here the Reformation took the form of a national-religious movement, turning into a civil war, as a result of which the prosperous Netherlands reached a crisis.
 After 80 years of conflict, the country is divided into two parts: southern Catholic Belgium and northern Protestant Holland7.
7 In the same place.
Protestant teachings also entered England, but, unlike other places, their spread here pursued purely political purposes; at first it had no established religion.
  The general principles of the Anglican Church are formed later, "occupying a middle ground between Protestantism and Catholicism."
  1559 Parliament affirms the supremacy of the monarchy in the church, the ecclesiastical structure by which the English state church is finally formed.
The country is made up of Puritans, who were extreme Protestants. They demanded that the English Church be cleansed of the remnants of Catholicism.
Anabaptism as a result of Protestantism, like Puritanism, takes an extreme position, criticizing both Catholicism and Protestantism.
 The Anabaptists, named after the Rebirth, demanded conscious baptism of all members of the community in adulthood and had a full social equality program accordingly2.
The 16th century marked a turning point in the process of restoring the power of Catholicism. The emergence of a new Jesuit monastic order, the main purpose of which was to expose heresy and severe oppression.
  They managed to stop the further spread of Protestantism in some German areas.
  Their activity is especially vivid in Lithuania, partly in Poland3.
The thirty-year war (1618-1648) was the biggest and longest political consequence of the "clash of Protestantism" with Catholicism.
 It was the first pan-European conflict in its nature; it had severe consequences for European countries, especially Germany, which reached the point of complete bankruptcy, some settlements were completely emptied.
 1648 The Treaty of Westphalia was signed, where the equality of all Protestants and Catholics in Germany was finally established4.
As a result of the Reformation, the Christian world was deprived of the united Christian culture, but the creation of national churches contributed to the growth of the national consciousness and cultural level of education of the European peoples.
  The need for Bible study has given rise to the need for educational institutions, and letters have been created for a number of languages ​​to enable them to print the Bible.
In addition to the obvious and major consequences, the basis for an open internal religious struggle is being laid.
  The official confirmation of Protestantism marks the beginning of the emergence of many sects, groups and sects within Christianity.
  Each of them has its own ideology, goals and aspirations և fights against opposing ideologies.
 This confrontation is no less dangerous even now, because it does not lead to an open struggle, but divides public opinion, 3 Ibid.
takes people under their influence and ideas, depriving them of the ability to think and act independently.
Szak Sargsyan THE POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF PROTEST IN EUROPE Keywords: Roman Catholic Church, Catholicism, Protestantism, Reformation, Martin Luther, Charles V.
