PERSONAL PSYCHOLOGICAL VIOLENCE Due to the lack of state statistical data on CHILD MENTAL VIEWS, it is difficult to get a complete picture of the extent of violence against children in the country.
  However, the researches of a number of organizations confirm the existence of a phenomenon in the republic.
2014 In January-July, the National Institute for Labor and Social Research conducted a study on Child Violence, which aimed to analyze the prevalence, types, causes and effects of violence against children in the Republic of Armenia.
  The survey was conducted in all regions, maintaining the rural-urban proportion, in 1215 families with at least one minor child.
  44% of the survey participants believe that violence against children in our society is one of the problems that requires urgent solution.
  59% of the respondents think that physical violence or corporal punishment is more common in families, 43% mentioned psychological violence, 30% - neglect, 4% - sexual violence, only 11% said , that no kind of violence is widespread.
 Survey participants reported beating, hitting with various objects (83%), locking in a dark room (73%), starving or not feeding (71%), threatening or intimidating (64%), neglecting a child, and forcing a child to work (56%) , slapping, pushing a child (43%), banning contact with relatives or friends (45%), constantly criticizing the child's appearance, behavior, mental abilities (46%) as violence against children.
36% of the respondents stated that their children are sometimes subjected to violence in the family, mainly physical violence և / or physical punishment (59%), psychological violence (58%), neglect (6%).
  As the main causes of violence, the respondents first mentioned the presence of bad habits in the family (drunkenness, drug addiction, gambling) - 84%, the presence of a crisis situation in the family (parents divorce, loss of life, presence of constant conflict in the family) - 50%, perpetrator of violence or the presence of mental illness - 48%.
The negative impact of 16% of the material presented (containing scenes of violence) on the media or the Internet was also noted.
According to the Yerevan Reception and Orientation Center, 75% of the children transferred to the center by 2014 were neglected in the family, 53% were physically abused, 8% were sexually abused, and 61% were psychologically abused12.
"Violence - force or coercion used against a person.
 It is manifested by two eggs, physical and mental. ”13
The classic types of violence are: physical, sexual, psychological (emotional) և economic violence.
  Domestic violence is a special type of violence.
  The preference for any of these types is due to the nature of the perpetrator14.
Domestic violence is a complex type of violence.
 It is the physical, emotional, psychological and economic pressure to intimidate, control and intimidate.
  Domestic violence is talked about when it is permanent.
Mostly women are subjected to domestic violence.
  Often, living in a situation of violence, they do not even notice that what happened to them is violence.
  This phenomenon occurs when the husband or ex-husband insults, humiliates the wife, does not allow him to see his relatives, girlfriends, hits, pressures, hits the child, does not want the wife to work, makes him think that he can not manage the family budget.
When studying the problems of couples, the conditions of their marriage և factors should be taken into account.
 Most conflicts occur during the first years of life together.
 In this period, the couple is faced with 3 tasks: the formation of the family structure, the division of functions և roles և the formation of common family values.
 For a favorable adaptation, the ideas about these 3 points may coincide, which is rare in real life. 12 www.womennet.am/child-abuse/ Children in Armenia are abused. It is suggested to toughen the punishments.
13 Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, vol. 2, ch. edited by Hambardzumyan V. H., Yerevan, 1976. 541 pages.
meeting.
 That is why the critical period of domestic violence is considered to be the first period of marriage - up to 1.5-2 years, the period of cohabitation after 10-15 years, during which relationships change և people.
Sometimes couples use violence when they are under the influence of affect, alcohol or drugs.
The model of domestic violence is mainly obtained by the spouses from their parental family.
 A balanced, happy, direct relationship does not lead to violence in the parent family.
The characteristics of the victim, on the one hand, contribute to the emergence of violence, on the other hand, to its development.
Aggressors are characterized by power, aggression, impulsivity, criticism of others, the tendency to dominate or suppress in conflict situations15.
Another problem of domestic violence is violence against children.
  As a rule, adults who have been exposed to it during their childhood tend to do so.
  A mentally healthy person will not allow his or her emotional or physical security to be compromised.
  Violence against a child is, in fact, a problem of adult pathology.
  Such an adult begins to take revenge on the society for his wounded childhood, replacing the object of revenge with himself or foreign children.
Sometimes violence against children is explained by the socio-economic conditions of life, the low material security of the family.
 This factor can be a cause of violence, but they are secondary causes.
 Parents need to understand that their children are not to blame for material hardships.
 Insufficient emotional relationships in the family, emotional deficit և can lead to violence against children.
 Violence against children can also be expected in families where the relationship between the spouses is in conflict.
No less important factor in the violence against children is the sexual dissatisfaction of the spouses or the lack of emotional ties between them.
 Some researchers believe that the path of pregnancy երեխայի difficult birth can be the cause of violence against a child.
 One of the most important causes of violence against children is the pathology of parental responsibility.
15 Малкина-Пых И. G., ”Victimology. Psychology of Behavior of Victims ”, http.
//readli.net/chitat The following types of children are mostly abused: • Physically handicapped և With psychological problems, • Born with unwanted pregnancies, • Large families, • Congenital or acquired defects, • Living on the street, • Growing up in childcare facilities.
Developmental psychology distinguishes several types of violence against children: • physical, • sexual, • psychological or emotional, • contempt16.
The causes of violence against children have been considered at different times with different preconditions.
  It was the psychopathological condition of the existing perpetrators, then the cause was considered in the social context, according to which the cause of violence is the parental value system, social isolation, followed by the idea that the unhealthy parent-child relationship is the cause.
It is now proven that not one factor causes instinct in children, but the whole system of factors17.
By psychological violence we mean constant or occasional insult, violation of human qualities, unreliable attachment, feeling of rejection, when a parent or guardian accuses a child of something he did not do, a constant lie, as a result of which the child loses confidence in adults, demands. which are beyond the child's abilities and strengths.
  Many people think that if the child is constantly oppressed, subjected to their will, it will not harm the child's development in any way, but, on the contrary, will contribute to having a stable character, and constant contempt will humiliate the child in the future.
  In fact, this is not the case.
The consequences of psychological violence are monstrous and leave a mark on life.
There are two types of violence: overt and covert, depending on the victim.
 According to the time, the violence in the past differs.
 According to the line, one-time multiple (repetitive), 16 Mikayelyan V., Mikayelyan L., Problems of child psychological development, Yerevan, 2013,224 pages.
It can take up to several years.
  According to the place where the violence took place, at home by relatives, on the street by children, by unknown adults, at school by teachers or children.
Specialists working with children claim that a child may not realize that he or she is being abused, depending on his or her age or other factors.
 If they understand that they are victims of violence, they do not have enough experience to predict the effects of such actions on their physical and mental health.
This type of violence includes psychological mutilation and psychological cruelty.
 Psychological disorders occur when a parent or guardian does not show care, attention, support, reliable attachment, does not understand, does not understand the psychological needs of the child.
Misbehavior of parents or guardians leads to low self-esteem, inferiority, lack of confidence in their abilities, rejection.
 The child feels rejected if he / she receives parental love and encouragement only when he / she fulfills all the requirements of the parent, if the child's wishes and demands are ignored, when the parent uses him / her in a conflict situation18.
Psychologist Bowlby notes that there can be two types of attachment in a parent-child relationship: reliable և unreliable.
 Unreliable connection will cause basic distrust, anxiety.
According to K. Horney's basic anxiety is intense և complete lack of security.
  He claims that anxiety arises in the absence of a sense of security in interpersonal relationships.
  Anything that destroys the sense of security in the relationship with the parents leads to a basic alarm.
  Therefore, the ethology of erotic behavior must be found in the parent-child relationship.
 If the child feels love, care, then he feels safe, most likely he will develop normally.
  K. Horny claims that if a child has a basic anxiety disorder, he or she may develop neurosis in adulthood.
  The basic anxiety is formed by the feeling of loneliness, incapacity and abandonment19.
Psychological violence can cause: • when the mother does not want to comfort the child in need of comfort, • insult, SPb.
 Peter Com, 1999. - 608 p. • when the parent identifies the child with a friend they do not like, rejected; • when the adult blames the child for his / her failure; • when he / she constantly criticizes;
Psychological violence against a child is more common in the following types: • Family, where the implementation of different types of violence is a way of life, • In families belonging to an authoritarian style of upbringing, • In problematic families (disabled child (s), families with unfavorable conditions), • indecent family where the parent (s) use alcohol, drugs or suffer from various pathologies; • family where there are psychological or other problems.
Emotional rejection causes the child: • in the affective sphere - low self-esteem, anxiety - high anxiety, nervousness, etc., • in the cognitive sphere - difficulty concentrating, bad memory, etc., • in the behavioral sphere - antisocial behavior, aggression, inability to socialize with peers. pronounced sexual behavior և etc .; • in physical development - short stature, weight loss;
Thus, psychological violence is a permanent or sometimes insult, violation of human qualities, unreliable attachment, rejection, contempt.
  Violence is overt, covert, perpetrated, perpetrated, one-time, multiple, at home, at school, on the street.
  The child may not realize that he or she has been abused or abused.
The government և society is directly responsible for the physical and psychological health of the child.
 If this problem is not solved, steps are not taken to stop the problem, then it will be almost impossible to have a healthy, stable society.
20 Платоновой Н. М. and Platonova G. P., Violence in the family.
 Features of Psychological Violence Mary Azizyan INVOLVEMENT OF PSYCHOLOGICAL VIOLENCE IN THE FAMILY Keywords: CHILD PSYCHOLOGY Keywords: violence, domestic violence, psychological violence, aggressor, victim, cognitive, physical
