WRITTEN FORM OF THE LOAN AGREEMENT AND COMPENSATION IN ARMENIA The loan agreement is one of the most popular Jamaican agreements in the world.
  It still existed in the Roman era under the name mutuum.
  Initially, this contract egg was a verbal transaction egg with a special procedure called "nexum" 1.
 "Nexum" is a form of transfer of ownership of "mancipatio" ("manus" - hand, "capio" - to take) 2.
 In ancient times, when coins were not minted, the contract was made of copper pieces and scales in the presence of at least 5 witnesses.
 Libripens, the scales keeper, weighed the pieces of copper in the presence of witnesses and handed them over to the debtor.
 Then, in a special ceremony, the lender announced that the borrower was obliged to pay a certain amount of copper, and the borrower swore to return it.
 Later, after the creation of coins, the contract of "nexum" was signed according to the same procedure, only with the difference that the coin was transferred.
Both in Roman law and in the legislations of most modern countries, including the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia3 (hereinafter referred to as the RA Civil Code or the Civil Code), the form of a loan agreement is subject to special regulation.
 This is evidenced by the RA city. Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 808 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, Articles 492-494 of the Civil Code of the Federal Republic of Germany, Article 1907 of the Civil Code of the French Republic, etc.
  The conclusion of a loan agreement in a certain way is intended to prove that the agreement has been concluded, as this agreement is mainly classified as 1 See Новицкий И., Римское право, М., 2002, p. 133.
2 See ibid., P. 72.
3 Adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999, See ARPA 1998.08.10 / 17 (50).
In the case of real contracts, which, as we know, are considered concluded from the moment of transfer of the property, the "written form" of the contract is nothing but a proof of the agreement between the "parties" to perform the given actions.
Legislations in different countries have dealt with contract issues differently.
  It is generally intended to be stamped, but the consequences of not complying with this requirement in different countries.
According to Article 808 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, a loan agreement between citizens must be concluded in writing if the amount exceeds ten times the minimum wage.
  A receipt issued by the borrower or other document may be submitted to certify the loan agreement.
  Due to the combination of the general and the special part, non-observance of the written form of the loan agreement in Russia deprives the parties of the right to cite the testimony of witnesses in connection with the terms of the transaction4.
RA city. In accordance with Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the loan agreement is concluded in writing.
 The contract is considered to be concluded in writing when there is a receipt given by the borrower or another document certifying the borrower a certain amount of money or a certain amount of property.
 Of course, we are talking only about the cases when the documents proving the transfer of a certain amount of money or a certain amount of property ականը the receipt given by the borrower were given to the borrower as a transaction.
  That is, the receipt or other document can confirm the conclusion of the contract, if it directly states that the money was transferred or the property was handed over as a loan.
 This is evidenced by the RA city. Part 2 of Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which states that the above documents may be submitted in confirmation of the loan agreement.
 The transfer of money or property alone does not imply a loan, as in reality it is possible that the property is transferred for other purposes (eg, to repay the loan, to receive the purchased goods).
 ՀՀքաղ. According to Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, non-observance of the loan agreement leads to its invalidity, such a condition 4 See БАРИНОВ Н. А., БЕВЗЮК Е. А., БЕЛЯЕВ М. А., БИРЮКОВА Т. А., БАРЫШЕВ С. A., Codex of the Russian Federation. Часть دومрая (потетейный) статья 808.
The letters are useless.
  Here, in our opinion, the Code has a significant drawback, as non-observance of the written form of the loan agreement should not lead to its irrelevance.
Article 878 of the Civil Code does not follow from the nature or meaning of a real contract.
 The loan agreement in the Republic of Armenia is a real agreement, it is considered concluded from the moment of transferring the property.
 This is directly enshrined in Article 877 of the Civil Code.
 After all, the difference between a real contract and a consensual contract is in the moment of their conclusion.
 Consensual agreements are considered concluded from the moment of reaching an agreement.
  It is obvious that an agreement is reached through a contract, միջոցով it is through such a contract that rights and responsibilities can arise between them.
 Real contracts are considered concluded from the moment of transfer of the property, ie from that moment rights and obligations arise for the parties.
  Due to its nature, the real contract should have less personal restrictions.
  In the case of a loan agreement, it must be considered concluded, regardless of whether a written agreement has been drawn up or not.
 And in Armenia, the validity of a loan agreement as a real agreement depends on the existence of a contract.
Article 878 of the Civil Code contradicts the very essence of the loan.
  According to Article 877 of the Civil Code, the borrower transfers property or money to the property of the lender, and the borrower is obliged to return the same amount, the same type, the same quality property or the same amount of money.
 That is, after handing over the property or the money, the borrower has a real opportunity to actually own, manage, use and serve them for his purpose.
 It is logical that the loan agreement is concluded at the borrower's suggestion կատար to fulfill his goals,, in case the transaction is actually done, the borrower has achieved his goal, the contract is null and void, as according to Article 304 of the Civil Code, in case of transaction invalidity Each of the parties is obliged to return to the other party all the proceeds of the transaction, and Article 877 obliges the borrower to return the same amount of property of the same quality.
 The subject of the loan agreement may be the monetary amount or the property determined by type, so the existing difference between the terms "return the same amount of money" or "return the same amount or property equal to the property received from the borrower" is not worth noting.
  In both cases, the borrower or the invalid transaction party is obliged to return the received property or money, ie the loan agreement, being fixed by an independent letter, is actually executed, և, as we mentioned, it does not make sense to consider the transaction null and void, especially when the parties accept the transaction being a loan.
The written form of the loan agreement is nothing more than proof that the terms of the agreement have been concluded.
  "The written form of the loan agreement is necessary for proof, not for the validity of the loan agreement, which can be concluded much sooner than giving it a written form, and the loan agreement itself is concluded by transferring money or other property determined from the lender to the borrower." . F. Shershench.
 D. expressed his authoritative opinion on the mentioned issue. I. Meyer. "Certainly, there are many loans in legal life, which are confirmed not by written contracts, but by receipts or other documents.
But receipts or other documents are only evidence of the conclusion of the contract, not the written form of the contract.
  Even in many cases the loan is made orally, without any writing. One party borrows money or property determined by the other party as a loan, and no trace of the contract remains.
 However, if the conclusion of the contract is proved by the personal testimony of the borrower, then he must be obliged to meet the requirements of the lender.
  The court has no right to recognize the claim unfounded only because the plaintiff's claims are not confirmed by a written contract….
 All this leads to the conclusion that the written form of the loan agreement is not a mandatory part of the loan agreement, but the loan agreement exists as an independent entity, but is defined by a written form6 ”.
At the same time, it should be noted that in case of non-observance of the written form of the loan agreement with the existing regulations, the lender can demand his property or money back only with unjust enrichment 5 See Shershenevich GF, Course on Russian Civil Rights, p. 485.
6 See Meyer D. I., Russian Civil Law, v. 604.
on the basis of returning the property acquired or saved at the expense of someone else.
RA city. According to Article 1093 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia. The rules of Chapter 61 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (liabilities arising from unjust enrichment) are subject to the requirements for the return of what has been done in an invalid transaction.
 And according to the same chapter, the recipient of unfounded property at the expense of another must return or compensate the victim all the income that he received or could have received from the day when he knew or should have known about the unfounded enrichment Article 1097, part 1), and in case of a monetary amount, it is subject to addition on it to use someone else's money. day. Interests defined by Article 411, from the day when he knew or should have known about the unfoundedness of enrichment (RA Civil Code, Article 1097, Part 2).
There is a situation when in the case of an orally signed, interest-free loan, the lender can demand income and interest from the borrower on the basis of unjust enrichment, which is a violation of the borrower's rights, a gross violation of the property right protected by his constitution.
 The RA Court of Cassation notes in civil case No. 3-33 / VD7. "The obligation to pay interest provided for in Article 411 is not a consequence of the invalidity of the transaction, but an obligation arising as a result of non-performance of the transaction, ie non-return of the amount paid under the contract.
  Therefore, the bank interest must be calculated from the moment of the obligation to return the money. ”
  RA city. Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure states that in case of non-observance of the loan agreement, it is null and void, and according to Article 304 of the same Code, the null and void agreements are invalid, regardless of the court recognizing it as such, ie from the moment of signing.
  Therefore, the interest of Article 411 is calculated from the date of disbursement of the amount to the borrower, as it is initially considered void.
Failure to observe the written form of the loan agreement shall not lead to its irrelevance in order to enable the party to prove that the loan agreement և (or) has been fulfilled.
In view of all this, not wanting to demean the written contractor, we would like to note that the best evidence for a loan agreement can only be a written contract or 7 See Collection of Judgments of the RA Court of Cassation, 2007, p. 7, http.
//www.court.am/files/news/582_am.pdf other document.
 In order to avoid complications, it is necessary for the loan agreement to be signed in writing, but if it is not concluded in writing, there is no point in creating other difficulties for the borrower to return the amount he has given.
  In the end, as a negative consequence, proving that the loan agreement was signed is already on him.
We suggest that the RA city. The 3rd point should be removed from Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it should have the following appearance: «1. The loan agreement is signed in writing.
 2. In receipt of the terms of the loan agreement և its terms, the receipt given by the borrower or other document certifying the lender to give a certain amount of money or a certain amount of property to the borrower may be submitted.
In this case, the written form will be considered a part of the loan agreement. In case of non-observance, the provision of Article 298 1 1 of the Civil Code will apply:
Directly related to the issue of keeping the written form of the loan agreement is the right of the borrower to receive interest on the loan amount or the interest on the contract to be fixed in the contract.
 RA city. Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 8 deals with the interest on the loan agreement.
 According to that article, the lender has the right to receive interest on the loan amount from the borrower, unless otherwise provided by the contract.
 In other words, receiving interest from the loan agreement is the right of the lender, it follows that the lender may not use that right.
 Here we are dealing with the compensatory և gratuitous nature of the loan agreement.
 RA city. Part 1 of Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure legally defines the procedure for exercising that right of the lender, exercising the right, noting that the amount of interest և the calculation procedure must be clearly defined in the contract.
  From the above 8 We think the RA city. The first sentence of Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure may be misinterpreted and may give rise to misinterpretations.
  At first glance, it can be understood that under all lending agreements, the borrower has the right to receive interest, regardless of whether such a condition is fixed.
 However, the legislator has fixed this sentence as a general norm.
  We think that the given sentence should be formulated in the following way. "The lender has the right to receive interest on the loan amount from the borrower if it is stipulated in the loan agreement."
It follows that a person has no right to receive interest without observing the mentioned order.
 More: RA city. According to Article 448 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a contract is considered concluded if an agreement on the essential terms of the parties has been reached in the manner prescribed by law.
  According to the same article, the essential conditions of the given type of contract are considered essential.
  RA city. It follows from Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that the amount of interest ը the calculation procedure, are considered to be an essential condition for a repayable loan agreement, կողմ the parties must reach an agreement on it, otherwise the agreement will be considered concluded.
 RA city. Part 3 of Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates two cases when the loan agreement is assumed to be interest-free, unless otherwise expressly provided therein. The loan agreement between the citizens is concluded in an amount not exceeding fifty times the minimum wage, it is not connected with the business activity of any of the parties. Under the loan agreement, not property, but other property determined by type characteristics was transferred.
Unlike point 2, not everything is quite clear in point 1.
 According to point 1, in order for a contract to be considered interest-free, it must be concluded between citizens, individuals, that is, contracts concluded between legal entities or their "citizens" are assumed as a percentage, unless otherwise provided by the contract.
  But not all the contracts signed among the citizens are supposed to be interest-free.
  In addition to the condition on citizens, in the 1st clause, two simultaneously operating conditions have been established, in case of which the contract will be considered interest-free.
These are: the contract was signed with an amount not exceeding 50,000 drams, it is not connected with the business activity of any of the parties.
  In the absence of any of these conditions, the contract will be assumed as a percentage.
  That is, in the absence of these conditions, if the issue of interest is not addressed in the contract, the contract will be considered unsigned, as no agreement has been reached on the essential condition.
 In our opinion, the code has a shortcoming here.
Article 879 of the Civil Code contradicts Part 2 of Article 878.
 The connection between the interest rate and the calculation procedure of the "contract" was more expressive in the case when, with this proposal, according to our proposal, the loan agreement was signed orally, that is, the RA city. According to Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, interest is not assumed.
  It is clear that in these cases the condition on interest will not be fixed in writing, ագիրը the contract will be considered unsigned.
 The same situation arises in the case of a loan-certified loan agreement.
  As we know, the receipt certifies that the borrower has received some property or money as a loan, it does not mention interest.
  The receipt is a debt document issued by the debtor as confirmation of the obligation, by which the debtor accepted the debt to the creditor.
  Giving a receipt is an act proving the recognition of the debt by the obligated person, in the presence of which it is not the fact in whose presence or where the action was performed, but the fact that the debtor has accepted (recognized) his debt. to the creditor 9.
 In other words, the existing legal regulation reduces the role of the receipt or other documents, which will certify the transfer of property or money to the borrower.
As they can be concluded only among the citizens - loan agreements not related to the business activities of any of the parties not exceeding 50,000 AMD, when property determined by assortment has been transferred.
 We accept that free loan agreements should be concluded with documents certifying the transfer of property or money to the borrower by word of mouth, receipt, but the scope of such agreements should not be narrowed due to the subject matter, the subject of the contract, the contract should not be considered unsecured. in the absence of a condition.
Such legal regulation does not follow from the principle of freedom of contract.
 The essence of this principle is that the parties can independently determine the terms of the contract, as well as whether to sign a contract or not.
  In this case, the right of the borrower to receive interest on the loan agreement should be combined with the right of the parties to conclude the loan agreement; it becomes obvious that Article 879 of the RA Civil Code contradicts the essence of the freedom of the contract.
Thus, the RA city. Pursuant to Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the legislator accepts the presumption that the loan agreement is compensable, based on the subject matter of the agreements, the subjects of the parties. 9 See Torosyan G. G., Practical interpretations of the RA Civil Code, 2013, p. 845.
obliges to address the issue of interest on the contract և to make a note in the contract.
 And since non-reflection leads to the non-conclusion of the contract, it contradicts the right of the person to sign a loan agreement, thus contradicting the essence of the freedom of the contract.
 We accept that the principle of contractual freedom is not absolute; it must comply with the law, but at the same time we insist that it must be in the interests of the parties.
The loan agreement is of a fiduciary nature, in many cases the parties do not address the issue of compensation, a loan agreement is concluded between them.
 If that contractor enters the RA city. In the cases mentioned in part 3 of Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, then that contract is considered not concluded; the institution of unfounded enrichment should be unnecessarily applied to those relations.
The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia on the repayment of the loan agreement is similar to the Civil Code of the Russian Federation in the form of Article 809, but here this problem is solved.
 The provision of Part 3 of Article 879 of the RA Civil Code is equally enshrined in Part 3 of the above-mentioned article.
  However, according to Article 809, Part 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, if the procedure or amount of interest calculation is not defined in the loan agreement, it is calculated at the bank interest rate of the borrower's residence or location.
  That is, even in the case of a reimbursable contract, if they do not provide for the amount of interest or the calculation procedure, the contract continues to operate, as the Code has established a dispositive calculation procedure.
As it turns out, this issue is not solved in Armenia, we see the solution to this issue as follows. The loan agreement should be considered by the Code as a gratuitous agreement, unless the parties provide otherwise in the agreement.
 In this case, the receipts, other documents certifying the transfer of the borrowed property or money, the orally concluded contracts will be valid in all cases, until the parties envisage a repayable loan agreement, and if provided, must record in writing the amount of interest and the calculation procedure.
 In this way, it would be lawful to justify the amount of interest, to oblige the person who wants to enter into a repayable loan agreement to fix the calculation procedure in the contract.
Thus, we suggest that the RA city. Article 879 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has the following form: «1. The lender has the right to receive interest on the loan amount from the borrower if it is stipulated in the loan agreement.
  The amount of interest ը calculation procedure must be clearly defined in the repayable loan agreement.
  At the moment of concluding the loan agreement, the interest rate may not exceed twice the bank interest rate set by the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia.
2. Interest is paid every month, unless otherwise provided by the loan agreement.
3. The loan agreement is presumed interest-free unless otherwise expressly provided therein. ”
Seyran Sahakyan WRITTEN FORM OF EXCHANGE AGREEMENT AND COMPENSATION IN ARMENIA Keywords: nexum, mancipatio
.
