GRIGOR ZOHRAP'S PAST LIFE THROUGH THE EYES OF OTTY WITNESS In this article, we will examine the life of Grigor Zohrap in Yervand Otyan's novels, in particular, "No. 17 Khafien" և "The Cursed Years (1914-1919)"
  For the first time in the novel "No. 17 Khafien", Yervand Otyan is mentioned together with his three friends, who demanded that the National Assembly condemn several members of the department who were committing dangerous acts.
  The very first chapter, which the author called "The Closed Session of the National Assembly", reads: "Unfortunately, we heard that," the deputies wrote, actions that can greatly endanger the dignity of the nation վարկ the credit of national power, if they have not already endangered.
The four deputies who made this demand were S. Pehreyan, Dr. Tulyan, Aram Antonyan "Yervand Otyan" 1.
The characters in both the memoir and the novel are varied, from prominent Turkish police officials and Armenian spies to ordinary, unofficial Turks and Armenians.
Otyan's works present the ideological connection between Armenian spies and high-ranking Turkish officials, as well as the Talaat-Zohrap friendship.
 Otyan was clearly showing that closeness, noting that Talaat had met Zohrab even the night before his arrest.
  Being a far-sighted person, Zohrab weighed the value of every small expression he made.
  Zohrab writes letters to the embassies of the great powers, expecting their help.
  Zohrab had to try in every way to get out of the traps set by Talaat, which was not so easy, it can be said, almost impossible.
 For Talaat, "the walls even have ears" and in such conditions it was difficult to find Zohrab.
 Here is the course of the events of the last Talaat-Zohrap meeting. "On the night of his arrest, Zohrap, Serkl played cards with Talaat Pasha and Khalil Bey in T'Orian until midnight.
 Then to get up.
 Talaat himself stood up and kissed Zohrab on the face.
This unusual show of sympathy confuses Zohrab.
"Why this kiss?" He asks.
"My heart goes out," replied the other.
Zohrab came out of the hall very excited.
 He will have a warning that that kiss is a catastrophic sign ”2.
A remarkable documentary about the last days of Zohrab's life is Otyan's "Towards Death. Zohrap և Vardges "article.
  According to Otyan's testimony, Zohrab told this incident to P. Mazlimyan.
"Barely on the way, he notices that someone is following him.
 He thinks for a moment that what he did wrong is a mistake - he will cross the street.
  The man also follows him.
  The victim steps in butter, the one who pursues him does the same, and finally, he turns his back impatiently and says, "Are you pursuing me?"
"Yes," replied the other, "you were a police commissioner."
"Why?"
1 Yervand Otyan, "No. 17 Khafien", Book A, Yerevan, 2000, page 33.
2 "Ariamart", K. Constantinople, 1918, № 21 (1836), 15 December.
"Do you know who I am?"
"Yes, Zohrap Effendi."
"But it will be a mistake," cried the poor man. "I was with the Minister of the Interior now." "It may be, but the order given to me is absolute. I have to obey."
Zohrab continues on his way to the apartment, where the police are waiting for him.
 Commissars and policemen follow him to the Spartan ladder.
"What is the order given to you?" Asks Zohrab.
"Take you to the police."
"Now? Immediately?" "Yes, immediately."
"And if I do not want to go."
"Then we will take him by force."
"Don't you know I'm a meme?"
"We know, but the order given to us is absolute."
Arshak Chopanyan mentions that the reason for Zohrab's arrest was his words addressed to Talaat that the latter would be held responsible for his crime. "One day," he says, "be assured that you will be held accountable; you will not be able to justify your actions."
 Talaat Bey asks sarcastically, "Who will demand that bill?"
"I," replies Zohrab, "I will demand an account from you in the Parliament as if I were an Armenian."
This reality was recorded in their memoirs by Shirvanzade և Serovbe Davityan2.
As an eyewitness, Otyan presents in detail in his works the way of Vardges and Zohrabiants, their sufferings and tortures, their thoughts and worries.
  Otyan's cases are valid documents, because in the testimonies of Khachik Peltekyan "With the Five Zohrab" և Aram Antonyan "In the case of the murder of Zohrab և Vardges" we witness the depiction of almost the same realities.
 A. Antonyan not only wrote what he saw, but also retold the events based on the materials he collected.
 This large-scale material of Antonyan has reached us by Sh. According to Misakyan 3.
As a result of the parallel examination of the same cases and events, we notice that Otyan's documentary differs in one important feature, that is, he records facts, events, realities without emotional saturation and authorial commentary.
During the exile, "Vardges", "Zohrap", the latter's wife spared no effort and energy so that the exiles could return home.
  They wrote letters to many Turkish officials, even met in person, but in vain; all promised to give a positive course to the case, but the promises remained unfulfilled.
Otyan recalled the events of the last days of Zohrab and Vardges as follows: "The enormous genocide takes place a few hours after Urfa.
  A group of Turkish Chechens surround the chariot.
  The leader of the Chets, as I heard in Aleppo, was Ialil Bey, a relative of Enver, who later became commander of the Turkish army in Baghdad, certainly as a reward for his bravery in killing Zohrab and Vardges.
The criminals stop the chariot and order the two exiles to get off the chariot.
Zohrab gets down while Vardges shouts: - No, I will not get down, kill me in the carriage.
This is how Zohrap և Vardges, the two noble sons of the Armenian nation, were martyred. ”4
Tachat Takesyan told the same about the death of Vardges and Zohrab, adding the words of Zohrab. "Ruthless, I feel sorry not for dying, but for being killed by traitors like you."
  You can send me to the Andean world, but there are still two Victims left in this world.
2 Ibid., Pp. 277-278, 281-283.
3 Ibid., Pp. 300-370.
4 "Ariamart", K. Constantinople, 1918, № 25 (1840), 19 December.
my fast children who will be able to take revenge on me. "
1 Zareh V. Orberyan, writing the memoir "The Last Night of Zohrab and Vardges in Urfa", also described that cruel day, documenting Zohrab's last words. "You are really bad and executioners, all of you Turks ... You must be held accountable for all your crimes against the obedient Armenians of the Ottoman Empire. »2.
When Zohrab's family demands authentic materials from the Government, the latter issues two official documents, according to which he died a natural death.
 One was signed by the priest of Zohrapintagh, the other by the prefect of Urfa.
E. In his novel "No. 17 Khafien", Otyan records a documentary reality of the Armenian Genocide, from the city center to the arrest and exile of intellectuals in the suburbs.
In the novel, Otyan introduces us to the active activities of Armenian spies in the wake of the events following the expansion of the pre-genocide political events in Constantinople, as a direct witness and actor of the events.
Astik Markosyan, as the organizer and executor of many pre-genocide events, is significantly different from Zohrap.
 We can see how different these two Armenians are.
  We meet him in three books of the novel "No. 17 Khafien". even if he is not present at the events, but his name is always in circulation.
  The latter was a toy in the hands of the Turkish government, a poor man who put money above all else, who did not know his past, his homeland or his nationality.
In the novel "No. 17 Khafien" Otyan does not touch upon what fate Astik deserves after being exiled, but reading Otyan's memoir "The Cursed Years (1914-1919)" we meet the exiled Astik already named Asatur Der Matteosyan. և Abik Mupaeachyan) Asatur TerMatteosyan came out with some deported Armenians.
"I'm too busy, brother," he said, clasping my hands. I do not have time to scratch my head.
  I would like to see you for a long time, but now is not the time….
"We want to see you too," I said.
"Now I'm going to Gaimagami to see what people are doing," he continued. "I work for an hour, then I'm free.
"Have you opened an office here?" I asked in surprise.
- Yes, I have an office, order for an hour, I will wait.
"Which side is your office on?"
"At the post office, in the street on the right, ask Nicole for the shop."
 But I will definitely wait.
 Goodbye for now.
 Don't forget, one hour… ".
We promised to go to his office.
Both Mupahejyan and I knew Asatur Ter Matteosyan very well, we knew his adventurous life in Istanbul, but we did not imagine that he could establish an office in this state of exile and persecution. ”3
Being a work of art, it has its own uniqueness, as describing the preparation for the Genocide, it documents the history of the Armenian people through the eyes of an eyewitness through its authentic characters.
1 "Grigor Zohrap in the memories and testimonies of contemporaries", pp. 395-401.
2 In the same place.
3 Yervand Otyan, "Cursed Years (1914-1919)", Yerevan, 2004, p. 165.
Hripsime Kostanyan GRIGOR ZOHRAP'S LAST WAY THROUGH THE EYES OF OTYAN'S WINNER
