FEATURES OF POST-ELECTION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BURDIE'S "SOCIAL FIELD" AND "HABITUS" CONCEPTUAL APPROACHES IN ARMENIA.
  Historical overview: During the last two years in Armenia, a number of changes took place in the procedures of organizing and conducting the Electoral Processes of the Electoral Code, a number of elections were organized, from the constitutional referendum to the local elections.
  The post-election process was relatively peaceful compared to the previous elections as a result of all the listed elections.
The election results did not cause public unrest in the form of rallies or other civil movements.
  It seems that the last parliamentary term of 2017 The April 2 elections were the most organized in the parliamentary elections held in Armenia.
 Moreover, in 2017 It accepted the results of both the parliamentary [1] and the May 14 Council of Elders elections [2] and officially recognized the opposition "Yelq" bloc that participated in the elections.
 However, these elections were marred by a number of irregularities during the election campaign and the vote count.
In general, since the country's independence in 1991, parliamentary elections have been held in 1995, 1999, 2003, 2007, 2012 and 2017.
  Now, making a historical overview, let us present the post-election developments of the parliamentary elections after the publication of the voting results.
Thus, the 1995 resolution of the RA National Assembly of the first convocation The results of the elections were not considered legitimate by a number of opposition political parties.
  Besides, before the elections, Levon Ter-Petrosyan banned the activities of the "Dashnaktsutyun" party in Armenia, which caused wide public discussions and dissatisfaction.
 1995 After the June 21 elections, a rally was organized in the Theater Square, where the Yerkrapahs expressed their concern about the results of the elections, considering them falsified.
"Epokha" weekly in 1995 In his July 14 issue, he wrote the following about the election results. Only on July 10 did opposition leaders become outraged by the CEC's figures, accusing the authorities of "unprecedented falsification, use of brute force, and illegal activities."
1999 Although the May 30 parliamentary elections were relatively peaceful, they were marked by numerous inaccuracies in the voter lists.
 Nevertheless, in 1999 The key event of the political post-election processes in 1999 It was the October 27 terrorist attacks [6], which completely changed the political field and the general logic of the country's development as a result of the elections.
2003 The referendum on making changes in the Constitution was held together with the elections of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia of the third convocation on May 25. The latter did not receive support from the people.
  Besides, as a result of the elections, no party received the necessary votes to form an absolute majority in the parliament, due to which three parties formed a coalition government.
 The post-election developments of this election were similar to those of 1995. The opposition was going to boycott the parliament formed as a result of the elections.
 A number of opposition politicians stated that the elections were rigged.
  Members of the Justice Party boycotted the first session of parliament, but did not relinquish their parliamentary seats.
2007 The May 25 parliamentary elections were not marked by active post-election events in the form of protests, boycotts and rallies.
  The political forces that participated in the elections accepted the voting results.
2012 year. The elections of the National Assembly of the fifth convocation of May 6, 2006 passed without any extraordinary post-election developments.
2015 On December 6, 1945, a referendum on constitutional amendments was held throughout the country, which was marred by numerous irregularities.
 Nevertheless, as a result of the referendum, the majority of citizens voted for the bill, saying "yes" to the process of transition from a semi-presidential model of government to a parliamentary system of government.
 2017 On April 2, 2010, parliamentary elections were held in Armenia for the first time, using the so-called ranking system and the use of electronic voting.
Social space և elections. In general, every political election և electoral process takes place in a certain social և physical space.
 During the electoral process, the country is divided into territorial units - polling stations, constituencies, which are accountable, controlled by the Central Electoral Commission.
 During the conduct of political elections at the level of a person or social agents, the place of voting, the polling station, is determined by voter lists according to the voter's residence, registration and / or location.
 In fact, electoral processes, like any social process, take place in a certain social space.
 By this logic, electoral processes should be viewed in the context of social space, and electoral behavior, as a behavior manifested by social agents, presupposes the existence of social practices that structure that behavior.
 For now, according to Bourdieu's theory, let's stop the problem of interpreting the electoral processes in the social space.
It is noteworthy that Bourdieu identified sociology with social topology.
 According to Bourdieu, the social world is a multidimensional space, built on the principles of differentiation և placement, և formed by the combination of qualities or characteristics in the observed social community, which are able to give their addressee a certain power և power within that community.
 Agents Thus, groups of agents are characterized by their relative positions within that space.
  Each of them is in a certain position or in the categories of adjacent positions, և in fact it is not possible to occupy two opposite positions at the same time.
  According to the criteria chosen for constructing this space, են are its actuators, this field can be described as a field of relation of certain forces, that is, as a group of objective proportions of forces, which are attributed to all members in that field; agents' intentions or their direct interactions.
During the elections, we already know in which polling stations it will be heated.
  A few days before the elections, the so-called "neighborhood boys" living near those polling stations are becoming more active.
  In our district, a day before the elections, light bulbs were hung on the headquarters. as if it were a panicle.
 The workers there were doing some intensive work.
 We know everyone.
 Most of them are the employees of the municipality of that area or their relatives and friends. In our country, for example, the whole street was owned by the relatives of one of the Republican candidates, the others were either condominium workers or I don't know, they were people we once thought were oppositionists, but they don't have jobs, now they have money earn.
 One day I saw, I asked, I said, listen, you have been cursing them all your life, now you have come, you have mixed with them, what a mess.
 He said, "Well, how many elections are there now? They asked me to help them, people I know, my son's friends are full, oh, I can not tell my son, go and do whatever you want (quote from an in-depth interview, observer)."
Capital for the construction of social space, which can be materially expressed in an objective state, is a power that spreads in the field in a given period.
 During the elections, certain types of capital, like the trump cards in the game, endow the power, which determines the chances of victory in the given field. Each field corresponds to a unique capital that is available in that field as a power or bet in the game.
  For example, the amount of cultural capital (the same applies to economic capital) determines the combination of chances of victory in all games, where cultural capital is used, and participates in the determination of positions in the social space insofar as that position depends on the chance of success in the cultural field.
Thus, the position of a given agent or voter in the social space can be determined by his position in different fields, as well as through the distribution of power in each field.
 It mainly refers to economic (in all its forms), cultural and social capitals, as well as symbolic capital, which is often called authority, rating, name, etc.
 It is in this way that other types of capital are perceived and recognized as legitimate.
 It is possible to build a simplified model of the social field, assuming the position of each agent with the manifestations of all possible spatial games.
 It must be accepted that each field has its own logic, its own hierarchy, so that the economic field tends to wrap its structure in other fields.
  In addition, the social field can be described as a multidimensional space of positions, where any existing position can be determined from a multidimensional coordinate system whose meanings are correlated with different variables.
 Thus, according to the total volume of capital, the agents are placed in it at the first level of measurement, and at the second level of measurement, they are distributed according to the combination of their own capitals, as well as in the common property consolidation with relative weight in different types of capital.
 In this case, the agents are "objectively" determined by their positions in those relations.
  They are institutionalized with a stable, socially accepted will and legally guaranteed social status.
 This power determines the current or potential power in different fields և access to the specific income it gives [9].
Knowledge of the positions occupied by agents in a given space contains information about the inherent properties, conditions, or their relative properties, the positions.
 Knowing the space of positions, one can distinguish categories, that is, groups, as a group of agents occupying the same position, who by engaging in the same conditions, being subject to the same circumstances, have all the opportunities to acquire the same dispositions;
  This "written on paper" class has the possibility of theoretical existence, և allows to explain, predict the practices, characteristics and behavior of the classified, which leads to their consolidation in the group.
 But in reality it is not a "real" class as a group of people who are mobilized և ready to fight.
 In this sense, it can be argued that it is only a "possible" category, as it is a group of agents who will objectively respond less if they need to be mobilized.
  During the elections, these masses are, in fact, those who vote for this or that party on the grounds that they have received a material reward or social status in exchange for that vote, as such, are considered the "possible" electorate of a political force that In all likelihood, they are not ready to fight to defend or defend the political views or ideological struggle of that political force or candidate.
In electoral processes, what exists and what we can talk about refers to the space of relations.
  The latter, according to Bourdieu, is as real as the geographical environment, within which movements are paid for by work, effort, especially time (to go down from above means to climb, to crawl, to bear the traces of it on one's own skin).
  According to Bourdieu, the explanation of social reality in an impartial, objective theory should be understood to include agents' perceptions of social reality, that is, their contribution to the formation of their view of social reality, as well as the role they always play in the formation of social reality. to ascribe their position to their identity.
  The perception of social reality is a dual product of social structure.
  Objectively, it is structured in the social environment, because the features that characterize agents or institutions are perceived not independently, but on the contrary, in very incredible combinations.
  Observing the subjective aspects, the perception of social reality is structured in such a way that the mechanisms of perception and evaluation are adapted at the moment; everything that is presented (especially in language) is the result of a previous symbolic struggle, is expressed as a result of more or less modified symbolic forces.
  However, objects can be perceived and expressed differently.
  As objects of the natural environment, they always imply partial uncertainty - variability, because, for example, more stable combinations are never based solely on existing statistics between key features, but as objects of history, they change over time, their meaning is unknown, delayed. relatively undetermined.
 From this point of view, it is unclear what creates the basis for a pluralistic orientation of worldview.
  It is connected with the diversity of perspectives, with every kind of symbolic struggle that arises with the production of socially illegitimate views and the wrapping or influence of those views.
The categories of perception of social reality are considered to be mainly objective structures of social space, as a result of which they direct agents to perceive the social world as it is, to accept it as something presupposed, and not to oppose it by opposing various, even antagonistic possibilities.
A sense of position, like what you can or should not "allow yourself", contains a tacit perception of one's position, a sense of boundaries, that is, a sense of space, which means either being accepted and respected, or They make others respect each other.
 If the objective relations of forces seek to reproduce them from the point of view of their social reality, which is always included in those relations, then it means that the principles that structure that worldview of social reality are in the objective structures of social reality. in consciousness.
Recognition of social reality, or rather the categories that make it possible, is the main task of political struggle, a struggle that is as theoretical as it is practical in order to preserve or transform the social world by preserving or transforming the categories of perception of social reality.
Electoral processes և habitus. Electoral processes are influenced by a number of internal and external factors that determine the process and results of the organization of elections.
    The elections that have become our focus and the electoral behavior that emerges during it as phenomena of social reality can be interpreted through Boudier's notions of "habitus" իտ "social field".
 Before interpreting elections through these concepts, it is noteworthy to see how the electoral process reflects the chain of contradictions between "structuralist constructivism" or "constructivist structuralism" described in Bourdieu's theoretical concept.
 If we analyze the results of the elections held in recent years and the post-election events, we will see that in many cases the election results not only recognize the legitimate political forces, their electorate, but also legitimize the idea of ​​the results being predetermined in the society.
 In other words, the popular opinion that a separate vote can not change anything և influence the outcome of the elections, becoming a special "structure", determines the whole process of participation of citizens in the electoral behavior during elections, on the other hand, citizens structure the relations through which It is acceptable to use vote-buying techniques, as many are convinced that their choice will not change anything.
 In the chain of these contradictions one can see the dialectical interconnection of objectivism and subjectivism put forward by Bourdieu.
And indeed, the behavior of the voters determines and then influences the outcome of the elections, and the structures circulating on the other hand - the institution of electoral bribery - the effects of the social environment, inevitably force people to express the behavior that objectively leads to a situation where everyone accepts the election results. They are considered falsified, and the institution of elections is inefficient in terms of expressing the will of the people and ensuring political participation.
 "… Recently, after the elections, we see that everyone is convinced that the elections are fake, but at the same time they are fulfilling their" duty ", so to speak, leaving the rest to the person they voted for.
 But during these last elections it was very interesting.
 Because we felt how big a problem it is when there is no confidence in the elections at all, because if there was that confidence, the preconditions for this election to be fair were quite high, unlike the previous elections, and if people just believed that these mechanisms could be avoided. It seems to me that in that case they would have participated better in the elections, but everyone was convinced that he would benefit from the elections, and as they say, "pulling a dog's hair is okay."
 My benefit will be only this 10-20 thousand that I will receive "(quote from an expert interview, human rights activist).
Bourdieu further explains the terms "structuralism" and "constructivism" used in his theory.
 According to him, through structuralism he tries to show that there are objective structures in the social reality, regardless of the consciousness և will of the agents, which are able to direct or suppress their practices and ideas.
Through constructivism he tries to present that there is a social heritage - experience, on the one hand, in the form of perception, thinking, mechanisms of action, which are components of the "habitus", and on the other hand, there are social structures, in particular, what he calls "social fields ”or groups, sometimes referred to as social classes.
When studying the peculiarities of the formation of electoral processes, it is possible to understand the change in the behavior of the social agents involved in those processes, depending on their position and habitat.
  Habitat defines Bourdieu as a system of world-perception-evaluation mechanisms, cognitive-developing structures, which agents acquire through continuous experience in occupying a certain position in social reality.
 Habitus is both a system of reproduction of practices and a set of mechanisms for evaluating and perceiving those practices.
  In both cases, the habitus reflects the social position it has developed.
"In the previous elections, we went with our family to elect an opposition candidate. Nothing has changed.
  My family and I are in opposition, but during the elections I worked in the Republican headquarters.
  It's a job now, I had to do it, for which they paid me.
  We had the opportunity to reason with it, and we had some pre-social issues, nothing changed during the elections, as a result, again, it happens the way they want.
What can we change? ”(Quote from in-depth interview, proxy).
Summarizing the above, projecting it on the explanation of the post-election processes in our country, we can say that each social agent (voter), depending on the participation and experience gained during different elections, as well as the current position, can perceive and reproduce it differently. Practices that are considered acceptable are տիվ objectified in a specific period of time.
LITERATURE [1] "Yelq" bloc accepts the results of the parliamentary elections, 03.04.2017, 16.
29, URL.
 http:
//www.dialogue.am/elqy-yntrutyunneri-ardyunqneri-masin/(Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
[2] "Yelq" bloc accepts the results of the Yerevan Council of Elders elections, 15.05.2017, 18.
18, URL.
  http:
//yerkirmedia.am/1political/elq-dashinq-yerevani-avagani/(Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
[3] 2017 Presentation of the results of monitoring the abuse of administrative resources and other electoral violations in the NA elections.
  Transparency International Anti-Corruption Center, URL.
  https:
//transparency.am/en/news/view/2046 (Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
[4] Araratyan A., "NA elections: v1.0 - v4.0", 1995 elections, Mediamax, 05.04.2012, 10.
11, URL.
 http:
//www.mediamax.am/en/news/Elections/4576/ (Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
[5] Araratyan A., "NA elections: v1.0 - v 4.0", 1999 elections, Mediamax, 13.04.2012, 09.
44, URL.
 http:
//www.mediamax.am/en/news/Elections/4633/ (Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
URL.
 https:
//www.kommersant.ru/doc/16112 (data date.
 05.11.2017). [7] Araratyan A., "NA elections: v1.0 - v 4.0", 2003 elections, Mediamax, 20.04.2012, 12.
34, URL.
 http:
//www.mediamax.am/am/news/Elections/4710/ (Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
[8] Referendum on Constitutional Amendments, 06.12.2015, Transparency International Anti-Corruption Center, URL.
https:
//transparency.am/elections/2015-12-06/map/ (Accessed.
 05.11.2017).
Anahit Gharibyan COMMENTS ON POST-ELECTION PROCESSES BURDIE "SOCIAL FIELD" AND "HABITUS" CONTINUOUS.
