NEWLY FOUNDED MONUMENTS IN THE FIELD OF ARTSAKH In the framework of the research of the Artsakh expedition of the Institute of Archeology and Ethnography of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia in 2013. In June-July, we carried out exploratory work in some of the plains of Artsakh in order to study the stone-shaped monuments.
 The main goal of the work was: • To find out the initial location of the previously displaced monuments, to find out their cultural environment, • To explore, to discover new monuments in the steppe parts of Artsakh.
Human-like monuments have previously been found in a number of places in the steppe part of Martakert.
  Today there are their accumulations in the vicinity of Tigranakert, Artsakh, as well as Gyavurkala, not far from the latter.
 Several monuments from this environment were transferred to Stepanakert and Martakert historical-geological museums during the Soviet years, and some of them remain in the open field.
 As a result of the exploration of the surface material, we were able to discover 5 human-like monuments, as well as to find out the initial location of several previously discovered monuments and the circumstances of their discovery.
It was possible to find out the place of the preliminary discovery of some of the previously discovered monuments in the yard of the Martakert Historical and Geographical Museum1.
  They were found են moved to Martakert in 1975-1976. About 3 km north of Martakert from Bakhshun-Tapa settlement.
  The monuments were found during the landscaping of the area for horticultural purposes.
 They were taken to the yard of the Martakert Regional Executive Committee building, from there to the hill near the city bridge, where a park was planned, and from there to the Martakert Historical and Geographical Museum.
  Along with the monuments, several shells were found, the location of which is not yet known.
  The specific location of the monuments was clarified with the help of Artavazd Nalbandyan, a well-organized painter who organized the leveling works in time.
 As a result of reconnaissance excavations carried out by a detachment of the expedition in this place, several fragments of shells were found, which date back to BC. From the 1st millennium to the Middle Ages.
 However, as a result of our excavations in the same place, no other cultural layer or monument was found.
1 Yeranyan N., Martakert stone anthropomorphic monuments (iconography և typology), "Proceedings of the international conference dedicated to the 500th anniversary of Armenian typography և YSU SSS's 65th anniversary", vol. 4, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 110-114.
Search operations were also carried out in a number of ancient sites and settlements in the Martakert region, in the area of ​​Gyavurkala, in the vicinity of the former Mollalar, Sofulu, Boyahmedli (now Nor Haykajur), Papravend (now Nor Karmiravan), in the area of ​​Gharachilar villages, Tigranakert.
  As a result of the works, we found a stone human-shaped monument in the cemetery of the former Mollalar village (Fig. 1).
  The monument is broken, about a third of it is preserved.
 It is facing the ground, with an image (probably hair) of relief engraved on the back.
 On the front side of the monument, a small part of the hands "below" has been preserved.
 Judging by the preserved part, we can assume that the hands are raised upwards again.
  The dimensions of the preserved part of the monument are: 80 cm height և 50 cm width.
We found two more human-shaped monuments in the cemetery of Sofulu village, north-west of Gyavur-kala.
  The first of the monuments is half-buried in the ground, it is a clear three-part, only the part of the head is visible, and below the waist it is broken.
  The hands are raised upwards again.
  There are no traces of imagery on the opposite side.
 The dimensions of the preserved part of the monument are: height 70 cm, width 45 cm (Fig. 2).
  The other monument was located about 30 meters from the last one, facing the ground, with no traces of imagery on the back.
  The monument in front looks like two parts, the eyes and the nose are barely noticeable.
 The dimensions are 140 cm high և 60 cm wide (Fig. 3).
The discovery of the next two monuments is more interesting.
 The first of them was discovered by the expedition about 70 meters east of the early Christian church in Gyavur-Kala (Fig. 4).
 The monument was found in H. Petrosyan և L. Kirakosyan on the bottom of a military trench dug during a search for surface archeological items.
  As a result of the excavations, we found out that the monument was placed on an early Christian burial mound.
  It is east-west, which proves that it has been reused և to serve only as a building material.
 The face of the monument is depicted with a U-shaped nose, fingers pointing upwards, and one of them is broken.
 The monument on the opposite side has no iconography.
We were able to find another human-like monument in the southern pavement of the second early Christian church in Tigranakert (excavations were carried out by H. Petrosyan, T. Vardanesova և N. Yeranyan).
  The monument is complete, clearly three-part, flattened on both sides, which has no iconography, but judging by the grooves of the monument, we can assume that it was lying face up.
 Therefore, it is very likely that the monument had an iconography beforehand, but after being placed in the pavement, it decayed և and lost the iconography.
  The dimensions of the monument are: height - 110 cm, width - 50 cm (Fig. 5).
It should be noted that none of the previously discovered or newly discovered monuments was in its original location (in situ).
 Although it is still difficult to pinpoint the monuments, it is clear that none of them belong to the environment from which it was found. they are reused.
  We think that the monuments found both in this and nearby areas were erected at least in BC. VII century then they are related to the Chimera-Scythian nomadic tribes.
 As it is known, these tribes were also in the territory of Artsakh և Utik during their invasions to Central Asia.
 This is evidenced by both the historical sources and the archeological finds from the territory of Artsakh.
 Probably as a result of those contacts, these manifestations of culture appeared in these areas1.
Such monuments have been scattered from Mongolia to the Apennine Peninsula in different centuries, representing different ethnic communities.
  The oldest monuments in the literature are attributed to the Scythian-Sarmatian tribes.
  Scythian human-like monuments, as a rule, depicted a warrior Scythian (possibly the ancestor) վում erected on tombs.
 Currently, about 160 such monuments are known2.
There are many views on the compositional-semantic interpretations of other similar human-like monuments.
  In particular, D. Raski sees in Scythian monuments the image of dead but heroic people - warriors, possibly a king.
  And M. Artamanov expressed an opinion that the monuments depict "heroic warriors", և this is connected with the cult of the famous Scythian ancestor, Targita.
  He paid attention to the peculiarity of the monuments, that the depiction of akinak (staple dagger) is a characteristic attribute of almost everyone3.
Thus, examining the famous stone anthropomorphs from the territory of Artsakh, we can mention that Artsakh was once inhabited by Scythian-speaking Iranian-speaking tribes, or at least was in their zone of ideological or physical influence.
 Both the strategically convenient position of Artsakh and the favorable climatic conditions probably contributed to it.
  It is not by chance that both these newly discovered and hitherto known monuments were found in the plains of Artsakh, which should have been favorable for the semi-nomadic tribes.
Nzhdeh Yeranyan NEWLY HUMANITARIAN MONUMENTS IN THE FIELD OF ARTSAKH Keywords: stone humanoid monuments, Martakert, Artsakh Tigranakert, Gyavur-kala, Chimera-Scythian tribes.
