COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF COMPULSORY ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS.
 PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS AND DEFICIENCIES Prompt, timely and timely execution of judicial acts is one of the most important manifestations of the principle of the rule of law.
The following principle has been known since Roman law: ubi ius, ibi remedium, which implies that there can be no law without effective remedies.
 The issues of execution of the judicial act are mainly addressed both at the national and international levels.
  The European Court of Human Rights will state its position on this issue, noting that the enforcement of judgments within the meaning of the Convention presupposes an integral part of the fundamental right to a fair trial, the provision and protection of which are the basis of every rule of law.
  The position on the urgency of this issue was also expressed during the 24th Conference of European Ministers of Justice entitled "Execution of Judgments in Accordance with European Standards", according to which "proper, effective and consistent execution of judicial acts is a prerequisite for building a strong and respected judiciary in for strengthening and development ”2.
Improper execution of judicial acts can lead to a situation where the protection of the civil and legal interests of individuals can be unrealistic.
 It can lead to distrust of state institutions, regardless of the extent to which the laws 1 See ECHR 1997 case Hornsby v. Greece, Estima Jorge v. Portugal (1998), Immobiliare Saffi v. Italy (1999) and Georgiadis v. Greece (2000).
2 See Resolution No. 3 of the 24th Conference of European Ministers of Justice.
clearly regulate the legal relations arising in this sphere,, how strict and legal the legal position of the court is.
  For every person entitled to judicial protection, "justice must be visible, enforceable, not written down" 3.
Therefore, for the settlement of the mentioned issue, it is possible to choose a mechanism that will ensure the proper and effective execution of judicial acts.
  In the framework of this topic, we will try to present the problems identified as a result of our research, to present in connection with their solution methods that will ensure the harmonization of public and private interests in the process of execution of judicial acts.
Currently, the system of compulsory execution of judicial acts in the Republic of Armenia, for objective and subjective reasons, does not allow ensuring the compulsory execution of all judicial acts.
  The low salaries, workload and low qualifications of the compulsory executors largely lead to the inefficiency of their work.
  As a substantiation of the above-mentioned circumstance, we can refer to 2008. The report on the feasibility study of the private system of compulsory enforcement of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Report), which states that the salary of enforcement officers, in addition to other legal remuneration, is based on the interest rate on confiscated assets, which is quite a small amount.
 The report states that this amount is not enough to reduce the risk of corruption or to promote fast and efficient service to the creditor.
  Due to this, the flow of staff is quite high, for the executors to leave their work in order to be transferred to another job4.
 In addition, the report addresses the lack of oversight և corruption factors in the state system of enforcement of judicial acts during that period, in particular stating that “the structure of the system is weak. 3 See Dr Alan Uzelac Professor, The role played by the profession of bailiffs in the proper andLecture delivered at the Council of Europe seminar.
 The Role, Organization, Status and Training of Bailiffs - Strengthening the Enforcement of Court Decisions in Civil and Commercial Cases, 2002, p. 3.
4 See Ministry of Justice Program Implementation Office December 16, 2008, RA Private Enforcement System Feasibility Study Report, p. 19.
avoids corruption, endangers the interests and rights of creditors.
  Such an atmosphere undermines the rights of creditors who are unable or unwilling to "assist" agents by "providing them with additional" resources. "
  Consequently, the growing distrust of the society towards the justice system eventually turns into a general legal nihilism.
It should be noted that the systems of law enforcement agencies of different countries are of a national nature; they are formed in each country under the influence of different factors.
 Enforcement systems are divided into three groups: public, private և mixed.
The state system of enforcement operates in Belarus, Germany, Denmark, Israel, the USA, Finland, Switzerland and, of course, in our country.
 Thus, according to Article 2, Part 2 of the RA Law on the Service Ensuring the Compulsory Execution of Judicial Acts, "The Compulsory Enforcement Service is a special type of state service, the specifics of which are defined by this law."
  According to Part 4 of the same article, "The Compulsory Enforcement Service operates in the system of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia."
The status of a civil servant endows the compulsory executor with general power and authority.
  In Russia, the United States and Finland, these enforcement bodies are part of the executive branch.
The private system of compulsory enforcement is characterized by the fact that the foster parent is a self-organizing specialist, who bears full property responsibility for the activity.
  Bailiffs in Belgium, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, France, Estonia are private individuals whose activities are subject to licensing.
In this system, bailiffs are governed by regional and national chambers as self-governing bodies.
5 See note. Report, page 21.
The convenience of this system for the state is conditioned by the fact that the state does not finance the activities of bailiffs in any way, but on the contrary, both the burden of self-financing and the full property responsibility of the clients are placed on the latter.
 As in the case of the private-legal system, the amount of the bailiff's remuneration depends on the results of his work, therefore the bailiff is interested in the maximum efficiency of his activity6.
In France, enforcement proceedings are carried out not only by private bailiffs, but also by prosecutors-generals, prosecutors, police commanders and officers.
Candidates for private bailiffs are subject to strict requirements: legal education, two years of work experience in the bailiff's office, passing a state qualification examination.
  In the French system, the approach is such that the private executor does not enforce the judicial acts in favor of the state, which are made by the administrative courts.
Functional responsibilities of bailiffs in the Netherlands combine the characteristics of both a public and a private person.
 They have the right to engage in private debt collection activities, by mutual agreement of the enforcement parties, provide legal advice, act as a proxy in court, and organize their activities on the basis of an approved business plan.
 The existence of such a program is a mandatory requirement7.
 As for the mixed model of enforcement, it is typical of countries such as Belgium, Bulgaria, Great Britain, Kazakhstan and Canada.
  In the Republic of Kazakhstan, for example, the system of private compulsory enforcement differs from the state in the following: • All types of acts subject to compulsory enforcement are reserved to private compulsory executors, except for acts by which the state is a party, 6 See Ярков В. V., Non-partisan (partial) organization of compulsory fulfillment.
  "for" and "against" // "Journal of the Supreme Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation", 2007, N 9.
7 See Рескьюexecution_eu.html, 05.05.2017.
груп, official website, available at http.
//resq-group.com.ua/ • Enforcement actions are carried out on a paid basis; • Private law enforcement officers are also not subject to the legal provisions governing sanctions applied during enforcement proceedings8.
Of particular interest is the mixed system of Bulgarian enforcement.
  The private executors here are private persons who carry out the compulsory fulfillment of private property claims.
  What is special, however, is the fact that the law allows the state to impose on individual enforcement officers in individual cases the execution of judicial acts in favor of the state.
The Bulgarian Institute of Private Enforcement operates quite effectively, as evidenced by the fact that the vast majority of enforcement documents are under the activity of private enforcement agents.
 This is primarily due to the large number of statutory powers for private executors, as well as the high rates set for the service provided.
  In addition, all government agencies, staff, and organizations should cooperate with private executives to assist them in carrying out their duties.
Referring to the analysis of the systems of execution of judicial acts, we see that, taking into account the general criterion, we have not been able to decide which system is effective and which is not, because there is no system that is preferable to the other, which can be used in any situation and circumstances. to have the same "effective results".
Thus, as a result of the study of different countries on the issue under discussion, in our opinion, the following advantages of the private enforcement system can be identified: • The introduction of this institution, first of all, will ensure the effective execution of judicial acts as soon as possible.
 plus and minus, available at http: // www.
//articlekz.com/article/9702, 05.05.2017.
9 See the official website of Russian bailiffs, available at http: // www.
//fssprus.ru/inter_razdel11/?print=1, 05.05.2017.
• The state is relieved of the burden of financing the Judicial Acts Compulsory Enforcement Service, and therefore the budgetary policy pursued in this area, as this system operates on the principle of self-financing at the expense of the creditor • • Unlike countries with a state enforcement system, Stricter professional qualification requirements; • Private Enforcement Service, as a type of professional activity pursued for profit, is supposed to promote competition between these entities, which բ will increase the quality of enforcement of judicial acts;• The interest of private performers և Motivation to perform effectively due to the fact that under this system their remuneration is directly proportional to the performance, • Independent property liability of private performers for their own shortcomings as opposed to the state enforcement model where the state directly bears responsibility; • Private enforcement officers must independently organize the activities of their office, in particular, hire their employees, acquire the necessary equipment և technical means; • State control over the private enforcement service is not exercised alone;The latter is characterized by the existence of a certain system of self-government (national-regional level chambers).
As for the shortcomings of the private enforcement system, the following can be mentioned among them: • It is problematic to endow private officials who are not officials at all with the authority to apply coercion; • the issue of mutual cooperation of private executors այլ other bodies assisting justice in connection with, for example, the search of the debtor և (or) his property; • as a type of business activity, private performance will primarily pursue the purpose of making a profit;which can reduce the interest of private executors in the case of small property claims (alimony confiscation claims are typical), • Lack of self-financing of private executors due to the small population in certain regions (for example, in the vast majority of regions); Their appointment by the state, as well as the fact that these persons are called "private" after the exercise of state control over their activities; • Ultimately, the introduction of private forced labor systems may lead to an increase in legal aid mechanisms, resulting in limited access to the rights protection system.• Lack of self-financing of private performers due to the small population in certain regions (for example, in the vast majority of regions of Armenia); • ultimately, the introduction of private enforcement officers into systems may lead to an increase in the cost of legal aid mechanisms, resulting in limited access to the rights protection system.• Lack of self-financing of private performers due to the small population in certain regions (for example, in the vast majority of RA regions); • Generally, it is problematic to license the activities of "private" performers, presumably by their appointment, as well as after state control over their activities. • ultimately, the introduction of private compulsory service systems may lead to an increase in legal aid mechanisms and, as a result, to a lack of access to a rights protection system.• It is generally problematic to license the activities of "private" executors, presumably by appointing them to the state, as well as to call these persons "private" after exercising state control over their activities; • Finally, the introduction of private compulsory systems may lead to higher legal aid mechanisms. Restriction of access to the rights protection system.• It is generally problematic to license the activities of "private" executors, presumably by appointing them to the state, as well as to call these persons "private" after exercising state control over their activities; • Finally, the introduction of private compulsory systems may lead to higher legal aid mechanisms. Restriction of access to the rights protection system.The introduction of private enforcement officers may lead to an increase in the cost of legal aid mechanisms and, as a result, to a lack of access to a rights protection system.The introduction of private compulsory services in the system may lead to an increase in the price of legal aid mechanisms and, as a result, to a lack of access to a rights protection system.
Execution of judicial acts is not carried out in a political-social vacuum, that is, it is free from political-social factors.
 It should be noted that it is in this process that many circumstances have a significant positive and negative impact on performance, subjecting it to many changes.
For a state in transition, any kind of legal process can be ineffective not only in the execution of judicial acts, but also in other processes.
  The reason for such effectiveness can be the multiplicity of legal processes (including cases pending in court), as well as the length of the development of those processes.
These circumstances create a situation that has a negative impact on the implementation process.
The next problems are related to the certainty, transparency and predictability of legal processes.
  Along with these problems, there is a lack of experience համապատասխան lack of experience in the relevant institutions, as well as external interference և (or) corruption factor.
 If the above-mentioned circumstances lead to the reduction of the qualitative features of the judicial acts made by the courts, then, due to that, spontaneous complications arise in the process of proper and fast compulsory execution of judicial acts, which, taken as a whole, affects the efficiency of justice.
The solution of the problems arising during the compulsory enforcement should be carried out as much as possible with the harmonization of conflicting interests, ie the comprehensive legal regulation should ensure the comprehensive protection of the rights of creditors, debtors and legal interests.
Thus, completing the above, we believe that in the current conditions it is more expedient to introduce a mixed enforcement system in the Republic of Armenia.
  In this case, it is not about the abolition of the state system of compulsory execution, but, in fact, about the possibility of choice given to each creditor. that is, to allow the creditor to determine the executive or private law of the judicial act that has entered into legal force for his benefit.
In general, for the introduction of the proposed system, we believe, it will be necessary to legislate the legal regulations of all stages prior to enforcement (including bankruptcy legislation).
  At the same time, it is undeniable that the introduction of the institution of private bailiffs itself will improve the enforcement of judicial acts, as the interest of private bailiffs in the rapid and effective execution of judicial acts is always much higher (as shown by other countries' experience) than state or "budget" compulsory executors.
However, the introduction of private enforcement agents can inevitably cause a number of problems.
 In this regard, it is appropriate to mention the following point of view expressed in the literature. We can call the approaches to the legal reform processes in the countries in transition countries a "pendulum approach", because in which case it is impossible to find a version that is more balanced and reasonable in different radical positions.
The consequences of such reforms sometimes do not meet the original legal expectations. ”10
 The activity of a private executor will be licensed by the state, so first of all it will be necessary to set certain professional standards, such as higher legal education, professional training, passing qualification exams, qualification, issuance of a license.
  In this case, the legal status of private compulsory executors և state compulsory executors must be differentiated by law, the enforcement documents issued by them must have equal legal force.
It will be necessary to differentiate which cases are subject only to the compulsory executors of the state system, etc.
Despite our concerns, however, it should be noted that the report, as of 2008, according to state statistics, addresses the continuing increase in the number of unresolved cases, the current lack of funding for public service staff, 11 which cannot be ignored.
 It is not accidental that in the mentioned Report a conclusion was made on the introduction of a private enforcement system, proposing possible solutions և options.
  We consider that the issue raised in the Report is more than relevant today; the introduction of a mixed system of enforcement will contribute to the effective, reasonable implementation of judicial acts in our country as soon as possible.
Martun Stepanyan, Kristine Galstyan COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF COMPULSORY ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS.
 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM Keywords: compulsory enforcement, judicial act, private enforcement officers, enforcement system, right to judicial protection
.
