THE THEME OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN THE ART OF THE ITALIAN PAINTER OF FRANCESCONI AND ITS EXPRESSIONS IN THE DIASPORA PRESS is not possible.
  In this sense, the representation of the Armenian Genocide through art can play a significant role in its recognition and condemnation.
  Over the years, many artists have protested against not condemning the Armenian Genocide, expressing their protest through art.
The Armenian Genocide, with its comprehensiveness, remains a key theme for the works of many artists.
 For many Armenian painters, it has been a material for creation since the 19th century. Hovhannes Aivazovsky, Vardges Surenyants, Leon Tutunjyan, Jansem, Arshile Gorky, Gayane Khachatryan and many other Armenian painters have touched upon the Armenian Genocide during their creative life.
  However, it became the material of work for foreign painters.
One such artist is the Italian sculptor, painter Anselmo Francesconi (1921-2005).
  The latter has 47 works with graphic solutions, summarized in his "Massacre" series.
The themes of these works by Francesconi have deep emotional layers.
  It is a unique interpretation of human tragedy, presented in the universal language of art, in a different way, because the viewer can interpret the meaning of the painting.
  The "Massacre" series speaks instead of the author, even regardless of the author's feelings and will1.
 In this sense, the impressions conveyed by Francesco's work may be highly subjective, but we should not ignore the historical events that formed the basis for the creation of such a series.
  In other words, it is simply impossible to ignore the historical layer of these works, no matter how general they are, the massacres and the genocide.
A. Francesconi was mainly told about the Armenian Genocide by his Armenian wife, Margarita Tovmasyan, but he personally got acquainted with the historical events, read and studied. This is clear from the titles of many of his works.
One such example is Francesconi in 1965. The work entitled "The Telegram" was done.
  In this case, reference is made to Talaat's telegram addressed to the governor of Aleppo.
 A horseman is depicted in the center of the work.
  The contrasting colors and lines of the image made with graphic solutions, spreading to the right and left of the center, convey a sense of movement.
 The horseman carries Talaat's telegram-verdict, in which he is instructed to massacre all Armenians, even children, and not to pay tribute to the sting of conscience2.
 The next works, it seems, will be the depiction of the logical continuation of that telegram: massacres, endless scenes of massacre, genocide.
  "Massacre of Children" is another work dedicated to one topic.
  Although it differs from the first in terms of style, but in terms of purely thematic nature, this work has many parallels with famous Renaissance artists, for example, Rubens' painting "The Massacre of the Innocents".
  "Memory, or, to be more precise," Innocents 1 Барт Р., Selected works.
 Semiotics. Politics, Moscow, 1994, p. 384-391.2 Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, Volume 7, Yerevan, 1981, p. 429.
"The echoes of the" massacre ", mainly the genius catastrophic works of the 17th century, are present in all the paintings, but especially in the" Massacre of Children ", - notes art critic Elena Pontigian in her article dedicated to Francesconi's" The Massacre "series 1.
Francesco did not depict his work in the genre of classicism, but the character of the characters depicted in them is obvious. We can even see their mood without distinguishing specific features, at the same time feeling the action and the scenes - children being killed, the ruthlessness and horrific cruelty of the perpetrators, the bloodshed.
He presented the implementation of the telegram instructions to Francesco in other works, such as "Exile", "Separation", "Massacre", etc.
 Another interesting fact is that in Francesconi's works, the parts of the body that are often left unfinished, the shifting of the compositional center to the left or to the left, give the impression that the massacre scenes are endless; inside, on the floor and ceiling.
  In his "Massacre" series, Francesconi managed to present the historical events with graphic solutions with the true power of art, free from national perceptions, free, like the Renaissance artists, when they depicted King Herod massacring children, or Picasso, "Guernica".
  He was able to convey to Francesco the mood, the character of the depicted characters, in other words, through art he truly reproduced the story, at the same time leaving space exclusively for the work of the viewer, without interfering in that relationship at all.
The artist's works have been exhibited in different countries of the world, such as Switzerland, Italy, Germany, France, Iran, etc.
 Although since the 1960s. Francesco has recently been exhibited in many countries. The artist's works were first exhibited in Armenia in 2010 at the National Gallery of Armenia thanks to his wife, Margarita Tovmasyan, five years after Francesco's death.
  She donated 10 works dedicated to her husband on the Armenian Genocide (with 24 protection points) to the National Gallery of Armenia, where they are still located.
Much has been said and written about Francesconi's "Massacre", especially in the 1960s and 1970s, when his series was already presented to the public in the form of exhibitions.
  Imagine the spirit of the Diaspora Armenians when it was presented in Gen.
  In the "Ayk" periodical published here we read: "If Anselmo's art, by its abstract nature, is not so accessible to the common interest, the magnificent print published on the occasion of the exhibition tells us that the artist will express his anger over the Armenian massacres.
 Even the famous telegram of Talaat, addressed to the governorship of Aleppo, is included in this booklet. "Anselmo will narrate the genocide in the language of his art, and his art, as we have said, is not understood by every visitor," the article reads in connection with the screening of "Massacre" ("The Massacre") 2.
 In this publication, the author of the article expresses the spirit of the local Armenians, at the same time noting that the presentation of this tragedy is not accessible to everyone who watches it.
It is interesting that during these years the publications about Francesconi's art in the Diaspora Armenian press are mainly in the genre of articles, there are also analyzes of works, which can be considered as artistic analyzes as well.
  Such an article was published in the "Alik" newspaper published in Tehran.
 In 1969, Francesconi's works were exhibited in the art department of Tehran University, and, of course, the local Armenians welcomed it with great enthusiasm.
  "This tragedy is the first time that it is presented in the spirit of art, that is why the viewer does not create a purely emotional state, but the feeling is combined with the thought and makes him analyze and think.
 When the observer leaves the hall, he involuntarily takes with him the advice of the problem presented to him ”3.
The great importance of this exhibition for Diaspora Armenians is evident from the announcements published by this newspaper, urging the local Armenians to watch the exhibition for 2 "Ayk" daily, born on May 23, 1968.
3 "Alik", Tehran, 20.02.1969, № 40.
դես 1.
 At the same time, it should be noted that the publications of the Diaspora Armenian press published in this period mainly have an emotional emphasis.
Another interesting fact ևs. If we compare the articles about Francesconi published in the Armenian press since 2010 և 1960s. It is clear from what has been published that in our time there were mainly news items about the Francesconi series.
  They do not have the genre of the article, there are no artistic analyzes or they are not available.
 In this sense, we can state that the journalistic materials published nowadays are very inferior in content to the 1960s on the same topic. to the materials published in the Diaspora Armenian press.
  As we have already mentioned, Francesconi's art was talked about in Armenia only in the 2000s.
  The exception is the "Voice of the Homeland" periodical, which was considered the link between Armenia and the Diaspora.
 For example, in 1969 An article dedicated to Francesconi's exhibition was published in Yerevan 2, but in Armenia in 1960-1970. Little was known about Francesco.
 Instead, the foreign press covered Francesconi's exhibitions.
 In this sense, Francesco, through his art, has really taken a significant step towards the recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  However, there are problems in the analysis and collection of these materials, while the existence of such materials can be really useful in the way of recognizing and condemning the Genocide.
Although other European painters have referred to the Armenian Genocide in their art, such as the Czech painter Jiri Nosek, Francesco, perhaps, is the only European painter to have addressed the Armenian Genocide on this scale.
  His "Massacre" series is unique not only in terms of art, but also in terms of giving international recognition and recognition to the Genocide, as firstly, they give an assessment of the events that took place, secondly, these works have been exhibited around the world, attracting not only local Armenians but also the international community. .
Francesco has once again proved through his works that art is one of the best ways to restore historical justice and present it to the world.
  The theme of the Genocide was central to Francesconi's art. After working on the creation of the series for four years, he later had numerous exhibitions, presenting "The Massacre", at the same time giving his assessment of 1915. cases.
  Francesconi's "Massacre" is not a work of art done in the style of a graphic, it is a protest, a rage, a demand to be recognized and condemned.
Of course, Armenians all over the world have been very sensitive to this issue, which has found its echoes in the 1960s. In the Diaspora Armenian press, where the Diaspora Armenians say the word of pride to Francesconi.
 At the same time, the articles published in the Diaspora Armenian press about Francesconi and his art are not just words of gratitude, they are both emotional, but at the same time soberly written artistic materials.
Mary MughdusyanHAYOTS GENOCIDE Italian painter Anselmo Francesconi art and its expression Diaspora press 1960 TT.Banali words, Anselmo Francisco, Armenian Genocide recognition and condemnation of the art, Diaspora Armenian media, painting, artist, "Massacre."
