VIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS A PLATFORM FOR POLITICAL FORMATION AND DIFFUSION Modern theoretical approaches, political image concepts, various analyzes
 Theoretical approaches and concepts interpreting the political medium, the essence of the political image, structure and functions, the main principles and factors of formation, as well as the peculiarities of the expression of the image of political parties and leaders in different social networks are presented.
  Statistics are presented, which prove a significant increase in the number of social network users, which leads to an increase in their impact and opportunities.
  This, in turn, brings about qualitative development in the spheres of communication and public relations.
Internet, virtual social network.
 Global virtual analysis shows that as of 2015, about 40% of the world's population (7.2 billion) are active Internet users (more than 3 billion) and about 30% (more than 2 billion) are virtual social users. is an active user of networks (hereinafter referred to as social network) 1.
Social Networking Service (SNS) is an Internet platform designed to build social relationships.
  In the modern world, social networks have become a serious tool in various socio-political developments and processes.
 Social networks have changed the field of information, drastically reducing the number of people turning to print and traditional media, because in the 21st century socio-political 1 http.
//www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/new-global-social-media Life trends make people aware of the news at all times.
In Armenia, the Internet, social networks, their use and the mass of users are actively growing, creating a platform for public discussion, where everyone gets the opportunity to express their opinion and participate in the discussion.
  In 2015, the number of Armenian Internet users reached 800,000.
  At the same time, today the largest developing network in Armenia globally is Facebook, moreover, the increase in the number of visitors is about 10-15% 2 per month.
In parallel, the statistics of the last few years of the population of the population "Internet users" prove the following: 2012 year. 68% of the population used the Internet, in 2014 - 75%.
  Active Internet users (3 hours a day or more) make up 24-25% of the population.
 The presence of people in social networks is growing, for example, more than one million people from Armenia visit social networks every day. networks.
  The daily active Facebook audience from the territory of Armenia reaches about 560 thousand users3.
 The majority of Internet users in Armenia use mobile phones, which further develops the ability to use the Internet.
  Recently, the use of mobile applications (for example, Viber, Skype, Whatsup, etc.) has significantly increased, as well as applications for social networks (Facebook, Odnoklassniki).
  Thus, the possible technical means are used to increase the opportunities and means of using social networks, to make them easy and convenient for the users.
The socio-political opportunities of social networks are mostly manifested in Facebook, Twitter, and in Odnoklassniki, Instagram, Vkontakte, the activities of political leaders and institutions are almost non-political, although there is a political-social discourse.
 By definition, this fact also depends on the capabilities of social networks, tools, goals of users, for example, Facebook users directly or indirectly express their political views and positions.
2 Martirosyan S., Social Networks in Armenia, Noravank Foundation, Yerevan, 2015.
3 Martirosyan S., The image of the average Internet user in Armenia, Noravank Foundation, Yerevan, 2016.
The transfer of a significant part of the socio-political discussions to the virtual field is also confirmed by the fact that the main hashtags of 2015 are #ElectricYerevan, #ohtalan և # электромайдан.
  From June 22 to July 2, 2015, the tag #ElectricYerevan was used more than 68,000 times on Twitter, and # электромайдан - about 20,000 times 4.
For political discussions, the Internet, in particular virtual social networks, provides a platform for political discussion, in which there is a wide and diverse audience, which can be segmented, select the target audience and achieve the corresponding political goals.
  The modern political system is public in structure and ways of expression. has a demonstrative, massive nature.
  Social networks, being a special way of political communication and information transfer, have their unique role and significance, especially in the context of the pre-election struggle, as they provide an opportunity for political leaders and parties to present themselves to the voters in the intended way.
The subjects of politics, in order to achieve their goals, for information and ideological influence, are manifested through mass media - TV, newspapers, radio, Internet, social networks, etc.
  The types of political entities are grouped according to their level of function: • at the personal level - politicians, state officials, leaders (leaders), • at the public level - public - political organizations, ethnic groups, • at the territorial level - states, countries, regions, etc.
Political discussions are held on social networks about the existing political entities at the above-mentioned three levels, as a result of which the subjects acquire a certain political middle ground.
The phenomenon of political image, as one of the ways of reflecting the reality of the political material world in the consciousness of an individual, has existed at all stages of the development of society.
 The image of a politician is a complex և dynamic phenomenon, which 4 Martirosyan S., Political and Civil Movements of Armenia on the Internet, Noravank Foundation, Yerevan, 2015.
For a political figure, it becomes a significant, modern component that predetermines the success of his social and political activities.
 The image is a purposefully formed image, which endows the subject of politics (leader, party, state, etc.) with additional socio-political values, which contributes to his / her more emotional perception5.
 Voters often make their choices on an emotional level rather than rationally.
Sometimes, not wanting to think, they replace the complex, deep, comprehensive portrait of the candidate with his ready-made image, in other words, they evaluate not the candidate's program or ideological basis, but his appearance, movement, willpower, masculinity, power, etc.
The ideas about the image phenomenon were formed in the early historical past. In their discussion of leadership, theorists used the tools and tactics that enabled them to gain public attention, sympathy, and trust.
The theoretical foundations of the political image appeared in the works of Italian writer, historian, political theorist Niccolo Machiavelli.
  The latter is one of the founders of leadership's imagery.
Referring to the image առաջնորդ features of the leader, he writes: "A politician aspiring to power should be proclaimed as kind, reasonable, humane, faithful to his word, pious, far-sighted, striving for universal respect, able to win and preserve the sympathy of the people.
Image in the context of sociological theories.
 The political medium itself is a social phenomenon, as it arises և spreads through social interactions և communications.
 One of the most common approaches to the study of the problem of political image is the theory of interactionism (interaction), which is characterized by the consideration of "political image - audience" relations as a unit of analysis.
  This approach focuses on the mutual influence of the mentioned parties7.
E. Goffman was aware of the importance of self-presentation. Theory և practice, Yerevan, 2007, page 5.
7 Mead GH, Mind, Self and Society.
 From The Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist, Chicago, 1934, those who play in front of an audience to impress.
This concept is called the dramaturgical approach, and the theory is called the impression management theory8.
According to the theory of ethnomethodology, social interactions are carried out through various forms of social communication through verbal communication of everyday life.
This phrase contains more essential information than just a verbally expressed text. These are the supposed meanings accepted by the participants in the interaction: "background meanings" 9.
  The participants of the communication process assume that what they say will be interpreted in accordance with the rules (background expectations), which are the image of the society in the consciousness of its members.
 Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online.
 More and more often, the consumer-voter is offered not so much programs and services as certain characters and styles.
  Thus, the main problem of image phenomenology is the correspondence of the perception of the social subject, and in the political reality, of the subject of politics, of his own Self, to the image really formed in the society, to the image he would like to present to the society.
  The political image is the և symbolically expressed ideas about a politician, a party in the public opinion.
  The main task of a political entity or image-maker is to determine what a social figure expects from a politician or other political entity, what his or her followers, rivals, authorities, media and non-governmental organizations want to see10.
Theorist of postmodernist philosophy J. Baudrillard introduced the notion of "simulation" (falsification); he observed the phenomenon of pervasive semiotization (signaling) when the sign sphere acquires the status of the only "self-sufficient reality" 11.
 The political image can be presented as a semiotic (symbolic) system reflecting all spheres of modern society.
  The image of an individual, product or social institution 8 Goffman E., Forms of Talk, Oxford, 1981, p. 128.10 Melkonyan N., Political image. Theory և Practice, Yerevan, 2007, p. 14.
It is a dance that is often deliberately created or altered by the media, advertisements, and propaganda.
 The image is formed both on the basis of the real behavior of the individual, as well as on the assessments, opinions, ideas, prototypes of others.
Management theorists A. Thomson և A. Strickland defines the notion of "image" as the opinion of the broad masses about the enterprise, its products և the reputation of its services, the ,consumer և position of consumers12.
 That is, the image is what we have, and the opinion is what others have about us.
 According to the above definition, we, creating our image, create certain opinions about it.
Opinion is first and foremost information about a person, product, organization, which is called image-forming information.
 It can be of two types: direct and indirect.
 People receive direct imagery through direct contact with a person, product or organization. This information refers to appearance (make-up, hair, clothes, product packaging, etc.) և internal characteristics (mental characteristics, character, temperament, intellect, worldview, product quality, etc.) 13.
  In general, directly informative information includes the following aspects: dress style, manners, speech style, gestures (gestures), professional literacy, practice, initiative, and in the case of a politician, also political principles.
  Indirectly informative information is mediated information obtained from so-called third-party information.
  Indirect image information assumes 3 sources: people who provided certain information about a person or organization, results of a person or organization's activity or influence և person or organization environment (residence, place of residence, home, office, car, etc.).
 Indirect image information can be both official or unofficial, documentary or verbal, as well as true or false.
The opinion about political subjects, which is formed on the basis of imagery information, is not always conscious, it may not be realized by the recipient of the information, as it can be realized not only on a conscious but also on a subconscious level. Theory և Practice, Yerevan, 2007, p. 30.
manifested in the form of this or that feeling.
 Thus, one of the essential principles of image formation is the following principle: In order to form a "desirable" opinion in the society, it is necessary to influence not only the consciousness of people, but also the subconscious. moreover, mostly on the latter.
 According to research conducted by American psychologists, 80% of an individual's behavioral actions are performed at the subconscious level.
 Therefore, the image maker works not only to create a rational-explanatory opinion, but also to generate a feeling-opinion.
 The formation of a political image is a creative process that depends on a number of factors: the socio-economic situation of the country, the mentality of the society, the structures of the electorate, the personal characteristics of the leaders, as well as the stereotypes and myths underpinning public perceptions.
Peculiarities of the image of political subjects.
The positive image characteristics of political entities testify to their stability, credibility, and commitment to the development of society.
  The personal image of a political leader contributes to the identification of his personal and social layers.
  The position, prestige and level of recognition of political parties in the society today largely depend on the image they carry.
  In general, the image of a political party includes the image of the leader և the main representatives, the ideology (political program, goals, history: political symbolism), the image of the electorate (members, supporters և voters), as well as the visual image.
The main feature of the image of political subjects is that the social network is the means of self-presentation of the political subject, formation and dissemination of the political image.
The main purpose of using political image in social networks is to form an image in accordance with the essence of the policy subject, to present and constantly circulate the already formed image, to provide accessible, emotional, easy-to-remember ideas about the political image of the leader or party, its political basis. they are in the mass consciousness.
The main structural components of the political image in social networks are the subject of the political image (individual candidates, political parties, etc.), the object (elective or target groups), the subject (programs, ideas), the purpose of the political image (formation, transformation, dissemination), means ( pictures, texts, videos, tags, which are circulated through political entities, social media և other users, pages, groups.
The political image is formed and spread by 2 main methods: rational and emotional.
  The rational method is an information process aimed at the consciousness of the potential voter. In this case, arguments, verbal structures, pictures and diagrams are used to form the image.
 The method of forming an emotional image awakens memories, produces images, influences through the combinations that appear through the reproduction of the situation.
The functions of political image in social networks are to inform the audience about the views of politicians, parties, proposals, to establish a connection between the society and political subjects, to separate one's own subject from competitors in the conditions of political competition, drawing the voters' attention to its special positive qualities.
The formation of a political image through social networks presupposes the discovery of significant characteristics of a politician: appearance, movement, public behavior, program provisions, which are means of informing the target audience.
The formation and dissemination of political image on social networks is carried out by the following means: • social network pages, including media pages, official pages of political entities, etc., • social network users, including politicians, public, cultural figures, activists, etc. • social networking groups, hashtags և other platforms consisting of a certain preference ելի belonging to the target audience.
One of the mechanisms for creating and spreading a political image on the Internet is the circulation of paid political information on social networks, the main purpose of which is to provide information about the political product, attract new supporters, etc.
The main goal of the media in projecting a political image is the creation and dissemination of political myths, which, according to the American sociologist G. According to Lasswell, they act as "a system of ideas which the masses are ready to regard as true, whether real or false."
Researchers call modern society a mediocre society in which real power belongs to the mass media.
 According to the famous French researcher R. Debrey, who coined the term "mediocrity", now uses the functions of the church, which belonged to the church in medieval Europe, to replace the former saints in the public consciousness with image-maker "stars" and idols, and to replace faith. is the public opinion expressed by the media.
  Hegel called the reading of newspapers "the morning prayer of modern man."
Through manipulation, the media even manage to change the stereotypes about political parties and leaders in the public consciousness, to convince the population that at that moment they need a leader or political force with such characteristics.
 Some Western image consultants believe that about 99% of voters in large countries make their choices because of the image portrayed in the media.
American researcher J. Brown described the main methods used by the media in the implementation of the political image, which are mainly typical of social networks15. The use of stereotypes.
  Such an example is to call a politician a "communist", an "oligarch", a "bureaucrat".
Changing or labeling names.
  Numerous nicknames and labels of politicians are circulating on social networks, which are also freely used by the media.
A selection of facts or "silence և emphasis".
  It is used to divert the audience's attention from possible but "inappropriate" information to other information.
An obvious lie.
  Dissemination of misinformation often has more unexpected results.
Repetition of information.
  If information is often repeated on social networks, sooner or later it is accepted by the audience and strengthened in the collective consciousness.
Pointing at the enemy.
  Information is often presented not for the sake of, but against any real or imaginary enemy.
Reference to authority.
 Informational influence by an authoritative person.
Relying on "opinion leaders".
 It is an effective mechanism for influencing an individual's value perceptions and public opinion.
  For example, the page of Artsrun Hovhannisyan, spokesman for the RA Ministry of Defense, in 2016. In April, it was the most read Facebook most popular on Facebook by Armenians.
The "spiral of silence" effect is based on the manipulation of public opinion through false facts.
  The effect is that those who consider themselves members of a minority prefer to remain silent, not to express their opinion16.
Manipulation of ratings.
  Thus, the forms and tricks of influence used by the media are diverse and can be used both individually and in different combinations.
  However, a professional PR or image-making professional must not only have sufficient skills to use them properly and effectively, but also be able to develop ways to counteract them.
  Image shaping is an ongoing process that requires politicians to be constantly aware, well aware of the country's socio-political issues, able to respond to the most important events in a timely and timely manner.
Modern philosopher, sociologist M. According to Castells, politics is becoming more and more personalized, and the path to power is in creating an image. Politicians are involved in the game played by the media through them17.
Media reading is mostly done electronically.
  Recently, electronic mass media have developed significantly, which are mostly read through social networks.
 Virtual social networks present the materials available in the whole press, some radio stations 16 Ноэль-Нойман,, Общественное мнение.
 открытие спарали молчания, Москва, 1996. programs, almost all TV programs.
  It should be noted that Armenian TV companies provide more internet views.
  The media is one of the most important factors influencing politics, as it regularly and promptly conveys politically relevant information to a wide audience.
 The power of the media lies in the possibility of creating an image of this or that type of political entity.
Referring to the social network Facebook, it should be noted that mainly oriented users with their own position take an active part in the discussions.
 One can often be critical of the clash and mutual criticism of political PR teams.
  The pages of almost all the parties are available on the social network Facebook, as well as the pages and users of the regional-central structures are displayed in different ways, which, in fact, hinder the centralized flow of information.
  That is why the number of those who like it generally does not exceed 10,000.
The parties in Armenia on the social network Facebook, according to the number of likes. It is noteworthy that the newly formed parties, staffed with young politicians, have done visible work to have more followers on social networks.
 There are channels of parties on the social network Youtube, but the number of followers is very small.
The pages of political parties on the social network Twitter are incomparably passive, although the global political debates are significant, and political leaders and political image experts use Facebook and Twitter as much, and some prefer Twitter.
Virtual social. The world statistics on the political sphere is as follows: Looking at the above picture, it becomes clear that in the PR work of political elections all over the world, a lot of attention is paid to the pages on social networks and their operation.
 According to Facebook, the most discussed topics in 2015 were the US presidential election, the November 13 terrorist attack in Paris, the Syrian political war, the immigrant crisis, the Nepal earthquake, the Greek financial crisis, the fight against ILIP, the terrorist attack on the Charlie Hebdo editorial office. և Baltimore protests.
  It becomes clear that public policy discussions were reflected in social networks.
Recently, public-civil initiatives have appeared in Armenia, which have made social networks their main information tool.
The 5 most popular social initiatives on Facebook are: The pages of political leaders on Facebook: The most active users on Facebook, which have a significant impact on public opinion. The above statistics show that the public relations activities of political entities play a significant role in social networks. circulating information.
 The success of politicians' parties depends to some extent on the peculiarities of political image and perceptions on social networks, as well as on their possible influence in shaping public opinion through social networks.
In conclusion, we should mention that social networks, as a way of transmitting political information առանձնահատ a special way of communication հստակ, clearly reflect the political processes taking place in the society, in particular the state of political culture. The political atmosphere, the attitude of the political forces towards each other, the civilized, not so civilized forms of political struggle, as well as the degree of political role of the society.
Therefore, it becomes obvious that virtual social networks are an effective and practical platform for the formation and dissemination of political image.
Literature 1. Melkonyan N., Political image. Theory և practice, Yerevan, 2007, p. 5, 14.2. Martirosyan S., Social Networks in Armenia, Noravank Foundation, Yerevan, 2015.
3. Martirosyan S., The picture of the average Internet user in Armenia, "Noravank" Foundation, Yerevan, 2016.
4. Martirosyan S., Political and Civil Movements of Armenia on the Internet, Noravank Foundation, Yerevan, 2015.
7. Ноэль-Нойман Э, Общественное мнение.
 revelation of spirals of silence, Moscow, 1996.10. Mead GH, Mind, Self and Society.
  From The Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist, Chicago, 15. http:
//www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/new-global Armen KhachikyanVIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS POLITICAL IMAGE FORMATION, PRINTING, POLITICAL NETWORK, POLITICAL NETWORK political information, Facebook, Twitter, image of a political leader Summary.
