ARMENIAN-TURKISH RELATIONS IN 1991-1994 1990s At the beginning of the 20th century, the Soviet Union was on the verge of collapse for obvious reasons, which would inevitably lead to a drastic change in the military-political situation in the international arena.
 The former Soviet republics, including Armenia, took the path of independence, getting rid of the compulsion to communicate with the outside world through Moscow.
After the re-establishment of independence, the newly independent republic became a full member of international relations, having the opportunity to develop its foreign policy voluntarily and at its discretion.
  However, it should be noted that in the previous years, being part of the Soviet state, being deprived of the opportunity to conduct independent foreign policy, Armenia did not have experience in international contacts, concept of international policy - standards of practice.
And what was the regional policy of Turkey at that time?
 The events that took place after the collapse of the USSR gave access to the region, in addition to the Russian Federation, to other global actors, the United States and European institutions.
  At the same time, they began to show interest in the South Caucasus, such as Iran and Turkey, which in the past had such a role or influence in the region.
  Moreover, the latter was seen by the West as a desirable way to limit Russia's influence in the region and to prevent Russia's "return".
Under the new situation, there was a need to develop and implement a new regional component in Turkey's foreign policy.
  In particular, the South Caucasus is of great geopolitical, strategic and security importance for Turkey, moreover, Ankara was convinced that the South Caucasus and Central Asia would be Turkey's spheres of influence in the future.
 They believed that "the 21st century will belong to the Turks" 1.
It should be noted that Turkey, having close linguistic, historical, cultural and political relations with Azerbaijan, gave preference to that country in the South Caucasus from the very beginning.
As for Armenia, it, in the person of its leadership, in the early period of independence, by adopting a tough stance towards Moscow, began to show inclinations towards the West, և Turkey, as a full member of the Western camp, caught its attention.
According to the Chairman of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia L. According to Ter-Petrosyan, one of the most important issues facing Armenia was overcoming international isolation, if not good-neighborly, then at least the establishment of normal relations with immediate neighbors.
  According to him, "Armenia should have established relations worthy of civilized countries with all its neighbors, including Turkey ... Traditional contradictions should not prevent us from taking advantage of the relations with Turkey, at least trade and then wider economic relations." on the level ”2.
It should also be emphasized that by becoming an independent state, Armenia was deprived of the Soviet shield, while its military capabilities were very limited.
  The national security imperative for such a state meant to neutralize the possible military threat in a peaceful way.
  In that sense, the "establishment of good-neighborly relations with all the neighbors", which was the basis of the foreign policy of the newly independent republic, can be considered correct.
  It seemed that the Armenian leadership was trying to solve the task not only of strengthening the republic's position in the international arena, but also of ensuring national security through political means.
1991 After the referendum on the independence of the Republic of Armenia in September, the Turkish side, first of all the media, put into circulation a version, according to which L., who was elected the first president of the Republic of Armenia. Ter-Petrosyan assured Turkey that Armenia 1 See Demoyan G., Foreign Policy of Turkey and the Karabakh Conflict, Yerevan, 2013, p. 121.
2 Ter-Petrosyan L., Armenian-Turkish relations, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 16-17.
may refuse to mourn the Armenian Genocide in the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of the century, as if Armenia is ready to take that step on the condition that favorable conditions for economic cooperation are established between the two countries, in particular, Armenia will be allowed to transport goods through Turkey.
  In December, Armenian Foreign Minister R. Hovhannisyan denies the authenticity of such a letter, stating that Armenia both seeks active economic cooperation with different countries, but there can be no question of forgetting the tragic period in the history of the Armenian people3.
1991 On December 16, the Turkish government, among the former Soviet republics, recognized the independence of the Republic of Armenia.
  In this connection, in 1991 On December 24, the Prime Minister of Turkey S. Demirel addressed a message to RA President L. Ter-Petrosyan, who calls on Armenia to adhere to the basic principles of international law, especially territorial integrity and inviolability of borders in its relations with Turkey and other neighbors, to be guided by the principles of good neighborliness and to build its policy on them4.
 Whether Turkey recognized the independence of the Republic of Armenia, nevertheless did not hurry to establish diplomatic relations with it.
  Referring to the RA Declaration of Independence, he justified his step by the territorial claims of Armenia5.
However, it should be noted that although Turkey ostensibly refused to establish diplomatic relations with Armenia, nevertheless official Ankara tried to establish certain relations with Armenia, particularly in the economic sphere.
  In this context, the position of Turkey was remarkable, which was approved by the Chairman of the Board of "Alarco Holding" Joint-Stock Company. Alaton ծրագր expressed readiness to provide the port of Trabzon for the use of the Republic of Armenia6.
 In this connection, official 3 See Arshakyan G., The main principles of Turkey's policy towards the Republic of Armenia in 1991-1994, // "Issues of Armenology", Yerevan, 2015, p. 22.
4 See ibid., P. 274.
5 See Ananyan A., The Armenian Genocide in the Context of the Armenian-Turkish Dialogue, // "Issues of the History and Historiography of the Armenian Genocide", Yerevan, 2004, p. 6.
6 See Hovhannisyan N., The Middle East region խնդիրը The problem of national security of Armenia, // "Near և Middle East countries և peoples", Yerevan, 1996, N 16, p. 15.
There is Ankara, represented by Foreign Minister S. Giray stated that "Turkey is kind to all its neighbors, who refuse any hostility, aspire to have friendly relations with it."
It should be noted that by expressing readiness to expand economic ties with Armenia and agreeing to provide the port of Trabzon, Turkey was at the same time trying to move the Armenian-Turkish relations from the economic to the political sphere.
  As the Altonian plan envisaged the transportation of raw materials from the Central Asian republics to Armenia via Azerbaijan, Turkey was trying to involve Armenia in a rather lucrative deal, most likely with the intention of wearing a "leash" in the negotiations with Azerbaijan.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that in that period the Turkish ruling circles began to act with the readiness to take the role of mediator, particularly in the Karabakh issue.
  In this regard, Prime Minister S. Demirel in 1992 In January, he announced that Turkey would greatly contribute to the settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict, only that Armenia and Azerbaijan would continue to trust him.
  With a similar statement, he was repeated by Foreign Minister H. Chetin 8.
However, the situation changed in 1992. Following the events of late February.
  The liberation of Khojaly by the Karabakh forces was an occasion for Turkey to abandon the Alatonian program.
  Turkish tendencies of rapprochement with Armenia turned into widespread anti-Armenian hysteria.
  Turkish Foreign Minister Chetin, who was in Tashkent on an official visit in those days, was ordered to leave for Baku immediately, and President T. Speaking in Izmir on March 4, Ozal demanded that his government take decisive action against the "crimes" of Armenians9.
In this regard, it is not superfluous to mention that in connection with the events in Khojaly, the phrase "Khojaly Genocide" is still circulating in Azerbaijan, which has become a joint Turkish-Azerbaijani program, despite the process of recognizing the Armenian Genocide.
  Thus, the Azerbaijani side is trying to cover up its monstrous crime with its own 7 Arshakyan Gr. work., page 25.
8 See ibid.
9 See ibid., P.
to the people, which was carried out due to political intrigues for the struggle for power.
 In fact, the Khojaly peacekeepers were shot near Aghdam, which is controlled by the units of the People's Front of Azerbaijan, and even the former President of Azerbaijan A. Mutalibov Czech journalist D. Given to Mazalova և 1992 In an interview published in "Nezavisimaya Gazeta" on April 2, 2010.
The liberation of Khojaly in 1992 In May, the liberation of Shushi and the opening of the Lachin humanitarian corridor followed.
  After the liberation of Shushi, Prime Minister S. Demirel stated at the extraordinary session of the government that what happened was "another terrorist act of Armenians against Azeris."
  From now on, Turkey can not act as an outside observer, because the attempt to resolve the Karabakh conflict by force is obvious. ”11
 And in 1992 At the special sitting of the Turkish Parliament on May 20, Foreign Minister H. Chetin announced. "Until now, Turkey has tried to take a neutral position on this issue, its diplomatic efforts have been aimed at the peaceful settlement of the issue, but from now on Turkey will support Azerbaijan in all international instances.
  The OSCE has accepted that Karabakh is the territory of Azerbaijan, and today the Armenians have occupied Lachin.
  Turkey will not allow a change of borders.
  Armenia is responsible for all the consequences arising from this. ”12
Trying to soften the Armenian-Turkish relations a little, to promote the development of trade and economic ties between the two countries. In June, first in Rio de Janeiro, then in Istanbul, L. Ter-Petrosyan-S. Demirel meetings 13.
  During the last meeting, referring to the Armenia-Turkey bilateral relations, L. Ter-Petrosyan noted that they should not come from the Armenian-Azerbaijani relations, in response to which S. Demirel stressed that some people agree, but there is bloodshed, the only obstacle to the establishment of inter-diplomatic relations between the two countries is the ongoing armed conflict14.
10 See http for more details.
//www.xocali.net/ha/p07.html (available on 30.05.2016).
11 Arshakyan G., ref. work., page 26.
12 Hakobyan T., Armenians և Turks.
  War, Cold War, Diplomacy, Yerevan, 2012, p. 282.
13 See ibid., P. 287.
14 See Arshakyan G., op. work., page 27.
1992 In the fall, the problem of bread arose in Armenia, which is in a difficult socio-economic situation due to the blockade.
  Armenia should have bought bread on the loan of the European Union.
 President L. Ter-Petrosyan contacted Prime Minister S. He discussed with Demirel the possibility of importing wheat through Turkey.
 After the latter's positive answer, a corresponding agreement was signed in Ankara in October, և Turkey provided one hundred thousand tons of grain to Armenia instead.
  In November, Syrian President Hranush Hakobyan arrived in Armenia via Turkey. Six thousand tons of grain donated by Assad.
1992 On December 29, L. Ter-Petrosyan's telephone conversation with S. With Demirel, during which the Turkish Prime Minister expressed readiness to continue grain deliveries to Armenia, as well as to discuss the possibility of supplying electricity to Armenia from third countries through Turkey.
Negotiations on the draft Armenia-Turkey protocol և Yerevan-Ankara relations continued until the spring of 1993.
 It was then that the relations between the parties became tense again, being again conditioned by the Karabakh problem.
Let us add that, in all probability, the decisive tendency on the part of Turkey to develop the Armenian-Turkish relations was conditioned by the fact of keeping Armenia in the political orbit of Turkey.
  As Turkey represented the interests of the West, Armenia was then directly involved in the sphere of influence of the West through the Turkish medium.
 In other words, the connection with the West was mediated through Turkey.
Thus, as we can see from the logic of the development of the Armenian-Turkish relations, the Karabakh issue is gradually becoming a decisive factor in it, on which Turkey's position is constantly aggravated by the Azerbaijani authorities.
  In its turn, it should be emphasized that Turkey raises this issue in order to divert the attention of the world community from the recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
Turkish-Armenian relations became more complicated in 1993-1994.
 In particular, in 1993 In April, when Armenian forces liberated Kelbajar (Karvachar), Armenian-Turkish relations became extremely tense.
  Turkey's reaction to the liberation of Kelbajar was very sharp. Already on April 2, Turkey announced that from now on it will check all the planes that transport cargo for Armenia through Turkey.
 On April 3, Turkey banned all types of cargo transportation through its territory to Armenia, saying that "they contribute to the military efforts of Armenians against Azerbaijan."
  The H-50 air corridor was closed in front of the Armenian planes, as well as the Gyumri-Kars track, thus subjecting Armenia to a complete blockade.
 This was followed by open military threats.
 In those days, the issue of possible Turkish military intervention in the Karabakh conflict began to be actively discussed in the political and military circles of Turkey.
  President T. Ozal made a statement "to stop the advance of the Armenians by the Turkish military forces."
  Moreover, he announced. "It is time for Turkey to show teeth to Armenia."
T. Ozal's bellicose statements served as an occasion for Ankara to discuss the issue of applying the "Cyprus version" to Armenia.
  The version was supposed to attack suddenly արագ quick capture of Armenia.
  In the meantime, the Turkish military units, which were on "alert" in the border region of Armenia, were replenished in April.
It should be noted that after the liberation of Kelbajar, Turkey's tough stance was probably conditioned by the fact that it was the beginning of the occupation of the territories, which would later be called "occupied territories" by Azerbaijan.
 In this regard, it is appropriate to quote 1993. On April 20, Prime Minister S. Demirel's words addressed to the RA President.
  The latter, showing a map, said: "This is Armenia, this is Armenian land, we have no question, this is our neighbor, this is Karabakh, this is not Armenian land, but Armenians live there, you had concerns, you took Karabakh, we understood that, this is Lachin, this is your land No, there were no Armenians living there, you took it, you said it was for security, we understood that too.
 What do you have to do with Kelbajar? You are killing our brothers. ”17
In the atmosphere of tense Turkish-Armenian relations, in July-August 1993, the Armenian forces had new successes.
  The NKR Army managed to liberate Aghdam և Fizuli, Jabrayil և Zange 15 Chakryan H., The Karabakh Issue in the Context of Armenian-Turkish Relations, Yerevan, 1998, p. 23.
16 Ibid., P.
17 Hakobyan T., note work., page 297.
lan. A circumstance that raised a big wave of protests in Turkey.
 In connection with the success of the Armenian forces in 1993 On July 25, the newly elected President of Turkey S. A closed-door session of the Turkish Security Council was held at Demirel's residence, after which Foreign Minister H. Chetin stated that taking advantage of Azerbaijan's internal instability "in view of the change of power taking place in Azerbaijan", the Armenians had "conquered" new territories.
 He warned the Armenians that they would not be able to hold those territories in their hands. "Armenia will pay dearly for these territories," he stated.
1994 ceasefire on the Karabakh front The ceasefire on the Karabakh front in May 2006 eased tensions between Armenia and Turkey to a new level, bringing Armenian-Turkish relations to a new level.
1994 On the eve of the May ceasefire, President S. Demirel said in an interview. "Turkey is ready to establish diplomatic relations if Armenia withdraws its troops from the territory of Azerbaijan.
  Our attitude towards Armenia is not based on hostility.
 However, if they want to exist in the region as an independent state, they must have good relations with Turkey.
  They continue to kill people and occupy the territory of Azerbaijan.
  "We have told the leaders of European countries that if the Western countries publicly support Armenia and the Muslim countries come to the aid of Azerbaijan, then a Muslim-Christian war will start in the Caucasus."
From these other similar statements, it was presumed that Turkey had already adopted in the Armenian-Turkish relations and would continue to speak the language of preconditions in the future.
 As for the Armenian side, L. In Ter-Petrosyan's words, "Turkey has created a trap for itself, from which it can not get out, as the normalization of relations with Armenia is connected with the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict."
  If Turkey is really interested in contributing to the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which it has turned into relations 18 Ibid., P. 307.
19 Ibid., P.
Turkey would have achieved its goals much easier if it had improved its relations with Armenia by now ”20.
Looking back on the Armenian-Turkish 1991-1994 It should be noted that this relationship is characterized by a complex and contradictory process.
 Tendencies of rapprochement have sometimes appeared between Armenia and Turkey, sometimes the relations have become tense.
 As a rule, at a certain stage of rapprochement, the military-political situation in the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict zone has intensified, thus making the tendencies of rapprochement insignificant.
 Turkey's attitude towards Armenia depended on the course of the Karabakh issue, which, as a source of tension, had a negative impact on relations between the two countries.
 In addition, it should be noted that in order to establish diplomatic relations with Yerevan, the Turkish side also set preconditions for Armenia to renounce its claims related to the Armenian Genocide and not to make territorial claims against Turkey.
  In fact, the Turkish side chose the policy of exerting pressure on Armenia, trying to use Armenia's economic and political difficulties to extort concessions from it.
Gayane Hovhannisyan ARMENIAN-TURKISH RELATIONS 1991-1994 Keywords: Armenia, Turkey, Russia, Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, Armenian Genocide, Alatonian program Summary.
