BASIC ASSUMPTION AS THE FOUNDATION OF A LAWSUIT According to Article 8 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.
  This provision of the Declaration has been enshrined in Article 18 of the RA Constitution1. Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.
  The institute of securing the claim is aimed at ensuring the protection of rights, which are regulated by Articles 14-10 of the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the CCP), Chapter 97-102 of the "Securing the Claim" 2.
  The institute for securing a claim has received a more systematic and effective regulation in Chapter 13 of the draft CCP (Articles 120-127) 3.
This institution is one of the institutions often used in practice, on which the possibility of enforcing a judgment directly depends.
  In our opinion, justice can be considered successful if the court decision that has entered into force is carried out.
 Therefore, we think that the application of the institute of securing the claim should be more clearly regulated.
 And that clear regulation requires solutions aimed at both legislative and practical application.
  In practice, there are often problems with the question of when a court should uphold a claim.
  The law refers only to the grounds for securing the claim. as such they act on the initiative of the court 1 See ARPA 2015.12.21 / Special issue, hereinafter referred to as the RA Constitution.
2 Adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
 See ARPA 1998/20 (53), 09.09.1998.
 Hereinafter referred to as the RA Civil Procedure Code or CPC.
3 See the current draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia", hereinafter referred to as http.
//moj.am/storage/files/legal_acts/legal_acts_525118627441_Qagh.dat_final Project, 11.01.2016.pdf.
and the mediation of the party.
  However, no claim is made to the mediation.
 We consider that the substantive presumption should be fixed in the legislation as a basis for using the claim security. The presumption is that non-enforcement of the claim may make it impossible or difficult to enforce the judgment or worsen the condition of the disputed property.
  In the framework of this article, an attempt has been made to present the essence of a reasonable assumption as a type of evidence, to clarify its significance for the institution securing the claim.
The security of the claim is the legal means used by the court, the purpose of which is to provide guarantees for the execution of the future judgment in case the claim is satisfied4.
  It has been defined differently by theorists.
  A. Sukhar defines the provision of a claim as a set of measures to ensure the actual execution of a judgment5.
  Lawyer E. Muradyan finds that the claim is secured by the Inter-Branch Judicial Institute, which envisages the court, at the request of the plaintiff, to take measures commensurate with the relevant procedural rules, aimed at the implementation of the judicial act, if the claim is upheld.
 It is a means of judicial coercion6.
 According to Article 97 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, the court, through the mediation or initiative of the person participating in the case, takes measures to secure the claim, if not taking such measures may make it impossible or difficult to execute the judicial act or lead to deterioration of the disputed property.
According to the RF Arbitration Code, lawsuits are urgent, temporary measures aimed at securing the lawsuit or other property interests7.
According to the Civil Procedure Code of the Federal Republic of Germany, the institute for securing a claim is a temporary right of protection (der einstweilige Rechtsschutz) 8.
Analyzing the above-mentioned legislative-theoretical quotations, we conclude that the institute of securing the claim is a litigation 4 See Petrosyan R., Civil Procedure of Armenia, 4th edition, Yerevan, 2012, p. 262.
5 See Greater Iridian Dictionary. 3rd edition, Moscow 2007, page 377.
6 See Muradyan Ts. M., Arbitration Process, Moscow, 2004, p. 72.
7 See Arbitration Procedure Code (APC RF), Article 100.
8 See Zivilprozessordnung (ZPO) Abschnitt 5, 917.
It is a set of actions, the purpose of which is to create real guarantees for the execution of the judgment in case of satisfaction of the claim.
The purpose of the institute of securing a claim is: • to create optimal conditions for the real protection of a person's rights և real legal interests, • to ensure the execution of a court decision 9.
The typical features of a claim security institution are: • urgency, • temporary nature, • protection of the plaintiff's property interests, • proportionality of the security measure to the claims10.
The means of securing a claim in a civil proceeding are restrictions, impediments, and obligations imposed by the court for a certain period of time, which are called to create appropriate guarantees to ensure the execution of judicial acts.
The main problem with the institute of securing a claim, which arises in court practice, is the determination of the subject of proof, that is, in case of the existence of justifications, the securing of the claim is used.
 All cases where the court applies a security measure without any justification that would prove that in case of non-application it will be possible to ensure the execution of the judgment should be excluded.
  V. F. Yakov rightly states: "We must exclude the cases of unjustified use of the means of securing the claim, especially in the preparatory stage, as the latter upsets the existing balance between the parties, disrupts the activity of one of the parties.
  They lead to destabilization, especially in cases of joint ownership, bankruptcy ”11.
A reasonable assumption, or reasonable suspicion, known as a reasonable suspicion, is more common in American law.
 It is a standard of proof, which has less clarity than probable cause and evidence, but more than "primary, non-specific suspicion."
 We are convinced that the suspicion is more 9 See Volchenko O. ,., Russia and Germany are proving the founding of a measure based on the failure of the civil procedure in the civil process.
3 See D. Sargsyan, Peculiarities of the Institute for Securing a Lawsuit in Civil Proceedings.
Journal of the Supreme Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation, 2003, № 4, page 16.
It is a purely criminal term, և, we find that it is more expedient to apply a reasonable presumption in civil proceedings.
  A sound assumption must be based on certain facts.
  When considering a reasonable assumption in the context of securing a claim, it should be considered as an assumption that failure to apply the claim security will make enforcement of the judgment impossible, worsen the condition of the property or cause other damage to the plaintiff.
That is, there are circumstances by virtue of which the execution of the judgment will become impossible if the claim is satisfied.
 For example, the defendant will show unscrupulous behavior.
The problem that we present in the framework of this article is that in practice there are often cases when the court rejects the motion to secure a claim, arguing that insufficient evidence has been presented.
  In our opinion, it is not possible to demand 100% evidence from the plaintiff that non-application of the claim will make it difficult to enforce the judgment, because such evidence, with rare exceptions, cannot be presented.
 Meanwhile, the unscrupulous behavior of the same respondent is very possible due to the excessive "substantial" justification of the claim.
  That is, the purpose of proposing this regulation is to limit the court's discretion.
 Legally, of course, it is not possible to fix the scope of all the justifications that are necessary to apply for securing a claim.
 This problem requires a more practical solution.
 However, according to the decision of the Court of Cassation, it is not possible to regulate it, at least with the current CCP, as the Code does not provide an opportunity to appeal the decision to secure the claim.
The draft has improved the institute of appeal.
  First of all, the exhaustive list of decisions that are subject to appeal is clearly defined.
 In particular, decisions have been made on the application of a security measure (counter-security), the rejection of the claim (counter-security), the replacement of one means of securing the claim by another or rejecting the replacement, the cancellation or refusal to cancel the claim.
Pursuant to Article 97 of the RA CCP, the court, through the mediation or initiative of the person participating in the case, takes measures to secure the claim, if not taking such measures may make it impossible or difficult to execute the judicial act or lead to deterioration of the disputed property.
  Securing the claim is allowed at any stage of the trial.
  Article 120 of the draft CCP does not offer any new regulation on the substantiation of the claim.
  The new regulations relate to the mediation procedure; if the current code allows for a claim at any stage of the proceedings, the draft clearly states that it is permissible at any stage of the trial in the court of first instance, counter-securing Giles, which we will not address in this article.
 In conclusion, let us mention that within the framework of scientific work, we should make the following proposal of a legislative nature: to fix the well-founded assumption as a basis for securing the claim.
Margarita Ghazaryan BASIC ASSUMPTION AS THE GROUND FOR SECURING THE LAWSUIT Keywords: securing the claim, means of securing the claim, execution of the judgment, substantiation, criterion of evidence Summary.
