SOME CONSIDERATIONS "IN THE LIKE OF BRIBE OR BRIBE" OPERATING INTELLIGENCE WAS CONCERNED
 It made many manifestations, covering all branches of the state apparatus, including various public relations.
  Traditionally, the most high-risk corruption crimes, the whole of which is bribery, are bribery, from which bribery is also derived.
From the study of law enforcement practice, it becomes obvious that in the current conditions, the best way to detect corruption is to carry out an operative-investigative measure, that is, to imitate giving or receiving a bribe.
  It is in fact the only way to fight corruption that does not require large-scale legislative measures1.
  However, it should be emphasized that a person who voluntarily informs the law enforcement agencies and cooperates with them must have passive external behavior, otherwise it will be a "bribery provocation" 2.
Confirmation of the fact of corruption is one of the most difficult circumstances to prove.
 This observation is conditioned by the fact that, unlike other crimes, it is committed by mutual consent of the two parties, the bribe-taker and the bribe-taker, who seek to conceal the crime.
  The significance of the "imitation of bribery or bribery" operative-investigative measure is that it not only provides an opportunity to "track down" the actions of the bribe-taker or bribe-giver, but also to manage the whole process of the crime, fix the crime, in particular the transfer of bribes. ՛Ս Яни П., В.борьбе с коррупцией эффективны только репрессии // Российская юстиция.2001, N 7, էջ 43.
2 See Musatkin A. N., On the Results of Operating Measures by Parties, 1998, Vladivostok, p. 408.
to act in a criminal trial to prove the guilt of the criminal.
The probative value of the results of this operative-investigative measure is exercised by the fact that it provides undeniable information about the commission of a crime.
Therefore, taking into account the mentioned circumstance, we consider it necessary to comprehensively study the conditions of legality of the's implementation of the's, to identify the gaps in the legislation, proposing adequate solutions to them.
According to Article 14, Part 1, Clause 16 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activity, during the operative-investigative activity, the operative-investigative measure in imitation of receiving or giving a bribe may be held.
  Article 30 of the same law stipulates that the operative-investigative measure in question may be carried out only on the basis of a written statement of the person who received a bribe or offer to give a bribe only for the detection of the crime of bribery.
 As for the concepts of "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe", they must be interpreted in the sense of the RA Criminal Code.
From the system analysis of the above provision it becomes obvious that the simultaneous existence of the following conditions is necessary for the execution of the mentioned operative-investigative measure.1. If it is aimed at revealing the crime of bribery or bribery, such concepts are interpreted within the meaning of the RA Criminal Code.
2. If there is a written statement of the person who received the offer to receive or give a bribe.
Let us touch upon each of them հան to raise the possible problems that arise in the legal practice in the conditions of the existing formulations.
First of all, it follows from the above that "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" OSH can not be carried out to detect alleged criminal acts that are not considered a crime of receiving or giving a bribe.
  In other words, in the relevant cases, the implementation of the operative-investigative measure subject to discussion cannot be considered lawful.
This follows from the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, which provides for a minimum level of detection of abuse of power in covert surveillance proceedings, including a clear definition of the nature of the offenses which may constitute grounds for authorization to intervene. number 3.
   Therefore, the spatial interpretation of the scope of the crimes will lead to the violation of the legitimate interests of the person's rights guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
In the context of the above, the question arises whether the "imitation of bribery or bribery" OSH, in addition to the crimes provided for in Articles 311 և 312 of the RA Criminal Code, can be committed other, for example, receiving illegal remuneration by a public servant, free will of the voter to detect crimes that impede implementation.
The RA Court of Cassation expressed a legal position on the above-mentioned issue. In the decision on Jazhoyan, stating that "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" the OSH could not be carried out in order to reveal the features of the crime envisaged by Article 3111 of the RA Criminal Code.
  The mentioned position is substantiated by the fact that otherwise the terms "illegal payment" and "bribery" will be the same, while according to Part 2 of Article 5 of the RA Criminal Code, the application of the criminal law by analogy is prohibited4.
In the conditions of the current legal regulation, when the legislator uses different terms in the RA Criminal Code - "to receive a bribe" or "to receive an illegal payment", we agree with the legal position expressed by the RA Court of Cassation.
Besides, we think that there is no common notion of the terms "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe" in the RA Criminal Code, which leads to misinterpretations.
 This is substantiated by the fact that the concepts of "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe" used in a number of crimes envisaged in the RA Criminal Code have been used in different meanings, which does not follow from the requirements of Part 4 of Article 36 of the RA Law on Legal Acts. When defining the same concept in a legal act, the same words, terms or phrases should be used when expressing the same idea, in a certain order, in 3 See, for example, Sefilyan v. Armenia, complaint no. 22491/08, point 125.
4 See RA Court of Cassation, K. Decision No. 2/0004/01/14 of February 27, 2015 on Jazhoyan, item 16.
just as different concepts cannot be applied in the same way.
The Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia, referring to some issues in the legislation related to the possibility of committing a crime under the purpose of detecting the crime of illegal payment by a public servant, did not address another important issue, in particular, which articles of the Criminal Code The imitation of "receiving or giving a bribe" was made by the OSM.
In other words, can it be committed in order to reveal the crimes envisaged by Articles 1542, 200, 201 of the RA Criminal Code?
 The controversy of the issue is conditioned by the fact that, in contrast to receiving illegal remuneration by a public servant, in the disputed crimes the legislator has used the terms "to receive a bribe" and "to give a bribe".
  In particular, Part 1 of Article 200 of the RA Criminal Code establishes criminal liability for bribery of an employee of an commercial or other organization, arbitrator, including an arbitrator, auditor or lawyer performing functions in accordance with the legislation of a foreign state, that is, illegally. or to mediate or offer money, property, property rights, securities, or other benefits to another person through them through an intermediary for the purpose of whether or not to take action in favor of the bribe-giver or the person he represents.
  And according to Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code, the legislator considered it a crime to receive bribes from the candidates conditionally to vote for or against one of the candidates, to participate in the elections or to refuse to participate in the elections.
K. In the context of the above-mentioned legal positions of the RA Court of Cassation on Jazhoyan, it is impossible to give an unambiguous answer to the question under discussion, as although the terms "bribery" and "bribery" are used in the mentioned crimes, their content differs significantly in Article 312 of the RA Criminal Code. from the concepts used.
  To substantiate what has been said, let us bring only one obvious example. Transferring only the subject of the bribe to the recipient of the bribe, which is included in the concept of "receiving a bribe" used in part 1 of Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code, as the disposition of the article clearly states the actions for which the bribe is paid or the condition of voting against, participating in the elections or refusing to participate in the elections.
  In other words, the notion of receiving a bribe does not include the purpose of its fulfillment, as well as demanding, accepting the promise to receive and accepting the offer.
In contrast, the legislator, defining the concept of "receiving a bribe" in Part 1 of Article 311 of the RA Criminal Code, included the purpose of the execution, that is, the performance of an action by an official within the authority of the bribe-giver or the person representing him or her. Failure to do so, or contributing to the commission or non-performance of such an act by the exercise of official authority, or sponsorship or permissions of the Service.
It turns out that the legislator, although he used the same terms, that is, "receiving a bribe" or "giving a bribe", meant different meanings in different crimes, which is unacceptable in the context of the RA Law on Legal Acts.
Taking into account the mentioned circumstance, we consider that it is necessary to make appropriate amendments to the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, to link the possibility of performing a “bribery or imitation of bribery” to the RA, not to “receive a bribe” or “give a bribe”, but to the RA with the detection of specific crimes envisaged by the special part of the Criminal Code.
In other words, we propose to directly list all the crimes that will be considered lawful for the detection of the crimes under consideration.
Moreover, let us note that the legislator did not in any way refer to the possibility of carrying out the OSH discussed in order to reveal the mediation of bribery.
In order to make the issue more visible, we will analyze the following situation, find out the legality of the operative-investigative measure in the imitation of receiving or giving a bribe.
Situation 1. Official A., having learned in advance from his secretary that his neighbor G. had made an appointment with him, wants to ask him for help in carrying out his official duties, understands that G. is preparing to offer a bribe to him; he decides to inform the law enforcement bodies about it; he gives a written statement.
  The law-enforcement bodies, in the manner prescribed by law, "imitated receiving bribes" from the OSH, arrested G. at the moment of exchanging the bribe.
 During the investigation of the case, it turns out that there are features of bribery mediation in G.'s act, as some D. gave money to G. և to ask to find an official who can solve the problem that worries him.
It follows from the above-mentioned problem that the "imitation of receiving a bribe" was done not by giving a bribe, but for the purpose of revealing a bribe mediation, of course, with the aim of identifying and prosecuting the bribe-giver.
  We consider that the OSH made in the situation under discussion can not be considered lawful, արդյուն its results can not be used as admissible evidence, as it was made to detect bribery, as an opportunity for the legislator to provide.
 It turns out that its results can not be used to prove the guilt of G. the mediator.
In addition, the question arises as to whether the results of the OSH made in the present situation can be used to establish the fact of bribery by D. or not, as the legislator has provided for the possibility of bribery to reveal the crime of bribery.
 We find that in this case the answer to this question is negative for the following reasoning.1. As a result of the OSH, the fact that the bribe was transferred was not directly confirmed by the bribe-giver, but by the mediator.
 In order to confirm the fact of giving a bribe, it is first necessary to prove the existence of an agreement between the bribe-giver and the "bribe broker".
2. In addition, the results of the CIS under consideration may not be used as admissible evidence to establish the guilt of the bribe-giver under the rule that "the fruit of a poisonous tree is poisonous".
 According to the theory that the fruits of a poisonous tree are poisonous, evidence obtained on the basis of factual data obtained in violation of the law is also inadmissible.
 The RA Court of Cassation has taken a legal position on the mentioned issue. According to Sargsyan's decision, according to which the factual information obtained as a result of a lawsuit in violation of the law, regardless of its significance for the case, loses its legal force, its probative value և cannot be included in the combination of evidence in a specific criminal case վել be charged5.
The issue under discussion is also important. The decision of the RA Court of Cassation on Sefilyan, which clarified some criteria of the theory "the fruits of a poisonous tree are poisonous", in particular, stated that even in order to declare inadmissible evidence based entirely on (illegally obtained) data, it is necessary to obtain that evidence with reasonable reason.
  In other words, along with the criterion of "deriving", there is also the criterion of "absence of causal connection", the essence of which is the following. Evidence can be considered admissible if the State could have obtained it with reasonable effort6.
In the context of the above-mentioned legal positions, we can state that the factual data obtained as a result of the "bribery imitation" as a result of the OSH, that is, the fact of transferring the bribe, could not be confirmed in any other way.
  It turns out that the law enforcement bodies were deprived of the opportunity to get the given evidence with reasonable efforts.
 Therefore, the resulting evidence must be declared inadmissible.
Thus, we can state that the results of the OSH in this case can not be used as admissible evidence, moreover, other evidence arising from it ևs must be declared inadmissible, so neither the bribe-giver nor the bribe-taker can be found guilty. at the core.
Let us now turn to the second condition of the "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" of the OSH, according to which the written statement must be given exclusively by the person who received the offer to receive or accept a bribe.
Under the above-mentioned legal regulations, a conscientious official can not make a written statement to the law enforcement bodies without being held criminally liable.
It should be noted that due to the high public risk of receiving bribes, now the moment of completion of the crime has been moved to an earlier stage, envisaging criminal liability not only for actually receiving the subject of bribery, but also for demanding it. 5 See RA Court of Cassation on A. Sargsyan September 16, 2009 IECRD / 0295/01/08 decision, point 15.
6 See the decision of the RA Court of Cassation on J. Sefilyan on May 31, 2014 WB 07/13, item 35.
from the moment of receiving the promise or accepting the offer.
 It should be noted that the above-mentioned regulation was established by the RA Law on Making Amendments and Addenda to the RA Criminal Code adopted on February 9, 2012, the adoption of which was conditioned by the international obligations of the Republic of Armenia and the need to fight corruption effectively.
In addition, in contrast to the norm establishing criminal liability for bribery, in case of receiving a bribe, the legislator should provide an incentive, that is, a norm establishing the possibility of exemption from criminal liability on the basis of voluntary reporting of a crime.
  As a result, a deadlock is created for an official who wants to perform his duties in good faith և to contribute to the fight against corruption, because in a case when he has not yet been offered a bribe, but he is well aware of such information, he can not make a written statement և contribute to a crime In the other case, when he accepted the offer to take a bribe, that is, the crime of taking a bribe was over, but he applied to the law enforcement agencies, giving a written statement, he is not released from criminal liability due to the lack of an incentive norm.
We consider that such a situation is unacceptable է hinders the organization of an effective fight against corruption, as it objectively deprives officials who want to cooperate with law enforcement agencies to act in favor of legality.
  Therefore, we propose to make relevant changes in the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, to give an opportunity to give a written statement not only to the person who accepted the offer to receive or give a bribe, but also to those who are definitely aware of a specific case of making such an offer.
Under the current legal regulations, there is another legal loophole, in particular, the bribe-taker, a key participant in the bribery chain, is deprived of the opportunity to make a written statement, on the basis of which law enforcement agencies can make the relevant OSH, ie imitation of bribery.
We consider it necessary to emphasize that the lack of imitation of bribery mediation is a serious legislative omission, which excludes the cooperation of the bribe mediator and the law enforcement body.
To present the legal issue more visibly, let us bring the following example. Situation 2. A. wants to be hired illegally և asks his neighbor B. to help him in that matter.
 B., who was in good-neighborly relations with official G., undertook a mediation mission.
  However, after giving his consent, B. changes his mind - he wants to inform the law enforcement bodies about it in order to catch the perpetrators of the crime, to bring them to criminal responsibility.
In the situation presented in the quoted request, B. is deprived of the opportunity to cooperate with the law enforcement bodies, as the legislator did not envisage the "Imitation of bribery mediation" OSH.
It should be noted that the existence of the OSF under discussion is conditioned by the fact that it has a bipolar orientation. In one case, it is aimed at identifying the bribe-taker, and in the other, at identifying the bribe-giver.
We consider it necessary to emphasize that even when the bribe-taker transfers the bribe to the official, the bribe-taker, it is not lawful to carry out an "imitation of bribery" operative-investigative measure, as the bribe-giver is not the bribe-giver, but the bribe-taker.
 In the context of the legal positions expressed by the decision of the RA Court of Cassation on K. Jazhoyan, the results of the operative-investigative measure "Imitation of giving a bribe" based on the written statement of the bribe mediator will be recognized as inadmissible.
Proceeding from the above, we propose to envisage in the RA Law on Operative-Intelligence Activities the possibility of carrying out a "bribery-mediated" OSH, which will solve the gap in the legal practice.
Tigran Ghazaryan SOME REMARKS "OPENING TO GET A BRIBE OR EXAMPLE TO GIVE A BRIBE" OPERATIVE INTELLIGENCE MEASUREMENT
ABOUT.
