CONFIDENTIALITY. CAUSES, CLINICS AND CONSEQUENCES When discussing the types of addiction from different angles, the environment of relatives of addicts, relatives, in particular, the psychological and personal changes that take place with them are forgotten.
 This gap can be filled to some extent by the study of the phenomenon of solidarity and discussion.
The concept of solidarity is not yet well known in the scientific world.
  It should be noted that this term originated on the basis of the study of chemical dependence, when the mechanisms of drug addiction were identified և the dependence of the environment on the drug addict, which was considered as addiction 1.
  Of course, this phenomenon is observed in any relationship, but it should not be understood in a broad sense, because the term addiction is used only in situations that have pathological features, pose a risk to the addicted person, contributing to the deterioration of his quality of life.
The definitions of this disorder are quite different in the literature, but the authors do not go beyond the main semantic framework.
 For example, according to Sh. Cruz: Addiction is a specific condition characterized by a strong attachment to anxiety, as well as an extreme attachment (emotional, social, sometimes even physical) to a person or object.
  V. Moskalenko defines solidarity as follows: "A person who is completely obsessed with how to control the behavior of others is not at all concerned with satisfying his own vital needs."
One of the most famous specialists in the study of the phenomenon of solidarity, M. Bit, gives the following definition of solidarity. "The person who allows the other person's behavior to influence him is dependent, besides, he is obsessed with controlling another person's actions.
 Another person can be a child, an adult, a lover, a husband, a father, a mother, a sister, a best friend, a grandmother, a grandfather, a client, it can be a person with alcoholism, drug addiction, a person with mental or physical problems, a person with normal development who He regularly experiences feelings of sadness… ”4.
 According to O. Shorokhova, all dependent people have similar mental phenomena, such as low self-esteem, a sense of conscience 1 Москаленко В., Созависимость.
  characteristics and practice of transcendence. Lessons in Narcology, 2nd ed., Apathy, suicidal thoughts, uncontrollable aggression, pressure, attachments և thoughts, self-hatred, control over everything, oppressive anger, clinging help, focus on others, neglect of one's own needs, Communication problems, self-control, laziness, sexual problems, depressive behavior և, finally, mental and physical disorders 1.
 It should be noted that M. Beatty sees empathy as a unique form of self-defense, as the behavior of many addicts changes as they try to survive by satisfying their own needs in difficult psychological situations.
The causes of addiction are many, but, to some extent, one of the main reasons is the unfavorable (dysfunctional) family.
  Upbringing in a dysfunctional family creates a favorable basis for building solidarity2.
 A child growing up in such a family is more likely to be at risk of becoming addicted later in life or while in the parent family.
 Describing a dysfunctional family, it can be noted that there are conflicting relationships in the family, each member's self is not different from other members (ie, the boundaries of their own self are not specified), there is a high level of control over other family members, problems in the family are denied. րանք Illusions prevail (that is, it is assumed that, by not taking any action, the situation will have a favorable outcome, everything will be settled without such a rational basis), judgments և feelings are extreme, as is communication between members of the family, indirect and emotional. Expression is not encouraged3.
  There is a predisposition to addiction in children who have had a difficult childhood, one of the parents was absent or had a chemical addiction, where the child has been abused.
 In addition to the unfavorable family, it should be noted that addiction can be formed from childhood traumas, not only in the family, but also from peers, teachers, in the yard, at school.
  Children who have been sexually, physically and psychologically abused have empathy4.
In addition, it should be noted that the shame and guilt in all these situations are the emotions on which solidarity is based, which hinder the building of normal independent relations.
Weinhold explains the causes of addiction with the problems that arose during early childhood. "From the moment of birth until the age of two or three, the child completes the process of solving a number of developmental problems.
  One of the most important psychological problems of this stage is the establishment of trust between mother and child.
 If that basic trust or connection ends successfully, the child will feel safe enough to explore the outside world. 3 Ibid., P.
և Later, at the end of that age stage, he celebrates his so-called second or psychological birth ”1.
 The meaning of psychological birth is the psychological independence of the child from the mother.
 One of the most important achievements of this stage is the ability to rely on the strength of internal resources.
  The child learns to control behavior.
 If this stage is not completed by the end, the child becomes psychologically dependent on others, does not develop his clear Self.
The main symptoms of addiction are the feeling of dependence on other people, low self-esteem, psychological limitations, needs from various external stimuli, etc. 2.
 Symptoms of this disorder include delusions, denial of problems, self-deception, attachments, frozen emotions, and stress-related health problems.
People with addiction have a characteristic feature of the emotional sphere - the obnubilation of emotions or the rejection of emotions.
  In the family, depending on how the stressful situation will be, there is an increase in tolerance for emotional pain և negative emotions in people with addiction, which leads to dullness of emotions4.
Psychotherapist V. Moskalenko notes. "Low self-esteem is the main characteristic of solidarity, on which everyone else is based.
Hence the outward orientation of those with addiction.
Those who are addicted depend entirely on external evaluations and relationships with other people, although they have a misconception about how others should treat them.
Պատճառով Because of low self-esteem, they can constantly criticize themselves, but they will not tolerate if someone else does it….
 Those who are addicted are not able to accept compliments and encouragement properly, it can even strengthen their sense of conscience… ”5.
Dr. Z. Korobkina writes: "Among the main manifestations of chemical dependence in the mental sphere are the subordination of consciousness to the subject of addiction, the loss of self-control, the denial of the fact of dependence.
According to experts, addiction is a mirror image of addiction, as all the above-mentioned symptoms are also observed here ”6.
"According to research, relatives of addicts usually have symptoms typical of drug addicts, frequent headaches, depression, gastric or duodenal ulcers, diseases of the cardiovascular system.
 "The only exception is that addiction does not lead to cirrhosis of the liver," writes O. Shorokhova 7.
 V. During the research initiated by Moskalenko, it was found out that psycho-physical diseases observed in addicts include asthma, arterial hypertension, neurocirculatory dystonia, gastritis, cephalgias, colitis, etc.
 These 2 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., P.
7 Ibid., P.
Patients try to control what is not controlled, spending their efforts not on living, but on survival.
  This is where the mental and physical illnesses come from, which in turn testify to the progressive course of addiction.
 V. Moskalenko writes: "Neglected addiction can cause death from psychosomatic illness, from being inattentive to one's own problems.
  Thus, solidarity can have different manifestations.
  It refers to all aspects of a person's mental activity, worldview, human behavior, belief system, values, as well as physical health.
Comparing the dependence of the father որ the dependence of the mother, O. Shorokhova came to the conclusion that drug addicts and alcoholics can not be full fathers in families, just as drug addicts and alcoholics can not be full mothers as a result of the long-term effects of distress, "insoluble nervous tension" 2.
A person with addiction is constantly trying to help the other person կարող if he can not distinguish when he really has to act as a rescuer, then others will take the opportunity to transfer him to the status of a victim.
 Based on this, it can be concluded that those who are addicted can become direct participants in their own victimization.
 All this is happening in S. Karpman triangle scheme 3.
  Ս. The Karpman Triangle is a psychological-social model of relationships between people involved in transactional analysis.
  In each corner of the triangle there is one role (rescuer, victim, pursuer), which is assumed by the one who is dependent.
  V. Moskalenko writes that the shift of roles in the triangle is accompanied by a rather intense change of emotions.
 The ability of a person with addiction to stay in one another is from a few seconds to several years, in one day it is possible to alternate twenty times a day in the roles of rescuer-pursuer-victim.
  In this case, the goal of psychotherapy is to teach people with addiction to distinguish between these roles, to consciously renounce the role of savior.
E. In her work on addiction, Emelyanova gives a number of psychological images of people with addiction.
Although each typology is conditional, it helps to form a more accurate picture of the inner workings of a person with addiction.
  Each type of person in the classification is the bearer of the corresponding complex, և each complex in its turn implies a certain means of completing the Self of the given person.
  The complications are as follows: self-humiliation, suffering, sadistic tendencies, narcissism, insatiable thirst for love4.
Another way of classifying the phenomenon of dependence was suggested by I. Victorova.
 He divides people suffering from addiction into the following conditional groups: "Suffering. This is one of the typical lessons of solidarity.
  Pride is at the heart of the suffering of the afflicted.
  They take great pleasure in their ability to cope with discomfort, frustration, and even pain.
  The source of self-esteem for this species is the ability to fight despite victories and defeats.
 For the afflicted, it can be the first, and efficiency is pushed to the background.
  Many who are addicted to chemicals also behave in this way, wanting to solve their own problems alone.
  Then they expect from the people around them that their noble behavior will be respected and highly appreciated.
  Sufferers, finding no alternative, continue to fall victim to the situation, hoping that one day their contribution will change many things in the situation.
Persecutor. This type is the opposite of suffering.
  The persecutor experiences the anger and bitterness that the sufferer will never allow himself to experience.
 Their behavior often goes beyond what is accepted, although they are focused on the mistakes of others.
  They blame others for their own failures and misfortunes.
  Both sufferers and persecutors overestimate the nature of their influence on those around them, not realizing what they can actually control and what they cannot.
  However, the nature of the manipulative abilities of the persecutors ողների differs.
 Sufferers manipulate themselves to be "good", while persecutors continue to manipulate people, inspiring a sense of conscience և anger.
Conspiracy partner. The personal qualities of the family members of a person with chemical addiction are gradually changing.
Instead of changing his personal qualities, the one who is addicted becomes a conspiracy theorist.
  One of the most extreme manifestations of encouragement is the denial of the fact of chemical dependence.
 Moreover, this denial can be so strong that it will continue even after the treatment of a person with chemical addiction.
 People in this group are well aware of the negative nature of chemical dependence, but refuse to accept it in their family.
  The main description of the behavior of dependent people belonging to this group is the denial of the problem.
From the cup. As mentioned above, there is a possibility that addicts may become addicted to chemicals themselves.
 Their way of life and worldview already coincide with the attitudes of those who are addicted, անց the transfer of their status to someone who is addicted to an addicted person can be very easy.
 In addition, many addicts believe that the only way to keep in touch with someone who is addicted is to associate.
 People with addictions in this group sometimes realize that they can no longer stand the doses offered by the addict.
  However, those who are addicted, instead of controlling the situation and giving a favorable outcome, simply reduce their share.
A folded person. This group of people who are addicted becomes indifferent to everything.
 They are so immoral that they fall into emotional stagnation.
  Apathy, by giving a certain peace and tranquility, deprives the person of the sense of meaning և of life.
  From a therapeutic point of view, this is the most difficult situation, because the therapist can not tell the addict that the solution to the problem is to eliminate the pain, because the person no longer feels pain.
As mentioned, solidarity cannot be attributed to all people in the same situation.
  There are cases when an individual is able to find a rational solution to a given problem at once.
 In this respect, M. Beatty writes in his work. As Ernie Larsen puts it, if addicts define their problem as 'living together with a drunkard,' the solution is not to live with a drunkard.
  In part, this position may be considered correct, but the real problem of those who have it as co-dependence is their very nature, that is, co-dependent behavior ”2.
 E. Larsen points out that being a member of a family with a chemical addiction contributes to the development of solidarity in the rest of the family, but at the same time it is relative, depending on the personal qualities of the individual, the preconditions, and the degree of resistance to addiction.
Evidence of the uselessness and ineffectiveness of some traditional treatment and rehabilitation methods has emerged in connection with the widespread spread of drug addiction and alcoholism.
  According to psychotherapist G. According to Lugovkina, this phenomenon is explained by the fact that after rehabilitation therapy, people with chemical addiction find themselves in the same family environment in which they were addicted, in other words, they return to the environment from which they left to be treated for addiction.
  And when one of the family members of a person suffering from drug addiction or intoxication observes the phenomenon of addiction, it undoubtedly jeopardizes the continued stability of the beneficial result obtained with the help of therapy և may lead to the recurrence (return) of the addict's disease3.
  In addition, there is a high probability that a dependent relative may acquire some chemical dependence himself.
Getting acquainted with the problems of addiction, we consider it necessary to mention that in the relevant rehabilitation centers it is necessary to provide psychological assistance to people with addiction որպես as a primary prevention, որպես as a means of ensuring mental security.
1 Ivanova O., Lesson-presentation “Compatibility”.
 hunting with self-childhood ”, 2013, fig. 16-20. Anahit Haykazuni CONFLICT. CAUSES, CLINICS AND CONSEQUENCES Keywords: addiction, chemical dependence, low self-esteem, suicidal thoughts, mental and physical disorders, stress disorders, drug addiction և drunkenness, savior, victim, persecutor.
