WTO DISPUTE RESOLUTION FRAMEWORK OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DECISIONS OF REASONABLE time-limit ARANDZNAHATKUTYUNNEREArevtri WTO / hereinafter referred to as the WTO / Dispute Settlement tsagatsarevtrayin kargavoroghmarmni and disputes between Member States is the main function of an appellate court.
  Therefore, the activities of the latter will not serve their purpose if the decisions made during the settlement of disputes, that is, the settlement of instructions, are not implemented.
 In other words, the provision of mechanisms to ensure the implementation of the decisions made by the dispute resolution bodies is essential in the dispute settlement process.
Article 21 of the Dispute Settlement Rules և Procedures Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement) is devoted to overseeing compliance with the recommendations made during the settlement of disputes.
Pursuant to Article 21 1 1 of the above Agreement, prompt compliance with the recommendations և arrangements is essential from the point of view of ensuring the effective resolution of disputes between all members.
Thus, the above provision clearly states the need for speedy implementation of the decisions taken during the settlement of disputes, which is the indisputable responsibility of all Member States, but at the same time, taking into account the specifics of disputes in this area, as well as the fact that the parties are more than likely. Disagreements regarding the terms and conditions of implementation. The Agreement has given certain powers to the Dispute Settlement Body during the decision-making phase, ie the latter oversees the implementation of the decisions.
In particular, Article 21 3 3 of the Agreement provides that a Member State is obliged to inform the Dispute Settlement Body of its intention to implement the recommendations։ the arrangements.
  It should be noted that the disputing States Parties, as a rule, express their intention and readiness to comply with the requirements set out in the Recommendations and the Settlements, and it is not uncommon for a Member State to express a negative attitude towards the implementation of decisions at an early stage.
  At the same time, however, we must state that not only the readiness of the other party to implement the decisions made is essential for the complaining state, but also the implementation of those decisions as soon as possible.
Article 21 1 1 of the Agreement explicitly states the urgent need for implementation of decisions, but taking into account the specifics of the international trade sector, the difficulties of direct implementation of decisions related to that field, Article 21 3 3 of the Agreement states that if If implementation is not possible, then the state should be given a reasonable period of time to implement it.
 The agreement does not define the term "reasonable term" by providing for the possibility of setting a reasonable period.
 The notion of a reasonable time at present 1 See the Agreement on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes, adopted in 1994 in Marrakesh.
In the case of European Communities - Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Products 1, it was stated that a reasonable period of time should be the shortest period during which it is possible to comply with the requirements of the Dispute Settlement Body և Appeal Settlement.
The above concept is essential for understanding the nature of the reasonable timeframe for implementing WTO decisions, as it clearly states that the reasonable timeframe should be the shortest period during which it is possible to ensure compliance with the recommendations made.
 This definition follows from the urgency requirement of the arrangements set out in the Agreement.
  That is, each time the arbitrator sets a reasonable time, he must take into account the fact that that time should be the shortest period that makes the execution of the decision possible, and not the other way around.
We consider it necessary to emphasize that the provision of a reasonable period of time is an exception to the requirement of urgency to implement the recommendations, therefore, each time the state submits a requirement to set a reasonable period of time for implementation 2.
In addition, the Agreement provides for three procedures for setting a reasonable time.1. This period shall be proposed by the offending State and approved by the Dispute Settlement Body.
2. In the absence of such approval by the Dispute Settlement Body, this period shall be approved by agreement of the parties within 45 days from the moment of acceptance of the instruction by the Dispute Settlement Body.
3. In the absence of such agreement, a reasonable period shall be established within 90 days of the acceptance of the order ընդուն by the arbitrator.
Naturally, in the case of the establishment of a reasonable time under the first and second procedures, the views of the States Parties shall be clearly taken into account;
However, the issue is different in the case of the third procedure, when a reasonable time limit is set by the arbitrator, which is binding on the parties.
 Moreover, at this stage it is more difficult for the parties to set a reasonable deadline for control.
Whether the agreement uses the term arbitrator, according to the reference given in the Agreement, both the individual and the group of individuals can be considered as an arbitrator during the implementation phase.
 The arbitrator shall be appointed by the States Parties to the dispute, but in the absence of such agreement, the arbitrator shall be appointed by the Secretary-General within 10 days after consultation with the parties.
  Moreover, the Agreement does not regulate the issue of where the arbitrators are selected from.
 In the theoretical literature, you will think that this issue is not regulated by an agreement, but in practice the arbitrators are mainly elected by the Appellate Body.
 However, we would like to note that the Agreement did not regulate the above issue, which may be a cause of legal uncertainty.
 Therefore, we consider that there is a need to regulate within the framework of the Agreement the issue of which body the arbitrators will be elected from.
Referring to the procedure for setting a reasonable time, we think it is important to find out what criteria should be followed by arbitration when setting a reasonable time.
The agreement does not specify the criteria that should be the basis for arbitration within a reasonable time.
  Article 21 of the Agreement explicitly states that the reasonable time limit may not exceed 15 months, the calculation of which shall take effect from the date of acceptance of the instructions or arrangements, but the terms of the arbitration shall not specify the time limit.
 At the same time, we would like to state that according to Article 21, Clause 3 of the Agreement, that period, the maximum of a reasonable period, may be longer or shorter due to certain circumstances.
1 See “European Communities - Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Productshttps.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds26_e.htm, available on 04.05.2015.
2 See Yang G., Mercurio B., Li Y., WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding, Kluwer Law International, 2005, p. 256.
(Hormones) ”is available. That is, it turns out that on the one hand, the Agreement sets the maximum amount of the reasonable term, which is 15 months, on the other hand, due to certain circumstances, allows to extend that period, without specifying it. as a result of those circumstances, that term may be extended, by what line or how many times.
In this case, the question arises: if the Agreement was intended to set a maximum period of reasonable time in order to prevent attempts to set longer periods as a reasonable period, then why, under certain circumstances, does it allow that period to be extended?
We believe that the authors of the Agreement should have taken into account the fact that if they intended to set a maximum reasonable period, they should not have considered the possibility of extending that period, especially when the terms of the extension are abstract, in particular "due to certain circumstances". However, it does not specify what circumstances may be grounds for extending the maximum period of reasonable time, which may lead to arbitrary applications, moreover, to the detriment of the appellant's economic interests, as in the event of a reasonable time, the offending state continues its WTO. activities or inactions that do not comply with the agreements, causing harm to the complaining state.
 Moreover, if the authors of the Agreement had envisaged the possibility of extension, taking into account the interests of developing countries, it would have been more expedient to allow only them to extend.
Otherwise, the principle of urgent implementation of the decisions referred to in Article 21 (1) of the Agreement is endangered.
Moreover, the Agreement does not stipulate the circumstances that the arbitrator should take into account in order to extend the limit for a reasonable period, but as a result of the study of the practice within the WTO, we can state that one of the first circumstances is the complexity of legislative changes.
 In particular, in the case of the EU - Bananas 1 the European Union substantiated how difficult it is to implement legislative compliance within the EU, as a result of which the arbitrator provided 15 months և 1 week as a reasonable period.
Referring to the process of legislative changes, we would like to state that in the case of Japan - Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages 2 Japan, as a justification for a longer reasonable period of time, noted that dissatisfaction, which will affect the implementation of decisions in the legislature.
Contrary to the above assertion, the United States stated that the date should be based only on the type of normative act to be adopted, the technical problems and obstacles that arise during the drafting and adoption of the normative act.
  According to the United States, no socio-economic circumstances or problems should be taken into account, otherwise it will have a negative impact on the entire international trade.
 In this case, the arbitrator rejected the positions of both parties and set 15 months as a reasonable period for the implementation of the decisions.
Moreover, in another case, the panel expressed a rather interesting position on the issue of setting a reasonable time due to the length of the legislative process, noting that the circumstance of the legislative process should not be based on the fact that the state may seek extraordinary legislative procedure. to make decisions.
In order to determine the duration of the legislative process, the possible dates of legislative changes should be taken as a basis, without taking into account the possibility of convening extraordinary sittings3.
1 See “European Communities - regime for the importation, sale and distributions of bananas”, WT / DS27 / 15 (7.01.1998.) Para. 19.
2 See "Japan - Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages", available at https.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds8_e.htm, available on 20.05.2015.
http:
//scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1354&context=bjil, available 28.04.2015.
Available: See A longer, more reasonable period of time may be required to extend or extend the financial position of a State in crisis.
 In particular, in Indonesia - Certain Measures Affecting the Automobile Industry 1, the arbitrator set a reasonable time limit of 12 months, taking into account Indonesia as a developing country and the difficult financial situation of the country.
At the same time, the study of the WTO practice shows that the arbitrator mainly takes into account the obstacles of legal nature when setting a reasonable time.
 This point was confirmed in the case of Indonesia - Certain Measures Affecting the Automobile Industry, where Indonesia asked for a longer period of time to mitigate the negative consequences for the economy as a result of the decision, which was not accepted as a basis by arbitration.
Thus, the article outlines the main circumstances under which the arbitrator was guided in setting a reasonable time within the framework of previous cases.
  These circumstances could not be exhaustively mentioned in the agreement, as taking into account the diversity of situations, it was not possible to envisage an exhaustive list of circumstances, but at the same time envisaging definite guiding conditions would help prevent possible arbitrary manifestations.
 In particular, we believe that the agreement should have stipulated that when assessing the impossibility of direct implementation of decisions, first of all, the implementation of normative acts to be adopted, the peculiarities of the adoption process, ie legal obstacles should be taken into account.
Thus, we can state that the urgency of the implementation of the decisions, the instructions, the regulations, is envisaged by the Agreement, as it is in the interests of the complaining state, but taking into account the diversity of international trade, the peculiarities of the legislatures, it is obvious. It is impossible to ensure the immediate implementation of these decisions.
 For this reason, the Agreement on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes, adopted within the framework of the WTO, provides for the possibility of setting a reasonable deadline for the implementation of the established act.
 And although the institute of reasonable time provided by the above-mentioned agreement has certain legal uncertainties, which have already been mentioned in the work, nevertheless, this institute is essential in the decision-making process, as it has a wide practical application, ensures mutual protection of disputes.
Do AtanesyanAREVTRI WTO DISPUTE RESOLUTION FRAMEWORK OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DECISIONS reasonable time-limit ARANDZNAHATKUTYUNNEREBanali words, the World Trade Organization, within a reasonable timeframe, "Settlement of disputes" Agreement on Rules and procedures for dispute resolution.
