ABOUT SOME TALISH PLANT NAMES The word structure of any language can have certain differences from a geographical point of view, related to the existence of different occupations, unique living conditions, and the peculiarities of nature in general.
 In this respect, the vocabulary of the plant world, in particular plant names, may be present in the vocabulary of Talysh, one of the Iranian languages.
The unique climatic conditions of Talish have left their mark on the flora. More than 150 plant species grow there, among which there are also many endemic species.
  In the vocabulary of the Talysh, who are so close to nature and are engaged in agriculture, plant names have a special place, they express their thinking և worldview towards life.
  In the list of Talysh plant names, in terms of three dialect groups (northern, central, southern), one can find mostly phonetic variants of the same plant, but there are many that are called by different words.
 The most distinct of these three dialects are the plant names of the southern dialect, both in terms of phonetic change and word change due to the influence of literary Persian.
In the framework of this article, the plant names of the Talysh nature և most typical of the Talysh nature և linguistically interesting will be presented.
Bərz1, burunj2, berz, berj3 - rice (oryza).
  The word is derived from Middle Persian brinj dz, which is borrowed from Baluchi, Ossetian, Svan brinj, Georgian brinji, Kurdish birinj, Turkish pirinj, Bulgarian pirinև. care.).
  1 Amiri of Iranian horses (cid.
31) n R., Guyeš-e T (cid.
31) leşi, Tehran, 1384 Š / 2005, p. 121.3 'Abdoli' A., Farhang-e tatbiγi-e T (cid.
31) leši-T (cid.
31) ti- (cid.
31) zari, Tehran, 1380 Š / 2001, p. 144.4 http:
//loghatnameh.org/dehkhodaworddetail-db016360fd9b459f87217ace5e36eb9d-fa.html is the original * vrinji-, which is the same as the Vedic vrīhí.
5 In the Talysh dialects, bərz is the most common, with burunj in the north and berz in the south.
 In Talysh, the vowels are distinguished by their instability, as a result of which they are easily changed in different dialects.
  There is no exact information about when rice was introduced in the Caspian region շրջան on the Iranian plateau.
 The authors of the rice map in the Atlas of Edible Crops suggest that rice was grown in the Caspian region in BC. In the 4th century 6.
 13th century sources claim that rice was grown in Atrpatakan, Fars, Khuzestan, Caspian regions, which are still the main areas of rice production.
 1982 2.5% of Iran's arable land was used for rice.
 Rice fields make up about 52% of Gillan arable land, 16% in Mazandaran, 3% in Fars and the remaining 1% in the rest of the country.
 Rice production is concentrated in the Caspian region, which in 1982 accounted for 85% of the country's total harvest.
  Only these regions have enough water due to abundant annual precipitation, rivers and dense network of streams.
 In Gillan բնական The natural conditions in Mazandaran are not so favorable due to the cold winter weather, and in spring and summer the temperature is low for growing rice, which limits the growing season to once a year.
  1911 Rabino աֆ Lafont notes that although Gillan's rice is better than Mazandaran and Astarabad, the last two regions provide rice to the Persian capital և center.
 Rice cultivation, like many other activities in Gillan, has expanded in response to the demand of the Russian market.
 1874-1892 50,000 tons of rice was exported to Russia annually in 1915. reaches a maximum of 90,000 tons.
 The rice was transported to many centers of Gillan: Astara, Hassan Kiadeh, Langarud, Rudsar, Anzali.
  Rice production in Iran increased after World War II. It was 450,000 tons, and in the 1970s it was more than a million.
The lands used for rice cultivation in the Caspian region stand out in many ways.
  Until 1960 Small private farms could very rarely be found in Gillan և Mazanda 5 Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, h. A, Yerevan, 1971, pp. 492-93.
րանում.
 1960 83 Gillan farms 65 65% of Mazandaran farms do not make more than three hectares.
 The standard farm in Gillan, in which one family worked, was 1.5-2 hectares.
In the 1970s, agricultural companies were set up to unite the lands.
 1976 There were two such companies in Gillan, which occupied less than 1% of the rice fields7.
Women do the hardest work, using basic tools or no tools at all.
  Their wages were noticeably higher than those of men, as women were more productive and productive than men.
 The social status of women in Gilan և Mazandaran, which was higher than anywhere else in Iran, was undoubtedly crucial in rice production.
 From the middle of the 19th century, the main migrations took place when the rice fields had to be prepared for planting.
 Every winter, tens of thousands of men left their villages in East Atrpatakan (particularly Ardabil, Khalkhal) to work in groups on the rice farms of the Caspian lowlands.
 Nowadays, migrations have decreased.
  In addition to women farmers, women were recruited from neighboring towns or Caspian highlands.
  Under a 6-8 week contract, these women were hired like men to plow the land.
 They are given a room, food, a fixed amount of rice, money, and sometimes clothes to change dirty clothes.
 The need for outside labor to reap is less felt, because men and women worked together.
 Some of the rice was sold.
 Rice traders had a special place in the weekly markets and in the big markets of the cities.
  They often increased their profits by buying crops before harvest.
 Among the most common types of rice among the Talysh are: hāšemi, sadri, tarom, hasani, xazar, neda, āγāyi, γariba, čimpā.
  Ṣadri is usually grown in the Sefidrud Delta, while čampā և other medium-sized species are grown in Mazandaran, Gorgan, Talish, where water supply is limited.
Preparation of rice fields (Talysh bijur, bijār) covers the period from winter to early spring, during which the soil is plowed 3 times. the first time he plows lightly with an ox, the second time he plows with a shovel the third time.
After that they dig the muddy soil.
  In early spring, the rice seeds are moistened and placed in a special bag or basket to germinate.
 The first stage of planting (ne թ, Talysh tumažor) is done by women.
 In the second stage, women cultivate (vijin) rice fields, which are more difficult than planting; they must be done twice a month (May 21-June 20).
 The third stage, the harvest, takes place from late July to early November.
  Harvesting (berenj-bini, Talysh bičin) is done by men and, if necessary, women.
 Then they tie a bunch of them and dry them.
It is typical of the Caspian regions to finish the drying process by smoking.
It is said that it gives a good aroma to the rice and keeps the rice grains together during cooking.
 Rice has always played an important role in the Iranian diet.
  The fact that rice is a major part of the traditional diet of people in the Caspian region is confirmed by the dishes prepared with it, the frequency of consumption.
  Anecdotes highlight the differences between people living in the Caspian region who eat rice and people living in other parts of Iran who eat bread.
 However, the consumption of bread during the meal has spread only in the Caspian regions only recently.
 In these regions, rice is eaten for breakfast, lunch and dinner, especially in Talish, which has been less affected by the patterns typical of urban consumption.
  In Talish, an adult man eats about 1 kg of rice on average daily.
 According to Mokadasi ibn Haukal, rice was the main dish in Tabarestan, Daylam and Gillan.
 Rice bread (lāk s) is made today in Gillan, as well as in Kermanshah, Ghazvin and Shiraz.
 Since the Safavid period, rice in Iran is mainly used in two dishes: polow և ևelow.
 The simplest and fastest way to make rice is kata, Gillan's traditional rice dish.
 Once washed, the rice is boiled in water for one and a half times in a pot.
 When the water is absorbed, you can add the refined oil, salt, the vessel is closed before cooking the rice.
 Saffron and yogurt can be added.
 Kata is prepared in another way, when the rice is cooked not with water, but with tomato sauce, adding potatoes and minced meat.
  The top layer of Kata is crunchy և slightly brown.
 Kata is cut with a knife and balls are made with fingers.
  Kata is served for breakfast in several ways: it is heated, soaked in milk like porridge, prepared with cherries or bergamot, as well as seasoned with cheese or garlic.
 It is eaten with meat and fish for dinner.
 Rice is also used to make various sweets, in which the inhabitants of the Caspian region specialize.
  For example, nān-e berenji ("rice bread" made from a mixture of wheat and rice flour, seasoned with spices), fereni (rice dough mixed with crushed almonds, sugar, saffron), jukulku (a mixture of grape juice, chopped walnuts, with ṣadri), h alwā-ye ārd-e berenj (with rice flour, sugar, water, saffron, rose water, cardamom) 9.
 When someone visits a house in Talish, the landlord is the first to offer to cook rice ին to entertain: b ՝rz bәpatam? or bәrz bәnam?
 Rice freshly picked from the field smells good, but does not grow well, but old rice, which has a bad smell, grows a lot.
 Talysh people like to compare this old and new rice with experienced, inexperienced people.
 Bumariša10, bumaša11, gazar12, gazer, gazәr, yerkokü13 - carrot (daucus).
  In the northern և central dialects of Talysh, bumariša or bumaša are common, and in the southern dialects, gazar.
  Bumariša is a compound word consisting of the components bum "soil", a (connecting particle), riša "root", and bumaša is a shortened version of it (in Talysh the middle r is unstable).
  In Persian it is snow, gazar (naև zardak, havij), from which they borrow Arabic jazar, Assyrian gezārā, Kurdish gizir, Gypsy ġezer.
  Paspat is compared to the latter by the Eanskrit garjara, the Indian gajur, the Afghan gazara, all meaning "carrot" 14.
 Modern botanists distinguish several types of carrots in Iran.
  Parsa distinguishes 8 types.
  He singles out several local names for wild carrots. panir-vāš literally means "sweet cheese" (in Gillan), Turkish āq-bāš literally means "with a white head" (in Khalkhal), ešak-zardakī literally means "dog carrot" (in Bakhtiari).
 The other wild species is called šaqāqol, which is widespread in Atrpatakan, Karaj, Khuzestan, Mazandaran15.
  Carrot has long been grown in the Iranian steppes, its name is 9 http.
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/berenj-rice 10 Пирейко Л. A., note work, page 40.
11 Author's field work.
12 Rafi'i 'A., Loqatn (cid.
31) me-ye t (cid.
31) leši, Rasht, 1388 Š / 2009, p. 214.14 Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, h. A, Yerevan, 1971, p. 499.
is represented in the same way in the whole country: gezer, zardak (Behdin), gazar (Damavand), gezar, gozrak (Faramarzan), gəzər, zərdək (Gilani), gezer (Sabzevar), zerdak (Kuchan), gēzar (Kurdish) , gezer (Lak), zardak, bīḵ-zemīn literally: "basic root" (Lure), zarda / ek (Mazandaran), zīrzamīnī literally "underground" (Sarvestan), gazar (Northern Tatar), havīja (Southern Tatar).
  The earliest mention of carrots was in the Divan of Atema Shirazi.
 In addition to many quotes, he mentions some of its uses (carrot pilaf, carrot halva).
  Most information about the culinary use of carrots comes from the Sefyan period.
 According to Haji Mohammad Ali Bavarchi in his Kār-nāma, carrots were used in soup (āš-e ḥalīm) և 5 types of pilaf (3 are named ՝la-palāv, nargesī-palāv, qabūlī-palāv).
Today, in addition to being eaten raw, carrots are also used in various regional dishes, such as gəzər- (v) āvīj / -qūrmə (a type of omelet) made in Gillan.
  Carrot juice is very popular in Iran, which is offered in soft drink shops and sidewalk kiosks17.
xindina, xondune22 - watermelon (citrullus), Persian hendevāne.
  Talysh: zәmәstoni (zәmsoni) hmt. Tatar zumustuni (Caucasian Persian), has mast. Talysh zәmәston (zәmson) և corresponding to Armenian: watermelon, Georgian: sazamtʰro, all of which have their roots in "winter" zumustun, winter, zamtʰari.
 This shows that the Talysh, the Tatars, the Armenians, the Georgians, living in the same geographical and cultural area, have historically had very close linguistic contacts.
 Elda, on the other hand, can be explained by the fact that watermelon is a very hydrating and refreshing plant.
 H. Acharyan also Turkish qarpuz "watermelon", which according to folklore is interpreted as the Turkish word qar "snow" + buz "ice" 23.
  It is customary among Iranians to eat watermelon on Yalda holiday (during the winter solstice).
16 Afš (cid.
31) r I., azipazi-e dawra-ye ṣafawi.
 Matn-e do res (cid.
31) la az (cid.
31) n dawra, Tehran, 1360 Š. / 1981, pp. 66,17 http:
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/carrot-the-taproot-of-daucus-l 18 Пирейко Л. A., note work., page 107.
19 Author's field work.
20 'Abdoli' A., ref. work, page 188.
21 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 124.
22 Bazin M., ref. work., page 274.
23 Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, vol. G, Yerevan, 1977, pp. 156-57.
Γaysi24, šinālak25, širnālak26, zerdāyu, zardālu27 - apricot (prunusarmeniaca), Persian zardālu.
 The homeland of the tree is Armenia.
 A. In the Abdolinir dictionary he mentions the word čaγāla28 for apricot (Hmt. Armenian ցոգոլ - unripe apricot).
 The compound word Šinālak (širnālak) consists of two components: the suffix šin "sweet" + ālak, which indicates that something is too much.
Sualif, su29 - heracleum.
 The wild species grows in the humid meadows of Iran and in the surrounding areas.
  Because of its peculiar appearance, it is ignored by ordinary people.
  The 5 species common in Iran are usually called by one name: golpar, in Gilan - kolpar or kulpar, in Mazandaran - kūla / ek, in Lars - karso, in Azerbaijani - bāldïrḡān.
 The compound word sualif is found in the central dialects of Talysh, and the variant su in the south.
Among the plant species, H. Rechingeri is one of the endemics of the Gillan Mountains, including Talish.
 H. persicum, sometimes incorrectly called "Persian marjoram" ("Persian oregano") in English, is an endemic species of Southeastern Anatolia, Iran.
30 Aluš31, alāš32, tə (i) nəγ33, tənək34, alәš, aloš, alduš35, γәzәl-goz36 - fagus, Persian: rāš.
 It grows in the high forests of the Caspian Sea, from Astara to Gorgan.
 Various sources mention Astara, Ashtalem Rasht, Karganrud, different regions of Talish, Dorfak mountain, Manjil, Ramsar, Talar plain, Nur, Kojur, etc.
 Beech wood is used more than other trees - in the manufacture of doors, windows, furniture, cribs, boxes, banisters, farmer tools, etc.
 It is a valuable firewood37.
 Beech is a sacred tree for the Talysh.
 N.Mar mentions specific beeches on Ulya Shavesh hill, which are 24 Пирейко Л. A., note work., page 62.
25 Author's field work.
26 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 183.
27 Bazin M., ref. work., page 275.
28 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 177.
29 Author's field work.
30 http:
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/golpar 31 Author's fieldwork.
32 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 132.
33 Пирейко Л. A., note work., page 215.
35 Bazin M., ref. work., page 272.
36 http:
//www.loghatnaameh.org/dehkhodaworddetail-e092bcd5656d4496b200fed08c4bc5ce37 http:
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/beech-fagus-l were worshiped by the Talysh.
38 In the central, southern dialects of Talysh, the variants aluš, alāš, aloš are mostly available.
  According to popular etymology, it originated from the word օl օ v - "flame", "fire", as beech wood is considered a good firewood.
 Γәzәlgoz is found in the Astara dialect թարգման translated from Turkish means "red eye".
 Tə (i) nəγ, tənək are found in northern dialects.
Le (y) na39, lan40, le41, urdu42, piza43 - reed (phrágmites), Persian: ney.
Among the types of reeds are: kora leyna, օ zolejna (local reed species), lejna šaka (sugar cane), xuga piza (lake reed type, literally pork reed).
  The variants Le (y) na, urdu, piza are found in the northern dialects of Talysh, and in the southern dialects - lan, le.
  The word "reed" can be found in the name of Lankaran, the capital of the Talysh: * lankar-ān = lan (Talish le (y) na) "reed" + kar (Talish ka <ancient Iranian * kata-) "home" + ān (Old Iranian - āna) - a suffix forming a place name.
44 (дзельква).
 It is one of the most characteristic trees of the Hyrcanian forests, found in low-lying Caspian forests, from the lowlands of Lankaran to Goli Dagh, which is 900 meters above sea level, as in the Nalkhid forests.
  Azad is one of the endemic plants of the Hyrcanian botanical region of the Euro-Siberian area.
 The tree is called ազատzād - "free" in Persian և Gilani, azedār or azzār in Mazandaran, āqča āḡāj in Goli Dagh, nil in the northern dialects of the Talysh, səγ (x) in the central և southern dialects.
  Azad has "soft masters" with serrated edges, like the spider, but smaller, which often serve as fodder.
 It is sometimes kept for this purpose along with other forest trees49.
  The height of some freaks exceeds 30 meters, and the diameter reaches up to 1.80 meters.
 They are preserved in many sanctuaries of Gillan, often 39 Pirejko L. A., note work., page 131.
40 Author's field work.
41 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 228.
42 Пирейко Л. A., note work., page 221.
43 Miller B. V., note work., page 244.
45 Пирейко Л. A., note work, page 152.
46 Author's field work.
47 'Abdoli' A., ibid., P. 213.
48 Bazin M., ref. work., page 272.
They were worshiped.
  Azad has high quality heavy hardwood.
  The villagers of Gilan make anthatup from it, which they call čāṇčū, and the carpenters consider it the best wood.
 It is considered a sacred tree by the Talysh.
 Ն. Mar mentions the freedmen growing up near the village of Veravula, which were sacred.
50Kaškar, karafaliv, šabxosb51 - Lankaranian albicia, Lankaranian acacia, silk tree (albizzia julibrissin), Persian: šabxosb.
 He is one of the endemics of Talish forest.
Noteworthy are a number of complex Talysh plant names. • ltlivāš52 is a medicinal plant with a milky white substance flowing from its stem.
 It is a complex word with the root vāš "grass".
• kunasujā53 - is a Talysh plant name consisting of two components: kuna "butt" + sujā "burning".
  The plant was so named because it was used to hit children on the buttocks when they were being held in disarray.
• kəlāliva54 - a plant with large leaves, which grows in mountainous և cold places.
• rəməjaliva55 - an herb that is useful for wounds or pus.
• armaliva56 - an evergreen plant species.
The last three are composed of the Talysh liv root "ter".
In some Talysh plant names one can notice roots with animal names.
 For example: • hāušāguš, avalik, xargušaliv57 - A flower growing in the pastures of Talish.
  Hāušāguš is a compound word consisting of two roots: hāuš "rabbit" + ā joint + guš "ear".
 Xargušaliv is also a compound word: xarguš "rabbit" + a joint + liv "owner".
• gajuju58 - is a complex word: ga "cow" + juju "stink".
50 Marr N. J., note work., page 6.
52 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 181.
53 Author's field work.
54 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work, page 203.
55 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work, page 151.
56 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 177.
57 http:
//sfandiar91.blogfa.com/tag/%DA%AF%D9%84-%D9%87%D8%A7-%D9%8858 Author's field work.
• ganzašāx59 - is a complex word: ganza "deer" + šāx "pose", Persian šāx gavazn.
Plant names can be found in a number of Talysh expressions, proverbs, as well as in fairy tales.
 Let's bring some examples: tayf60, tiaf61, teref62, teraf63 - radish (raphanus), Persian: torob.
 The following phrase is common among the Talysh: av eštān šešnay, nunday tayfa liva sa, literally, "He washes himself and puts radish on the ground."
 They say that to the person who wants to praise himself, to show that he is the best.
āmbur (māmbur) 64, ambur, māmur, burnbur65 - moss (bryophyta), Persian: xaze.
 There is a saying among the Talysh people: moričә māmburi zahla baše, hežo čay lona-sa bebaše, literally, "The snake is disgusted with the moss, because it always grows near its nest."
 They say that about an unpleasant and intrusive person.
sənjə66, senjer67, pesle68, sәnji69 - փշատ (elaeagnus), Persian senjed.
The Talysh had a custom in ancient times, according to which the grooms took the bride as a thorn in the side as an expression of their love.
In addition, the Talysh use an expression like pesleәstane ?, literally, "did you buy a thorn?"
 They say that to a person who takes something worthless70.
kang71, kangar72 - kankar, artichoke, Persian kangar.
 When a person eats for free և does not work, they say kangar haru langar rise, literally, "Kankar has eaten, he has thrown the anchor."
šəmšor73, kiš74 - buxus, Persian: šemšād.
 The expression sine kiš kāre, which means excessive http http, is widespread among the Talysh.
//www.taleshshenasi.blogfa.com/post-110.aspx 60 Пирейко Л. A., note work., page 210.
61 Author's field work.
62 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 164.
63 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 84.
64 Пирейко Л. A., in the same place, page 21.
65 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 133.
66 Field work of the author.
67 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 217.
68 Amiri (cid.
31) n R., ref. work., page 140.
69 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 170.
70 Author's field work.
71 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 237.
72 Rafi'i 'A., ref. work., page 199.
73 Пирейко Л. A., note work, page 258.
to make more efforts.
  Besides, the Talysh have a tale about how the boxwood became an evergreen tree.
 According to that, once St. Khidr gives water to the crow from Zemzem's paradise spring and commands it to be poured on the heads of the people so that they may gain eternal life.
 The crow takes the water, flies and sits on the boxwood tree (at that time the boxwood tree was not evergreen).
 The crow decides to pour water on his head, but he does not succeed.
 The water is filled with shimshatra, which from that day becomes evergreen.
75 Literature 1. Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, h. A, Yerevan, 1971.
2. Acharyan H., Armenian Radical Dictionary, vol. G, Yerevan, 1977.
13. Afš (cid.
31) r I., (cid.
31) azipazi-e dawra-ye (cid.
31) afawi.
 Matn-e do res (cid.
31) la az (cid.
31) n dawra, Tehran, 14. Amiri (cid.
31) n R., Guyeš-e T (cid.
31) leši, Tehran, 1384 Š / 2005.15. 'Abdoli' A., Farhang-e tatbiγi-e T (cid.
31) leši-T (cid.
31) ti- (cid.
31) zari, Tehran, 1380 Š / 2001.16. Rafi'i 'A., Loqatn (cid.
31) me-ye t (cid.
31) leši, Rasht, 1388 Š /2009.17. http:
//www.iranicaonline.org/18. http:
//www.loghatnaameh.org19. http:
//sfandiar91.blogfa.com 20. http:
//www.taleshshenasi.blogfa.com 74 'Abdoli' A., ref. work., page 242.
Shushan Azatyan ABOUT SOME TALISH PLANT NAMES Keywords: Talysh, plant names, Talysh dialects, Talysh.
