LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF RA TOURISM FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT Tourism is one of the most dynamically developing և large areas of the non-productive sector of the world economy.
  The best way to develop it is to ensure the stability of development, which can be achieved first of all through state policy.
  Sustainable development ensures the satisfaction of the needs of current generations, while not jeopardizing the ability to meet the needs of future generations և is accompanied by the harmonious development of economic, social and environmental components of public life.
Comprehensive studies on the legal regulations of the RA tourism և analyzes have not been done ․ From the point of view of the concept of sustainable development, the legal acts regulating the sphere of tourism of the Republic of Armenia should be evaluated.
  Therefore, the study of such a topic in scientific circles is topical.
The aim of the work is to study the legal acts related to the sphere of tourism of the Republic of Armenia և state policy programs (Law of the Republic of Armenia on Tourism [5], Concept of Tourism Development of the Republic of Armenia [2]), to show their compliance with the concept of sustainable development և its ideology.
  The work also made a comparative reference to the Regulation of World Tourism Conduct.
The Government of the Republic of Armenia has declared the main principle of the state policy in the sphere of tourism to make the latter a priority branch of the economy [5, Article 4].
  For this purpose, in order to effectively solve the problems in the sector, to ensure the development of the sector, the state has implemented legal regulation by adopting normative legal acts, developing state policy programs and ensuring their legitimacy.
At a certain level of society's development, the regulation of public relations is carried out not through individual-normative regulation (social norms - customs, traditions, moral-religious norms), but by the establishment of norms of law by the state.
 Legal norms are exemplary rules of general conduct for a given situation, the requirements of which are addressed to anyone who finds themselves in a given situation [7, 18].
The normative legal acts regulating the sphere of tourism are by their nature legal acts of general action, which include the totality of certain types of public relations in the territory of the state (in this case, temporary movement of people խնդիրները related issues), apply to persons engaged in tourism or tourism activities. They expand.
  According to the entities adopting those normative and legal acts, we separate the acts of the legislative power adopted by the bodies of public power regulating the sphere of tourism - sub-legislative acts of the executive power.
In order to regulate the sphere of tourism in 2003. The Law on Tourism was adopted on December 17, 2006, which regulates the relations arising in the field of tourism, which arise in the process of exercising the rights of citizens to rest, travel and free movement [5, Article 1].
The RA Law on Tourism defines the main concepts and terms used in the sphere of tourism, gives their explanation, defines the main principles of the state policy, the means of regulating the sphere, the goals, the priority directions.
  Regulates the organization of services, the provision of hotel and other accommodation qualifications, the obligations of travel agents and agencies, the rights and responsibilities of tourists, as well as the provision of tourist safety during tourism activities.
Historical and Cultural Objects of Tourist Interest և To ensure the protection of the environment, to keep them clean, to save them from destruction and damage "On Specially Protected Areas [3]", "On the Use of Historical and Cultural Monuments and Historical Environment [6]" պան "Environmentalist" [4] The law on control provides for liability in case of violation of the law, but it is necessary to show consistency, toughen the fines, and establish control over the most visited and most visited tourist facilities.
The concept of sustainable development sees stability in achieving economic efficiency, environmental cleanliness and social welfare.
  Therefore, it is necessary to take into account various economic, ecological and social indicators when organizing the tourism industry, especially rational use of nature, protection of natural and cultural monuments, control over specially protected areas, involvement of the local population in tourism, equal distribution of tourism revenues among different regions. .
  The law on tourism should be comprehensive, including legal regulations in a number of other areas, which can indirectly contribute to the development of sustainable tourism.
In order to regulate the spheres directly related to tourism (hotel sphere, entry-exit permit, licensing of guides), relevant by-laws will be adopted, as developed in 2007. The concept of tourism development of the Republic of Armenia has been approved by the government.
  It aims to comprehensively study և analyze the tourism resource base of the Republic of Armenia, the tendencies and perspectives of tourism development, define the directions of the state policy in the sphere of tourism, identify the problems, challenges and obstacles.
 The concept also referred to sustainable development, the best way to achieve which is the active and effective cooperation of all stakeholders - public administration, local self-government bodies, the private sector, the population.
 According to the concept, the need for sustainable development is conditioned by the fact that tourism destinations in Armenia are developed mainly on the basis of tourism resources, and without the preservation of those resources, sustainable development of reproduction is impossible.
  Therefore, an attempt has been made in the concept to define the indicators with the help of which it is possible to make tourism sustainable.
  However, the concept developed earlier does not comprehensively include sustainable development և its ideology.
The concept of tourism development has some shortcomings, including uncoordinated, incomplete information on the preconditions, resources, statistical data and quantities of tourism development in Armenia, which is due to the lack of a unified statistical system.
  The quantitative indicators of tourism in the Republic of Armenia are presented in a very general way, which makes it impossible to understand the rates of tourism development and make comparisons.
 The action plan presented in the concept does not specify the grounds for implementation, the responsible bodies, who must, within their authority, follow the implementation of certain points of the concept.
  It has a declarative nature.
  The concept of tourism development discusses the challenges and obstacles to the development of the sector, certain issues, as it was implemented in the tourism sector until 2030, but they have no research or scientific basis.
 Therefore, in the context of the ideology of sustainable development, there is a need to make changes in the development programs, taking into account the fact that in the case of a dynamically developing sector, the data of almost 10 years ago are no longer relevant.
Unlike the latter, in 1999 The adopted World Tourism Code of Conduct [1], which includes 10 articles, defines "rules of the game" for tourist destinations, tourism operators and tourists [8. 302].
The World Tourism Code of Conduct is based on the concept of sustainable development; population involvement.
The World Tourism Code addresses the environmental responsibility of tourists։ travelers.
 In particular, point 3 of Article 3 of the Regulation refers to the workload of the tourist destination, for the solution of which he considers it expedient to coordinate the flows of tourists և visitors over time.
 Paragraph 4 of the same article defines the creation of such types of e-tourism, such types of infrastructure, which will ensure the protection of the natural heritage.
  The law regulating the sphere of tourism of the Republic of Armenia should also address the issues of protection of the natural environment by tourists, following some points of this regulation.
Tourism is a kind of means of self-education and self-development of groups of individuals, therefore, according to international and national legal norms, the exploitation of people should be limited, which is currently a serious problem for the tourism sector.
When defining tourism priorities by the state authorized body, it is desirable to include in that list the types of religious, rehabilitation, educational, cultural, rural-ecological tourism, which are distinguished by their harmless impact on the society and the natural environment.
  Separate tourist destinations in Armenia have been declared priority areas for tourism development by the Government, respectively long-term development programs have been developed.
  So far, the cities of Jermuk, Tsakhkadzor, Goris have such development programs as the city of "Tat" with its neighboring rural communities.
  Nevertheless, many problems on the way to tourism development in these regions remain unresolved; one of the best solutions would be to introduce the ideology of sustainable development in those programs, as well as the implementation of these principles.
The rights and responsibilities of tourists should be properly regulated by law, taking into account that tourists should not commit crimes or other harmful acts during the trip, such as behavior that may be considered offensive to the local population.
The World Tourism Code clarifies the rights and responsibilities of visitors, tourists, in particular, their involvement in the purchase and sale of illegal weapons, drugs, endangered animals, antiques [8, 302].
 Taking into account the above, it is possible to clarify the limits of responsibility by the legislation of the countries.
The Law on Tourism should also provide access to tourism and rehabilitation services for all segments of the population, setting a cabotage price at a lower price for the country's citizens when engaging in domestic tourism.
Such a step will allow increasing the number of domestic tourist visits.
Thus, the legal regulation of the tourism sector does not fully include the principles of the concept of sustainable development և ideology, therefore, in order to achieve sustainable development of tourism, it is necessary to develop a comprehensive draft law, Code of Conduct for Tourists (Code of Ethics).
 2012 year. The Yerevan Declaration was signed at a conference in Yerevan on October 19, 1945, in an attempt to apply the World Tourism Ethics Regulation.
In order to ensure sustainable development, the state authorized body in the field of tourism must, within the limits of its competence, ensure the legality of the adopted legal acts.
 It is desirable to develop development concepts for those areas of tourism that have the greatest positive impact on the natural and social environment.
 By studying, several directions can be suggested to achieve sustainable tourism development.1. to regulate separate directions of tourism.
  In particular, taking into account the wide opportunities for the development of ecotourism in the country, as recognizing that ecotourism is the best manifestation of the concept of sustainable development in tourism, . Licensing առանձին qualification of separate tourism services, which will enable to offer ecologically safe services in accordance with international standards.
  There is a need for legal regulation of hotel, transport, tour guides, entry and exit permitting services, 3. Clarification of the rights and responsibilities of tourists և travelers, as well as subjects of tourism activities during tourism activities, development of measures aimed at ensuring their safety, definition of liability in case of crimes and other violations by the legislation of the country; The long-term development programs of the tourism sector should be encouraged by the state authorized body supervising the sector, in which it is desirable to include the principles of sustainable development, 5. Ensure legislation that promotes environmentally safe
 Including the establishment of privileges at the institutional level, such as the granting of tax benefits for the operation of tourist houses in rural areas.
Literature 1. "Regulation of World Tourism Conduct", adopted in 1999. By the UN General Assembly, 1999.2. "Concept of RA Tourism Development" was approved by the RA Government in 2007. According to the decision N 1126-N of September 13, it is available at http.
//www.mineconomy.am/up/files/Turism-consept-196.pdf.
3. RA Law on Specially Protected Areas, Yerevan, 2006, available at http: // www.
//www.parliament.am/legislation.php?sel=show&ID=2781.
4. RA Law on Environmental Control, Yerevan, 2005, available at http: // www.
//www.parliament.am/legislation.php?sel=show&ID=2286.
5. RA Law "On Tourism« Tourism Activity "was adopted on 17.12.2003.
6. Law of the Republic of Armenia "Immovable monuments of history, culture and historical environment" for protection http.
//www.parliament.am/legislation.php?sel=show&ID=1641&lang=arm.
available for use ", Yerevan, 7. Vagharshyan A., Theory of State և Law - 2, Lectures, YSU, Yerevan, 2011.
8. Dolzhenko G., Basic Tourism.
 Учебное пособие, Ростов на Дону, 2008.Amalya Navasardyan THE LEGAL REGULATION OF TOURISM IN THE CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT FROM THE PERSPECTIVE Keywords: legal regulation, tourism, global, sustainable
