SUSTAINABLE TRAVEL MANAGEMENT MODELS ANALYSISTourism is one of the key elements of the tourism system.
 It can be defined as a center (area) with all possible amenities, means of delivery, and services to meet the various needs of tourists.
  In other words, tourist destinations contain the most important and decisive elements necessary for a tourist.
 The region of tourist destination is one of the most important in the tourism system, as it is the image created by it that attracts the tourist, promotes visits, activating the activity of tourism systems.
Lepper N. Cooper S., Pletcher D., Gilbert D., Shepherd R., Wankhil S. World Tourism Organization Richie B., Crouch D. A specific area that a tourist chooses to visit և spend some time there, an area using a tour desk [ 1].
A set of services և means designed to meet the needs of the tourist [2].
Physical space where the tourist spends at least one night.
 Physical-administrative boundaries of the destination, which define the management system that determines the market competitiveness of the destination [3].
Specific area with administrative borders, country, macro-district (whole of several countries), any region of the country, city, special area (national park), etc. [4].
Geographical area, which is characterized by Nikitina O. A. with a high concentration of tourism resources, as well as with an infrastructure network providing mandatory auxiliary services [5].
Any socio-geographical area chosen by a tourist or group of tourists Pavlova E. N. as the destination of the visit, which provides all the facilities, organizations, facilities and services necessary for the accommodation of Pramke V. [[6].
Destination is a set of interests, different types of services, attractiveness and infrastructure network, which form the uniqueness of the area [7].
Table 1. Definition of the concept of destination by different authors The concept of "tourist destination" was introduced by Professor Lepper in the use of world tourism literature in the 1980s.
  According to him, the destination is an area with certain geographical borders, which, containing a complex of attractive conditions, can influence the tourist's choice, satisfy his needs.
Based on the definitions singled out by the above-mentioned authors, we derive the typical aspects of tourist destinations, which are interconnected and mutually agreed.
 Typical aspects can be divided into 5 main parts: 1. Geographical spatiality. It is accepted that the destination is an area with certain geographical borders - city, country, island, etc.
2. Infrastructure ություն The need for tourism resources. The destination is not a direct area visited by e-tourists, but an area that provides an appropriate infrastructure network for the provision of tourism services.
However, the infrastructure network is considered only an auxiliary product of the destination.
  Tourists visit the destination not for the sake of infrastructure.
 Tourism resources are of fundamental importance for the destination.
3. The need to apply marketing strategy. The destination is an integrated, systematic product, which is based on the expectations and needs of the tourist, and the tourism infrastructure ensures that those needs are met.
The application of marketing policy expands the perception of the destination as a mere spatial unit with a competitively relevant image of the destination.
4. Destination as a managed object. According to the definition of the World Tourism Organization, destination management is the systematic management of all elements that make up a destination (infrastructure, accessibility, promotion, pricing, etc.) [3].
5. Social feature. The social side shows that the destination is only a place intended for tourist interest, but an area where people live and work.
 It is a complex of activities of social, economic, cultural relations, which can also exist outside the framework of tourism activities.
  It is necessary to comprehensively approach the issue of turning the area into a destination place. to take into account the prejudices not only of the tourist, but also of the local population related to that area.
Stable tourist destinations. In the 1980s, the concept of sustainable development was put forward to develop a strategy for the modern problems of society and their solutions, according to which sustainable development is a development that meets the needs of modern generations without compromising the needs of future generations while maintaining the principle of environmental equality [8]
Based on the ideology of stability, tourism is considered to be sustainable, which fully takes into account the current economic and social, environmental and environmental impacts of its activities, satisfying the needs of visitors, sectors of the economy and host communities.
 Moreover, the tourist destination can be stable if the anthropogenic facilities and infrastructure in it, the service enterprises aimed at satisfying the needs of tourists operate on the principle of sustainable business.
  That is, the stability factor of the tourist destination determines the sustainable management policy implemented in the destination.
In order to better understand the essence and features of sustainable destination management, it is necessary to consider several models of tourist destination management, analyze the relationship between those models of management and sustainable management, find out to what extent each of these models complies with the principles of sustainability. The primary elements and methods of business.
Figure 1. Model of top-down destination management [10] Top-down approach (Figure 1) Tourism strategy is typically developed at the highest national level (mainly by the Ministry of Tourism) (eg Australia, Italy) for the whole country և individual regions ( mainly defined by tourism strategy).
 As a result, this strategy is strengthened at the appropriate levels and then implemented.
 In other words, the region oversees relevant tourism development և plans (preferably at the national level), sets priorities for their implementation, and creates decision-making guidelines for small regions.
These criteria and strategies are then adopted at the relevant political levels to the extent permitted by local conditions.
 Market-oriented goods և The responsibility for developing service packages (for example, all-inclusive travel) falls on local service companies և cooperating parties.
However, it is possible that some regions will be in an unfavorable position, as funding may not be enough for all regions, միայն it is possible that only those regions that are interesting or have a convenient location in terms of tourism will receive support.
Figure 2. Top-down model of destination management [10] In the top-down model (Figure 2), strategic decisions are made at lower levels.
 This approach is generally used when the smallest political units have a high degree of autonomy, which means that they can make independent decisions based on the interests of their municipalities / marzpetarans / residents.
  As a rule, in case of this approach, there is no general strategy for the country.
 As a result, this often leads to individual municipalities / marzpetarans developing similar approaches, taking into account further tourism activities to be carried out in the area under their jurisdiction.
Based on the example of the above two models of tourist destinations, we can identify the features of sustainable management.
However, it is necessary to first answer the following questions: 2. Why?
 Why are we worried about the economic and social situation?
 What do we want to stabilize?
There are համար for environmental issues.
3. How?
 How can we ensure sustainable development?
 What basic approaches can help us?
What needs to be stabilized - the management of tourist destinations?
By stabilizing the management of tourist destinations at the local and global levels, we contribute to economic progress, the solution of social problems and the advancement of environmental processes.
Why do we want to stabilize?
  Because the intergenerational և intragenerational spatial equality has been violated.
 Sustainable management of tourist destinations is a way to overcome the challenges of social equality and justice.
 As a tool to ensure the efficient use of environmental resources, which are a key element in the development of tourism, supporting key ecological processes, helping to preserve natural heritage and biodiversity.
How.
  Based on a systemic approach.
  The most accepted of the systemic principles are diversity, participation, partnership, subordination.
In the case of a top-down approach, the government develops a tourism development strategy and manages tourist destinations.
 That is, the "sustainable governance participation ապահով ensuring diversity" component is subordinated.
 In communities, the role of decision-makers aware of both social, economic and environmental issues in the governing process is declining, which contradicts the principles of sustainable governance.
 In the case of sustainable management, the heads of local authorities, representatives of the tourism, social and health departments of the marzpetarans և the local population should be involved in the discussion of programs and service proposals proposed by the destination system, while maintaining the local vital priorities.
Weaknesses are different when approached from the inside.
  Despite ensuring diversity, participation կառավարման partnership components in the process of tourism destination management, marketing strategic steps անհրաժեշտ mass investments անհրաժեշտ are needed in terms of publicity դ to increase the role of destinations ային mass investments, which in this case are made at the local level.
In conclusion, we can say that a tourist destination is a physical area that a tourist chooses to visit, where he spends time to get impressions, using the services of the tourism infrastructure network.
 It has physical-administrative boundaries that allow it to become a manageable object.
 Examining the models of tourism destination management, it becomes clear that each model has its strengths and weaknesses in terms of making the destination more economically profitable and considering sustainable management as a strategic step in solving social / environmental problems.
 Given the characteristics and specifics of tourist destinations, both state governing bodies and local self-government bodies and organizations should implement sustainable governance mechanisms in order to create a sustainable image in the tourist destination, to develop a mechanism to maintain the spread of image value. subjecting to positive globalization.
LITERATURE [2] Cooper C., Tourism.
 Principles and Practices, Harlow, Pearsen, 2005, p. 278. [4] Ritchie B., The Competitive Destination.
  a Sustainable Tourism Perpective, Cambridge.
 CAB International, 2003, p. 291. [7] Framke W., The Destination as a Concept.
 A Discussion of the Business - Related [8] Boyd Stephen W. and Butler Richard W., 'Managing Ecotourism.
 an Opportunity [9] URL.
 http:
//www.e-unwto.org/home/main.mpx. (date of address.
 06.11.2017). [10] Scherhag K., Events - Wachstumsmarkt im Tourismus, Dresden.
 FIT, pp. 83-100. GHorgyan Shamam SUSTAINABLE MODELS OF MANAGEMENT OF TOURIST DESTINATIONS Keywords: stability, sustainable development, tourist destination, management.
