FEATURES OF THE CLASSIFICATION OF AN EFFECTIVE BUSINESSMAN In all spheres of human activity a great role is attributed to his communication ability, interests, needs, which accompany a person during his conscious life.
  Research concludes that awareness of regularity, unique communication, provides great opportunities for interpersonal communication.
  It turns out that as a result of normal, successful communication, such relationships are formed as: neuropsychological stability, compassion, reflection, humanity.
 It follows that the chosen profession puts its stamp on a person's communication skills, is a stimulus for the study of people with certain orientations (including pedagogical, law enforcement officers, medical care workers, as well as social workers).
 And in recent years, as a result of research, the discovery of personal characteristics typical of a businessman has emerged.
  At the same time, the research did not allow to form a complete opinion on the psychological development of the businessman, communication skills, which are touched upon in this article.
We think that the communication features of a businessman's complex psychological formation ընդհանուր have common features.
The communication feature of a business person can have different classifications1. • Knowledge of communication tools, knowledge of communication rules ների principles, communication skills և communication skills; • Ability և communication skills; • Ability և Ability to counteract the other, 1 Borodina G. В., Психология делового общения.
 Learning ability. M.
 INFRA-M, 1998, 224 p. • Establishing the right relationships with people, arousing their interest in oneself, informing the interlocutor about plans և actions, seeing oneself through the eyes of others, developing the ability to listen, adapt to situations, the ability to feel right, accepting one's own և others' communication Ability: • Communication skills, outside of humanism, programming և organizational skills, correct communication, timely detection, effective communication skills, obstacle prevention, communication skills, tolerance.
From the above comes the role of the entrepreneur in the structure: - communication preparation skills, willingness, communication organization (programming) skills, ability to maintain relationships with people - knowledge of the rules, substantive approach to communication, communication forecasting skills, communication training, training preparation. Communication organization (programming) skills, ability to maintain relations with people, knowledge of communication rules և knowledge of the order, substantive approach to communication, communication step prediction skills, - skill of the process underlying communication. Ability to communicate with people, the ability to arouse people's interest in themselves.
Ability to express oneself in the communication process, ability to assess the situation of communication, contradictions ությունները ability to prevent negative events, prevention of disappointment և tolerance, communication flexibility ում self-control in communication, as well as professional problem solving skills, ability to influence others, self-interest, self-interest ability.
Communication classification through improving the quality of communication, improving the willingness to communicate, knowledge of the principles of communication և the principle of communication, the ability to recognize people, the ability to communicate with the other person, the ability to adapt to the situation, contradictions կանխ Problem-solving skills - the ability to influence others, the ability to defend one's interests, the ability to communicate one's thoughts and actions to the other person.
  Other important factors are the communication procedure, organizational (programming) ability, correcting the next steps of communication, identifying the obstacle to the success of the ability to prevent in time, the ability to prevent negative phenomena, conflicts, flexibility, the ability to influence people.
  Another possible classification of communication is the process of communication that takes place, including the willingness to communicate, the knowledge of the rules of communication, the ability to recognize people, the flexibility of communication, the frustration, the tolerance2.
The communication features of a business person come in three main directions.
The communication of businessmen in different fields shows that they have a complex of communication. Its main feature is its ability to make timely decisions in favor of the efficiency of its own business.
  It is facilitated by the process of communication regulation, as well as the stability of achieving his status, leaving a certain impact on the interlocutor 3; 4. The peculiarities of the development of business communication have a great impact on the development of his professional communication, which differs in business development: trade, services, industrial. etc.
- In the field of business and communication in the industrial sphere, the balanced development with the subordinates prevails, the regulation, which play a great role in the management.
- Service providing communication with customers, subordinate employees, business employees. It is very important to understand և accept the customer ցանկ և understanding, in 2 Завялова Е. K., Posohova S. T., Psychology of pre-employment.
 Learning. Пособие. Слб., Узд the power of self-government, the creative component, ումը communication in non-traditional conditions.
Thus, the communication characteristics of a successful entrepreneur change depending on the type of business they are engaged in.
- A businessman engaged in production reveals a variety of intellect, masters politics, science, living conditions.
 They are quite insecure, they try to analyze everything with respect to the authorities, in their opinion, they are skeptical, they are patient with the opinions and inaccuracies.
  They accept the opinions and suggestions of others calmly, change their opinion very easily, act freely, prefer their participation in everything, make independent decisions, are purposeful, bear responsibility, ready to sacrifice all comforts just to maintain their independence. They are likely to have a tough temper, but they are not always fully convinced of their attractiveness.
Able to information և show caution.
 In certain social classes they have self-established behavior, in some cases they show emotional expressions, there are manifestations of self-expression.
- The businessman in the field of trade may not trust in communication, be suspicious, be careful with the environment, expressing skepticism.
  He rarely falls under the influence of others, shows dominance, shows character fluctuations, adapts to the moment, is approachable.
 Entrepreneurs providing different services are characterized by a high degree of neuropsychology (high-level neuropsychological stability և behavior management, high adequate self-esteem և understanding of real activity), balanced emotions, calm, self-confident, serious plans և deeds realistic, fully aware of their demands.
 They are stable from a randomly changing mood, they treat everything thoughtfully.
 They are literate in communication, polite, careful, and patient enough.
  They can manage themselves quite well, adapting to situations.
  Entrepreneurial activities are carried out with a refined design, flexible behavior, rather changeable views, cunning, can be attracted by gestures, rich experience in deception in communication.
 They are soft, high-class, polite, follow their word-customs, are brave, full of energy, active, strive to live by their beliefs and rules4.
  They can aggressively assert their rights to independence, demanding independence from others.
 They are communicative, they are able to establish simple and sincere relations with the environment.
 They build mutual cooperation with the environment, orient themselves quickly when communicating with a partner, without confusing a person's self-discovery with self-presentation, preferring personal forms of interaction.
  The discovery of the properties of entrepreneurial communication takes place through the psychological features, which are related to the given field of activity, on a professional level.
For business psychologists, the following tips have been developed: • For entrepreneurs working in the manufacturing sector, the emphasis should be on the entrepreneur's self-confidence, communication flexibility, ability to trust people around him, and their non-verbal expressions.
• For entrepreneurs working in the commercial sector, great attention should be paid to gaining trust in the environment, reducing personal anxiety, and effective problem solving in conflict situations.
For service entrepreneurs, first of all, respect for the norms of interpersonal relations և high tolerance towards the environment.
Hasmik Manasyan CLASSIFICATION FEATURES OF EFFICIENT BUSINESS COMMUNICATION Keywords: communication, capabilities, interpersonal, business, personal characteristics, organizational contradictions, externalization, psychological, commercial, industrial.
