THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN PUBLIC-POLITICAL LIFE It is impossible to imagine a modern information society without advanced communication technologies, which determine the progress of public relations.
  In almost the entire sphere of the civilizational development of the society, the word has served as a means of regulating the behavior of individuals and the general public.
  In this sense, the separation of a possible factor in the organization of the "rhetorical art of debate as a political life" process in the ancient Greek-Roman reality is not accidental.
  The enormous potential of language and information technologies in shaping public opinion, regulating human behavior, and carrying out other functions has not escaped the attention of actors and theorists of socio-political processes.
 In the context of what has been said, it can be considered accidental that one of the figures standing at the roots of the religious reform movement, M. Luther, with the German translation of the Holy Scriptures, made a "mission" of the epoch-making significance with his active contribution to its publicity, as he stimulated the church in the European reality to intensify the struggle against political aspirations and political ambitions.
  And one of the prominent representatives of the French Enlightenment movement, Sh.L. Montesquieu once said in this regard that there is a force known since Machiavelli. It is the press, banned for a long time, but gradually gaining strength as a "fourth power".
 Due to that, modern nations have a movement of ideas.
 According to Montesquieu, the functions of the press correspond to the functions of the police.
 It expresses the opinions of the citizens, reports the complaints, exposes the exploitations, the illegalities, forces those who have taken power to back down on morality1.
It should be noted that the assessments on the role of information technologies in the social and political life have been legally changed due to their development.
  Moreover, these changes did not call into question the role of information technologies in social and political processes, but documented the dynamics of the latter's influence in those processes.
  The views of the media on the direction and regulation of human behavior, the formation of public opinion are diverse.
  The fact that this influence has been universally accepted is not in dispute, while when it comes to the nature or quality of the influence, there are some differences.
2 Ջ. Bryant և S. Thompson, in his book The Basics of Media Influence, sought to classify these approaches, distinguishing between proponents and researchers of the idea of ​​limited, moderate media influence.
  It should be noted that this division is a bit unclear, as the criteria on the basis of which it is clear that the moderate effect is not clear, for example, why the strong influence is not limited at the same time, how does it differ from the unlimited moderate?
 In making this division, the authors first of all mean the general picture and the orientation of the research results on the problem of mass media discussed in different periods of the 20th century.
2 See Bryant J., Thompson S., "The Basics of SMI Driving", Moscow, 2004, p. 52.3 See ibid., Pp. 53-60. The shift in perceptions of the role of the media in studies over the years is somewhat understandable.
 The latter must first be explained by the factor of media access և prevalence.
 That is, by the fact of the size of the relevant audience, the possibility of direct influence on it.
The concept of "mass media" is often referred to as the "fourth power" both in everyday colloquial language and in various publications.
  Since the era of scientific revolutions, the emergence of a new "structure" of power alongside the judiciary, the legislature and the executive was not accidental.
  However, this notion does not represent the content of the growing influential role of the media in the international, domestic and socio-political events of the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
The question of the political role or significance of the media has caused serious controversy at the level of theoretical discussions, as some researchers accept the essential role of the media in shaping socio-political opinion, while others do not.
 Thus, for example, E. Dennis writes: "The media shapes our thinking, influences our opinions and positions, pushes the expression of some forms of behavior. for example, to vote for a specific candidate ”1.
  It should be noted that the co-author of this work opposes E. Dennis on the operational description of the media.
  "It is possible," he writes, "that the media can focus our attention on certain subjects, but this is not the power that forces them to act."
The "inhospitable" attitude towards the term "Chorrord Ishkhanutyun" is first of all conditioned by the fact that it has no legitimacy, it is not an "equal" member of the three branches of government.
 And if it is not so, then it acts not as a "power", but as an instrument of power, which makes the use of the corresponding term scientifically inadmissible.
 Of course, the media, compared to the executive, judicial and legislative branches of government, does not have the appropriate level of legitimacy, officially has no such recognition, lacks state coercion; to prove the validity of the approaches which either refuse to use the term "fourth power" or consider it applicable only in a figurative sense.
  This should be explained by the fact that the disagreements on this issue are mainly conditioned by different understandings of the concept of power.
 "The essence of power," writes E. Prokhorov - is the ability to directly or indirectly subjugate people to solve problems.
 From this it becomes clear that such (subjugating people, indirectly or directly influencing them) government functions can be performed not only by state structures and institutions, which are authorized to act as powers, but also by formal and informal subjects of politics, various organizations. etc.
Even if we accept that the term "fourth power" is applicable only figuratively, it will not change anything essential in the media's potential to exercise power functions, as linguistic "covers" can not limit the objective processes that accompany modern reality. under the influence of the information factor.
  "Mass media," writes A. The Kowlers, by becoming the fourth power, aspire to be the first և, most likely, will achieve their goal ”4.
Today, the media is one of the most important institutions of modern society in the world, without which it is difficult to imagine the progress and development of society.
 The potential of the media to shape and direct public opinion has not only a positive but also a negative significance, as it is able to make the democratic "masquerade" a participant in the democratic forces' headlines, to promote the process of forming a one-dimensional person, etc.
  Therefore, it is not accidental that the concerns are related to the possible neglect of the moral component in the activities of Information Technologies, to the activities of journalists who circumvent the rules of good faith and professional ethics. 2 Ibid., P. 155.
with.
 These concerns have found expression not only in the field of research, but also in various institutions and institutions.
The enormous impact of information technology on political consciousness and behavior has given rise to two main views, one of which is the positive impact of the media on politics and society as positive and the other as negative.
  These positions are an expression of unnecessary extremes, because they "ignore" others, focusing on the role played by the media in public and political life.
  The fact that the public opinion manipulated by the media can be directed to the implementation of anti-state, anti-national, inhuman actions is, of course, evidence of the destructive potential of the media.
  However, the same mass media are able to perform the exact opposite function, which speaks of the fact that they themselves have neither a positive nor a negative "mission".
 The greatest danger to citizens and democracies is the use of the media for political manipulation.
  It is a closed government of political consciousness based on lies and lies.
  In the modern world, the "institution" of political manipulation, unfortunately, is widely used not only in totalitarian and authoritarian states, where it acts as a powerful method of mass media, but also in modern democracies, especially during party campaigns and election campaigns.
  In today's Western countries, no presidential or parliamentary election campaign can take place without special manipulations and advertisements, which, intertwined, create a perception of politics in the electorate, which is far from reality.
The media, like all large institutions, is managed and controlled by some people or special bodies.
 In most countries of the world, there are special organizations to manage and control the work of the media, which follow the norms of morality and law.
 Thus, in France, such an institution is considered the Supreme Communication Council, which oversees և manages not only state but also private TV հեռուստ radio stations ․ It gives state permission to go on the air.
  In the UK, the direction of radio and television is determined by the government and parliament.
  Newspapers, radio and television include in ordinary relations "ordinary citizens", "politicians", "those who are not professionally engaged in politics, but have a great influence on political processes."
 In this sense, it can be confirmed that the media is an organic part of political communication.
The role and significance of a free press are very great in democracies. This circumstance protects both the people and the government elected by them.
  The guarantee of the "health" of democracy is the permanent people-government connection, the mission of which is carried out by the media.
  In the absence of the media, democracy is doomed to "death."
 And if the media are not free, then democracy can not avoid a serious "disease".
  That is why the freedom of the press, which is enshrined in a number of international instruments, is so important all over the world.
  Moreover, in today's reality, the media aspirations for power are in line with the logic of democratic developments.
  If in totalitarian regimes the power of the media is a continuation of the power of the ruling regime, then in a democracy the power of the media should be a continuation of the logic of strengthening and developing democracy, in the context of which the authorities become "vulnerable" groups.
Argina Davtyan THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN PUBLIC-POLITICAL LIFE Keywords: information technologies, mass media, fourth power, democracy, public opinion, manipulation.
