MEDICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF THE SANATORIUM COMPLEXES OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA There are very few medical-geographical studies in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
  In this sphere are used A. Hayriyan, E. Tumanyan, R. Mkrtchyan, A. The works of Valesyan և others [3,5].
 Medical-geographical zoning of the territory of the country has been done [4], but the medical-geographical zoning factors of those regions or their features are not separated.
  Separated 5 medical-geographical regions: Central, Shirak, North-Eastern, Shan and Syunik (see map 1).
There is also a developed medical-climatic zoning scheme (R. Mkrtchyan, J. Stepanyan), according to which 2 zones are separated: 1. North-Eastern relatively weak land և 2. Internal severe land without forest.
 They cross the border through the watershed of the Kur-Araks river basins.
 Exceptions are the forested areas of Goris and Kapan, which are located in the northeastern region, and the Spitak region in the inner region.
The aim of our research is to analyze the medical-geographical conditions of RA sanatoriums.
Based on the purpose of the work, we have singled out the following research issues: • Introduce the medical-geographical conditions of sanatoriums, separating upstream zones, • Analyze the health potential of each zone, • Discuss the existing potential of sanatoriums in terms of impact on the human body. resort complexes.
We have separated two upward zones of the resort complexes, the lower zone I, up to 1500 m. Many diseases of Dilijan, Arzni, Lori are treated for tuberculosis, disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, chronic gastritis, duodenum, esophagus, spinal cord, musculoskeletal system, female genital organs, cardiovascular and endocrine systems.
II high zone, above 1500. Hankavan, Bjni-Aghveran, Marmarik, Tsakhkadzor, Aragatsotn, Sjan, Stepanavan-Gyulagarak, Jermuk are treated for chronic hepatitis, chronic gallbladder inflammation, proctological-urological muscular system, gynecological disorders, metabolism.
Let's analyze the medical-geographical conditions of the resort complexes of these zones.
Map 1. Medical-geographical region of Armenia [4] Dilijan resort complex ․ Dilijan is located at an absolute height of 1250-1510 m, is distinguished by its pastures, moreover, there are many rainy days both in summer and winter, due to which the recreation period can operate all year round.
 The climate of the area is temperate mountainous, with cold snowy winters and hot, relatively humid summers.
 Summer is hot, the average temperature in August is 18 ° C, winter is cold, the average temperature in January is -2 ° C.
 The annual precipitation is 550-600 mm, the lightning intensity is 2011 h, the average humidity is 73%, the minimum is observed in February 63%, and the maximum color is 80% in September.
  The area is assessed as humid.
  The average annual wind speed is 2 m / s.
Winters are moderately cold, relatively windless, there are no very cold weather, but they are changeable.
 Due to this variable nature, there are restrictions on climatotherapy except for January-February for about 23-27 days, the rest of the period due to wind and snow is recommended to refrain from medical activities.
During the summer season, climatotherapy is carried out in May-September.
  Air and sun baths provide comfortable conditions in June-August, but at the same time, at certain times of the day, there is a limit to the amount of light due to strong radiation.
In addition to the wide climatic possibilities, Dilijan is distinguished by its healing mineral waters.
  There are 2 dozen mineral springs in the area of ​​Dilijan, which have iron-hydrocarbonate-chloride-sodium-calcium composition.
Dilijan's remedies are clean forest air, warm climate, carbonated iron, silicon, hydrocarbonite and mineral waters.
  Patients suffering from tuberculosis are successfully treated in Dilijan.
  Due to the high content of iron in silicates, it is successfully used for the treatment of chronic gastritis.
  "Dilijan" և "Dilijan Florova" mineral waters are equivalent in their health properties to the mineral waters of French "Vish" and Georgian "Borjomi".
 Dilijan is usually compared to the famous Swiss resort of Davos and Georgian Abastuman.
Dilijan, in addition to being a health resort, is also a socio-economic object [4].
Lori recreation area.
The area is located at an altitude of 1300-1500 m, in the subtropical zone և has typical mountain-forest climate features: moderately hot, relatively humid summer, moderately mild winter.
  Sun days are 2000-3000 hours a year.
  The average annual temperature is 6.6-7.4 ° C, the average annual humidity is 30%, the average annual wind speed is 1.9-2.9 m / s.
Winter is sunny, the temperature is positive during the day, and at night it drops below zero.
Spring is cool, especially in the first half, most of them are rainy and cloudy, the spring regime is changeable, 10-12 days a month.
It is wet and hot in summer.
 Most of them are cloudy and rainy.
 Grassy, ​​moderately humid conditions prevail.
Autumn is moderately warm, with predominantly rainy days, cloudy and rainy conditions increase.
  The second half of autumn is moderately cold.
In winter there are some restrictions on climatotherapy.
  18-20 days a month, winter treatments can be prescribed: walks, games, sports events in the fresh air.
  The air temperature is low in April, so it must be done carefully.
The summer climatic season lasts 5 months, from the end of May to October, but it can be appointed in the second half of April, in June comfort conditions are observed for 8-10 days.
 Its frequency increases in July-August, 10-13 days.
  The duration of sunbathing is great in summer (5, p. 129).
  There are mineral springs and mud in this zone.
Arzni cafeteria complex.
  Balneoclimatic cardiology resort is located at an altitude of 1250-1300 m above sea level.
The climate in Arzni is continental. mild (average temperature in January -5 ° C), summer is pleasantly cool (average temperature in July +22 ° C), autumn is warm and long.
  The duration of Ar-glare is 2236 hours per year.
  The humidity and wind speed are average, and the atmospheric pressure is stable, without sharp fluctuations - 657 mm.
 Winter begins in the first ten days of December, it is moderately cold with no wind.
Winter climate treatment in Arzni sanatorium is very effective for the organism.
  There are no restrictions for all types of climatotherapy in January-February.
The duration of summer climatotherapy is from mid-May to October.
  There are comfortable conditions for air և air baths.
In terms of the number of clear days, "Arzni" surpasses all the resorts of the Caucasus, as it has an advantage over the seaside resorts.
 Through research, it became known that Arzni is suitable for the treatment of hypertensive diseases in all seasons (5, p. 125).
Summer is more favorable for cardiovascular patients with stable compensation, autumn is more favorable for patients with unstable cardiovascular activity, and winter is more favorable for patients who do not have cardiac dysfunction (5, p. 125).
In addition to the climatic possibilities, the sanatorium is distinguished by its mineral waters.
  The main healing factors of the resort are carbonic acid, sodium chloride carbonate, sodium magnesium mineral water.
Methods of treatment: mineral water baths, hydrotherapy և physiotherapy, therapeutic gymnastics, step therapy (5, p. 125).
From the medical-geographical analysis of the resort complexes of Zone I, it became clear that due to the relatively low absolute heights, the climatic conditions here are mild, there are good conditions for air, sun baths, outdoor walking, in some places the treatment process is year-round.
Stepanavan-Gyulagarak resort health resort.
Stepanavan-Gyulagarak mountain-climatic, mineral-sanatorium health resort zone is located at an altitude of 1400-2000 m in the mountain-forest zone of the sub-retrograde zone և has moderately cold, characteristic forest climate features.
  Rich vegetation, forest mass, fresh air, abundance of solar radiation, moderate humidity create effective conditions for the treatment of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis.
 The duration of Ar-glare is 2100 hours, the maximum is observed in August-September.
The average annual temperature is 6.6-6.8 ° C, the average annual relative humidity is 73%.
 The winter is moderately cold.
In winter, climatotherapy is prescribed in special conditions: 25 days a month you can go for walks and aortic games.
In summer there are maximum comfortable conditions for climatotherapy.
  Air baths can be held for about 5 months, from the tenth day of May to October.
  Other types of climatotherapy can be started from the second ten days of May (5, p. 129).
Hankavan-Marmarik resort resort area.
  Balneoclimatic health resort is located at an altitude of 1750-1960 m above sea level.
 The climate is mild, summer is moderately warm (average temperature in July-August is 16-18 ° C), winter is moderately cold (average temperature in January is -7 ° C).
Due to the landscape-climatic features, the region is divided into two distinct balneo-climates. Lower, relatively dry part, և higher mountain-sports resorts.
 Hankavan sanatorium has different climatic lines.
  Ar-glare is 2300 hours per year, the humidity of the sub-region is 76%, the minimum is observed in October 73%, the maximum in November-January 80%, the average wind speed is 1.5 m / s.
Climatotherapy has a special significance in winter, both preventive and curative.
 In light cold weather without windy weather, a therapeutic walk is recommended.
 20-22 days a month suitable for winter climatotherapy.
In summer there are favorable conditions for climatotherapy in the air.
  The importance of the sanatorium increases even more with mineral water.
  The chemical composition of the waters of the Hankavan springs is similar to that of the Essentuki waters (5, p. 125).
Tsakhkadzor resort area.
  The city is located at an altitude of 1700-1900 m above sea level. It is surrounded by forests and hills.
  The climate is mild, the average air temperature in August is +18 ºC, and in January - 6ºC, the average annual precipitation is 600-700 mm, the hourly hours are 2500.
 Humidity in winter is 45-53%, and in summer - 35-43%, the average annual wind speed is 1.4 m / s.
Mountain-climatic health resort Tsakhkadzor has an alpine-forest climate, moderately hot, relatively humid summer և moderately cold winter.
In summer, the climatic treatment season lasts from May 25 to September.
  In June, comfortable conditions for air therapy are observed for 8-10 days, and the conditions for sun therapy are favorable for more than 20-25 days, in July-September sun baths can be appointed.
In addition to climatic health conditions, mineral waters and forests are used (5, p. 133).
Bjni-Arzakan-Aghveran resort area.
  The zone is located at an altitude of 1500-1700 m, in the mountain-steppe, mountain-forest zone.
  The main healing factors of this balneoclimatic zone are the mild, favorable climate, rich forest cover, numerous mineral springs.
The climate is moderately warm, sometimes moderately hot, with moderately cold winters and hot, relatively humid summers.
 From the climatic point of view, the lightning intensity is 2310 hours, the average annual temperature is 7-0 ° C, the annual annual temperature is 22 ° C, the relative humidity is 67%.
  The average annual wind speed is 3 m / s, in contrast to the wind of other regions, it is strong here.
 Despite the rather high altitude, the winter is grassy, ​​it is due to the proximity of the forest area.
In this zone are the villages of Arzakan և Karashamb, which have the structure of coal chloride-hydrocarbonite-sodium-calcium of mineral waters.
  Cellular mineral water with its physicochemical composition is classified as carbonic acid, weakly acidic, chloride-hydrocarbonate-sodium-calcium water group, mineralized 4.2 g / dm3.
Medical research has proven the effectiveness of the internal use of this water in the treatment of chronic hepatitis, chronic inflammation of the gallbladder.
 The high content of hydrocarbons contributes to the normalization of gastric secretion-acidification functions և is prescribed for chronic gastritis, duodenal diseases (5, p. 128).
Jermuk cafeteria complex.
  The city is located at an altitude of 1980-2080 m above sea level.
  The climate here is mountainous, with summers and long, snowy winters.
  The duration of Ar-Shine is 2409 hours per year.
  The average daily air temperature is + 0.4 ° C in spring, + 15.3 ° C in summer, + 4.9 ° C in autumn, -9 ° C in winter.
  The average annual temperature is 4.1 ° C.
  The sanatorium is distinguished by the abundance of precipitation - 802 mm, relative humidity of 68%, which is considered the best for the organism.
 The average wind speed is 2 m / s, in summer 3-3.5 m / s.
Summer weather conditions directly contribute to the healing of the organism.
The main resort resource of Jermuk is the mineral water of the same name.
 It normalizes the production of gastric juice, reduces inflammatory phenomena in the digestive system, due to the large amount of carbon dioxide and sulfates has anti-ulcer value.
The waters of Jermuk are chemically similar to the mineral waters of Zheleznovodsk and Karlovy Vary.
  The spa treatment complex includes hot mineral waters for internal and external use, therapeutic food, step therapy, climatic և physiotherapeutic measures, drug treatment և spa regimen.
Comprehensive studies have confirmed that the balneoclimatic factors of Jermuk Highland Resort have a beneficial effect on the compensatory-adaptation mechanisms of first- and second-degree hypertensive patients and ischemic heart patients.
High-altitude health resorts also have effective therapeutic conditions due to the climate, clean air and mineral water.
  One of the advantages of this zone is the wide opportunities for winter sports.
The results of the research can be presented through the following conclusions: • Clean mountain air, climate, forest vegetation, mineral waters, mud have health and healing significance in Armenian health resorts.
• There are opportunities to treat various diseases in health resorts.
• The sanatoriums of the Republic of Armenia have a great potential, համար for their preservation և sustainable development, rational use is needed.
• Transition from one-function sanatoriums to multifunctional sanatoriums, providing the sphere of entertainment (various cultural, sports programs).
• Development of new approaches to the diet used in health resorts, including the health opportunities of the Armenian national cuisine.
List of literature 1. Popular medical encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2001.
2. Mkrtchyan R., "Medical-climatic zones of Armenia" Sci. Collection of works, E., 1999, p. 199 pages.
3. Valesyan A., "Medical-geographical assessment of the ecological condition of Gyumri" E., 2004, p. 64.
Maria Tangamyan MEDICAL-GEOGRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF THE SANATORIUM COMPLEXES OF RA Keywords: Resort complex, medical-geographical circle, comfort-disconnect conditions, healing factor, mineral waters, natural balm, balneocl.
Summary.
