THE HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF ARARATIC LANDSCAPES AND THEIR MODERN ANTHROPOGENIC TRANSFORMATION According to Berg, "It is possible to understand this landscape only when it was known, how it came to be, how it came to be."
It is obvious that the modern landscapes in the territory of the Republic of Armenia have been formed for a long time, the history of their transformation is inseparable from the history of the development of human society.
  This process can be seen everywhere, or it is developing at a non-constant speed.
  Using the vastly published historical, geographical, and literary sources on the anthropogenic evolution of landscapes, we can shed light on the various natural, social, and other mechanisms of their formation.
 The subject of study is the Ararat Valley, which since ancient times has always been the scene of foreign invaders, various historical events, the change of climatic factors, human economic activity, have left their mark on the landscapes currently prevalent in the region.
The Ararat Valley is the cradle of the Armenian statehood, the political, socio-economic, social-cultural center of the country (Figure 1).
It should be noted that due to its physical-geographical-geographical position, it is an exceptional region, where throughout its history its existence has changed dynamically; different civilizations and peoples with their culture and traditions have followed each other [2].
As we know, the main environment of human living, survival and activity is the landscape.
  That is why let us refer to the idea of ​​that anthropogenic factor.
  Any use of space has a certain effect on the environment, it changes the landscape, which can lead to irreversible consequences.
Figure 1. The area under study on the map of the Republic of Armenia. However, it should be noted that if the same landscape is used properly, we can get the desired area with prosperous positive results.
 Therefore, it is necessary to take into account every component of the landscape before making any economic changes.
The historical approach, which is based on the archival, stock and museum information sources of literature, is of crucial importance in the study of the interaction of natural and social systems [1].
Comprehensive study of the activities of natural-social systems is currently impossible without a geo-ecological approach, which allows not only to study ecosystems, but also to assess the problems of environmental protection that arise during their interaction and development, and ways to eliminate them.
As noted by A. Մ. Khazen "չի did not know the history of the earth from protocariot to man այնպիսի a kind of living being that has not changed the habitat."
In the modern era, not only the social impact of all spheres of social life, but also the nature of man (fragmented forests, endangered species of plants and animals, polluted rivers, swampy lakes, intercontinental "regional highways) have sometimes led to" catastrophic ".
  Global climate change is a global catastrophe that threatens mankind.
  All of this is the result of human (often unconscious) activity.
  The perpetual conflict between the pursuit of human energy, the resourcefulness of mankind, and the real capacity of landscapes has brought us to the brink of deep ecological crisis, and sometimes even catastrophe.
If the natural phenomena on the surface of the planet take place in a very sloping manner, then in the case of the interaction of the anthropogenic factor, these processes have a narrow local nature, as a result of which the pressure on specific regions increases 1000 times.
  This is particularly pronounced in the reservoirs of deep megalopolises, where ground bending occurs at speeds of 10 to 300 mm / year.
The transformation of natural landscapes is influenced by "natural" and "human" factors.
  Natural factors are modern trends in global climate change, endogenous factors.
Endogenous factors such as tectonic movements and volcanism play a role in the main factors influencing the change of the basic parameters of the ecosystem.
The anthropogenic factors influencing the transformation of natural landscapes are: technogenesis, unconscious nature use, population migrations, armed conflicts.
About human-nature interaction ազդեց We already know the impact of human economic activity on natural landscapes.
  As we know, human activity in natural landscapes leads to their abrupt change (deforestation, construction).
  Such actions lead to the degradation of natural landscapes, accelerate erosion processes, and reduce the flora and fauna.
The last quarter of the 20th century is characterized by the destructive degradation of natural ecosystems, their visible transformation.
  This process can be seen everywhere, that it is developing at a non-constant speed.
In the mountains this process is slow, in some parts it is even more noticeable.
  On the contrary, it is noticeably faster in the foothills, in the plains, it has irreversible consequences.
Human economic activity can play a role in changing natural ecosystems.
  It is interesting to note that the use of landscape areas և the emergence of certain landscapes is predetermined by natural conditions և resources.
The Ararat Valley is one of the cradles of human origin.
  Archaeologists have found archaeologists in the Ararat Valley near the town of Arzni, in the vicinity of the town of Arzni. Ancient and new Stone Age tools have been found in the bones of anthropogenic glacial animals (Trogon elephant, rhinoceros, wild horse, camel, bull, deer, reindeer).
 The Ararat Valley in the historical period is now one of the leading regions of Armenian culture, with rich historical and modern monuments: the culture of Shengavit (V-IV millennium BC), Teghut agricultural settlement (end of V millennium BC - IV millennium BC), Metsamor Ancient metallurgical center (III-I millennium BC), famous Urartian fortresses: Erebuni (Arin-fortress), Teishebain (Karmir Blur), Urartian canal through Hrazdan tunnel, Etchmiadzin Cathedral, Hripsime's temple, The monument of the heroic battle of Sardarapat was built, many monuments.
  According to the researches of famous archeologists, the historical process took place here continuously (more than 800000 years).
  Throughout history, different tribes and peoples (Armans, Urartians, Armenians) have lived here, of which, after centuries of consolidation, m. թ. a. The Armenian people were formed in the 7th century [12].
Living in a mountainous country with uncomfortable living conditions, severe terrain, arid climates, poor soils and vegetation, it was very difficult for the people of that region to survive.
Engaged in hunting, agriculture, animal husbandry, agriculture, and trade, man began to discover the world around him, to look for ways to influence nature.
The Armenians first began to artificially irrigate and appropriate the desert-semi-desert lands of the Ararat Valley, which is evidenced by the very old irrigation systems of some areas, which were built in թ. a. In the II millennium (Figure 2).
It should be noted that the ancient Armenian capitals, such as Armavir, Dvin, Artashat, and Yerevan, were in the study area.
  The remains of Yervandashat, built by the Yervanduni, as well as the remains of the cities of Dvin and Artashat were found in the eastern part.
 There are also 5,000-year-old relics and monuments belonging to the city of Argishtikhinil in Urartu.
Figure 2. Ancient Repair System Still in the historical works of Armenian thinkers and scientists we can find surprisingly accurate information about the Ararat Valley.
  For example, the writings of Movses Khorenatsi clearly mention the creation of special forests by man in order to alleviate the climate.
 This is evidenced by the forest layers in the area of ​​Artashat, Dvin, Yervandashat cities.
Today, in some parts, the artificial forest created during the reign of King Khosrov in the 4th century has been preserved, which is located in the territory of Khosrov State Reserve.
Later, due to population growth and economic development, the anthropogenic impact on the area intensified, which led to a sharp change in the natural landscape.
During the years of Soviet rule, essential oil and technical crops were given a large place in the economy of the Ararat Valley.
 Geraniums and roses were especially popular.
  The former Hoktemberyan district of Jechmiadzin provided 80% of the USSR geranium production.
Methods of exploring the area և The development of individual landscapes in many cases is due to the ուրսresources, so it is no coincidence that the Ararat Valley has become a historical site in the development of mankind.
It should be noted that the Ararat Valley is distinguished by the natural landscapes and historical structures preserved here (not very much).
  At present, another problem has arisen: to preserve what is left of the natural landscapes.
Here the historical landscapes are rapidly replacing each other.
Landscapes և Anthropogenic Since the change in the landscapes of the Ararat Valley has a very long history (Figure 3), they have been studied since the 20th century.
Figure 3. Change in the organization of the Ararat Valley landscapes over time. Before 1950-60. Most of the Ararat Valley was unusable land, but due to human labor, Lake Ararat was turned into orchards due to human labor, but at the same time, due to unscientific approach to the land, many problems arose: land degradation and erosion.
 The anthropogenesis of natural landscapes intensified greatly in the 1960s due to the expansion of the irrigation network, land improvement, and construction work.
  The technical equipment of the production made it possible to use the water resources of the rivers for irrigation, to ameliorate large areas of saline alkali-swamps.
  The lowland flood-meadow, desert-semi-desert-steppe landscapes of the Ararat valley, foothill volcanic plateaus, have undergone radical changes.
  The artificial increase of groundwater in conditions of intensive evaporation causes the problem of salinization of the whole lands, if we take into account that the Ararat valley has primary salinity, then during the last 15 years the process of artificial use of groundwater by man under artificial non-state control has led to
Land desalination is possible only in the conditions of efficient operation of the drainage network.
  Drainage (Figure 3) is a system of artificial canals through which excess water comes out.
  Within the borders of the Ararat valley, natural landscapes have been preserved only in places where there are habitats of salt marshes and low marsh meadows (30,000 hectares).
  It should be noted that most of these lands are under anthropogenic pressure, as a significant part of the area has been turned into fish ponds (Figure 4) [1].
Figure 3. Drainage system Figure 4. Fishery in the Ararat Valley And 13% of the area is a grassland-grassland meadow landscape type, most of the areas of which have been disqualified due to irregular grazing.
  The area of ​​agricultural farms is 424.6 thousand hectares (Figure 5).
Figure 5. Agriculture in the Ararat Valley In the border areas of the Ararat Valley, especially in the Armavir region, to the north, north-west of fish farms, due to the widespread reduction of groundwater levels at relatively high levels, a shortage of drainage networks has been reported.
As in the past, large volumes of water continue to flow to the Araks through drainage channels.
Landscape changes are due to man-made structures.
  It should be noted that the large-scale development of natural landscapes in the territory of the Ararat Valley became more active after the construction of the Saint-Hrazdan cascade.
  For irrigation purposes, canals have been built from the Akhuryan, Metsamor, Araks, Hrazdan rivers, due to which the main part of the plains has been turned into irrigated landscapes.
  Here, instead of humus-poor, gray semi-desert soils, the type of meadow gray irrigated soils with 2.5-3% humus content was formed.
Land salinization processes in Armenia are mainly spread in the Ararat Valley.
  The reason for soil salinization is the rise of groundwater, the failure of the drainage system, through which that water must be removed, then the groundwater rises and over-moistens the soil, then evaporates, leaving the salt in the soil.
  Every year, the saline land area is expanding due to the uncontrolled exploitation of the groundwater resources of the Ararat Valley, gross violations of irrigation norms, inactivity of the drainage system, and anthropogenic factors.
  The area of ​​saline liquids is 40 thousand areas.
 The irrigated lands of the Ararat Valley are at greater risk, where the groundwater horizon, changing at a depth of 0-3.5 m, has different quantitative and qualitative effects on soil salinization over time (Figure 6) [1].
Figure 6. Saline soils in the Ararat valley. It is interesting that the anthropogenic impact in the study area has a dual nature. On the one hand, there are swamp-meadow, desert and semi-desert landscapes, which, along with artificial irrigation, are still of great importance in agriculture, on the other hand, the natural ecosystem is changing, the ecological balance is being disturbed.
They naturally have a greater impact on the landscape in populated areas.
The Ararat Valley is considered a unique example of man-made changes in nature, when in a mountainous country like Armenia, where the average altitude is 1800 m, more than 80% of the area is occupied by mountains [1].
It should be noted that in the area of ​​the amelioration station, near Jrarat village of Echmiadzin region, 4 haetalon land plots have been separated, which have been preserved in ecosystem condition for more than 100 years and no anthropogenic factor has influenced the development of this area (picture of land plot: pictures 7 և 8).
The 1500 m Ararat plain, in its relatively flat terrain), with its long (up to 2700 hours per year), well-defined subtropical climate, is considered to be a very important area for human activity for the Republic of Armenia [5].
(800 m. Taking into account the fact that the anthropogenic influences in the Ararat Valley will continue for a long time, it is necessary to organize և start anti-erosion և fire-fighting operations, creating forest layers in some parts [1].
Figure 7 ուրSurfFigure 8. Saline և Sodized soils in the Ararat Valley Anthropogenic impact in the Ararat Valley can be divided into 4 types: water change, abrupt change, slow change և almost unchanged.
Anthropogenic impact Anthropogenic levels of change Water change Abrupt changes Slow changes 70% և more Almost unchanged և 20% The anthropogenic transformation of the Ararat Valley is facilitated by the existing metallurgical plants [mining].
LITERATURE [2] Nersesyan S., Natural Territorial Complexes of Araratyan ևEconomic-ecological assessment of their anthropogenic changes, Yerevan, 2012, 167 pages.
[3] Aslanyan A., Ararat concavity, Physical geography of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1971, 318 pages.
[4] Gaginyan R., Anthropogenesis of the natural environment և Landscape-geo-ecological classification in RA, Sustainable social development ևArmenia, Yerevan, 1997, 113 pages.
[5] Balyan S., Avetisyan V., On the issue of rational use of water and land resources of the Ararat depression in connection with climate change, Armenia. Climate change issues, art. people.2th let. Yerevan, 2003, 129 pages.
[6] Mkrtchyan A., Weed flora of the Ararat depression. Vegetation, Yerevan, 2003, 215 pages.
[7] Samvelyan N., An attempt to classify the landscape composition of the Ararat concave, Yerevan, 2001, 322 pages.
[8] URL.
 http:
//www.sgp.am/ (The link was made on 19.11.2018).
[9] URL.
 http:
//www.arlis.am/ (The link was made on 19.11.2018).
[10] URL.
 http:
//www.slideshare.net/mariqechechyan (Link made on 19.11.2018).
[11] URL.
 http:
//www.sgp.am/ (The link was made on 19.11.2018).
[12] URL.
 https:
//hy.wikipedia.org/ (The link was made on 19.11.2018).
Ghazaryan Silvia HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF LANDSCAPES OF THE ARARAT FIELD AND THEIR MODERN ANTHROPOGENIC TRANSFORMATION Keywords: anthropogenic changes, landscape transformation, salt transformation
