THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION'S SYMBOL ON PR STRATEGY In the modern world, it is impossible to imagine an economy, business development, well-developed PR strategy without advertising, otherwise people will simply not be biased in the variety of products.
  In order to have as many customers as possible, companies are ready to take any step, invest large sums in PR policy, change their image, even rebrand, և all this to attract potential customers.
Building the image of any brand starts with choosing the name of the organization, which is a very important and responsible job.
 The chosen name may be unsuccessful, which will have a negative impact on the whole image.
  There is an opinion that the name should be connected with the external image of the organization, but this is not so, as a successful name increases the classification of the organization1.
For many organizations, firms, products rebranding is considered the best way to develop.
  The integral elements of the brand are the logo, the name, the design, the symbols.
 These have a decisive role in the brand.
 All these elements must be thought out in detail, correspond to the purpose of the organization, service.
 The work is considered successful when an individual brand is created, which has no such environment, is able to surprise, attract, make happy.
  Brand-building agencies create the brand, and the further preservation of the brand is considered the business of the organization, where PR has its unique and important role.
2 There is an opinion that it is better to teach public opinion than to influence it.
 However, reasonably designed PR programs can change public opinion in some way.
The aim of this work is to study the connection between the psychological impact և PR strategies of the symbols of effective communication operators operating in Armenia (VivaCell MTS և Beeline).
The hypothesis is that the right combination of colors and words կազմակերպ in the symbols of organizations will increase the effectiveness of PR.
Every day we encounter many identical products, we are physically unable to compare the composition and functions of all of them.
 In this situation, the brand is just a "lifeline", because each product has a label that is clear to ordinary, ordinary people.
 However, experience shows that the brand can not last long in the same place, the problem of rebranding arises over time.
  Radical brand changes are tantamount to building a new brand.
 In the case of deep rebranding, the new brand may be associated with the old one with only one or more attributes, for example, with the name Kamlogot.
 However, such changes are risky.
 The image of the organization, of course, is closely interconnected with the leadership of the organization.
  There are many organizations in the world today, whose leaders' image is not only an important part of the organization's image, but also increases the value of the organization by millions of dollars.
There are archetypes-stereotypes typical of culture in the public consciousness.
  For example, in the field of telecommunications, all mobile operators encounter such archetypes and stereotypes related to mobile communication, such as the danger of mobile communication or the fear that conversations are overheard by special services.
  Of course, it is almost impossible to fight against such archetypes and stereotypes by rational means.
 The same goes for specific archetypes and stereotypes related to a particular organization.
As an example of what has been said, one can cite the stereotypes about "ArmenTel" in our society.
  It is true that after Beeline enters Armenia, it comes under the Beeline brand, but in the public consciousness, Beeline is still associated with ArmenTel, and, of course, the same stereotypes apply about the services provided by the latter.
  It is true that the "Beeline" brand is so influential that it can not but have an impact on an emotional level.
 However, taking into account the peculiarities of our society, we think that it would be more correct for "Beeline" to develop a unique strategy to finally get rid of the negative perceptions related to "ArmenTel" image.
 In this case, the need to work on a subconscious level is already emerging, when the emphasis is not on the rational, but on the emotional.
 Various PR technologies can be used here, including rebranding.
We have used the following methods and techniques to solve our scientific problems.
 We used psychological tests, questionnaire - activity analysis methods. Isard's "Connection of Emotions with Color Recognition" test.
 The aim is to identify the color perception of the subjects և the emotional (emotional) effects arising from them.
 The test consists of a table, which includes 8 colors according to the Luscher table (blue, green, red, yellow, purple, white (we changed the gray suggested by the author to white), s, gray) և 9 emotions according to Isard (interest, joy, surprise, sadness, anger, resentment, conscience, fear, fatigue).
• Questionnaire method developed by us ունակում contains ten questions.
  The proposed questionnaire includes the gender data of the respondents, various questions measuring the psychological impact of the PR strategy of VivaCell-MTS Բ Beeline communication operators (a sample of the questionnaire is presented in Annex 1).
 The aim is to identify the associations that the respondents have with the symbols of the organizations, such as the strength of the PR influence.
• We also conducted a psychological analysis of the activities of VivaCell-MTS և Beeline communication operators, in particular PR strategies, with the aim of revealing the contribution of psychological knowledge in the PR of the latter.
First of all, it should be noted that both companies we have researched are 100% recognizable, which proves that brands as such are successful.
  Let us now turn to the specific analysis and the results obtained from it.
  The analysis of the research is based on public opinion, where we worked with 100 male and female people aged 20-60.
 We conducted both tests with the same people, the comparative analysis of which will be presented as a percentage of the research.
Referring to the "VivaCell MTS" symbol (logo), first of all it is necessary to separate the color features of the latter.
 It is a unique combination of red and white colors.
 As already mentioned in the theoretical part, red is one of the most influential colors, which is very difficult not to notice, to ignore.
  The PR specialists of the organization have worked for a long time on the choice of the symbol, they have reached the result that our society is witnessing today.
 VivaCell-MTS is today the most powerful mobile operator, which is the result of their right work, literate PR strategy.
Without ignoring the choice of color, it should be noted that the developers of the organization have decided to focus on the combination of red with white, which is one of the most influential color combinations, in this case, visually gives a little depth to the symbol, gives a sense of simplicity.
 Emotions caused by red are different for men and women.
 If in women red color causes anger in about 16%, then in men the emotion of anger is lower.
  It is clear that the abuse of this color can cause aggression, especially in women.
  Happiness occurs in women about 18%, and in men - 6%, which proves that in any case red is desirable for both.
  10% of women and 26% of men are interested in red, that is, the mentioned color is able to arouse a strong desire in a person to do this or that.
  4% of women և 6% of men feel dislike for red, which means that few people have a rejection of this brand.
 And here is the fear if in the case of women it is close to 1%, in men it is completely absent (0%).
Emotions towards white are milder by the subjects than in the case of red.
 In this case, the emotions of women and men are almost equal.
  In 18% of women, white causes a feeling of happiness, which is almost equal to the figure of men (20%).
 Curiosity arises in 22% of women 16 16% of men, conscience in 6% of women 10 in 10% of men, surprise in 4% of women 2 2% of men, no white woman is angry causes (0%), and in the case of men 2% have noticeable anger.
 It seems that white has almost no negative emotions, which suggests that the use of this color in PR strategy can lead to a positive result, but it is recommended to use it in combination with a second color to make it a positive, perfectly pure color. It does not make people feel empty.
 The use of color is also used in the selection of employees' clothes, where white predominates.
Referring to the color features of the "Beeline" symbol, it should be noted that in this case the color combination of blue-yellow stripes works, where this is a more classic example, and yellow is a requirement for confirmation, and yellow on the image brightens the image and draws attention to it. captivating.
Emotions arising from yellow differ between men and women.
 It causes joy in 16% of women 20 20% of men, which proves that it is a positive color.
 It causes anger in 12% of women 8 8% of men, so it should not be abused.
  In case of surprise, the data differ significantly from each other, because if only 6% of women report it, then for men it is 18%.
  It is obvious that this color has the ability to arouse people's interest.
  6% of women and 4% of men are tired of yellow. Here, too, the data are almost equal.
 But in case of dislike, men abstain (0%), in contrast to 4% of women.
  The results of the research show that the yellow color has the feature of attracting attention quickly.
  The use of this color can be considered successful, but without abuse.
  The preference for yellow testifies to the long-awaited hope of great happiness, the pursuit of something new but not yet formed.
 Rejection of yellow means disappointment, a sense of unfulfilled hopes, an attempt to protect oneself from further losses and disappointments.
The next shade, which is used in the symbol of "Beeline", is this, the results of which are very contradictory for men and women.
Thus, if it causes fear in 22% of women, then only 10% of men respond to the same emotion.
  The explanation for this can be considered that the female sex is more emotional than the male.
 This color causes sadness in 14% of women և 4% of men, which we consider a contradictory indicator. Here, too, the reason can be defined as the sensitivity of women.
  If only 3% of women get it, then 9% of men get it, which can be said to be effective in developing a PR strategy.
  S tires 6% of women և 10% of men, and 2% of women հակ dislike any man (0%).
Thus, based on the results of the research, we can say that the unique combination of colors can give an exemplary result, as it has a strong effect on any color, emphasizing and strengthening the properties of that color, a vivid example of which is "Beeline".
 The clothes of the staff of the organization are "selected" in yellow-blue color combination, which also works in the case of "VivaCell MTS" in accordance with the colors of the symbol.
The questionnaire developed by us also included a question about the associations with the symbol of the organization.
  In the case of VivaCell-MTS, it causes different associations with men and women, but is mainly associated with eggs, victory, charity or warmth, and the name with victory. Receiving the survey data, we were a little surprised, because the majority of VivaCell-MTS We did not expect the identification of the symbol with the egg.
 From a psychological point of view, we consider this a method of hidden influence. Maybe the creators of the brand deliberately used this method to deliberately influence the human subconscious, because the egg is considered the beginning, the life.
  Translated, "Viva" means "victory" and "Cell" means "cell", but very few people pay attention to the translation of the brand, moreover, many, without knowing the meaning of the latter, identify it with the egg.
  What can be said is that the symbol, as such, is influential due to the right color combination PR PR strategy, which creates a feeling of warmth and kinship in people.
 In the case of "Beeline", the combinations are also interesting.
  First of all, let us mention that "Beeline" literally means "Bee" - "bee" և "wide" (Line) - "line", "connection".
 In this case, the dominance of the "bee" version can be considered the result of a good influence, as few consider the meaning of the brand name when taking combinations.
  It can be said that the brand has a very correct influence system, which is preserved in people's memory for a long time, because in the advertisements there was often a bee, which is agile and hardworking.
 In addition to the name, my logo is chosen correctly, because the symbol of the earth on a subconscious level evokes in people a symbol of unity, integrity.
Referring to the rebranding, it should be noted that in the case of VivaCell MTS it was not as strong as in the case of Beeline, the reason, perhaps, was the newness of the company, besides, if Beeline is the completely renamed version of ArmenTel, then VivaCell Has taken on only the "MTS" supplement, which enriches the name from a psychological point of view.
  Referring to the rebranding of "ArmenTel", it should be noted that in this case the rebranding strategy was faster, but not so effective, because, despite the rejection, many in the society still continue to use the "ArmenTel" brand.
  This is more noticeable in the older age groups. The reason, perhaps, years ago, was the only powerful means of communication in people's memory, which was more powerful than today's rebranding of the same brand.
  We also conducted a research to find out the effectiveness of "ArmenTel" rebranding.
  It should be noted that the "ArmenTel" brand was preferred by people over 40 years old, reasoning that it is an old habit, and it is a bit difficult to give up the habits.
  Besides, it was the first communication operator in Armenia.
 But the "Beeline" voters reason that "ArmenTel" was replaced by "Beeline" due to advertisements.
  This is where the impact of "Beeline" commercials should be emphasized.
From the point of view of advertising, Beeline's self-presentation is more interesting in terms of scenes and plot than VivaCell-MTS, which reflects a more classic example.
  Because of this, the ads of the first operator can be considered more impressive and influential.
 The only negative element in advertisements is that being interesting, funny (mostly), it is updated and changed quite late, which makes people bored, in which case there is a serious risk of dislike.
 VivaCell-MTS's commercials feature elements of European culture, the ads are more ethereal և simple, the music is memorable, does not cause aggression while watching, addresses the most pressing issues, including those with disabilities, the ads are directly related to public life. which, unlike the other, has the ability to circulate longer without tiring people.
 And in the case of "Beeline", advertisements often cause aggression, because the volume under the advertisement is quite high, which is a method of attracting inattentive attention from a psychological point of view, but the probability of causing aggression increases in this case.
 From a structural point of view, they are more influential than VivaCell-MTS advertisements, because in this case, attention should be paid to the camouflage.
  Beeline ads have a lot of humorous elements, which is a well-chosen PR strategy, taking into account ethnicity, because Armenians love humor and appreciate it.
Assuming from the beginning that the right combination of colors and words in the symbols of organizations increases the effectiveness of PR, we came to the conclusion that the hypothesis as such is confirmed, because in the case of organizations we see specific strategies with the resulting results. .
Thus, by doing the above research, we come to certain conclusions, that is, there is a psychologically influential link between colors և emotions,, which suggests that color choices can have a positive or negative impact on an organization's success, reputation, recognition, and overall performance as symbols. The dominance of any one color is capable of causing aggression, so at least one other color combination is needed.
 Because different colors evoke different emotions, a bunch of different colors is encouraged by the symbol, as a psychological connection is created between the image of the leader և between the given organization,, which determines the effectiveness of PR.
  However, if it is not there (in the example of "Beeline"), then the effectiveness of PR is conditioned by a compensating factor, such as the symbol created by the appropriate color combination.
Literature 1. Pesotsky E., Sovremennaya reklama.
  Theory and practice, Rostov n / D, «Phoenix», 2003,3. Резепов И., Психология рекламы и PR, Из-во.
 Dashkov and Co., 2009, 224 p.4. Cenev V., Psychology (ADVERTISEMENT, NLP AND 25-KADR), Publisher.
  ООО "Бератор", Satenik Grigoryan PSYCHOLOGICAL INTRODUCTION OF THE ORGANIZATION'S SYMBOL PR PRACTICE Keywords: brand, advertisement, PR, rebranding, archetypes, stereotypes, symbols, symbols.
