THE ROLE OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE RA SOCIAL SYSTEM. PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES The study of the public system and civil society of the Republic of Armenia, the identification of peculiarities and the observation of the existing tendencies, as well as the realization of possible predictions during the further establishment and development of the ideological field of the society are very important.
The problems of the social system and the patterns of development are closely related to geopolitical, strategic, geoeconomic, ideological, civilizational, psychological, many other direct or indirect or related issues.
The study of the public sphere is used especially in the historical stages, when active political processes take place both in domestic and foreign policy, such as electoral processes, intensification of diplomatic efforts to resolve conflicts, intensification of investment flows of superpowers, consequently strengthening their influence in the region. intensification of the ongoing struggle, possible change of the foreign policy strategy of the state, any shift of geopolitical nature 1.
The existence of the above-mentioned processes in our region is obvious at the current stage.
This situation also dictates to address the problems of the social system in Armenia as soon as possible, moreover, from several perspectives.
  The field study is remarkable in terms of "global politics", "regional developments", "domestic political situation", as the developments in the mentioned spheres are clearly reflected in the social relations that are taking place within the country and are constantly in dynamics.
Globally, the study of the issue is becoming a priority, as one of the primary goals of Armenia is, in fact, the adoption and development of democratic values.
  And in this context it is impossible not to consider the place and role of civil society.
The work refers to a number of problems in the field of civil society and the ways to solve them.
  As a result of the field research, such issues are revealed that can contribute to the development of the RA civil society.
There are many NGOs in Armenia, studying the problems of the latter is an extensive process.
 The existence of this work, which deals in detail with the existing NGOs in the Republic of Armenia and their problems, facilitates the work of both researchers and those interested in the topic.
  Functionally, it can be useful for NGO representatives to better understand their place and role in the process of building civil society.
 Addressing the current challenges of the NGO sector, we get an overview of the current situation և The work can serve as a comprehensive guide for those interested in the field.
Let us briefly refer to the notion of "civil society": "It is not a mechanical whole of citizens, it proves that the coexistence of human coexistence" See Vardanyan T., Avetisyan K., The role of youth non-governmental organizations in Armenia, Yerevan, 2005, p. 4.
on the qualitative originality of a person's existence ”.
  One of the political science dictionaries states that the essence of civil society lies in its non-state, non-political nature, as well as in the alternative and opposition to the political state2.
Civil society institutions are non-governmental organizations, civil movements, religious organizations, trade unions, the media, the state և international governmental և non-governmental organizations.
Non-governmental organizations are one of the key institutions of civil society, as they are legally registered organizations and always carry out legal activities.
 According to the current law of the Republic of Armenia, a non-governmental organization is a voluntary association of individuals established on the basis of common interests to satisfy other or intangible needs3.
NGOs perform a number of functions in the public system, the most important of which are the following.1. Disclosure and satisfaction of the interests of the members of the given organization or union, 2. Social integration և mobilization function, 3. Socialization function, 4. The function of representing and defending the interests of the participants4.
Among these, NGOs have other functions, but these are the main and key functions that distinguish NGOs from other civil society institutions.
  Other functions include communication, information, support, education and other functions.
NGOs help members and participants not only realize and express their particular interests and demands, but also commit to representing those interests - the group's demands to government bodies, political parties, the ruling elite, and so on.
At the same time, it should be noted that NGOs do not oppose the state, but on the contrary, strengthen it, help to take into account the unique interests of different social groups, contribute to the development and implementation of state policy.
 And it is noteworthy that the main techniques of NGO activities are persuasion and educational methods.
Today, the NGO sector of the Republic of Armenia faces a number of challenges, which hinder its effective activity, often do not provide an opportunity to carry out the assigned functions, eventually leading to liquidation.
Taking into account the most important role of NGOs in the public administration system, let us refer to the most noticeable problems, proposing theoretical solutions for the further application of the RA civil society և state system.
  The internal problems were possible as a result of the interviews of the NGO representatives and experts.
Lack of financial resources.
 Lack of resources is a serious problem for NGOs.
  NGOs find it difficult to find sufficient և ongoing funding for their activities.
 However, the number one problem in this field is that there are some individuals - non-governmental organizations that control the means of incoming donors.
In other words, they do not allow a wide range of NGOs to be able to use donor programs.
It turns out that the list of organizations receiving grants is always the same.
 Here, mechanisms can be developed, or the funding can be distributed according to the direction of the NGOs, or a limited amount of funding can be set for one NGO to enable others to carry out their activities.
  And the more efficient distribution of those financial means or the implementation of joint programs may be more effective.
1 Manucharyan H. ։ Others, Political Science, Yerevan 2006, p. 313.
2 Borcov G., Man and society.
 short encyclopedic dictionary-lawyer, Rostov n / D, 1997, p. 114.
3 RA Law on Non-Governmental Organizations, Article 4. (available at http: // www.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docid=337 link).
Existing organizations often have limited resource mobilization skills, և generally do not seek funding available in the local market, preferring to wait for the support of international donors.
The fact that NGOs operate mainly at their own expense, not at their own expense, poses a great danger, that is, there is dependence on donors և there may be a tendency for donors to interfere in the NGO's activities, advancing their priorities.
 At the same time, it is impossible to act without donor programs due to the lack of financial stability.
Inefficient management.
 This is one of the most serious problems hindering the effective activity of the sphere.
  Many NGOs lack knowledge of effective governance, and more often than not have no idea what NGOs need to have councils և or what the NGO's role and functions are.
 Inefficient management of available resources by non-governmental organizations is also noticeable.
Lack of strategic planning.
 In the case of some NGOs, there are strategic plans that allow to clarify the mission, values ​​և ways of activity.
 This allows you to disobey the whims of donors.
 When NGOs do not have a clear strategic plan, they very easily become non-developmental organizations that operate spontaneously.
One of the biggest challenges is the almost non-existent networking.
  This is the reason for duplication efforts, the strategic conflict at the community level, the lack of experience learning and the inability of NGOs to deal with the poverty of local structural elements, which deprives them of the opportunity for development.
The resource race reduces the efficiency of community activities.
Many NGOs operate at the community level, without any mapping, implementing projects without taking into account current community initiatives.
 All this happens due to the lack of NGO networks; it often happens that several NGOs decide to carry out the same work in the same area.
  The problem here is that everyone wants to be in the role of a leader, to personally implement the program, without raising it, he is afraid that his idea may be stolen.
 In this case, the goal is not to solve the problem, but to raise one's own rating.
Low level of communication within the sector.
  According to the NGO representatives, there is a low level of communication within the sector.
 Most NGOs do not have access to the Internet, receive almost no literature on development issues, and are generally excluded from issues of global, regional or national importance.
Limited-functioning NGOs.
 According to the NGO representatives, they have limited technical-organizational capacity.
 There are few NGOs that can or are willing to pay for such capabilities.
 Weak power is related to fundraising, management, technical development and management, management և other issues.
  Some NGOs believe that having quality standards should help them develop the required capacity.
Absorption of local NGOs by NGOs (international NGOs: ingo).
 Local NGOs are concerned that the potential area for their activities has been seized by the NGOs.
 NGOs often intervene without worrying about the stability of the local NGO system, paying state և community employees to participate in their programs, while local NGOs do not have that opportunity.
 As a result, it is difficult for local NGOs to compete with international giants.
Many foreign organizations do not cooperate with local NGOs, but provide unfair competition by curbing the development of the local network.
Political interference.
 Some NGO leaders point out that local politicians and leaders are interfering in their activities, as well as creating serious obstacles to their activities.
 For example, if NGOs are involved in discussing issues such as land disputes, local leaders may even threaten the NGO with deregistration.
These are the main challenges facing the NGO sector today են Obstruct effective activity.
 Many NGOs, of course, are well aware of these challenges, where they come from, but they are not able to fight or eliminate them.
 All this is conditioned by the above-mentioned lack of cooperation, which is conditioned by several objective-subjective reasons.
 One of the reasons is that many NGOs do not realize the challenges in order to be able to face them, and here are some, knowing the existence of challenges, either try to fight them alone or direct the vector of struggle against individual challenges, which, however, is the result. does not give.
  The Public Council can also be a platform for cooperation for NGOs operating in the Armenian field, becoming a means for NGOs to carry out their functions.
It would be exemplary for NGOs to address their own problems and the circumstances that hinder their activities in addition to public issues, to try to make the state audible. After all, the state is interested in the effective activity of NGOs, because in that case they can alleviate its worries.
The activities of NGOs affect the civil society system of the Republic of Armenia, as well as the deepening of domestic and international integration of civil society.
  Non-governmental organizations implement a number of programs, which, in fact, in one way or another, contribute to the strengthening of the integration processes of the Armenian society, strengthen the democratic legitimacy.
Summarizing the observed approaches, several conclusions can be drawn: • In Armenia, despite the many obstacles, a wide range of opportunities has been created for the activities of NGOs;
• The increase in the number of NGOs over the last two decades has pushed the latter to form a distinctive segment within civil society.
• The growing influence of NGOs, especially in democracies in recent years, is due to the fact that the state has ceased to be effective in carrying out its functions; և NGOs take on certain functions of the state.
• Over the past two decades, Armenian NGOs have been involved in all areas of public life, such as healthcare, education, development programs, peace, human rights, and the environment.
  They used funds from volunteers, private sources, donor organizations, and were self-governed locally, nationally, and internationally.
• For the successful integration of the RA civil society, it is necessary to create a social model that will reflect the interests of all RA citizens.
• By encouraging the activities of NGOs, by financing them, the state increases the legitimacy of its institution of executive power, overcomes the democratic deficit.
• Armenian NGOs, especially in the last few years, are in the stage of active development եին played a decisive role for the RA civil society.
• Today, Armenian NGOs face a number of challenges, the advancement of which is crucial for the development and progress of the NGO sector, as the potential that NGOs are unable to fully realize due to existing barriers is failing. The efforts made և cause a number of key functions to fail.
Hovik Veranyan THE ROLE OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE RA SOCIAL SYSTEM. PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES Keywords: NGO, civil society, budget, grant, challenge, government, public council, function, sector.
