WHY DO CHILDREN DANCE? ETHNOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS The number of ethnographic research on national identity and its components is quite large and continues to grow.
This is due to the activation of identity-building mechanisms, especially the growing role of identity in the face of conflict.
 There are various studies, articles and monographs on this square in Armenia, but we still cannot state that the issue has already been comprehensively examined.
In this report we will try to present one complex that has a great impact on the construction of national identity, that is, national voluntary dance, but not as an external part of professional culture, but as an element that builds or shows identity in everyday life, entertainment, various events.
The choice of the theme is conditioned by the recent popularization of the national dance, as well as its revival.
  Accordingly, we will try to clarify what they are conditioned by, what role the national dance plays, particularly in the daily life of children.
 We will try to find out the educational function of the national dance, the expectations and goals of the parents.
 Let's look at questions such as: why do children dance, who makes that decision, how do people react, and especially how does attending dance affect children, as well as their parents and others?
Two main ethnographic methods were used for the research: observations and in-depth surveys.
 We conducted the polls with the parents and relatives of "MENQ" dance group, the daughter of "Karin" traditional song dance group.
From the very beginning of the research, a difficult task arose to distinguish between "folk", "national" or "ethnographic" dances.
  They seem to be the same in the literal sense, but most philologists make a clear distinction.
  They think that folk dances are based on national dance. "They mixed the national with the classic, staged the popular" 1.
  They are artificially constructed from the elements of ethnographic as well as foreign dances, and "at first it can be confused to be considered a key national, before getting acquainted with these (national) dances" 2.
 And the national dances "came from pure roots" 3.
 "National dances are not random movements, but born from everyday life ... our national dance demands that you be in your usual posture, again shoulder to shoulder, again straight, but in a normal, non-artificial leg position, albeit subconsciously, instinctively it was directed at some physical correction ”4.
 Moreover, philologists have formed the opinion that the Eastern Armenian side is devoid of culture, and what we are dancing about today are the dances of Western Armenia, where the culture was richer and higher.
 And these dances were "lost during the years of upbringing in the Soviet Union" 5.
Interestingly, both parents and children usually tell about dance on occasion, starting to contrast it with the accepted "folk" dances.
One of the philologists described the national dance as "a force as if it were in blood" 6.
 "This ethnographic is closer, more intimate, where he is not very polished, how he was, yes, he remained the same.
 Շուտ You feel the closeness sooner ”7.
  One of the philologists mentioned that the parigal seems to awaken the love for the "national". "It is in any Armenian, it must be discovered."
 It turns out that dance is seen as a continuous element inherited through blood or genes that have preserved the pure national image for centuries.
As a result of the polls, it turned out that the decision to bring ethnographic dance in all cases is connected with the personal experience of a parent or relative.
 That is, the first "meeting" of the parents and their interest or involvement in it become a reason for the children to dance.
 None of them singled out the consideration of dance as a professional strategy, but their only expectation is a child 1 Hovhannisyan M., DAN, Yerchan, 2015 Ohanjanyan /.
2 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist M. Arzumanyan /.
3 In the same place.
4 In the same place.
5 In the same place.
6 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist H. Karoyan /.
7 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist E. Sargsyan/.
8 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist A. Ohanjanyan /.
to learn to dance and the circumstance is purely for them, devoid of its showy side. "No, I wanted him to learn to dance, that's all.
And he also learns dances with great enthusiasm. ”9
The image of the choreographer is used to take the child to dance.
  One of the philologists stressed that he gives special importance to the teacher, his "human quality is as a teacher".
 Parents see in the image of a teacher a patriot who should raise children in such a spirit.
 That is, when bringing dance, they expect that, as an authority, the given teacher will serve as an example for the children, especially for the boys.
  Some philologists emphasize the importance of bringing national dance to their sons. "In the upbringing of boys, ethnographic dance plays a very deep and very important role - to be strong in body and strong in body.
  In my opinion, he even trains the army.
For parents, dance is especially used as a way to "know the nation, to respect it, to have the right attitude towards the nation, to know the roots, to be properly Armenian" 11
We tried to understand whether there was any change in the children, such as parents or family members, that the children started dancing.
 In other words, we observed the changes on two levels: among the active participants of the dance - children, among the passive participants - family members.
 According to the parents, thanks to the dance, the children were physically stretched, as they expected.
 One of the philologists, who is a kinesiologist by profession, finds that dancing, as a motor activity, comprehensively trains all the muscles, the lower and upper extremities, as it corrects the posture.
In addition, he finds that national dances are useful for the vessels and joints of the legs.
  When talking about children, philologists noted emphatically that they had become more open, sociable, courageous, and more self-confident.
One of the speakers mentioned the importance of the environment in creating the moral image of a child.
 It is different from school and home և broadens their perception of others, the team, broadens their horizons "from coming, dancing, communicating, it fully opens 9 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist O. Terzyan /.
10 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist M. Arzumanyan /.
11 In the same place.
a »12.
  In addition, "enthusiasm and interest in national things are increasing; this national spirit is something else, complete" 13.
As they mentioned, the children got the initiative, they take the initiative at home parties, showing dances, teaching others.
  It is a blessing for them that they "know something that not everyone knows, and something that is of great value" 14.
  Especially in the new environment, "he is happy that he will bite, and it will be applied" 15.
 As the leader of the "Karin" group Gagik Ginosyan often mentions in his speech "By dancing he returns the pride of being an Armenian to the Armenian nation"
 This is the basis of the recent tendency of "Karin" to actively spread dances.
What happens during the course penetrates the house.
According to most philologists, "I learned a lot from their departure, but when they went and started bringing it home, it started to be discussed" 17.
 The use of foreign words is prohibited in this group, Children start using it at home.
 In addition to dancing, children learn the songs that accompany the dance, which they often continue to sing at home.
 Parents themselves are starting to listen to ethnographic songs more.
According to some philologists, their musical taste has changed. gives more importance to the national song and music.
 One of them is so inspired by the national song-music that in his words, every Sunday he is connected with his foreign friends via "Skype", they listen together.
  One of the philologists mentioned that sometimes when they return home from work, they learn dance movements with their children to unwind.
All philologists speak enthusiastically when describing the reaction of their surroundings and relatives.
  As one of them said. "Everyone gets a lot of pleasure.
 First they ask, how is it, what is it?
 It is interesting because it did not happen, it is not familiar.
 We do not have a dancer or a dancer of this style.
 We are very little connected with culture.
That's why everyone is interested, everyone asks, and everyone is 12 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist E. Sargsyan/.
13 Մ. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist O. Terzyan /.
14 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist M. Arzumanyan /.
15 Ibid.
16 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / observations from the event of the International Dance Day.
17 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist M. Arzumanyan /.
ճելի ա »18.
 Many philologists say that such dances were not familiar to them before, և now these dances are considered "special", in contrast to the "simple" dances that are spread in the air with movements of the hands.
 According to one of the philologists, the young generation in their family still considered it "Yezidi" in the 80s, when one of the elders of the house danced such dances19.
  There were two cases when fathers attended such dances when they were young, but years later they discovered them again, because ethnographic dancing was not so common when they attended, and today fathers take their sons to dance.
It is also interesting the attitude of the fathers towards the dances.
The latter often express a desire to participate, հաճախ attend some individual courses.
 Mothers are less brave and have a problem with time for that. They simply limit themselves to listening to dances.
 Such national dances help to relieve tension, fatigue, do housework faster, as they help to make the week easier.
Thus, according to this stage of the research, it can be concluded that what is educational is purely in terms of knowledge, it is an educational tool, as a possible component of national identity.
 It is considered not only as a part of aesthetic education, but also as a systemic education. "This is not a dance, I consider it as education.
  Just as we must be literate, so we must know dance. ”20
  Considering it as a component of identity, using the constructivist idea, it can be said that with the spread of national dance a new, post-Soviet identity is being built, opposing and rejecting the Soviet culture, the folk dance.
 Back in the post-Soviet period, national dance groups appeared in parallel with the folk dances, but the last dances, which were more widespread, had a higher status.
 In recent years, the current interest in national dances testifies to the change in its status.
  We saw how it goes from the level of group training to everyday life, it becomes a way to share happy moments, as well as to relieve tension.
 They sing an attractive dance and "Vara 18 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist E. Sargsyan/.
19 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2015 / philologist E. Hayrapetyan /.
20 M. Hovhannisyan, MPI, Yerevan, 2016 / philologist M. Arzumanyan /.
"Kich" feature and the resulting changes in children, as well as relatives.
Theoretically, when approaching the question from the point of view of Michael Bilig's theory of "Banal Nationalism" 21, we see how the idea of ​​"true Armenian, Armenian type" is brought up in children through dance, which, entering everyday reality, constantly reminds "who we are".
  And, of course, entering into everyday life, dance brings with it cultural phenomena such as national songs, games, holidays, which become an important component of identity.
Literature 1. Hovhannisyan M., Field Ethnographic Materials (MPI) 2015-2016.
Mariam Hovhannisyan WHY DO CHILDREN DANCE? ETHNOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS Keywords: national dance, identity, upbringing, daily life. Summary.
