THE SOCIOLOGICAL EXPLANATION OF THE ARTSAKH VOLUNTEER MOVEMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE FOUR-DAY WAR. Wars have always occupied a significant place in human history, and the phenomenon of war
In the analysis of any conflict situation or war as an armed conflict, it is impossible to limit itself to the observation of objective factors, as the subjective interpretations of the war and the social actions arising from them have a special role.
  The individual begins to take on a new role in terms of fighting or not fighting in a war situation, which is a potential resource for the country.
During the last re-escalation stage of the Artsakh conflict, during the April Four-Day War, the war was redefined.
Extremist and unifying calls were made, the issues of war and peace were once again on the daily agenda of the society.
There was a widespread opinion in various social circles that in case of war, citizens, especially young people, should volunteer to go to the front lines.
 However, along with a number of initiatives sparked by the April war, a large group of young people, war veterans, volunteered to take the lead.
Defining volunteerism as a social action, the organizer carries out the voluntary detachment at his own choice, without material remuneration, one can consider the continuation of volunteering in the Artsakh war as a unique social movement with unique tendencies of origin, development and institutionalization.
April 1 four-day war. On April 2-5, 2016, hostilities took place on the Artsakh-Azerbaijani line of contact, which were conventionally named "April War".
From this point of view, no special study of the phenomenon has been carried out in scientific circles.
  Besides, taking into account the possibility of delaying the resolution of the Artsakh conflict and moving to the field of military operations, the issue of scientific study of military volunteerism becomes more urgent.
  There is a need to find out the meanings of the volunteer movement and the social "face" of the war among the volunteers, to volunteer their motives, to find out what makes a person go to the front line, how do they assess the situation, what are the characteristics of volunteers?
 On the other hand, there is a need to consider the issue within the framework of society-army relations, revealing the preconditions and perspectives of institutionalization of the voluntary movement.
Thus, this article summarizes the sociological meanings of the volunteer movement in the Artsakh war and the social face of the war among the volunteers, revealing the results of the sociological research.
The applied video methodology includes the sociology of war in order to understand the role of war - the impact on the level of society, as well as the theory of social action - to look at volunteering from the perspective of the latter.
 Before proceeding to the results of the study, it is natural to make a brief reference to the theoretical foundations of the work.
It is accepted that theories interpreting war in sociology are divided into three conceptual approaches: structural functionalism, conflict theory, and symbolic interactionism, each of which interprets this egg of armed conflict from different angles.
Thus, according to structural functionalism, war performs certain important functions, such as raising public solidarity and, in some cases, preserving independence and democracy.
  According to the theory of conflict, war greatly enhances the interests of the military-industrial complex of the state, moreover, at the expense of ignoring social needs.
  According to symbolic interactionism, meaningful symbols, such as the flag, play a significant role in war, and the definition of war is greatly influenced by the formation of public opinion.
In the framework of integration sociology, Pitirim Sorokin, based on the concept of "social system", singled out the foundations of interstate peace, noting that the main cause of the war is hidden by the society in accordance with the normative systems (religious, scientific, economic, diplomatic, political). , aesthetic) in the process of sale realization or disruption of their simultaneous operation [1].
Representatives of classical sociology, such as Georg Zimmel and Georges Sorrell, have combined the effects of the war experience on people's social behavior with "pure normative militarism."
  The authors view the war as a social situation that radically changes the social dynamics.
 Thus, according to J. Sorrel's human casualties due to the social conflict create a sense of solidarity among the members of the group [2], and G. According to Simmel, war itself is an "absolute situation" [3] (English: "absolute situation"), a unique social event that bypasses any simple experience, emphasizing human emotions and creating new social meanings that ultimately refresh the moral values ​​of society as a whole. .
Proponents of social action theory և interactionists reject the approach that social behavior is largely conditioned by social structure և social institutions և argue that individuals play a more proactive role in shaping social life.
Մ. Weber, for example, believed that sociology should study social actions and their three aspects: meaning, purpose, and values.
  According to him, an action is considered social if it introduces a certain subjective meaning in the actor և, when that meaning is directed to someone [4].
According to Talcott Parsons' theory of social action, the actor uses various means to achieve his goals, which are influenced by social factors such as norms, values, ideas, and situational conditions.
T. According to Parsons, actors are influenced in action by a number of environmental factors, such as their biological characteristics and heredity, as well as some external environmental barriers that influence the choice of goals and means.
This work is based on qualitative methodology.
 The object under study was studied from two perspectives: the motivations for war's perceptions of war, peace perceptions, and institutionalization.
Two methods of gathering information were used: 1. In-depth interview method with 12 volunteers, selected on the principle of typical representation, 2. Thematic qualitative interview method with five key informants.
 Military experience և settlement has become a criterion for the selection of volunteers.
 The key informants were the commanders of the volunteer detachments, the lawyers of the military sphere - military journalists.
As a result of the research, it was possible to find out the meaning of war and peace among the volunteers.
 Moreover, for the analysis of the specific meaning of war, it is expedient to use the two logics of the Galtung triangle of conflict, within the framework of the latter referring in particular to the war situation, the attitude towards the war, as well as the behaviors shown during the war.
War situation. Within the framework of the characters of the warring parties, the volunteers define heroism as self-sacrificing self-sacrifice for the sake of the homeland.
 When talking about heroes, a group of volunteers separates the concept of "real heroes" by defining people who do not correspond to the latter as "people who will simply become heroes".
 Meanwhile, when talking about "real heroes", they refer to the people who "surrendered to the homeland", referring to the victims of the war.
The most popular character of the hero was Monte Melkonyan, whose memory the volunteers referred to the memories transmitted through oral stories.
 That is, according to the volunteers' observations, information about him is provided not through the institute of education, but through informal sources.
It is a noteworthy circumstance that the definitions of an Armenian volunteer և hero almost completely coincide. Here it is mentioned about conscious self-sacrifice.
 That is, the volunteers self-heroize, striving to identify with the hero.
 Moreover, from this point of view, reference is often made to 2Y. According to Galtung, social conflict consists of three main components: conflict situation, conflict attitude և conflict behavior.
The national unity conditioned by the genetic peculiarities of the Armenians և such characteristics are used as "conscious", "patriotic", "self-sacrificing", "fida", "holy man".
Attitude towards war. Combining the definitions of volunteers, war can be described as an abnormal situation, which globally implies a clash of cultures over a territorial issue, and from a local point of view, business at the expense of people's lives.
War is associated with such concepts as ignorance, evil, disgust, weapons, losses, smoke, disaster, thunder, famine (See Figure 1).
Figure 1. Associations on war It is interesting that war becomes a basic concept even when defining peace, defining it either as the absence of war or as the result of successful warfare.
  In other words, peace is simply not perceived as an independent category.
 Armenian society is neither a society of war nor peace.
According to Lyudmila Harutyunyan, "in societies where the shadow of the past war has been overcome, the situation of" neither war nor peace "is likely to strengthen."
  From this point of view, it is interesting that there is no clear orientation among the volunteers on the question "is Armenia a society of war or peace?" Opinions are scattered here among all possible options. "
Unlike war, peace is associated with concepts such as peace, clear skies, love, children, happiness, and freedom. (See Figure 2).
Figure 2. Peace AssociationsSense of Social Time. During war, the individual is endowed with unique social qualities, in particular, the ability to adapt to the threatening conditions of uncertainty, as a result of which a unique mechanism of worldview is formed, which can be described as "a picture of a world without a future".
In planning for the future, young volunteers often state how long they plan, and in the answers to the question "approximately how many years do you plan?" The age range varies from 1-2.5 years.
 In other words, the hypothesis put forward within the framework of the research that the planning of the future is short-term among volunteers is clearly proved.
Finally, it is possible to pay attention to the fact that the volunteers describe the range of 1-2.5 years as "long-term", which proves that not only the planning for the future is short-term, but also the sense of time is very tight, at least in 2015. Compared to the average life expectancy (75 years) of men in Armenia [8].
One of the problems of the research was to find out the motives of military volunteering and the tendencies of institutionalization.
  Therefore, it is natural to briefly address the motivations that have become the basis for volunteering, as well as the process of the volunteer movement and the peculiarities related to institutionalization.
Motivations for volunteering. The results of the research allow volunteers to group 3 basic categories into 3 or ideal types according to volunteering motives.
 These are the "For the sake of" category (for the sake of some value), 3 The names of the categories are based on the labels spoken by the volunteers during the in-depth interviews.
persecution), "Shah" category ("Talan" category of certain material or intangible interests (for the purpose of selling property), "Leisure" category (with the expectation of having a good time).
Moreover, it is interesting that the volunteers who took part in the research were classified as "for", և they revealed other types only when talking about other volunteers.
If we look at the phenomenon in the context of Weberian theory of social action, the actions of volunteers are mainly of a value-rational or purposeful nature, which means that volunteering is generally the result of rational choice.
Institutionalization of volunteering. As a result of the interviews with the key informants, it became clear that during the April war, the formation of volunteer detachments took place on two levels: the units of the Ministry of Defense and the Union of Yerkrapahs.
 From the point of view of institutionalization, the main sociological information is that only Yerkrapah volunteers are protected by the RA law, which means that independent volunteers do not have a legal status, therefore, no legal requirements can be made for the protection of their rights.
Thus, summarizing the main provisions of this article and the research findings, we can conclude that the war, especially the Artsakh war, having a unique sociological meaning in the Armenian society, can create different motives for striving for this or that social action in the society. to create unique perceptions of events in the identities of members of society.
Such social initiatives have a serious sociological significance, they constantly need studies, as a result of which the received social information can become reliable and grounded in the state policy-making and decision-making process.
LITERATURE [2] Sorel G., Reflections on Violence, Glencoe.
 Free Press, 1950. [4] Weber M., The Nature of Social Action, Runciman, WG 'Weber.
  Selections in [8] Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia, URL.
 http:
//www.armstat.am/am/?nid=126&id=11015 (Accessed.
 08.05.2017).
Smbatyan Hayk ARTSAKHYAN SOCIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE VOLUNTEER MOVEMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE FOUR-DAY WAR Keywords: war, peace, conflict, voluntary movement, social, movement
