Sci. Head: Doctor of Technical Sciences prof. You. Suvaryan The sustainable development of the country's economy is a progress of the economy, which registers economic success not only at the current stage of management, but also in the future.
  Taking into account the current problems of the Armenian economy, it is very important to increase the role of foreign banks in improving the lending process of the real sector of the economy.
 In this sense, commercial banks are financial institutions that have a great impact on the economic processes of a given country, as the results of economic activity in the banking system are also future-oriented and require the efficient use of the financial resources involved.
The medium-term development prospects of the Republic of Armenia are positive, in favor of which the reality of sound economic management speaks for itself.
As can be seen from Figure 1, 2013 GDP growth was 6.8%, which indicates sustainable economic development.
GDP GrowthIndustrial Product IndexGrowth of Goods-Services Exports Growth of Goods-Services Imports GrowthLine. 1. Macroeconomic indicators of the Republic of Armenia for 2011-2013 ․11 The diagram is compiled as a result of studies conducted by the author.
 The data are taken from Armenia's 2014 from the statistical yearbook.
Despite the above-mentioned significant successes, in order to maintain a stable pace of economic development in the Republic of Armenia and to accelerate poverty reduction, it is necessary to pay attention to some important issues: • Continue to further improve the real sector development environment.
  Although the business environment in Armenia is one of the most liberal among the other countries of the former Soviet Union, nevertheless, the development of the real sector does not fully contribute to the country's economic growth.
• Make the positive results of economic growth accessible to the masses.
• In the context of the expected expansion of economic growth, more attention should be paid to increasing the number of jobs, developing the economy of industry և agricultural areas and improving social protection systems.
• Increase access to basic services for the entire population.
In terms of the development of our economy, the 2014 budget of the RA Government is of great importance. Adopted by the decision N492-N of March 27, 2014-2025 Strategic Plan for Development (SDP), the proposed policies and measures are divided into 4 groups: 1. Employment expansion, which envisages expansion of employment during the first five years of the program, with an emphasis on creating high-paying, high-quality human capital development activities that will increase the volume, quality, and accessibility of primary services (including health, education, science, culture, and primary infrastructures), with special emphasis on the harmonious development of human-nature relations; 3. Improving the social protection system, the actions of which will be aimed at increasing the efficiency of the current system (including increasing targeting), creating the basis for financial stability in the long run, ensuring comprehensive provision of social guarantees, significant reduction of social risks, poverty reduction. Institutional modernization of the country's governance system, which, ensuring the continuity of the adopted basic policies, will be aimed at increasing the efficiency of the state, expanding the resources available to the state, targeted use, increasing the quality of services provided, reducing corruption,
It is obvious that in the process of implementation of the country's perspective development program, the investment policy of the real sector by the commercial banks of the Republic of Armenia will include economic, social and political goals.
 The economic goals of the investment policy should be: աճ increase of production volumes, կրճատ reduction of shadow economy, բարձր increase of competition of enterprises, բարձր increase of quality of output (services), կրճատ reduction of import, increase of export volumes, ռ rational use of internal logistics resources,, economic of regions development, ագործ reopening of production capacities ումը reconstruction,։ flow of financial resources to the production sector.
The social goals should be as follows:  creation of new jobs, increase of the population incomes,։ strengthening of the social justice in the society, նվազ reduction of the outflow of the population անում promotion of the inflow,  regulation of the internal migration processes in the country.
To achieve all these goals, a number of measures should be taken, in particular:  to create a favorable environment for credit investment,  to improve the legal framework governing the investment sector, ացնել to eliminate administrative barriers,  to develop an effective investment attraction system,  to develop regulatory investment structure,  develop և root investment measures.
The actual developments in macroeconomic indicators, in particular, the economic growth rates, have significantly deviated from the macroeconomic indicators of the sustainable development program, which is largely due to the 2008 with the global financial and economic crisis.
  As in Armenia, as in many other countries, due to the uncertainty of medium- and long-term forecasts, development programs gave way to anti-crisis programs.
  The significant deterioration of the world economic situation had a particularly negative impact on countries with open economies, including Armenia.
  Despite the fact that due to the crisis, the economy temporarily retreated, in 2010-2011. As a result of the policy aimed at promoting exports, the economic indicators with a high export orientation will be registered in the long run.
  It is obvious that the provision of such indicators has significantly conditioned the increase of the current investment volumes several times, which can be done on the basis of the development of the insurance system of all risks associated with the investment process carried out by commercial banks.
  Therefore, the strategy for promoting credit investments should be based on the right combination of rating incentives used in international practice, the provision of investment services and direct investment attraction.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the developments of the RA economy in the previous years, the behavior of the factors conditioning them, as well as the process of reforms aimed at strengthening the institutional base of the economy, the RA economy restored in 2013. exceeded the pre-crisis level.
  In our opinion, ensuring the economic growth of the country in the coming years is conditioned by the level of development of such sectors of the real sector of the economy as industry, energy, agriculture, etc.
 Therefore, the priority areas for lending to economic sectors may be: • high-tech e-projects, • mining, metallurgy, • electrical power systems, • chemical production, • light industry, • system software development, • food production, packaging, tourism, etc. .
Thus, it should be noted that the banking system of Armenia has made significant strides in its not-so-long period of development, however, there are still serious problems in relations with the real sector, the solution of which requires elaborating an effective lending strategy that will ensure a stable economic growth, which, in turn, will contribute to raising the living standards of the country's population.
Sergey Tankyan EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS DIRECTIONS FOR LENDING THE ECONOMY OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: lending, priorities, GDP growth.
