CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS According to high school students, a person as a "homo sapience" has features, thinking, cognition skills that he needs to build a purposeful or conscious life.
Each person is a psychologist of his inner world.
  Psychological and philosophical sciences, literature, art, open and reliable relationships with other people, communication with oneself, one's own life experience can help a person to self-knowledge.
  Self-awareness opens up at least 4 possibilities: to recognize, evaluate, change, accept oneself.
 There are various sciences that study the inner world of a person.
Studies of a person do not end with the study of his mental characteristics: temperament, motives, abilities, character.
  The study of self-consciousness is considered the final stage.
  Ս. Rubinstein noted that the study of a person ends with the discovery of self-consciousness1.
The development of self-awareness is included in the process of person formation և is considered one of the components of the person.
  The goal of the development of self-consciousness is the realization of one's own "I", the separation from oneself (these are expressed in the components of the individual և independence).
A. Spirkin considered self-consciousness to be the realization and evaluation of one's actions քների their results, thoughts, feelings, moral image ությունների interests, ideals և motives of behavior, his whole image տեղի his place in life2.
Due to self-awareness the person feels real, separate from others և from nature.
V. Stolin singles out several sources of the formation of self-consciousness, which have different influences and weights in different periods of personalization.
 Among them are the evaluations of others, the reference group, the comparison with others, the comparison of real-ideal "I's", the measurement of the results of its activity, etc.
  According to him, self-consciousness ensures the permanence of behavior, has a sense of responsibility towards social values, which are assimilated by the individual.
 V. V. Stolin considered self-consciousness to be a phenomenon that ensures the permanence of behavior և has a sense of responsibility for the social values ​​that the individual assimilates3.
The stages of formation of self-consciousness coincide with the stages of mental development, with the formation of intellectual-personal spheres, which begin from birth to the end of adolescence.
  For example, the first stage is related to the formation of the structure of the baby's body - the cooperative movement of body parts, the perception of its position in space.
 The next stage is considered to be the beginning of walking.
 The other is the stage of formation of gender identity, the treatment of oneself as a member of the opposite sex, and the most important stage in the development of self-consciousness is the formation of speech, the primary function is self-management of a person's behavior.
L. Stolyarenko distinguishes the following stages of the development of self-consciousness: • Indirect emotional stage (simple self-knowledge, which ensures the recognition of the processes of self-consciousness, mental states in the body), • Personal stage (level of anxiety about oneself, which has weaknesses), 1 See s Averin V., Psychology of personalities, Learning Position, St. Petersburg, 1999, p. 89.
2 See Spirkin A., Cognition and Self-Cognition, Moscow, 1972, p. 149.
3 See Stolin V., Self-knowledge of persons, Moscow, 1983, page 31.
• intellectual-analytical stage (level of awareness of self-thinking processes through self-observation և through self-analysis), • stage of purposeful activity (self-awareness, self-management, self-criticism, self-expression) 1.
According to E. Sapogova: self-consciousness contains: 1. Self-awareness, which is formed by the analysis of the results of one's own activities, the evaluation of the results of one's own activities by others through the observation of one's mental states, thoughts, worries, 2. Self-management և self-regulation, 3. Self-assessment, which contains knowledge և assessments about oneself, 4. Self-acceptance, which is considered as an integral indicator of "I" և self-confidence as a condition for successful development of a person, 5. Self-esteem 2.
The structures of self-consciousness can motivate to engage in appropriate activities, can participate in purposeful action.
  Self-awareness with its cognitive-emotional forms can determine the attitude towards those around, the style and nature of communication with them.
  Self-awareness in the form of "self-awareness" of self-knowledge can affect this or that feature of a person, and then completely the person.
  It can be used in various forms of self-management.
Self-consciousness is considered to have the highest psychological functions, which allows a person to stand out in this world, reflecting on the outside world, recognizing the inner world, worrying, and treating himself accordingly.
There are 3 interrelated components in the content of self-consciousness: • cognitive, which expresses the individual's self-knowledge, • emotional, which expresses his self-esteem (self-esteem), • behavioral, which ensures the individual's self-management 3.
According to A. According to Maslow, every person is born with a desire for self-realization. strives to reveal his possibilities and abilities to the maximum.
  According to him, people who have the opportunity for self-realization, have a creative approach to life, are more independent, react quickly.
 They need more than they need 4.
According to I. Connie's concept of "I" և self-awareness are considered a central component (aspect) of psychotherapy և psychological counseling.
A. Leont considered the problem of self-consciousness to be a vital issue in the study of the psychology of the individual.
 It was considered an unresolved, undiscovered issue, which crawled in the scientific-psychological analysis.
In one of the psychological directions, in behaviorism, the problems related to self-consciousness are not considered serious scientific problems, and individual psychology is critical of the possibilities of experimental research related to self-consciousness.
Individual components of self-awareness are studied experimentally5.
  One of the methods of revealing self-awareness is projective tests ("Rorschachitest", "Thematic aperception test (TAT)", etc.).
Psychology reveals not only the combination of individual elements of self-consciousness, but also their dynamics, seeks to identify the factors that affect the formation of the "I" image, its individual components (self-esteem, self-esteem), which is a person's perception of himself.
It is impossible to determine the level of self-esteem of students only on the basis of their academic progress or assumptions of their social origin.
  Factors taken as preconditions or determinants of self-consciousness should be considered systematically in relation to the subject's activities.
1 See Stolyrenko L., Pedagogical Psychology, High Education Series. 3rd ed., Rostov on Donu, 2003.
2 See Sapogova E., Psychology of human development, Textbook for student students, Moscow, 2005.
3 See Stolin W., 1983, p. 35.
4 See Maslow A., Motivation and Personality, New York, 1970, p. 340.
5 See Kon I., Revelation “Я”, Moscow, 1978, pp. 48-51.
When describing themselves, people often point out the features that distinguish them from others, trying to emphasize their peculiarities.
  It should be noted that not all features are realized by the person.
Already in high school age (15-16 years old) there is a desire to self-improve, to orient oneself.
 They want to be interesting, smart, bright, diverse, different.
  The age group of high school students includes children aged 15-18 (late adolescence և early adolescence).
 Both adolescence and adolescence are part of the study of personality ային age psychology.
Throughout life, a person, consciously or unconsciously, studies himself, his possibilities, abilities.
  There is a development of self-consciousness.
  V. James was the first psychologist who began to study the problematic nature of the "I" concept.
 He viewed the global, personal "I" as a double image, in which the conscious "I" and "I" as an object join.
 These are the two sides of a whole that always exist at the same time.
 One is considered pure experience, the other is the content of that experience1.
The "I" concept is considered to be a collection of human ideas about oneself and one's surroundings.
  A person evaluates all the information about the world around him due to the general system of perceptions about himself և develops appropriate behavior based on his value system, ideals, attitudes.
 For this reason, self-consciousness is often called by another name the "I" concept of the person.
Man's self-consciousness, as a system expressing his views, is very individual.
 People evaluate events in different ways, their behavior, the same objects in the real world!
Adolescence և the beginning of adolescence (from 13-14 to 17-18), according to AN Leont, is characterized by continuing to study.
 The child is more or less involved in the life of the society.
 Striving for self-realization, a person of high school age begins to show success in a specific type of activity, expresses thoughts about the future profession.
  During adolescence, the development of psychological cognitive processes takes place, the development of a person, during which the interests of the child change.
 The educational process is no longer a priority for him!
 The child begins to orient himself for "adult" life.
 The body begins to grow rapidly.
 The stage of adolescent sexual identity is emphasized in adolescence, but it should be noted that mental development does not end in adolescence.
According to Elkonin, the primary activity of adolescence is intimate personal contact with peers.
  This communication allows teenagers to gain knowledge about their lives.
  Belonging to a group inspires a teenager to be confident in his or her strengths.
  The opinion of the group to which he belongs is used for the teenager.
  The subjective image of the adolescent "I" is formed mainly on the basis of the opinion of those around him.
This is the basis for a positive shift in adolescents' self-esteem2.
The following personal neoplasms are observed in adolescence: • "feeling of adulthood" occurs, • formation of self-consciousness, • formation of self-determination և self-affirmation3.
According to Rubinstein, the development of self-consciousness in adolescents and young people moves from primitive steps to deeper self-knowledge.
  Adolescents' self-consciousness աստիճ the degree of self-esteem depends on stereotypes about what they think a man և woman should be like.
One of the characteristic features of a high school student is the growth of his self-consciousness.
  The level of self-awareness is also determined by the level of demands of the high school student from those around him / herself.
 They become more critical, self-critical, present high demands on the moral image of adults and peers.
V. Safin's research suggests that high school students have high demands on the moral qualities of their classmates.
  The author has studied the peculiarities of high school students' assessments, with which 1 See Maklakov A., General Psychology, Textbook for Students, St. Petersburg, 2008, p. 22.
2 See Khudoyan S., Crisis ages of personal development, Yerevan, 2004, p. 45.
3 See Stolyrenko L., 2003, p. 319.
They value the willpower of their peers.
  It turned out that high school students, assessing the personal characteristics և moral qualities of their classmates, prefer the will characteristics.
  Thus, it is a good basis for the formation of moral positions in the feelings of high school students.
Adolescents develop a desire to communicate while at the same time the desire to make friends increases.
  His "I" is different from the "I" of a teenager.
  Focusing on a few conflicts makes him educationally unorientated, internally conflicted.
  The unconscious desire to get rid of the former childhood identity activates his reflection, his sense of individuality, by which he differs from the others.
 Awareness of the peculiarities of the younger teen causes feelings of loneliness or childhood fears.
Adolescents 'or adolescents' perceptions of themselves always refer to the "We" image of the group, that is, their gender-specific image (peer-to-peer), but never completely coincide with that "We" image.
 He wants to be different.
 The reconstruction of self-consciousness is connected not so much with the mental development of the adolescent, but with the questions that have arisen about him նոր in the new context of maturity, from what point of view he views it.
The sense of maturity is governed by the bondage or female gender in the consciousness of high school students.
 The perception of oneself as a person develops intensively, with gender-specific needs, motives, value orientations, appropriate attitude towards the opposite sex, appropriate forms of behavior.
 Many girls value their boyfriends for their moral qualities.
 These features are less pronounced in teenagers.
  But when moving from class to class, the number of such assessments increases.
  According to I. Ս. Coni և V. O. According to Losenkov, girls are less sociable, but more honest, fair and loyal.
  Imaginations about one's self-esteem can often be exaggerated, manifested in reality, for example, if he does not keep his word, then what is said will be perceived as boasting.
 Adolescents may also have extremely low levels of self-esteem.
  They sickly accept criticism and humor.
  They consider that the main reason for failure is that some people do not notice their merits.
High school students' self-esteem shows caution.
 They point out their shortcomings rather than their advantages.
 Both girls and boys have the qualities of "quick flare", "rudeness", "selfishness".
  Among the positive features, such self-assessments are most often found: "loyal to the company", "I do not betray my friends", "I help in a difficult situation", etc.
 The qualities that can be used to communicate with peers or those that hinder them (irritability, rudeness, selfishness) come to the fore.
  High self-esteem is revealed when one overestimates one's mental powers1.
The main educational achievement of early adolescence is the discovery of one's inner world.
  The only conscious reality for a teenager is the outside world, where he reflects his imagination.
 Fully aware of his actions, he still does not fully understand his own psychological status.
  For a teenager, the external physical world is one of the possibilities of his own experience.
It is obvious from many psychological experiments that when children are shown a picture, asked to describe them, then children և adolescents describe actions, deeds, events, late adolescents և teenagers - acting thoughts and feelings.
  The psychological, deep "content" of the other person, the inner world worries them more than the external, situational context.
 People aged 14-15 begin to understand and reinterpret their emotions, as well as the state of their own "I".
The discovery of the inner world causes many alarming, dramatic anxieties.
 The inner "I" does not coincide with the outer behavior.
 The issue of self-control becomes a priority for them.
In addition to the realization of one's own uniqueness, uniqueness, uniqueness, there is a feeling of oneness.
  The teenager's "I" is still vague, sometimes it is perceived as anxiety or a feeling of inner emptiness, which must be filled with something.
 Very high school 1 See Matykhina M., Mikhalychik T., Prokin N., Adult and pedagogical psychology, Teach. пособие для студентов, Москва, 1984, էջ 280 -281.
It is typical for them to honor their own uniqueness.
  It passes with age.
  With age, it distinguishes its characteristic individual features.
For teenagers և adolescents, the most important thing in all time criteria is considered to be present - "grounded".
 They feel the flow of time lightly, all worries are related to their limited personal experience.
 The future is presented to them only in general.
 Adolescents later noticeably increase the speed of subjective perception of the flow of time.
  The development of ideas over time is closely linked to both mental development and the progress of a child's life.
 In adolescence, the time chain is perceived as a separate past and future.
Observing temporal perspectives is essential for understanding the age dynamics of the reflective "I".
  English scientists D. Coleman, D. Herzberg, M. Morris studied the "identity crisis" of 13-16 year olds using the Incomplete Sentences Method in 1977, combining the positive ("When I think about myself, I feel proud") with the negative ("When I think about myself, I sometimes"). "I'm afraid") և neutral ("When I think about myself, I try to imagine what I will look like as I get older").
 It turned out that the positive-negative assessments of the "I" change little with age, while with age the thinking about the future "I" sharply increases.
 The question "Who am I?" Presupposes the evaluation of not so unique features in adolescence, but of perspectives, opportunities, what am I going to become, what will happen to me in the future, how and why do I live?
The theme of death sounds sharp in adolescence self-consciousness, but not unequivocally.
For some they cause irrational fears, for others they cause new intellectual problems related to the idea of ​​time, for example, "I do not want to know when I will die, I want to know when I will be reborn again."
According to Erickson, adolescence is built around the crisis of identity, which consists of social-individual personal choices, identification-self-determination.
 If the teenager fails to solve these problems, then an inappropriate identity is formed in him, the development of which goes in four ways.1. Escape from psychological intimacy, close interpersonal relationships, 2. Deviation from the sense of time, inability to build life plans, fear of growing up, change, 3. Deviation of creative abilities, inability to mobilize internal resources և focus on a specific activity, 4. Formation of "negative identity", renunciation of self-determination և imitation of negative patterns1.
The level of identity is closely related to individual personality traits.
  It is possible to have a high level of self-esteem.
  "Deviant identity" և "premature identity" is associated with less intellectual independence, especially when solving complex problems in stressful situations.
  The first type of teenagers feel constrained, the second ones want to leave the game.
Working teenagers reach "mature identity" earlier than others.
Gender identity is also considered a priority.
 Identity is formed primarily in the field of professional orientation.
 Adolescents' tendency to self-study significantly increases, shyness, self-centeredness, the clarity of the "I" image decreases, self-esteem decreases, certain qualities of self-esteem change.
  These changes are also affected by their appearance - skin, face, body.
  Appearance is a priority for both teenagers and teenagers.
 They are constantly compared to their friends and surroundings.
The self-consciousness of high school students differs from selfishness, which plays a key role.
 It allows the young man (teenager) to open his unique inner world, allows him to establish his worldview.
The development of self-consciousness at that age takes place in the following main directions: 1. The realization of identity, the limitation of the "I" and not the "I" կիր its application in personal temporal space, 1 See Kon I., Psychology of Early Childhood, Age Psychology.
  Childhood, poison, юность.
  Хрестоматия.
  Учеб.пос.длястуд.пед.вузов, Москва, 1999, էջ 36.
2. "I" is a subject of existence (it appears at the age of three, when the child realizes himself as a source of activity), 3. Awareness of his educational qualities (own personality), 4. Study of one's own moral system of self-consciousness.
The formation of personal identity is a key direction in the development of high school self-awareness.
  The latter are characterized by the need to reinterpret their own "I" (identity crisis), choice of profession, self-orientation.
  Attention is drawn to one's own body և its transformation.
They take any external flaws very seriously (short stature, captivity, childish features, etc.).
 Self-control, reflection of one's own worries, interest in the inner world increases.
One of the important stages of maturation for adolescents is the development of self-consciousness, due to which a person is able to separate himself from his life activities, realizes his needs, opportunities, aspirations, thoughts, worries, etc.
  Adolescents strive to understand themselves, their abilities և peculiarities, their similarities և difference from other people, originality, being unique.
  This is where the teenager's high or low self-esteem is born.
  He tries to find his criteria of comparability.
  There is a transition from orientation on the assessment of those around you to orientation on self-assessment.
  Conceptions of the ideal "I" are formed1.
Ժ. Ժ Rousseau viewed adolescence as a period of growth of self-awareness, of the birth of a person.
 Stanley Hall described adolescence as a crisis of self-awareness, a period of individual feeling.
  Self-esteem is one of the main components of self-awareness.
 Adolescents' self-esteem is often inadequate. It either tends to rise or fall sharply.
Biological sexual development is considered to be an important factor in awakening sexual self-awareness.
 Man begins to perceive himself as a subject of sexual activity, sexual activity awakens.
 The teenager not only has knowledge about his sexual activity, but also feels like a woman or a man.
  An important factor in the qualitative reconstruction of self-esteem is the sexual need, the awakening and realization of feelings towards the opposite sex, the change of relations with others, especially the environment of peers3.
At the end of the transition period, adolescents develop a new neoplasm - self-orientation 4.
  This occurs when a person faces the need to solve the problem of his future.
A young high school student uses the qualities of "I" from the qualities of communication, willpower and intellectual qualities.
  Thus, self-knowledge, the formation of self-esteem, self-esteem is first of all realized under the influence of people who understand him as a bearer of this or that quality.
  Moreover, girls' self-esteem is lower than that of boys from adolescence. This is mainly due to the appearance.
The nature of adolescents' self-esteem shapes certain qualities of a person.
 Self-esteem can be influenced by self-assessment, which is considered motivating and orienting.
  Adolescents' assessment assumptions are aimed at finding answers to the questions about how he is in the eyes of those around him, how different he is from them, how close he is to his ideal.
  Later, young people 's self - esteem assumptions are determined by a combination of different assessments, by the result of science, as well as by others in search of their own essence, for themselves5.
Peculiarities of self-esteem affect the adolescent's status in the classroom.
  The nature of self-esteem is conditioned by educational and social activity.
 Adolescents who have adequate self-esteem are more advanced.
  Adolescents with adequate self-esteem have a wide range of interests, their activity is directed to different types of science 1 See Dubrovina I., Practical Psychology of Education, Textbook 4, St. Petersburg, 2007, p. 374.
2 See Khudoyan S., page 45.
3 See ibid., Pp. 185-187.
4 See Stolyrenko L., 2003, p. 318.
5 See Rean A., Human Psychology from Birth to Death, Full Course in Developmental Psychology, St. Petersburg, 2002, p. 360366.
interpersonal communication, recognition of others ին the process of revealing one's identity.
  Adolescents with low self-esteem tend to have depressive tendencies.
 Along with the increase in adolescents' self-esteem, the influence of parents decreases։ the influence of peers increases.
 However, adolescents are not completely separated from their parents; the connection with the family is maintained.
The volume and relevance of the assessed signs increase with age.
  Adolescents 'perception of other people is conditioned by both objective and subjective factors: the nature of emotional attitude towards the perceived person, the level of development of adolescents' cognitive abilities, their mental development, emotional, educational state, past experience.
 People's perception is conditioned by the individual peculiarities of the adolescent.
 It has been proven that adolescents' perception of other people's physical image later affects their perception of themselves in the same way.
The obedience of a high school student to their own desires means that they already realize their motivational system.
 Self-analysis becomes one of the important factors of educational activity.
 As a result of all this, it becomes clear to high school students that they need the knowledge gained in the educational process in order to be admitted to a university, to have a job, to raise children.
 Thus, the most important change for high school students is the fundamental transformation and formation of self-awareness.
Emma Mathosyan CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS IN HIGH SCHOOL SCHOOLS Keywords: "I" concept, self-regulation, self-discovery, self-esteem, self-knowledge, self-management.
