DEVELOPMENT OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SELECTION SYSTEM OF CIVIL SERVANTS Civil service positions, being a professional activity, present certain requirements to the occupant, which in particular relate to professional education, knowledge, abilities, skills, personal-psychological quality.
Although in many developed countries of the world, in recent years, in some countries, due to objective circumstances, the psychological qualities of a person are given priority, nevertheless in the process of selecting civil servants in Armenia there is no psychological choice. In fact, psychological qualities are not taken into account when selecting civil servants. .
 Our research is aimed at developing a system of professional psychological selection in the RA civil service.
In general, in order to develop a system of psychological selection of staff in any profession or field, it is necessary to study the following basic factors: • Important professional qualities required for the position և Psychological qualities required in terms of professional competence, in this case, what psychological qualities և should be civil the employee, • the management system (system features), • the employee's moral qualities and characteristics.
Professional psychological selection is a multi-level process that goes through several stages.
 In this paper, we will discuss the process of developing and organizing a system of professional psychological selection, that is, what stages it goes through, so that it becomes clear to us how you should implement that process in the field of civil service.
In all types of human activities, including work-professional activities, the effectiveness depends to a large extent on the individual psychological characteristics of the person.
  Each activity presents certain requirements to the system of individual-psychological features of a person.
  In order to ensure the compliance of human activity with that system, it is necessary to make a professional psychological choice.
Professional psychological selection is a system of measures that allows you to select for each specific profession the people who are most relevant to their individual characteristics, that is, fit to perform that activity with maximum efficiency.
Professional choice includes medical, educational, social and psychological choices1.
 Assess the physical and mental health requirements for a given profession or work activity from the point of view of medical choice.
 The educational choice is made to test the professional knowledge and abilities.
  In terms of these two elections, there are principles developed in the RA civil service system - procedures, which are also fixed by the relevant law.
  For example, the RA Law on Civil Service stipulates that you do not have the right to hold a civil service position related to your health condition, in accordance with the list of diseases approved by the RA Government, taking into account that these diseases may hinder the performance of official duties and responsibilities.
  In the process of selecting civil servants, the issue of medical selection is solved by checking the relevant medical documents.
In terms of educational choice, there are developed procedures and principles in the civil service system.
  The law և the relevant decisions for each position of the civil service set clear requirements for the relevant education և knowledge, գ the task of selecting specialists 1 See Aghuzumtsyan R. V., Stepanyan R. R., Professional psychological selection, Yerevan, 1988, page 4.
2 See RA Law on Civil Service, Article 12.
In the process, this knowledge is tested orally and in writing.
Of particular importance in the professional selection process is the psychological choice, which determines the requirements for the most important psychological properties for the activity in order to carry out that activity more effectively.
 In order to organize the process of professional psychological selection, it is first necessary to develop a system of psychological selection for the given field of work or profession.
 Professional psychological selection should be preceded by the stage of elaboration of methodological-organizational suggestions for selection.
  The purpose of elaborating these proposals is to determine the methods (tests) for evaluating the professional psychological functions necessary for a specific given activity, to determine the marks of professional competence, to withdraw them, and to scientifically substantiate them.
The development of a professional psychological selection system is carried out in the following sequential stages: 3. Determining the expediency of creating a professional selection system for the given profession (substantiation of necessity), • Defining a specific problem of psychological selection, • Psychological study of the given work հոգեբ Psychological analysis of work activities aimed at important professional qualities և Extraction of characteristics, • Determination of relevant quality requirements for candidates through professional methods կազմ Compilation of professional graphs based on them խ Psychograms;• Defining organizational-methodological specific procedures for psychological selection.
Now let's refer to the mentioned processes, discussing them in the system of the RA Civil Service.
3 See Aghuzumtsyan R. V., Stepanyan R. R., Professional psychological selection, Yerevan, 1988, page 6.
The development of a system of professional psychological choice for the civil service system has a serious justified need.
 First of all, the competition for vacancies has a lot of vacancies և, in fact, the current selection system does not have a well-developed scientific-methodological mechanism that will allow measuring the suitability of the personal-psychological qualities of the selected civil servants ի the position.
In addition, in order to assess the need for psychological selection systems in this system, we conducted a survey among the civil servants of the Civil Service Management's body, which is the organizing body, the vacancy commission, and civil servants of various government agencies.
Psychological study of work activity հոգեբPsychological analysis of work activity is carried out with the aim of extracting important professional qualities and compiling professional graphs and psychograms of positions based on them.
  Qualitative professional qualities, according to V. Դ ․ According to Shadrikov, it is the individual qualities of the subject of activity that influence the efficiency of successful mastering and implementation of the activity4.
The next issue, the decision of the relevant requirements for the candidates, is to some extent implemented in the civil service system.
  Each civil service position has its own "passport", which is developed, approved and amended by the Civil Service Council5.
  In the RA Law on Civil Service, the position passport is presented as follows: "Passport of the civil service position describing the rights and responsibilities provided by law for the civil servant holding the given position, presented to the civil servant from the point of view of possession of professional knowledge and work skills, as well as the requirements of having a corresponding rank of civil service. document »6.
4 See Aghuzumtsyan R ․, Petrosyan R ․, Poghosyan S ․, Khachatryan A ․, The psychological description of the peculiarities of managerial activity, -Yer Հ, 2015, CPA, p. 118.
5 See RA Law on Civil Service, Article 10.
6 See RA Law on Civil Service, Article 3.
Civil servants perform their official duties և work activities on the basis of a position passport, which is developed based on the functions provided for a specific position.
In fact, the position passport is a professional substitute document in the civil service system, as a professional graph is a description of a specific profession or position, in which, according to E. In ․ Garber և V ․ Վ ․ According to Kozach, the job description, the requirements for the specialist, the brief description of the main official responsibilities, the professional reputation in the group of certain positions, the required education, the inclusion of the qualification (category, degree, etc.), the socio-economic significance are presented7.
An analysis of a profession similar to a profession is a psychogram, but the latter gives a specific psychological analysis of the profession8.
 If the passport of the position in some way contains the information given by the professional graph, in terms of psychological analysis of the dismissal it does not contain information, that is, there is no psychogram of the given profession in the passport of the position.
In the current practice, the position passport is compiled on the basis of a professional graph.
  It should be noted that in our country many organizations do not differentiate between these concepts և The same information about the position or profession can be seen in different organizations in the "professional graph" or "passport".
  In the same way, there is no professional graph in the RA Civil Service system, instead the notion of "official passport" is used, which, however, differs from the professional graph in terms of content.
 For this reason, in order to develop a system of psychological selection in this field, it is necessary to create professional graphs, psychograms, from which all the psychological qualities and qualities that can be measured can be taken out to assess the suitability of the candidate's personal and psychological characteristics.
A separate part of the professional graph is the psychogram, which is formed through the psychological analysis of professional activities.
7 See Petrosyan M ․, Javadyan A ․, Amiryan D ․, Person և Position, Yerevan, State Service, 2013, 288, p. 86.
8 See Bodrov V. A., Psychology of professional convenience. Учебное пособие для вузов - Psychological analysis of professional activities aimed at determining the requirements for the psychological characteristics of a specialist, as a result of which the peculiarities of important professional mental processes are revealed, psychological qualities with potential for development of the profession are identified. on professional activity.
  There are professional methods: document analysis, inquiry method, viewing method, self-monitoring, self-report method, scientific experiment method, algorithmic method of work process description, etc.
Through professional psychography ագիտական ​​professional analysis of professional activity, after extracting the professional qualities for the given profession, a professional-psychogram is formed on the basis of them, which we have done in this work.
 After all this, in order to measure, evaluate or identify the professional qualities that have been extracted, it is necessary to use appropriate tools (methods, tests).
  The next process in the process of developing a psychological selection system is the selection and development of methods (tests) for assessing the necessary professional psychological qualities of candidates ևEnsuring their validity and reliability.
The last stage of the development of the psychological selection system is the definition of specific organizational-methodological selection procedures, which implies the solution of more technical-organizational problems.
Below we present the professionalogram of the position of the RA Civil Service Main Group, which was compiled by us.
  In compiling the professional graphs, we used the general description of the civil service positions, the collective monograph "Psychological description of the peculiarities of administrative activity" (Aghuzumtsyan R, Petrosyan R, Poghosyan S, Khachatryan A.).
 As an accepted example of a graph of a professional graph, let Ե Ս ․ The diagram in Romanova's "147 Famous Professions" professions ձեռն psychological analysis of professions (where all professions are based not on the formal features of professions, but on the psychological study of others), adapted to the characteristics of civil service positions.
The manual presents the descriptions and meanings of all the sections in each of the professional graphs և each concept 9.
"General Group of Civil Service Positions" Position Classification CardProfessional GraphHome Reproduction (Производство) RA Constitution, RA Law "On RA Civil Service", Labor Code - Relevant Laws on Body Activities (3rd level - higher) Specialized subjects - Advanced (3rd) "Together" typeInitiative typeSocial type Position of the group Name of the dominant dominant mindThe 1st field of basic knowledge ևLevelThe 2nd field of basic knowledge ևLevelProfessional fieldInterpersonal interactionPredominant interest1 ․ Dominant forms of activity Organization, planning, coordination, management and control of the work of the structural subdivisions under its subordination.
Problems և Gives instructions.
gives them creative solutions.
Qualities Qualities Highly developed organizational skills, which are based on such qualities as strong will, determination, purposefulness, perseverance, creative approach.
9 See Romanova E. S., 147 popular professions.
 Psychological analysis and professiograms. 3rd ed., Pererab. and more. / - М .:
 Аспект Пресс, 2011, 416 с.2 արդյունավետ The effectiveness of professional activity is conditional.
Communication skills (ability to communicate, negotiate, smooth relations).
Self-government.
Well-developed analytical skills (abilities to process, compare, evaluate and assimilate information).
Effective division of labor ելու Delegation skills.
Ability to reason, to orientate quickly.
Managerial skills.
Management skills arising from the functions defined in his / her passport.
uncontrollabilityRigidityOptitude to place one's own responsibility on othersAuthoritarianism Conservatism 4 ․ Scope of Professional Knowledge Civil ServiceCommunity ServiceCivil Service 5 ․ Group of other positions corresponding to the same type of personQ բարձր highest և leading group of positions ․ 6 ․ Educational Institution of Higher Education Institutions Higher Education Institutions SYSTEM OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SELECTION OF CIVIL SERVANTS Manuk Khachatryan EDUCATION Keywords: civil service, psychological selection system, professional graph, professional analysis of positions
