ABOUT THE PROBLEM OF PROTECTION OF PLANTS ON THE EDGE OF DISAPPEARANCE IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
The vegetation of the Republic of Armenia is very diverse (Fig. 1), which is conditioned by the unique geographical position of the Republic of Armenia, the peculiarities of the geological development, the complexity of the relief and the variegation of the climatic conditions.
 Armenia occupies an intermediate place among the two floristic Caucasian "Iran-Armenian provinces".
  The vast Caucasus province is characterized by mesophilic types of vegetation (forests and meadows), and the Iranian-Armenian province is characterized by arid species (desert, semi-desert, phryganoid vegetation, as well as teragactic steppes).
  Within the borders of the Republic of Armenia, the Iranian-Armenian province includes the Middle Araks depression with its slopes, the Arpa River basin և the southern part of the Meghri region [1, 2].
The Caucasus և The interaction of the Iranian-Armenian provinces created a great wealth of ebony communities, the distribution of which is subject to the law of vertical zoning.
 There are 7 high vegetation zones in our republic.
 The lower zones are occupied by deserts and semi-deserts, the higher by alpine vegetation, and among them are steppes, forests, meadows, and other types of vegetation.
Under the influence of the greenhouse effect, the temperature rises and the atmospheric precipitation decreases, as a result of which the landscape zones of the Republic gradually migrate upwards.
 If it's dark! In the first millennium, the desert vegetation zone was about 0.3% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, then in 1998. According to the data, it has almost tripled և is about 0.8% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
 It is estimated that the area of ​​desert vegetation will make up 5% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia (Fig. 3) [4].
 The semi-desert vegetation zone is dark! was about 4.4% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, then in 1998 ․ According to the data, it has reached up to 15%.
 According to the forecasts, the areas of the semi-desert vegetation zone are expected to increase, it will reach about 17% (Fig. 2).
 In the desert-semi-desert vegetation zones, where the majority of the population of the Republic lives, the humidity coefficient will decrease due to the decrease of precipitation.
 Reduction of evaporation in turn will lead to an increase in temperature.
  Less hidden heat will be expended on evaporation, which will raise the surface temperature of the soil.
 All this in turn will lead to the destruction or transformation of a number of plant communities.
  If BC In the first millennium BC, the desert-semi-desert vegetation zone occupied up to 700-800 m, then now its border is at the height of 1200-1300 m, and the desert-semi-desert vegetation zone is predicted to rise to 14001500 m (Fig. 2) [4].
The steppe vegetation zone is dark! In the first millennium it was 15.2% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, and now it is 37%.
 The steppe vegetation zone has increased at the expense of forests; the latter extends from 1600-1700 m to 2400 m (Fig. 2).
It is predicted that due to the greenhouse effect, the steppe vegetation zone will migrate several hundred meters up to 2500-2600 meters.
Mt'a! In the first millennium, forests made up about 40.3% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, and now - 6%.
  According to the forecasts, the forest zone will hardly be reduced if the deforestation does not exceed the afforestation works (Fig. 3).
Near the alpine zone In the first millennium it occupied 30.3% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, and now its territory makes about 28.2%.
  It is forecasted that the area of ​​the alpine zone will decrease to 22.5% (Fig. 3).
  The alpine vegetation zone used to extend from about 2300-2400 meters to 2800 m, and now 2600-3000 m.
  The area of ​​the alpine vegetation zone has decreased due to the steppes.
 According to forecasts, the area near the alpine zone will decrease, there will be upward migration.
  It will spread from 2800-2900 meters to 3200 m heights, and with it the area occupied by them will decrease (Fig. 2) [4].
Figure 1. Vegetation Zones of Armenia [5] The Alpine Vegetation Zone In the first millennium it occupied about 9.5% of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, and in 1998 According to the data, the area has decreased - it has reached 7.7%.
 According to forecasts, the area of ​​the alpine vegetation zone will decrease again by 6.4%.
 The reason for the decrease in the area of ​​the alpine zone is the upward migration of landscapes.
 At present the alpine zone spreads at altitudes of 3000-3500 m.
Figure 2. Dynamics of the spatial distribution of flora in Armenia [4] Figure 3. Endangered plants included in the RA Red Book [4] The issue of flora protection is of vital importance for all mankind.
 The floristic wealth of the Republic of Armenia includes about 3600 plants, և 1200 species of parasitic mushrooms [6].
 123 of the plant species are endemic, for the protection of which effective measures are needed.
  One of such means is the "Red Book" of RA plants.
 According to the RA Law on Flora 1999 Article 14 of the Law on the Red Book of Plants of the Republic of Armenia, which meets the international requirements, contains information on the status of rare endangered plant species, geographical distribution, ecological conditions, biological features, current status and conservation measures.
The Red Book entry is based on data on the number of species կրճատ reduction of distribution limits, deterioration of living conditions վտանգ risk of extinction [6].
The first edition of the RA Red Book of Plants includes only 387 species, the condition of which is more alarming, among them: hedgehog Garrielyan, prickly pear, maple-like, bright yellow berry, gaz gune, annual bell, etc. [7].
 Assessment of the condition of all species included in the second edition of the RA Red Book և The determination of their categories was made on the basis of internationally accepted standards.
 Extensive new material has been taken into account in assessing the species, which has been accumulated for 20 years after the publication of the first edition of the Red Book.
According to the procedure of keeping the "Red Book" of RA plants, the "Red Book" of RA plants was discussed at the sitting of the RA "Red Book" keeping commission, which gave its positive conclusion.
 The "Red Book" of RA plants was approved by the RA Government on January 29, 2010. Decision No. 72-N առում Includes a description of 452 species of plants և 40 species of fungi.
  In addition, the second section of the "Red Book" provides information on 223 plant species whose condition is worrying, such as musk, hyacinth atrpatakanyan, venerenavars, dandelion divider, onion akaka, canopy yellow, gourd gohar, Georgian goat [6].
The number of plants in the second edition of the RA "Red Book" has increased, but at the same time many species of plants in the list of the first edition of the "Red Book" have not been included for some reasons.
  The number of such plant species reaches 160.
  These plant species were not included in the second edition of the Red Book for a number of reasons.
At present, the so-called "Green Book" operates in parallel with the "Red Book" in the world.
  The plants that were once included in the "Red Book" list, with some improvement, have been included in the "Green Book" list.
 In other words, as a result of environmental measures of many plant species, they are in a more stable condition, or new habitats have been discovered; there is no direct threat to the species' existence.
 In connection with the discovery of several dozen new habitats of plants in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, they have been removed from the "Red Book" list.
 There are some species that are rare in Armenia, but are intensively distributed in other regions.
 Examples of such species are: highland maple, oatmeal Kochi, gaz gune, gaz gokcha, gas persian, patvuk Calver, turmeric Adam, dactyloris Iberian, solitary large, lily-purple, juniper, berry, fragrant, fragrant nettle.
  The latter is quite widespread in Armenia.
  For example, the bell's one-legged "legion owl" is widespread in the Mediterranean basin, and the imperial cylinder is a rare species in Armenia, but is widespread in the world.
There are plants in Armenia that are not well studied, based on incorrect data, many plant species have been included in the flora of Armenia.
 However, at present they have been removed from the flora of Armenia և, therefore the plants that were included in the first edition of the "Red Book" of Armenia are missing in the second.
 Examples of such plants are oat hedgehog, calve hedgehog, prickly pear, lily-of-the-valley, small pea, and level grass.
 According to the International Red Book, herbs that have not been harvested for decades are considered extinct.
 For tree species, this period is տարի 100 years։ more.
 Among such plants in Armenia were: hedgehog Araksyan, hedgehog Gabrielyan, hedgehog Vedi, onion net, gas cart, you Micheli, dexterous moss-shaped, silent Arnold.
In the first edition of the "Red Book" of the Republic of Armenia, the names of many plants are incorrectly chosen, but they are currently under a new name, they are presented in the latest edition of the "Red Book".
 Such species are: Anatolian flax, flax Seljuk, Tournefort stop, Transcaucasian snowdrop, yellow coriander, Roman dactyloris, etc.
Summing up the study, we came to the following conclusions. - There are very few semi-desert landscapes in protected areas, which is why it is necessary to add protected areas in which there will be a semi-desert zone.
 Semi-deserts are intensively used for agricultural purposes, as irrigation yields high yields of agricultural crops, which contributes to the transformation of semi-desert natural ecosystems.
 It is not allowed to destroy any plant species listed in the Red Book - the wild flora suffers significant losses from the uncontrolled collection of ornamental plants, herbs, which significantly leads to the reduction or extinction of local populations, as in the case of aloe vera. They are damaged because they serve as pastures - the ecosystems of wetlands are also subject to intensive human impact, such as the drying up of swamps, the use of water resources for irrigation, water supply for hydropower.
  Therefore, in order to save these ecosystems from destruction, it is necessary to regulate human economic activity in many areas.
Literature 1. Afrikyan K., Vegetation of the Republic of Armenia, National Atlas of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 78-79.
2. Gasparyan A., Plant Geography, Yerevan, 1971, 488 pages.
3. Armenia. Climate change issues (collection of articles), / A.H. Edited by Gabrielyan / Yerevan, 1999, p. 360.
4. "Red Book" of Armenian Plants, Yerevan, 2010, 591 pages.
5. Physical Geography of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1971, 469 pages.
Narine HayrapetyanAbout the PROBLEM OF PROTECTION OF PLANTS ON THE EDGE OF DISAPPEARANCE OF RA
