HASHMEN ARMENIAN HOLIDAYS AND TRADITIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF ARMENIAN CULTURE Studies on the holidays and traditions of Hamshen Armenians are mostly one-sided.
 This circumstance is used quite "effectively" by Turkey, presenting them to the world as "Turkish".
The study is a modest attempt to fill that gap.
Human social life consists of working։ holidays.
 Each, in fact, is a frontier, from which a new work, a new life begins.
 Holidays and traditions, whose roots go back to the Middle Ages, play an important role in the cultural and social life of the Hamshens.
At present, due to decriminalization, a number of elements have been eliminated1.
New Year (flowering) - Christmas, Christmas.
 In ancient times, Armenians celebrated the New Year on March 21, the day of the spring equinox, which is not accidental.
 Nature is resurrected at the beginning of spring, that is why the Armenian made that day the New Year, celebrated it with a joyful celebration, praising the awakening of nature, praying to the gods for a fruitful year (even today some Aryan peoples, Persians, Afghans, celebrate the beginning of the year March 21).
The second Armenian year was Navasard 1 (August 11).
 According to legend, the patriarch Hayk killed the dictator Bel in the province of Hayots Dzor, granting freedom to his family and descendants.
  That victory presumably took place in BC. 2492 on August 11.
 The Armenians called the August holiday Navasard, which means New Year.
During the reign of Catholicos Simeon of Yerevan (18th century), the beginning of a new year was adopted on January 1 (corresponding to the beginning of the year accepted in a number of Christian countries), or even before the 19th century. Half of it was celebrated in August in many Armenian provinces (Syunik, Artsakh, Utik).
  Only in the 20th century. At the beginning of the year, January 1 became the beginning of the year2.
The New Year of the Hamshens (flowering) coincides with the times of the Julian calendar, sometimes they also celebrate Christmas.
 The Christmas of the July calendar preceded St. The week dedicated to Barsegh the Great.
  According to the folk calendar, the first days of January were known as St. Parsegh days.
 That is why January 1 coincides with the days of Lent, և it is a law to celebrate the holiday within the family.
  Fasting dishes are placed on the festive table.
  Special attention 1 Khachatryan J., Petrosyan E., The games of the annual Hamshen holidays (end of the 19th century - 1st century), "Hamshen and Hamshen Armenians. Proceedings of the Conference ", Yerevan-Beirut, 2007, p. 223.
2 "National holidays (traditional and modern)", Yerevan, 2002, page 3.
It became a number of dishes, which had a sacred meaning.
 Preference was given to seven numbers (seven types), in which cereal dishes և pastries with fried pumpkin filling prevailed.
7 types of pastries were ordered in the oven beforehand, with the number of family members, one of which was marked with a sign of luck.
  In the evening, after sunset, the Hamshen Armenians celebrated the New Year with a special family dinner.
  They definitely put a big jug of water on the table, 4 burning candles that had to be lit before morning.
  Instead of a deer, a branch of an olive tree was used as a holiday tree (the deer has been used as a holiday tree since 1900), which was decorated with chopped walnuts, dried figs and apples.
  The branch was probably inserted into the ritual bread (to stop it), as was the custom among the Greeks1.
 On the New Year's table, a piece of boiled corn spiced with raisins and a stew (arman) made of corn flour with milk and vegetable oil, which was served with yogurt, were obligatory.
Wheat bread, grilled pumpkin pie, peas, dried fruits, walnuts with honey were mandatory.
The predictions based on the belief in the magical nature of the "first" in the New Year ritual system refer to the whole economic year, to know the degree of security of the latter in order to influence the forces of nature in a corresponding way.
 Some of these characters have passed to the Christian New Year.
 The most common and pervasive is the ritual custom of determining the abundance of the year (barrack) in some ethnographic regions called 2 years (in other places, krkenikam without a name) with a round, nut-shaped bread decorated with various sweets.
  In Javakhk there was this custom: the housewife, putting the "year" in a coffin at the dawn of Christmas, poured honey on it և, went out of the house with the brides, hit the ground with a stick and said three times, "Dovlat, you are a mountain, you are a gorge, aritun" - the same They come in regularly, distributing honey to everyone to sweeten the New Year, and keeping the "year" for evening divination.
  The "Year" bread in New Nakhichevan kept its old appearance more clearly, which directly speaks of its dedication to the New Year.
  "The year," writes Yer. Shahaziz, "which is the real sign of the year, is a big, all-flat bread. It is built in such a way that several parts or branches are clearly visible on it."
  The number of those parts or branches is 12, for 12 months of the year, or in proportion to the number of members in the house. ”3
 The bread of the year is prepared in the "Musho" migrant villages of Alashkert.
 In other ethnographic regions the divination bread was round, decorated with dried fruits and nuts, in which most of the money was put and baked that way.
  New Year fortune teller through that bread 1 Avanesov H., General features of Hamshen Armenian culture, "Mesrop Mashtots University", 2013, № 6.
2 Lalayan E., Javakhk. Famous Holidays, "Ethnographic Magazine", № 2, book B, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1897, page 246.
Shahaziz Yerevan, New Nakhichevan and New Nakhichevan residents. Rites and customs, "Ethnographic magazine", № 9, book 9, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1902, page 5.
3 In the same place.
 The divination with that bread dedicated to the New Year is now out of life.
Only the elderly remember that this custom was in their childhood.
4 Mkhitaryan Agh., Famous Holidays of the Year, "Eminian Ethnographic Collection", vol. A, № 1, Moscow-Alexandropol, 1901, page 261.
The situation was like this. The bread was cut according to the number of family members (and the Hamshens meant cattle) and distributed to each.
  The rituals of divination included other forms of ethnography.
According to B. Torlakyan, the housewife of the Hamshen Armenians, hid the sign of fortune in one of the apples - a coin, and in some ethnographic regions dried fruits and stones were used instead of coins2.
 The head of the family cut the apple and divided it among everyone.
  Whoever fell for the sign was considered happy և successful until the end of the year3.
 But it is difficult to imagine how big that apple would be to satisfy the whole family.
According to field research, a waiter full of apples (in the number of family members) was placed on the table, in one of which the hostess placed a silver coin 4.
 Everyone hoped that the apple would become their share with money.
  According to beliefs, a happy person brings happiness և success not only to his family, but also to the family in whose house he set foot for the first time in the New Year.
 In the Russian environment he was called the first visitor (polaznik).
  The belief in the kindness of the first visitor among Armenians has been preserved until today.
  The owner of the sign went to the spring in the morning for water, filled all the water tanks in the house.
 His obligatory and powerful duty was to feed the animals of the house with ritual food.
  Entering the barn, he first sprinkled grains of wheat in the corners of the barn, then fed each of the animals individually with the root of boiled corn kernels, and at the end he struck the animals lightly so that they would be fruitful.
During that action, uttering congratulatory words, he repeated the incomprehensible phrase "al pari, doul pari, kher achar, ek tusik".
  The purpose of the ritual was to ensure the abundance of crops, the fertility of animals and the health of people in the New Year.
The New Year was very dim in Sisian, because they were celebrating the Armenian New Year, Navasard 1.
  There was no congratulation. Sometimes only relatives gathered, ate, drank and rejoiced5.
Like Sisian, Gandzak's New Year was dim.
  Shops and workshops were not closed, so very few visited each other.
 An early liturgy was served in the city in the morning so that the year would go well.
  Visiting each other, they congratulated each other on the New Year and wished them health and success.
 Visitors were treated to coffee, walnuts and toast.
 In the villages they gave each other apples or lemons, served vodka and dried fruits.
  In some, the front of the door was decorated with red threads so that the New Year could be celebrated6.
 As in other Armenian ethnographic regions, Christian holidays in Artsakh have been assimilated with pagan rituals.
  The wide participation of people of different ages in the holidays was expressed not by the liturgies and processions with the participation of the clergy, but by 1 Odabashyan A., New Year in the Armenian folk calendar, Armenian ethnography և folklore, Yerevan, 1978, p. 9, pp. 52-53.
2 Avanesov H., Holidays and traditions of Hamshen Armenians in the context of Armenian culture, "Hamshen", 2013, № 16.
3 For more details see B. Torlakyan Foundation, h. 4, p. 226.
4 See Ժ. Khachatryan Foundation, Haykadzor, narrator: Vardan Ghukasyan.
5 Lalayan E., Famous Holidays, "Ethnographic Magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1898, book Z, № 1, page 249.
6 Lalayan E., Famous Holidays, "Ethnographic Magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1900, book Z, № 6, page 363.
with folk amusements.
  Here not so much the church penetrated into the public private life as the latter into the church.
 There were holidays that were not celebrated by the church at all.
  Such was Navasard, which, unlike other settlements, was celebrated in Artsakh not on August 11, but in November, which symbolized the end of the economic year1, as it was in ancient times.
  Until recently, it was stable in all the villages of Artsakh.
 It is true that in Shushi it was forgotten - replaced by the celebration of January 1, mutual visits and congratulations, but on the eve of Navasard 2 the villagers continued to bake a variety of cakes (dairy, sweet-boiled ears), cook with lamb and wheat, all New clothes and shoes were bought for the children (the custom was spread in all ethnographic regions և it has been mainly preserved).
 On those holidays gifts were exchanged by relatives and friends (this tradition is still preserved).
It is noteworthy that on that day the landlords especially congratulated the landlord of the village, the priest and took them apple and wine.
 In the yard, red cloth and various pieces of red cloth were hung from the trees (Sos) 3.
It is only a hundred years that Armenians, imitating foreigners, celebrate the New Year in the middle of winter.
 It is already becoming a habit.
 The sun-loving Armenian finds it difficult to come to terms with the custom of celebrating the New Year on January 1, և as soon as March 21 comes, the Armenian remembers his first New Year4.
Christmas is celebrated throughout Christendom with a solemn ceremony of և khurnem believers.
 In early Christianity, the birth of Jesus was known as the Epiphany.
  2nd century The Feast of the Epiphany was celebrated on January 6, and in the 4th century. According to the decision of the Roman Catholic Church, the birth of Jesus was celebrated on December 25, and the baptism on January 6.
  5th c. All Christian churches of St. Birth began 1 This traditional Armenian holiday dates back to the XX century. The beginnings, with some changes, were preserved in Syunik, Goghtn and Persian-Armenia, where Navasard fluctuated in terms of time from late summer to late autumn.
 Despite their partial peculiarities, Navasard rituals had a number of features in common.
 They were mainly celebrated in autumn, coinciding with the harvest, horticulture, orchards, and at the same time were a unique ritual border of agricultural labor contracts.
 The similarities of the festive ceremonies of the people of Karabakh with Lori, Tavush, Syunik and Goghtn are conditioned by the geographical location and migration movements.
 Mkrtchyan S., Holidays in the traditional life of Karabakh people, "Nagorno Karabakh Republic. The Past, the Present and the Future ”(Proceedings of the International Conference), Yerevan, 2007, p. 397.
2 Lalayan E., Varanda, "Ethnographic Magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1898, book C, № 1, pp. 338-349.
  Nuyni, Gandzak province, "Ethnographic magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1900, book Z, pp. 232-382.
 Lisitsyan St., The Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh (ethnographic review), WBU, vol. 12, Yerevan, 1981, pp. 67-73.
 Dadyan Kh., Jean-Gyulums. From Varanda Oral Literature, "Ethnographic Magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1908, book XVIII, pp. 25-32.
  Israelyan S., Pirjamal of Nagorno Karabakh, Nakhichevanik ազգ Ethnographic materials of the city of Shushi, 1970, HAI ABA of NAS RA, part I և II (N 355-356), 48.
 Grigoryan G., Ethnographic materials of Karabakh (Spandaryan village), 1970-1971, Yerevan, RA NAS HAI ABA, 19, parts I, II, notebooks I, II, III, IV.
Vardanyan S., Shushi region of the Nagorno Karabakh Autonomous Region, 1970 June-July, NAS RA NAS, notebook NNFF VII, page 6189.
 Ghaziyan B., Karabakh, Different times, starting from 1973, HAGA NAS HI BBA, notebook 1.
 Begyan M., Traditional customs, crafts and rituals of Lerin Jagir village, Yerevan, 1985, HAI ABA of NAS RA, part III, IV, 11/150.
 Ghazaryan N., Armenian settlements of Gandzak province (Elizavetpol) և historical architectural monuments. Gyulumner (Barsum, Tsagir, Khachakap), Yerevan, 1984, HAI ABA, NAS RA, 5/116, paper. 4.
3 "National Holidays of the Armenian People", edited by K. Mesropyan, part A, Stepanakert, 2003, pp. 8-9.
4 Khachatryan H., The ancient Armenian entertainers, Yerevan, 2003, p. 114.
The Armenian Church, adhering to the ancient custom, continues to celebrate the Feast of the Epiphany, the Nativity and the Baptism on January 6.
 On the first day of Christmas, in the morning and in the evening, the Armenians of Hamshen used to distribute "katay" to the hours, which is whole-grain bread.
 Wheat was mixed with cornmeal (corn) flour, a little honey water or "becmez".
  Cats were distributed on Holy Thursday ատ at Easter.
 In New Nakhichevan, the Christmas candlelight vigil started very early and ended relatively early.
 In the church, many of the bishops stood with lit candles from the beginning of the service until the liturgy.
 Daniel's book, as elsewhere, was read here by one of the children, խոսքերը the words of Sedrak, Misak, and Abednakov, uttered by three children standing alone.
 "Bless" is sung by everyone together for the Candlelight Supper.
 In addition to the usual dishes, fish stew, fried and boiled fish, it is definitely made պատրաստվում kubat, which is eaten with fish stew.
 Kubat is similar to the Russian pie, but it is more delicate, it is prepared with more taste, it is more tasty than the usual pie3.
 In Artsakh, this ton has been less exposed to pagan local colors.
  The day before, they baked an anal pie with oil, flour and nuts, in which peas, beans or small coins were mixed in advance as a sign of power.
This recurrence was solemnly cut in the presence of the whole family, and the missing members of the family, animals, and nunsikshan (this tradition was common among the Hamshens during the New Year).
 Whoever got the dowry, the welfare of the family had to be based on him during the whole year.
  This custom was widespread in all Armenian ethnographic regions4.
 The main activities of the holiday were only the obligatory games played on those days, which were ritual ceremonies performed with a certain script, song and dance.
 Christmas masquerades associate games with transfiguration with the magical purpose given in the first days of the year, which provided a good start և well-being.
The baptism of the Lord.
  The Hamshen Armenians celebrated the day of baptism in church order.
  Early in the morning everyone went to church to participate in the liturgy.
According to the information provided by the folklore, in ancient baptism, during the Water Blessing, the cross was thrown into the sea, and the swimmers went in to remove the cross.
 The baptismal ceremony of the cross was performed in the pool of the church.
 St. Festivals, competitions, games and a fair were held in the churchyard for three days after the liturgy on the feasts of Christmas, Water Blessing and Baptism, during which they sang and danced and organized a horse race5.
Tyarnendaraj.
 40 days after the birthday, Trndez, Tyarnendaraj, took place.
 Fires were lit in the yards of the houses and filled with them.
 After extinguishing the bonfires, they carefully covered the ashes of the bonfire, which is considered sacred, and made predictions in the morning with pictures of it.
  If the painting on the ashes was like an animal's footprint, especially a goat's hoof, give it "National Holidays of the Armenian People", part A, pp. 10-11.
2 Muradiants Y., Hamshen Armenians, "Ethnographic Magazine", Tbilissi (Georgia), 1900, book Z, № 6, p. 157.
3 Shahaziz Yer., Pp. 9,12.
4 "National holidays of the Armenian people", part A, page 12.
5 Avanesov H., The traditions of Hamshen Armenian holidays in the context of Armenian culture, "Hamshen", 2013, № 17.
He had to be productive and successful.
 The fire of Tyarnendaraj was considered healing րել it burned all diseases.
In the province of Gandzak, the newlyweds were bringing cold tree branches in the yard of the church.
  If a newlywed failed to fulfill this obligation, the priest would fine him 40 to 50 kopecks.
  In the evening, they lit a bonfire called a doorman with a candle taken from the church chandelier. The newlyweds turned around three times and finally flew over the doorman three times.
  The children stood around the bonfire, hugging a chicken, so that the hens would often lay eggs during Lent, and then return home with a scorpion.
  Some of the scavengers kept them soaked in a "milk boat" on the night of Easter soaking and soaked in that food.
  The ashes of Trndez were dissolved in water, they were given to the newborn to drink easily, and the sick to be healed.
In Artsakh, on the eve of Tiarnandaraj, the newlyweds brought a bunch of junipers to the churchyard and made a big bonfire, with a cross at the base and a square one at the top.
  After the service, he was praying in front of the church.
 The newlyweds brought the candles brought from the church to the bonfire from all sides and lit the bonfire.
  Usually no one flew by bonfire. It was done only in very few villages (Vaghuhas) by boys, more rarely by girls and unborn women1.
Carnival.
  In ancient times, the beginning of the Carnival was conditioned by the equinox of spring.
  It was believed that winter and spring (summer) fights took place during that period.
 According to the mythological thinking, the people considered it necessary to help the forces of nature with their participation, which was possible through the intervention of fight-competition games, magic actions.
 The Carnival of the Hamshen Armenians lasted for two weeks.
An abundant dinner table, reciprocal visits, congratulations and gifts were mandatory for all days.
 They believed that no matter how you celebrate the Carnival, it will continue throughout the year.
  Yokan և berah was one of the obligatory dishes.
  Yoka is preparing in the following way. They took three pre-baked pink lavash from wheat flour, dipped it in water, and softened it.
  After softening, they cut it, rubbed melted oil on each piece, then fried it with oil.
 They took the lavash for the mouth again, soaked it and softened it, then put stuffed with fried rice, onion, lettuce (milk) in each piece, folded the lavash on all four sides, then fried it in oil.
  The carnival dinners ended with the taste of a red-painted egg.
 This was called closing the mouth, because the seven weeks of Lent were an egg fast until Easter.
 The weddings took place mainly on the Carnival, all the days of the two weeks of which were considered holidays.
 In the evenings, men, gathering in someone's house, invited storytellers, musicians, puppet players (gharagtoz), then sang and danced.
 The women will gather separately.
  This period was full of theatrical games, which were mainly aimed at the fertilization and reproduction of animals, the magical actions of ensuring the abundance of crops.
 In those days the whole village gathered in the fields to watch the fights of buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams or dogs in the fields.
 A "National Holidays of the Armenian People", Part A, pp. 21-22.
It was considered a kind of representation of a married couple of a bride and groom.
  This is one of the simplest types of folk theater.
  Mobile games were widespread in all Hamshen settlements.
In Javakhk it is customary to call the carnival only one week before Lent, but this is not the case in the villages.
  Their carnival lasts exactly two weeks, starting immediately after Lent 1.
The people of Nakhichevan say "Goodbye" to the carnival, they spend the whole week, especially the last three days gathering together, "sitting down to eat", eating, the city's neighbors on fine sledges, and the villagers walking down the street in "tsunas" and having fun.
Carnival was the happiest rural time in Artsakh.
 Although it was still snowing everywhere, people of all ages were indulging in entertainment, especially on Thursdays, when men and women stopped working, having fun like children, and playing games.
 The old people did not hesitate to join this or that group խաղալ to play ball.
 The ball was sewn from pieces of cloth and wool or hair was stuffed into it.
 One group of players was trying to throw the ball away with a stick, the other was trying to bring it back 2.
Big pasd.
 On the eve of Lent, the old woman of the house used to make charkh (avik) from solid dough, put 7 feathers on it and hang it from the ceiling late at night.
 At the end of each week, he took out a feather.
 Charkh avik is the seasonal, ritual calendar, the symbol of the sun.
 The first week was called coconut week համար considered unfavorable for work.
 It is possible that Orcharkhanvik was called "kokoras-aklorik", as in many provinces of Armenia, aklatiz-gogoroz (aklorik).
 According to H. According to Muradyan, each day of that week had certain features that characterize that day: Monday - the moth - moth all year round (if he does not fast), Tuesday - seltun - seltar, rainy day, Wednesday - geltun - wolf day, Thursday - the windy house - wind "Friday is a muscle holiday - if they work, the mice will multiply, Saturday - painful - if they work, they will put the diseases at home."
All days are called holidays.
  In all the provinces of Armenia the holiday was used instead of Sunday, from the Greek word Kiriakos (ruler).
The Great Lent is the last period of the whole winter, the end of Christ's sufferings, it is fully manifested in all the rituals of the week of sufferings.
  During that period, a family liturgy-dinner was given every week in memory of the deceased.
  Sometimes after the liturgy, a meal was given by several families or an entire district.
Preparations for Easter have begun during the week of suffering.
 Boil eggs on Thursday according to the number of family members, paint on Saturday.
  They painted the eggs as much as possible to put on the holiday table, to give as gifts to relatives and friends.
  After entering the mother on Saturday, they opened the fast and started the Easter celebration.
 Pilaf with raisins and rice, milk soup, eoka, boiled corn, wheat bread, porridge made of corn flour and pastries were placed on the table of each family.
 Soaking started with egg, 1 Lalayan E., Javakhk, p. 254.
2 "National holidays of the Armenian people", part A, page 27.
The ritual food was considered to be the egg.
 Since wheat was hardly grown on the shores of the Black Sea, wheat bread was considered a festive dish by the Hamshens1.
 During Lent, the people of Nakhichevan say "Aghatsk", that is, aghuhats. When congratulating each other, they say "Happy Akhatsk".
In Javakhk, almost tired of eating carnival, they ate a few eggs in the evening, then washed their hands, rinsed their mouths and lay down.
Easter.
 Sunday was a day of solemn liturgy, congratulations and dinner.
 Everyone's main occupation was egg games.
 One type of game was beating eggs. Whose egg was broken, he lost.
  The broken egg was the winner.
 The second option was to roll from the mound.
 Erna-gpchush was one of the main games of that holiday.
  They sang and danced all day, rejoicing that Christ had been resurrected.
  Most people fast on Saturday and look forward to worship.
  Many go to the priest and force him to start worshiping immediately.
  Early Sunday morning, when, according to the people, the light falls on the martyrs, they go to the cemetery to light candles.
  After the meal, the priest hurries to bless the houses.
  Here, yeast, salt, incense, grain, water are placed on the hummingbird, and under the hummingbird, cocoons and eggs, so that they may be blessed and multiply.
 Then they go to each other's house, say "Christ is risen from the dead", "Blessed is the resurrection of Christ", shake hands and kiss.
 After congratulating, the rooftops are gathered and eggs are fought3.
  All this was typical of all ethnographic regions, but on the Easter table of the Hamshens there was a fried pig with a painted egg in its mouth.
New Sunday.
 The next Sunday after Easter was called New Sunday, which was the day of the covenant.
 The Hamshens mainly went to St. Resurrection or St. Church of the Savior, 10 km from Trabzon.
 In ancient times the sanctuary was located on a slope.
 Later the place was leveled.
 It became possible to accommodate about 150 people at a time.
  Each village had its place.
  In ancient times, the city-village authorities, the governors, the villagers, the sick and the gullible, all those who dreamed of recovery, gathered here.
 They sacrificed a goat or a ram, a red rooster, which they had to keep away from natural disasters, diseases, and evil.
 There have been donations of satisfaction.
  Only the one who was honest, had clean hands, was respected and had a reputation for slaughtering the Matagh animal.
 After turning the victim around the sanctuary three times, the ear was cut off, blood was spread on the devotee's forehead, hands, tongue, and sometimes on the head and hair.
 This tradition is still widespread in Armenian settlements.
 The victim's head and legs were left in the sanctuary.
  There were competitions, they sang and danced round dances.
 Men danced the most, their fast and complex dances.
 The women's girls danced separately.
 The opening of today's fairs was connected with that day4.
  After the Armenian Genocide, the Christian Hamshens spread all over the world, it became impossible to visit their sanctuaries, that is why the holiday was celebrated in resettled towns and villages.
Ascension.
 The holiday was called "white flower holiday" and was celebrated in May.
 The sanctuary was Lusaghbyur, 3 hours away from Trabzon.
  Young 1 Khachatryan J., Petrosyan E.
2 Lalayan E., Javakhk, pp. 264-265.
3 In the same place.
4 Ibid., Pp. 272-273.
The girls, climbing the mountains, collected flowers and water, put their badges (ring, earring, brooch, button, coin) and made divinations.
 The one who makes a fortune is our luck, and the pot is called luck.
 Gather under the apple tree, sing a quartet և take out a sign, which was said to be lucky.
 After the divination, they did not spill water, but rubbed it on their heads so that their hair would be abundant.
The ritual meal of the Ascension was milk soup.
 That is why the ascension was given the name of oil, eater, day.
 There is a legend about the day. During the ascension, the tombstone wanted to ascend to heaven with Christ.
  Christ pushed the stone down with his fist, և the stone remained motionless.
Christ ascended for 9 days վել was hosted by one of the angels.
  For that, the Hamshens fasted with 9 angels1.
Vardavar.
  Vardavar or the Transfiguration of Christ is one of the 5 pavilion holidays of the Armenian Apostolic Church.
 It is celebrated 98 days after Easter, in the period from June 28 to August 1.
  The history of the holiday dates back to pagan times.
 The holiday of Vardavar was connected with Astghik, the goddess of water, love, fertility and beauty in the Armenian mythology.
 Vardavar holiday was celebrated with great folk celebrations.
 Roses were presented to Astghik, pigeons were released and water was sprinkled on each other2.
Piro, referring to the tradition of celebrating Vardavar by the Hamshens, writes: "They make sacrifices in Vardavar, make a vow to their ruined monasteries and churches.
 Sheikh-ul-Islam had ordered that they, the people of Hemshin, not celebrate Vardavar, but they said that if they were even to tie the mouth of their cannon, they should celebrate.
A special phenomenon in Artsakh was the presence of Nurin in the Vardavar ritual complex, in part, despite the fact that each of them maintained a time-ritual self-image feature in everyday life4.
 Karabakh Nurin ("Gody", "Jolie") performed the function of preventing both rain-free and harmful precipitation5.
Thus, observing the Hamshen holidays and traditions in the context of Armenian culture, we aimed to refute the ethnographic thesis of the Hamshens having "Turkish roots" circulated by Turkish "scholars".
1 Muradeants Y., p. 158.
2 "The tradition of Vardavar in Kavron", translated by A. Kartashyan, "Voice of Hamshen", 2013, № 7-8.
3 Piro, Tachkatsats Armenians, "Nor-Dar" newspaper, Tbilissi (Georgia), December 21, 1893 (№ 227).
4 In Tavush, Hamshen, Pontos, and many other settlements, Vardavar was considered a day of opening, which was sometimes more solemn than the Feast of the Ascension.
 Vardavar was lit by bonfires in separate reservoirs, the ceremonies around which were similar to the ceremonies of the Terndez shooting (see Torlakyan B., Ethnographic Materials on the Social Relations of the Hamshen Armenians and the Pontic Armenians, Yerevan, HAI ABA, part 6, 230, notebook 3/30, p.
  Halajyan G., The ethnographic materials of Dersim, 1960, Yerevan, HAI ABA, part 5, 399, № 5b, page 1525).
5 Mkrtchyan S., pp. 397, 398.
  Hayrapetyan T., On the dual perceptions of rain-fed and rain-breaking rituals, "PBH", 2004, № 3, pp. 217-227.
Hovik AvanesovTHE HASHMEN ARMENIAN HOLIDAYS AND TRADITIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF ARMENIAN CULTURE Keywords: Turkish historians 'thesis on Hamshen Armenians belonging to the Turkish ethnos, Hamshen Armenians' holidays and traditions in the context of Armenian culture
