SOUND AND SOME VOCABULARY MOVEMENTS OF ASHTARAK CITY SPEECH One of the oldest regional versions of the Armenian language is the Ararat dialect, which has a clear phonetic, grammatical and word system.
  The Ashtarak dialect belongs to the Ararat dialect, which is currently spoken mainly in the regional center of Ashtarak, Aragatsotn region.
 The city has about 21,000 inhabitants.
 The speakers of Ashtarak are mainly locals, there are a small number of people who moved from Persia, Syria, Karabakh and Martuni.
  The population of the city is linguistically homogeneous.
  We have learned from the speakers of speech և we have included in our examination some linguistic features that characterize the current language status of speech.
  The main source of registration of linguistic facts is the informants, the bearers of the given speech.
  26 people aged 18-76 were interviewed.
As we know, Ararat Gharibyan classifies the phonetic changes in comparison with Grabar 1 into 4 main groups: first displacement, second displacement, displacement displacement, non-displacement or Grabar type.
 The second shift of the phonetic system is present in the Aratyan dialect, which has a four-tier phonetic system: key> banalidas> dasdzor> dzorjur-jurgirq> bookAparan> habaranavat the occurrence of wheezing.
  This speech is characterized by the deafening of the deaf (for example, to prove-to prove, to touch (my) -dibem և, etc.), which acts only in the middle of the word ավեր at the end of the word.
 At the beginning of the word, the deaf remain unchanged.
 Note that there are some words (for example, parapel, idiot, future, grandfather, grandmother և, etc.) that fall outside this rule.
  It is possible that the influence of literary Eastern Armenian is growing so much that the systemic change of consonants is gradually pushed out of the discourse.
It is typical of Ashtarak's speech that the vowels turn into deaf or breathless sounds, which, however, is mostly typical of the dialects belonging to the movement-movement of the consonantal system.
If we take as a basis that the systemic change in the given position is the spread of the given change on all the words, then the speech of Ashtarak city should be partially considered as a unit belonging to the subgroup of the four-shift consonantal system of the third movement.
The dialect of Ashtarak is distinguished by its phonetic and lexical features.
There are phonetic, meaning-changing layers in it, based on dialectal borrowed words.
 We have observed in the phonetic system of the mentioned speech 1 See Gharibyan Ar., Armenian dialectology, Yerevan, 1953, p. 58.
2 In the Ashtarak dialect, this word has a small meaning, it is pronounced with "b" and "p", but the letter "p" is more practical.
որոշ Some changes in the vocabulary during 25 years, making R. Markosyan's "Ararat dialect" 1 work.
  We mostly referred to R. The rules proposed by Markosyan, which have been changed or have emerged recently.
Now in the Ashtarak region the following villages speak the Ararat dialect: Parpi, the language of the inhabitants of which is considered one of the purest dialects, Oshakan, Ashtarak, Mughni, Saghmosavan, Kosh, Yeghvard and Dovri in the Nairi region, which have a population of more than 40 thousand 2.
When examining the phonetic system of the dialects of the Ararat dialect, R. Markosyan also referred to the phonetic systems of Ashtarak's speech, which have remained unchanged.
As for the emphasis, R. Markosyan writes that in the dialects of Lori, Ashtarak, Etchmiadzin, Vayots Dzor, Spitak, Abovyan region, Dashbash, that is, in the majority of the dialect, the emphasis in the Astapat sub-dialect is on the last vowel3.
 However, in general, to say that the emphasis in Ashtarak's dialect lately falls on the vowel is incorrect, as this refers particularly to the idiom of Parpi village. In the Ashtarak dialect itself, the emphasis is on the vowel of the last syllable.
Next, let's look at the phonetic changes, first presenting some of the changes in the phonological change made under the influence of position or stress.
 R. Markosyan writes that the sound at the beginning of the word ավեր remained unchanged at the end of the word4, but we have noticed that during the plural, and becomes mainly in the position of the end of the word, for example, areuns-harvins, bees-bees, cats-kadvens, etc.
According to R. According to Markosyan 5, in Ashtarak և Oshakan's's dialects, the vowelization of the consonants c, k, q has become so strong that they have turned into j, j, ch,'s, for example, q> j, eye-jaws (their expression for small eyes is known: beetle-punched), g> j - gini-jin, q> ch - kereghan-chhereghan (dish), sister-chir, g> ch - hogi-fochi, k> j - kher> cher.
  This phenomenon is not so close to Ashtarak's words. It has been preserved in some words և phrases, but is intended to be pushed out of the vocabulary of the speaking community, especially people aged 18-45.
  Instead, it is widely used, for example, in Yeghvard.
Let's add examples of interactive sound change, which are not mentioned in Markosyan's book. 1) Decrease of sound, for example, mill-mill, back-edi, inner-inner, upper-upper, etc., 2) progress in making, for example, crushing, grape-picking, etc.
These are the changes in the sound system that have appeared in the last 25 years.
 In the Ararat dialect, including the Ashtarak dialect, the other changes made by vowels, consonants, and two dialects are discussed in detail in R. In Markosyan's book "Araratian Dialect" և Ashtarak's dialect has not been changed either.
In the mentioned book, the author states that many dialects of Lori, Ashtarak, Vayots Dzor, Abovyan region, as well as the dialects of Javakhk and Dashbash have humility.
6 This rule attributed to the Ashtarak's dialect can no longer be considered correct, because -il bow is not as typical for this idiom as, for example, for Lori (for example, beril tem, asil tem Gylen) or another dialect.
  It is possible that these conjugation verbs are in the dialects of Ashtarak, but not in the dialect of Ashtarak.
Another fact is noteworthy. The verb to be Grabarian (my) in the imperative itself appears in adjacent formations as eghi (r), be, as well as il, ilek dzov, man eghi (r) // man il, man be // ma Be smart, be smart // be smart, be smart // be smart, be a gang (wait) // band, be a band // And so on.
 We think that this il to be (my) verb is a changed sound.
 Apparently, the lin of being (my) has fallen, the e of e has changed into i, which is based on being Grabarian. 1 See Markosyan R., Araratian dialect, Yerevan, 1989, p. 56.
2 See ibid., P. 36.
3 See ibid., P. 56.
4 See ibid., P. 62.
5 See ibid., P. 68.
6 See ibid., P. 50.
is the impact.
  However, it is not ruled out that this il may have arisen by a completely different root effect or sound change.
Thus, the Ashtarak dialect differs from the other dialects by a series of linguistic realities.
 There are similarities between Oshakan's "Ashtarak dialects", especially the vocabulary, but these two are not the same again.
 The speech of Ashtarak stands out with its peculiarities.
The examination showed that Ashtarak խոս խոս խոս Karabakh's dialect has obvious lexical similarities.
 This is due to the fact that there are many people who moved from Karabakh to Ashtarak, their dialectal influence is observed on the vocabulary of the speech.
Next we will examine the vocabulary layers of Ashtarak's speech, first of all referring to the words that have changed their meaning.
  Let us present a number of examples, comparing them with the data of the Armenian language dialect dictionary and other dictionaries.
Below we will present reinterpreted բառ words with expanded meaning.  HAP-Straight, green area (in other dialects: 1. Edge, edge.
 2. The palm of the hand.
 3. The edge of the abyss) (expansion of meaning),  BADO-Stairs collected from large stones (in other dialects:
  2. Rack, niche in the wall for storing various things) (reinterpretation),  DUGMA-Newborn grape sprouts (Ar, Jzkh, Gndz .: button) (reinterpretation),  YTI-There (ԲRB., SHMK. - so, such) (reinterpretation), Մ LAMBAR TAL-Stopping the flow of water (In other dialects, LAMBAR, anchor) (reinterpretation), plant, thyme) (reinterpretation),  TSUL-Chtes (Ղrb., Ղzkh., Khrb., Bl. TSULT: Tsntsoti, rag) (re-interpretation),  MJKHLOI-Tomato omelet.
  (In some Ararat dialects (Karin - MKHLU, Lori - MKHLAV, Akn - MKLA) means a type of omelet that does not beat the eggs during cooking) (reinterpretation), PORNJAN // KORJNJAN-Tomato (in other dialects, eggplant) (reinterpretation).
 Let us also introduce a few words of Persian-Turkish origin, which are still used in the Ashtarak dialect: Ա ABIDGARDAN-Three-liter metal cup < AMOGHLI-Uncle's son,  BADRLAMISH // GYABRLAMUGH-D-GYABRLAMUSH-D -Children's clothes,  DASH-Coin game,  TARAZEVI GAL-1. normalize.
 2. To come to your senses.
 (Turkish: TARAZ-normal, normal), Ղ "TSAYSAR-Cold, cold-blooded,  JOVT-Agah, greedy,  YALANTRAKHI3- By the way,  JLUR-Urenu branch,  OGHRASH-bad man.
 In the end, let's talk about, in our opinion, the most important!
 Here we present some words of the Ashtarak dialect, which were created and used by the people of Ashtarak.
  They are found in the regions with similar vocabulary, in the dialects of Oshakan, Parpi and other villages.
  We compared the words in the dialect dictionary of the Armenian language, Hr. Acharyan's "Armenian Language Dictionary" with Archimandrite Sahak Amatuni's "Armenian Word and Thing" dictionary.1 This word has a boring, stupid meaning in Turkish.
2 Lukh is a Turkish suffix.
3 Yalan, Turkish: lie.
 GIVE THE FOREIGNER-1.See 2.Study,  JELEVAZI-CHELEVAZI-Children's game,  STAND WITHOUT-SO much,  LEFT SO-MUCH,  TAPCHAK-Put your foot on the shovel, dig the soil, reach the river THE MOON IS JOLA TVEL-Crescent,  KHACHANDAZ-Gogatiak,  TSRNO-Neck crooked,  JUKUL-Small-bodied,  MEXELOR-The last 3rd day, turned into a sharp, այտ PIKOT
Mariana Botsinyan SOUND AND SOME VOCABULARY MOVEMENTS OF ASHTARAK CITY SPEECH Keywords: Ashtarak dialect, vocabulary shifts, newly invented words, changed words.
