ORHAN PAMUK'S NOVEL "JEWDET BAY AND SONS" AS AN EXAMPLE OF PRE-POSTMODERNISM: Nobel Laureate (2006) Turkish writer Orhan Pamuk The city ևmemories ", notes that until 1974. He studied architecture, painting, but after that he left everything and started writing.
 1979 His first novel entitled "Darkness and Light" is being prepared, which in the same year was awarded the literary prize established by "Milliyet" newspaper.
 This book, however, was published only in 1982 under the title "The Dead Beys".
 Literary critics և the author himself agree that it is a classic family novel, "bildungsroman", ամ Pamuk took as an example Thomas Mann's novel "Budenbrockers" 1.
 Pamuk himself admits that at that time he was obsessed with Thomas Manov, he tried to use his methods, style and language.
There is an opinion among literary critics that this novel is more realistic.
For example, according to Turkish literary critic N. Essen, in the book there is a "narrator who knows everything" specific to realist novels2, that is, the author, who in other novels of Pamuk sometimes gives way to the hero or heroes who independently dictate the direction of the events.
  In our opinion, however, Orhan Pamuk's first novel is on the borderline between realism and postmodernism.
  It is true that the novel is dominated by realistic accents, but certain elements of postmodernism are already evident.
  That novel could not be considered completely realistic, because the author, Orhan Pamuk, was already at that time with his aesthetic views against the realist, "Anatolian novel" and its principles.
 From the newspapers of the time quoted in the novel, some experts consider this to be a realistic emphasis, but this is how intertextuality is manifested in the principles of emerging postmodernism.
 Such quotations have become a certain style, which helps to build the combination or contrast of the real fiction, helps to make the boundaries of these two perceptions more vague and to convey the reader's perception.
The time limits of the novel "The Dead Bey և Sons" 1905-1970. It is Turkey. Even this temporal choice contains a borderline emphasis: the fall of the Ottoman Empire, the years of the establishment of the Republic of Turkey.
 The novel presents the social, political, cultural developments of Turkey in that period, and one family is a direct basis to show the overview of the more general development of these phenomena.
The novel consists of three parts, which are entitled as follows: "Preface", "Part Two" and "Epilogue".
  The title chosen for the first part seems to correspond to the general logic, as in that part a day of the Turkish start-up "date" is described, during that day the main priorities and goals set by the young businessman are presented.
 These goals are mostly domestic, they are connected with creating a prosperous family.
 Here, first of all, a direction of Muslim-Christian relations in the Ottoman Empire is noteworthy. It is known that in the empire, non-Muslims - Armenians, Greeks, Jews - were mainly engaged in trade, crafts and business, and the Turks were included in the system of office, in the military sphere.
  There was even a perception in the society that 2 In the same place.
It is not good for a Muslim to do business.
 Instead, non-Muslims had a middle-class, upper-middle class that was far more secure than Muslims.
  And here եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ եթ Ջև եթ եթ եթ։։ եթ եթ եթ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 The author describes in great detail the silent process of mutual understanding between Muslim and non-Muslim businessmen: "Greek-Jewish merchants were leaving their ranks with curious views of a Muslim."
  After 30, Dett, having achieved some success in the art industry, begins to plan his future life, where almost all the details are possible. He decides to buy a house in the already elite district of Istanbul, Nisantash, to marry a high-class pasha's daughter3.
"Dett's brother, Nusret, is completely different from him", in turn, becomes the founder of the line of "non-adapters" of the novel, who is also in various psychological crises.
  In this image, at the core of his problems is the East-West or Turkey-Europe conflict.
 Nusret visited Europe, Paris, is familiar with European literature, art, the French Revolution, its ideological side and the Young Turks who were active at that time.
  In Pamuk's novel, let 's meet the Armenian image, moreover, with mostly positive coloring. It's the patient Nusret's surviving girlfriend, actress Marie Chukhajyan4.
The action of the second part of the novel begins already in 1936. և From the very beginning, the topic of conversation of the new heroes is again Europeanization, but with more accentuated nuances.
 As it was mentioned, there is a time vacuum of about 30 years between the first and second parts of the novel, the reader already sees the child after 60, who has achieved his goals, created a large prosperous family, bought a house, a summer house, developed the enterprise.
 "Dead Bay presents his life through internal monologues" և the events that took place as if from the very moment when the descriptions of the first part ended.
 Thus. "I bought this house in 1905, I got married.
  It was then that an assassination attempt was made against the sultan.
  Then the Turks who came to power և restored the constitution.
  Then I bought the garden next door.
  During the war I got rich by importing sugar, with that money I arranged everything here.
 My enterprise started to flourish ”5.
 Historical events in Ջևdet monologue և Personal problems are placed on the same plane. It is as if the author is trying to show that they have equal potential for the image; sometimes the everyday is even more important.
  For example, the establishment of the Republic of Turkey and the acquisition of a coal stove are presented on the same plane.
 Jdet has the image of a man happy with his life, the pasha's daughter, Nigyan Hanim, two sons, Osman, Refik, and a daughter, Ayshen.
Refik is the son of "Det Bey" from a prosperous family, who is married and is expecting his firstborn.
  He works with his older brother in his father's enterprise.
  It seems that everything is to be happy, but gradually crisis phenomena appear in him, which turn into a deep crisis.
 Similar events begin with his friends.
 His friend Omer, who returned from Europe, being a civil engineer, strives to carry out a good and big project, to earn big money, becoming a "conqueror".
 The other friend, Muhittin, is also an engineer, but he writes poems.
  He is the most extreme among his friends, the most read է he fell into a crisis earlier than them.
 Already during his student years, he promised his friends that if he did not become a good poet at the age of 30, he would commit suicide.
  Friends often gather at Refik's house, engage in intellectual conversations, and discuss world literature.
  These disputes are disputes over finding a way out of the crisis and finding ways.
In the context of the use of intertextuality, the author pays considerable attention to the quotations from the periodicals, paying special attention to the political and social 1 For more details on the emerging Turkish bourgeoisie and its enrichment methods, see веевелева А., Об исского университета, 2009, серия 13, выпуск 2, p. 42.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Ibid., Pp. 123-124.
power problems.
 For example, the issue of Hatay, the sanjak of Alexandret, is regularly referred to in 1939. was annexed to Turkey.
  In particular, Muhittin is sitting in a cafe reading some headlines in the newspaper of a man sitting at the next table. "Hatay can no longer remain in Syrian captivity ... Yesterday President Ataturk ..." 1.
However, after the death of Jedit Bey, the traditional order in his family began to break down very quickly.
 Again, two conventional groups of characters are preserved. ՋևDet's mentality և worldview is maintained by his eldest son, Osman, and the crisis with Deepik immediately deepens, և he gradually falls into more and more uncertainty.
 However, Refik cannot understand what he needs - what he is really looking for.
 During quite a few internal monologues, he mentions: "I understand that something needs to be done, but I can not understand what exactly.
  What can be done ... ”2.
  Refik finally argues with a woman who does not understand him at all, և announces that he is leaving home, thus escaping from his family, life, himself.
 Russian Turkologist A. Suleymanova draws attention to the fact that running away from home is a certain symbol of the beginning of Pamuk's chaos3.
 In other words, the house is a symbol of peace, family unity, reconciliation with oneself, and, escaping from there, chaos begins for the hero.
The novel "Dead Bay և Sons" gives a lot of space to the description of family holidays and events, which is also one of the important elements of the family novel.
 However, all this և affects the psyche of the heroes, specifically Refik,, he tries to leave the reality.
 Turkish literary critic G. Aytach singles out another feature of the family novel - the description of household items, furniture - which is also found in this novel4.
The generosity, the indifference and the crisis developing on the basis of it, deepen in the character of another novel.
  Refik's friend Omer seems to be achieving his goals. After the construction of the tunnel in Kamakhum, he earned a lot of money, he had already prepared everything for the marriage with the deputy's daughter, but for an incomprehensible reason he started postponing the marriage, falling into indifference covered with indifference.
 Omer does not have that explanation either, the main question that torments him is the following. "What can be done, what can be done?" 5.
 In the chain of internal monologues, he begins to fear his own possessions. "I know what I do not want to become, but I do not know what I want to become."
In one part of the novel, Pamuk creates a chaotic image when all the characters are in crisis. Not only Refik, Omer, Muhittin, but also the main characters are "depicted in that state.
  This is an attempt to describe a kind of chaotic world.
  In this novel, Pamuk quite often uses the method of polyphony, which is an almost accepted principle for postmodernism.
  During the internal monologues, different characters begin to discuss the situation in a polyphonic way, each within himself;
It is noteworthy that in Pamuk's first novel there are some hints, incidental descriptions of the state persecution of Christians in Turkey, particularly Armenians.
  Thus, during a meeting, the president of the tennis club, while talking to Osman և Refik, mentioned that there was a threat hanging over their club, because "the new governor decided to demolish the current building, instead giving a small plot of land to the abandoned Christian cemetery" St. is nearby. ”8
  Although the Armenian affiliation of the cemetery is not mentioned here, only the name makes the problem clear - the attitude of the Turkish government towards the Armenian and Christian sanctuaries.
 Moreover, continuing the same topic, Pamuk details that one of the women present at the conversation notices that it is not allowed to play tennis in the cemetery, 2 Ibid., P. 262.
6 Ibid., P.
7 Ibid., Pp. 521-522.
To which those present respond that there are no graves in the area that is planned to be given to the club, but "only the ruins of an old church" 1.
In the third part of the novel, entitled "Epilogue", the events take place about 30 years later, in 1970.
 The author again gives descriptions of the events that took place with the characters in the past decades through hints or through the reflections of the heroes, internal monologues.
  In particular, the events of the third part are mainly centered around the image of Refik's son, the painter Ahmet.
 It is mentioned from the very beginning that five years before the events, that is, in 1965. Refik, who had long since gone bankrupt, had died, having lost all the last years of his life in his mother's small room.
  His wife, Perihan, left him a long time ago and married someone else.
Jdet Bey's family already lives in a new apartment building, which was built on the site of a former private house.
 Refik's son Ahmet lives in the attic of that building, which is the only thing his father left him.
  "Det Bey's wife, Nigyan Hanim, who suffers from an old illness, is still alive and on the verge of death.
  This section describes the political and social events that took place in 1960-1970. In Turkey, he especially singles out the left and active student movements.
 Quotations from newspapers are again given as an example of intertextuality.
 They are dominated by military ultimatums and overt hints of imminent military intervention.
 Ahmet starts talking to everyone about the possibility of a coup, through which the author depicts public perceptions of what is happening.
The Ottoman son Cemil, who is the successor of the "Death Bey" line, is briefly introduced. He is married, has children, manages their enterprise, is not interested in politics, art or other issues at all.
The book ends with the death of Nigyan Hanim, փոքրիկ a small detail again symbolizes the end of time.
  Leaving Grandma's room, Ahmet feels something strange և, standing for a moment, reports that the famous clock of the house they bought at the beginning of the 20th century has stopped.
  This symbolizes the end of the Nigyan Han Dey period, the bearer of his mentality.
 Ahmet hesitates for a moment whether the clock should be fixed, but then concludes. "Let time run" 2.
Thus, we can conclude that Orhan Pamuk's first novel is, on the one hand, a work that clearly contains the elements of the family novel genre, but, on the other hand, it is difficult to describe it as merely realistic.
 We are more inclined to think that this is one of the cases when realistic, late modernist or pre-postmodernist methods are intertwined.
 However, the postmodernist side is clearly expressed in intertextuality, the crisis of heroes, the search և other elements.
  For a young and novice writer, the mentioned work can be considered successful and at the same time a rather accurate reflection of the social and political events in Turkey at that time.
In conclusion, we can mention that Orhan Pamuk's novel "The Dead Beys և Sons" first brought the writer some recognition within Turkey, and secondly created grounds for tending to the postmodernist direction.
  The various tricks and methods of depicting the characters in the novel allow to describe it as pre-postmodernism.
GHORG Sahakyan ORHAN PAMUK'S NOVEL "JEWDET BAY AND THE SONS" AS AN EXAMPLE OF PRE-POSTMODERNISM Keywords: Orhan Pamuk, Jdet Bey և sons, postmalm.
