HOTEL SERVICE AND ITS PROBLEMS OF INCREASING EFFICIENCY IN GYUMRI Shirak region, և in particular, regional center Gyumri, has become one of Armenia's rich tourist centers due to its geographical location, unique natural resources.
  It was known throughout the Soviet Union.
Gyumri և Shirak region tourists came from many cities of the USSR of Armenia.
  Tourism experienced a particularly great development in the 70s and 80s of the 20th century, when the number of tourists visiting Gyumri reached more than 20,000 people a year (the number of unregistered tourists is not included).
 During that time, a well-developed tourist service infrastructure was formed in the city.
4 all-union և numerous contractual routes passed through the territory of Shirak region և Gyumri.
 In those years, cultural and ecological tourism was especially in demand.
1988 Due to the earthquake, tourism in Gyumri had a significant decline due to political reasons.
At present, both in the city and in the region, the organization of tourism is unsystematic, with elementary power, although there are all the opportunities for the development of tourism.
In general, the main indicator of tourism development is the qualitative-quantitative description of the tourism services sold in the area.
  Important indicators of tourism development include the following factors: 1. Quantitative description of the flow of tourists, 2. Level of tourism infrastructure development, 3. Economic activity of tourism organizations, 4. The development of international tourism.
The analysis of hotel service in Gyumri was carried out on the basis of one of the above-mentioned principles - the study of infrastructure.
According to the website of the Shirak Regional Administration, there are currently 15 hotels in Gyumri that can receive and serve tourists, providing all the necessary services.
 The number of seats in these 15 hotels is 430, including "Nane" hotel - 32 seats, "Araks" hotel - 42 seats, "Berlin" hotel - 30 seats, "Vanatur" hotel - 30 seats, "Golden Apricot" hotel - 18 seats, Voske Blur Hotel - 18 seats, Parvana Ojakh Hotel - 20 seats, Alexandropol Hotel - 36 seats, Villa Kars Hotel - 32 seats, Garun Hotel - 30 seats, Erazank Hotel - 22 seats, "Gyumri" hotel - 70 seats (53 rooms), "Mermaid" hotel - 15 seats, "Almas" hotel - 20 seats, "Astral" hotel - 15 seats.
Taking into account the guest houses operating in the city, we can say that at present in Gyumri it is possible to receive about 550 tourists at the same time, which is about 5 times more than in 2006.
 And if we compare this number with the number of pre-earthquake hotel complexes, we can prove that some of those places currently exist.
Another important issue is the analysis of the days spent by tourists in Gyumri.
  Our research revealed that 90% of the tourists who arrived in Gyumri stayed in the city for one day, spending the night in one of the hotels there.
 Furthermore, it can be stated that Gyumri is considered a transit city on the Georgia-Yer-Highway; tourists spend the night here mainly to continue their journey in the morning.
Summarizing the analysis based on the above-mentioned indicators, it can be said that tourism in Gyumri and Shirak region is characterized as a relatively poorly developed branch, despite the great opportunities.
Gyumri has a small place in terms of the number of hotels compared to other cities in Armenia.
 There are now more than 700 hotels in Armenia.
719 hotels are registered in the booking system, 471 of which are in Yerevan.
  The Armenian hotel reservation website Hotelium.am includes about 500 hotels [4], the Bar Armenia website has only 191 [2], and the Armenian "Spyur" directory lists 461 hotels, 15 hostels, 27 motels, 25 B & Bs. .
  As it was mentioned, the number of hotels operating in Gyumri does not exceed 15, therefore only 2.5-3% of the RA hotels are located in Gyumri.
There are no four- or five-star hotels in Gyumri.
 The hotels are among the hotels of "Three Plus" star.
Unlike Yerevan, the cost of hotels in Gyumri is too low, so it is affordable.
  For comparison, let us mention the costs of one person staying in several hotels of "Yerjan" in Gyumri per night.
 One night in "Congress" hotel costs 57,000 drams per person.
 A deluxe room at the Tufenkian Hotel costs 122,000 drams, while an ordinary room costs 77,000 drams.
In the second city of Armenia, Gyumri, the picture is a little different.
The cost of one night per person in "Nane" hotel is 36,000 AMD, in "Berlin" hotel - 27,000 AMD, in "Villa Kars" hotel - 25,000 AMD, in "Vanatur" hotel - 20,000 AMD.
 Prices in guest houses fluctuate around 10,000-20000 drams [3].
In order to increase the efficiency of hotel services in Gyumri, it is necessary to make a number of reforms.
The first precondition for increasing the efficiency of hotels is to provide high quality service.
  The service should be of high quality every day, every minute.
 Modern hotels should not only offer a bed, but also provide physical and mental comfort, "away from home."
 This can be achieved only through quality service.
 Currently, only hotels that are able to develop and implement long-term quality service strategies succeed [10].
The main activity of hotels should be the maintenance of the following points: • Management interest; • Establishment of service quality improvement council; • Involvement of all staff towards quality improvement; • Development of short-term և long-term strategy; • Establishment of incentive system.
It is also necessary to create a quality control program that will offer goal setting.
 The development of a quality management system is possible only in the conditions of the development of market relations, competitive environment in each field of service.
Quality is a rather complicated և unpredictable field.
  It is an integral part of every human activity.
  Quality in hotels refers to several areas: logistics, social information.
The material and technical quality is the comfortable location of the hotel, the placement of comfortable furniture in the rooms և halls և the equipment, the presence of high quality linen և etc.
Functional quality first of all includes cleanliness, guest registration, preparation of dishes and drinks.
 The quality of information is of great importance for the presentation of the hotel.
  The information can refer to the technical, functional, social situation of the hotel, staff, guests, etc.
The following methods are used to evaluate the quality of hotel services in the modern world. [11] 1. Differential method: the indicators of the evaluated service are compared with the indicators of the main example.
2. Complex method - use of the main indicator, ie an indicator that can describe the quality of service.
3. Method based on integral indicator, technical and economic indicator of service quality.
These methods have their disadvantages and advantages.
 For example, the disadvantage of the integral is the difficulty of applying it in the service sector.
The above methods allow you to compare the offered service with the expectations of the guests.
The efficiency of hotels in Gyumri depends not only on the quality, but also on the pricing policy.
 The higher the price of the hotel room, the less it becomes available for mass tourists.
 They prefer to stay in hostels, rent apartments.
  During the inter-season period, the discount system does not work in all hotels.
 In order to ensure congestion in hotels, it is necessary to reduce room prices by reasonable percentages during non-season months.
  The season in Gyumri covers the months of April-October.
 Therefore, from November to April it is necessary to organize many festivals, events, reduce prices, offer unique trips.
The "all inclusive" system can be very important in ensuring the congestion of hotels.
 Many tourists prefer to visit hotels that offer three meals a day.
 Such hotels are considered an excellent option for mass tourists.
  No such service is provided in Gyumri.
 Hotels offer breakfast only.
Animation services have a decisive influence on the efficiency of hotel complexes.
  Animatson service is a complex hotel recreation service.
  It is based on the intimacy of personal voluntary contacts between tourists and tourists.
  The animator և the tourist jointly participates in the entertainments, which are provided by the animation program of the tour complex.
  It aims to implement a new philosophy of hotel service, to increase the quality of service, the level of tourist satisfaction with the rest.
 Hotel animation is only related to services organized in tourism enterprises [8].
 In other words, hotel animation is an entertaining activity offered by hotels and tourist complexes.
  For tourists, leisure after a hotel room is considered a possible condition for the availability of entertainment.
 That is why in hotel management animation occupies one of the main roles, which is closely connected with other spheres և has a certain significance.
  The purpose of the animation service is the constant communication with the vacationers, as a result of which the quality of the tourist's rest depends.
  The workload of the hotel may depend on the quality of the animations.
Animation services are especially suitable for tourists relaxing with children.
 The hotel will also attract tourists by providing a wide range of services, including a swimming pool, fitness center, spa center, beauty salon, doctor's room can have a positive impact on the efficiency of hotels.
Gyumri hotels can offer animation services if ordered.
  In order to organize animation in local hotels, we can consider the existence of swimming pools.
 Gyumri animation services can be offered by "Vanatur" և "Yerazank" hotels.
  Vanatur hotel complex offers an elegant bath (sauna), a hall of ceremonies, a hall for business meetings, a cafe, a restaurant.
  Dream hotel has an outdoor pool, sauna.
The workload of the hotels depends on the brand name of the hotel.
 Over time, hotel owners have come to the conclusion that if they are in demand in one place, they may be in demand in another.
 That is, they can become a standard that is in demand all over the world.
  Traveling to different places, the tourist, as a rule, gets used to a certain standard, a certain brand.
  Next time, choosing a particular country, he wonders if that brand exists in that country.
  At this time, no brand hotel operates in Gyumri!
In general, we can say that the increase in the efficiency of hotel facilities is directly proportional to the flow of tourists.
  The more tourists visit Gyumri, the more hotels will be overloaded.
  The concept of tourism development has been created to increase the number of incoming tourists in Armenia.
 This concept lists all the resources necessary for the development of tourism, obstacles to development, and solutions.
  The concept outlines the steps that will be taken in Armenia by 2030 [1].
 In particular, for the development of tourism in Armenia, including Gyumri, it is suggested: • Develop new, competitive tourist destinations, • Ensure the effective use and preservation of natural և historical and cultural resources, commercialize, • Develop winter sports tourism, • Restore և develop health, health tourism, ecotourism, routes, • Ensure regional cooperation, • Monitor, • Select national brand, • Develop բր implement a detailed advertising program, • Improve the transport system, in particular, expand the air և network և Frequency, improve flights և Schedule, Improve domestic transportation,
After implementing these other measures, the Government of the Republic of Armenia expects that the hotel facilities will have the following characteristics: The hotel facilities will be diverse, will meet international standards, an advanced qualification system will be applied.
 Types of hotel facilities ևThe number will increase especially in the regions, offering expensive, medium-cost ության cheap hotel facilities.
 Most of the expensive hotels will stay in Yerevan.
Hotel facilities will be qualified and registered, which will help ensure a high level of health and safety.
 Hotel facilities should be accessible for online booking, have a signage system աշխատակից staff fluent in different European languages.
The design and construction of hotel facilities should be strictly controlled in tourist areas so that everyone stays close to the specifics of the area.
  In areas where there are not enough hotel facilities, it is necessary to attract investments.
Thus, it can be stated that hotel complexes in Gyumri do not function effectively.
 It is necessary to implement a number of measures that will increase the efficiency of hotels, in particular: • Improve the quality of hotel services, • Adjust hotel pricing policy, offer various discount systems, • Offer various animation services, especially for young people ընտանի families with children, programs to increase the number of tourists in the city.
Literature 1. Tourism development concept, available until 07.05.2016http.
//www.mineconomy.am/uploades/20152004124800803.pdf.
2. Hotels in Armenia, available until 07.05.2016https.
//barevarmenia.com/am/armenia_hotels.
3. Hotel room reservation, available until 07.05.2016http.
//www.booking.com/.
4. Hotels և Holiday homes, available until .05 07.05.2016http.
//www.hotelium.am/.
5. Online hotel reservation in Armenia - Yerevan և regions, available until 07.05.2016 http.
//hyuranocner.com/.
6. agoda hotel reservation system, available until 07.05.2016http.
//www.agoda.com/.
7. Hotels registered in Shirak region, available until 07.05.2016http.
//shirak.mtaes.am/hotel/.
8. Management of tourist and guest animations. General and special. Available until 07.05.2016 http.
//lektsii.net/3-20875.html.
service, available until 07.05.2016 http.
//www.scienceforum.ru/2014/595/5406, available until 07.05.2016.11. http:
//knowledge.allbest.ru/management/2c0b65625a2bd78b5c43b88521216c36_0.
guest companies, available until 07.05.2016http.
//www.bankreferatov.ru/referats/E3F1A2BE5A85972543257B250029B5B9/diplo
Davtyan KIM HOTEL SERVICE ՆԵՐ THE PROBLEMS OF INCREASING ITS EFFICIENCY IN GYUMRI Keywords: hotel, Gyumri, animation services, congestion development, pricing policyAm
