FEATURES OF ADVERTISING MESSAGE AND CODING FEATURES In society, values ​​are formed, disseminated, become more objective in targeted target texts, media texts.
 The most mature media today demands from the society an exceptionally high level of "semiotic literacy" to decode the message of the media text, to "read" its hidden meanings և the obvious nuances.
  The most common examples of media texts, unfortunately, are advertisements.
  Advertising և Advertising posters are everywhere today.
 It has flooded the entire market, covering almost all areas of our lives.
  Nearly three decades ago, Baudrillard noted that advertising was becoming a dominant form of public communication, that advertising was the official art of modern capitalist society.
Experts in the field have given different definitions in the interpretation of advertisements.
  Theorist Mudrov, for example, defines advertising as follows. "Advertising is a special type of activity that accompanies humanity throughout its development history" 1.
  And here Claude Hopkins mentions. "Advertising is the ability to sell.
  The methods of its influence coincide with the same methods used by the seller, persuading the buyer to appropriate the product ”2.
  According to the well-known "MccanErickson" advertising agency, "advertising is the well-presented truth" 3.
In general, it can be said that advertising is information about the consumer properties of goods and services in order to attract attention, create demand and disseminate them.
  Today, advertising is a constant companion of people և affects everyone.
  As a result, the huge amount of advertising that exists today in the life of the post-industrial-information society has become.
  This role is especially important in economic and social.
//mccann.com/truth/. There are in life.
 The ideological, educational, psychological and aesthetic role of advertising should not be overlooked.
 The daily impact of advertising on billions of people not only contributes to the formation of their consumer preferences, but also becomes part of the social environment, which participates in the formation of certain standards of thinking - social behavior of different segments of society in each country and around the world.
  Former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Winston Churchill said on this occasion. "Advertising creates the need for a higher standard of living.
  It aims to provide a person with better clothing, shelter, and food.
 It promotes diligence and high performance ”4.
The impact of advertising is long-term and indirect.
  A trait such as consumer logic is formed under the constant, lasting influence of egos for years.
 Moreover, the influence of advertising refers not only to the recipients of the message, their perceptions, attitudes and behavior.
  They are reflected in the practices and behavior of various institutions.
 It should be taken into account that the advertising message operates at two levels at the same time.
 At the primary level, it tells about the product, and at the secondary level (which is often not noticed or ignored) about the society5.
  It is at this last level that the social significance of advertising, the emphasis on certain values ​​and norms, is revealed.
Advertising is a communication process6.
  And in order for the communication to be more effective, the creator must clearly define his goals, single out the target audience, understand the desired response.
The main tool for the transfer of information, emotional and psychological impact is the application (message, message).
 The message of communication always has two sides: the content - the ideal sensible side, the expression - perceived by the sensory organs7.
In advertising messages, the connection of these two sides allows the coding system, which in turn is based on the provisions of semantics.
In advertising communication, coding is understood as a communication process that transmits information to the addressee 5 http.
//hetq.am/arm/news/31575/govazd-patmutyun-ev-ashkharhagrutyun.6 http:
//www.portal-1.ru/reklama/pr01.html. through text, signs (symbols) և images.
 All the eggs listed are in the field of semantics study.
As we have already mentioned, the unity of the content is expressed through the sign.
 The text is formed from the signs.
 A sign is a coding unit that ensures that one meaning corresponds to one horse.
  The concept of a sign is very relevant in the creation of advertising messages.
 It should be noted here that the sign or object, receiving additional meanings, sometimes moving far enough away from their original meanings, is defined as symbols.
Both verbal (non-verbal) and non-verbal (non-verbal) methods are used to form a message.
 In the latter case, gestures, typical postures, etc. are used.
  The creator must also take into account the fact that the recipient is well aware of the code being used.
 Otherwise, the communication efficiency will be quite low.
When coding, one should take into account the national mentality, archetypes, hierarchy of cultural values.
  The concept of "national mentality" should mean the worldview and worldview typical of the given nation.
  It presupposes the complex presence of such closely related elements, which have evolved throughout the history of the nation.
The main elements of this system are language, mythology, morality, history (including the attitude towards history), national memory, culture, etc.
Archetypes and stereotypes are often used in the construction of advertising messages.
The concept of "archetype" was put forward by the Swiss psychologist Tsilisopa K. Jung.
 The latter defines it as an innate mental structure, which constitutes each nation's own "collective unconscious" 8.
  Archetypes are especially prevalent in national works (myths, fairy tales, songs, jokes, etc.).
Stereotypes can be presented as standardized utopian scenarios that describe the schemes of psychological perception of this or that phenomenon.
 It is quite clear that these typical schemes are formed on the basis of collective experience, they have a real example of life in their basis.
Archetypes ողներին stereotypes help advertisers save time և resources while delivering the desired meaning.
8 http:
//www.taby27.ru/studentam_aspirantam/philos_design/teoriya-arhetipov. Theorist Williamson mentions that one of the means of the technical arsenal of advertising is the combination of feelings and moods with tangible objects. "By associating supposedly inaccessible things with things that are available, we can be assured that the first ones are available."
 That is, the available item, the purchase և use of the product makes available the social meaning attributed to it.
Advertising is also a story about a given society (albeit brief and concise), where cultural samples and values ​​are presented.
It is in this sense that advertising is like novels and movies.
Advertising is coded by means of image, sound, word, normative or pretending behaviors, rules, norms related to the prevailing value system, norms, etc. are presented.
In other words, with the help of advertising, the society, the expected positions and the offered opportunities become recognizable.
  Advertising messages contain references to identities, universal concepts of all, as well as images of the "ideal" human relationship և happiness.
For the analysis of Armenian advertisements, it is necessary to distinguish local-transnational (international, global, etc. different authors use different words) advertisements, to try to find out their interrelationships.
  The main difficulty of transnational advertising is to formulate its own message in a way that is understandable for the given cultural context.
 In this sense, the two main strategies of transnational advertising are known: standardization and localization of the advertising message.
 It is clear that each of these strategies has its own means and difficulties in creating and rooting out consumer tastes, lifestyles in different cultural situations.
It should be noted that under the inevitable pressures of local circumstances, local advertisements gradually take on appropriate forms.
 The best example, unfortunately, is the "Everything will be fine" video of "ACBA-Credit Agricole" bank, shot in 2015 and presented to the public.
  The video shot by "Status Holding" advertising agency, published on the official Facebook page of the bank, directed by Ruben Tsaturyan, has more than 250 thousand views, and more than 7 thousand Facebook subscribers will share the video և post it on their personal pages 10.
9 http:
//textb.net/51/26.html.10 https:
//web.facebook.com/acbacreditagricolebank/videos/878048135582815/. The video is not built exclusively within the framework of the national peculiarities of the national mentality and the stereotypes formed in them.
 The advertisement is based on local cultural values.
  The main character has decided to leave the homeland forever and seek luck on foreign shores.
  The topic is emigration, which is quite common today է is one of the most important problems of the state.
 Apart from the main character, at the beginning of the advertisement there is a mention of a family that wants to leave the homeland.
  In that part of the video, a modified version of Ruben Hakhverdyan's song "The best guys are leaving, looking for luck abroad", which has become very popular in the society and has become a slogan, is used, which sounds like this: "The best guys stay, they do not look for luck on foreign shores."
  This is also a successful way to encrypt the message, because the public recognizes the expression and is able to decrypt the advertising message.
A typical stereotypical hero in the video is the taxi driver, who complains about the current conditions, remembering the Russian "his businesses".
The video codifies the Armenian army, the Armenian statehood and Artsakh.
  It should be noted that the coding was done correctly, that is, the attitudes, national history and attitude towards that history were addressed among the addressees (in this case, Armenians) (only 250 out of 5 thousand peoples have a state, and we even have two).
Recalling remarkable moments, the hero realizes that "everything depends on us", that everything will be fine.
Color design is possible in advertisements.
  The protagonist of the given advertisement, when he is disappointed and disappointed in the taxi, is in black and white, and in the moments when he is the one who gives hope, the video is in color.
 The advertisement becomes colorful when the hero realizes that he should not go, but stay and believe in a good future.
 It is known that colors have a great psychological effect on people, causing certain emotions and feelings.
 It is well-known that dark colors cause bad mood and a certain anxiety in people.
 And, in fact, the construction of the video with such color formations also encodes, by which the authors show that it is not right to go.
It should be noted that in this video, as in the case of most locally produced commercials, the role of speech prevails, which is used here (there are no complicated terms, incomprehensible concepts) in non-slang language.
The target addressee of the video is also interesting. It is not only the person leaving the homeland, the soldier or someone on the verge of disability, but also anyone who has a problem.
  In other words, the message made up of emotional text makes everyone think, hope and believe that everything will be really good.
This competently made Armenian-made advertisement does not serve its purpose from the point of view of Hopkinsiz Formulation, that is, it does not promote the sale of the given product (service).
 But here we can mention the view of modern theorists that modern advertising is not aimed at the direct consumption of the product. "The purpose of advertising is to involve us in the structure of its meanings, to make it a participant in the decoding of linguistic and visual signs, and to enjoy it."
  Finally, it must be stated that having a psychological and emotional impact, the bank has solved the problem of trust with this video, assuring its customers that it is also concerned about the existing problems.
  And many theorists point out that when it comes to consumer choice, the majority prefers what they trust.
  Here, the very ideological message of the advertisement does not define consumption as an indisputable vital priority, as the only "real" goal, but presents consumption as a cure for all pains, as a way to "solve" psychological and social problems.
  Advertising again weaves the consumer image of the society ևthe "myth" that people's identity is determined not by production, but by consumption.
Summarizing the already mentioned provisions, it can be noted that the formation of a message in accordance with the main definitions of the national mentality is one of the important conditions for effective communication.
 It helps to overcome many psychological obstacles and make the message more understandable.
  Accurate use of stereotypes and archetypes also allows the recipients to subconsciously decode the advertising messages, thus bringing the work of the message creators to the desired results, saving time and resources.
As an example of the correct application of the above-mentioned provisions, it is necessary to separate the video "Everything will be fine" from the advertisements of domestic production, to hope that all further messages will be formed with literate approaches.
Knar Misakyan ADVERTISING FEATURES AND CODING FEATURES Keywords: advertisement, advertising message, coding, coding features, Armenian advertising Summary.
