WATER FACTOR IN CURRENT GEOPOLITICAL PROCESSESGeopolitics is a concept of the 20th century.
  The term was coined by Swedish political scientist Rudolf Chelen, "Theory of Geopolitics. On the Influence of Geographical Factors on International Political Relations ”in 1 work (1899).
 It is a method that, by studying foreign policy, allows players to understand, explain, "predict international policy" through geographical variables.
 It includes an applied study of area, climate, relief, demographics, natural resources, and regional assessment2.
The main geopolitical factors on which the state policy is based are the following: • Geographical (size, location, relief, length of borders, configuration, etc.), • Geophysical (climate, natural resources, availability of water, etc.), • Political ( political regime, features of government և state systems (etc.), • Social (standard of living, features of social structure, degree of urbanization of the population և etc.), • Economic (rate of economic development, rate of economic growth և prospects, infrastructure, strategic reserves, etc.) , • Military (combat capabilities of the armed forces, availability of modern weapons, number of army servicemen, availability of nuclear weapons, etc.),• Cultural-religious (religious-national traditions, development of science, level of education, health, etc.), • Demographic (population, composition, population density, birth և mortality rate, etc.), • ecological (environment) 3.
Among the geopolitical factors, the geographical position of the country in relation to the sea-land plays a key role.
 In this context, all countries are divided into two types: sea and land.
 The size of their territories is of great importance for the continental superpowers, which is a factor of their power and security.
 In this context, water policy, also called hydro-policy, is gaining importance in the ongoing globalization processes.
 It is the policy of impacting the water resources necessary for the development of mankind and wildlife.
  Its main goal is to meet the water needs of its own population and the state, to minimize the external impact in that area4.
The importance of this problem is due to the fact that demographic and climate change around the world is reducing the amount of water resources և International Relations, Edited by Devetak R. et al, Cambridge, 2012, p. 492, available at http: // www.
//www.book2look.com/vbook.aspx?id=9781107600003.http.
//rezadelavari.com/files/filebank/penguin_dictionary.pdf.
https:
//books.google.am/books?id=9nZ40xfLdZkC&source=gbs_book_other_versions.
Geopolitics.
Geopolitics.
relations, London, 1998, available, available in almost all parts of the globe.
 In addition, the Earth's water resources are disproportionately distributed, resulting in severe water shortages in a number of strategically important areas.
The world's freshwater resources are 34980 km3, and 46800 km3 are restored annually.
 However, there is now a shortage of fresh water in the world.
 70․8% of the planet is covered with water, so why is there a shortage of water resources in the world?
The reason is that saline additives are present in 97 քանակ5% of the vast amount of water resources in the world, and only 0.08% are available for use, most of which are on ice.
  The cargo contains 2/3 of the total volume of water available for human consumption2.
 He gave a rather clear description of the water problem in the world. Mogher, noting that "it is not where it should be; it is not the egg that is in our favor."
Fresh water is unevenly distributed for consumption.
 According to the average European consumption level, it reaches 200 to 300 liters per capita per day.
 In North America it is 500 liters per day, and in North Africa, Tunisia about 20 liters per day 4.
In developing countries, about 1 billion people do not have access to safe drinking water, and 2.5 billion do not have access to basic health services.
  According to some, 1430 thousand people die every day in the world due to water-related diseases, of which 10-20 thousand are children5.
  According to demographic and economic forecasts, already in 2025 ․ The number of people deprived of access to drinking water will reach 1 billion, and in 50 years - 7.7 billion.
 One of the reasons for the scarcity of water resources is the disproportionate ratio of population growth to water use.
 Over the next 50 years, the world's population will increase by 40-50%.
  According to forecasts, in 2025 Drinking water reserves will be reduced to 5-100 m3 of water per person per year.
According to a number of forecasts, in 2100 ․ The average temperature of the planet will rise by 1-3․50C, as a result of which the water level of the world ocean may rise by 15-95 cm6.
 According to some estimates, global warming will cause several billion US dollars in damage to the country's population.
 Until 2050 An additional $ 47 billion will be required for the water economy and $ 42 billion for the agricultural and forestry economies if the carbon dioxide emissions ratio is higher than in the average industrial period7.
In Europe, due to climate change, annual spending will be $ 21-9 billion, and additional water spending - $ 14 billion.
 Similar spending in America in 2050 can reach $ 30 billion.
In addition, the cost of finding new water sources is increasing, thus limiting their development potential, especially in the irrigation sector.
  For example, in 1970-1990. In India և Indonesia, and in 1980-1990 ․ in Pakistan, new irrigation International, Volume 25, No. 1, pp. 127-138, March 2000, available 1 Shiklomanov I., Examination of water resources sushi.
 itoges, problems, perspectives, Leningrad, 1988, p. 30, available at http: // www.
//elib.rshu.ru/files_books/pdf/img-09056.pdf.2 Gleick P., The Changing Water Paradigm.
  A Look at Twenty-first Century Water Resources Development, International Water is http:
//www.colorado.edu/geography/class_homepages/geog_4501_s09/readings/gleick2000.pdf.3 Аксенов Д., Войны за воду, Огонек, No. 11-12, March 2002, available at http: // www.
//www.ropnet.ru/ogonyok/win/200211/11-134 Kurt ․, What is the reason for the war for the great generation? Fight for water, available at http: // www.
//embassy.debis.ru/ru/library/internationale6 The Regional Impacts of Climate Change.
 An Assessment of Vulnerability, Summary for Policymakers, A Special Report of WorkingNations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its subsidiary bodies, November 1997, p.3, available at https.
//www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/spm/region-en.pdf.http.
//www.unep.org/Documents/Default.asp?DocumentID=192&ArticleID=2758, February 3, 2001. System implementation costs doubled 1, increased by 50% in the Philippines, 40% in Thailand and Sri Lanka it has tripled 2.
According to a number of forecasts, in 2025 In developed countries, water used in agriculture will be twice as expensive as now, and in developing countries - three times more, despite the fact that in 2025. 98% of population growth will be in developing countries.
 For example, the population of sub-Saharan Africa alone will increase from 532 million (1995) to 1.1 billion (2025).
  The cost of water in the industrial sector in developed countries in 2025 may increase by և 13%, and in developing countries by almost 3 3.
Despite the severity of the problem, provisions on the distribution of water resources in international law began to take shape only after the First World War.
  Since then, various bodies of international law have been trying to formulate a certain set of provisions on the basis of which it will be possible to "divide" water among the countries of the world.
Practically all international documents related to the water issue provide only general formulations, without clear solutions.
 International law lacks clear rules for the settlement of disputes over the use of water resources.
In fact, the most effective way to regulate such relations is through bilateral treaties and agreements.
One of the first major conferences on the water issue was held in 1977 in Mar del Plata, Argentina.
 The final conclusion of the conference was the following. "All nations, regardless of their level of development, socio-economic conditions, have the right to use drinking water that will meet their basic needs in qualitative and quantitative terms."
Lack of water resources or their disproportionate distribution can lead to serious consequences in some regions.
  There are more than 263 international river basins in the world, which cover half of the earth's land surface or 40% of the world's population.
  More than 145 nations are river basins.
  Some basins, such as the Danube Basin, are shared among 17 countries, while other basins are spread across 3 or more countries.
In regions where there is a scarcity of water resources, it seems that the only way out is to solve the water problem.
 The war for water resources can be fought between different states and their alliances.
  As the management of water resources is within the sovereignty of states, it is considered politically sensitive8.
Taking into account the above-mentioned tendencies, it can be predicted that the struggle for water resources will intensify in the 21st century.
 Former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has warned that the fight for water could lead to war and conflict in the future.
  One of the reports of the US Intelligence Council stated that the number of interstate conflicts will increase by 9 in the next 15 years due to water scarcity.
  2050 As a result, population growth will result in only a fraction of the hydrological cycle of drinking water that existed in the 1950s.
 As a result, to meet growing demand in 2025.1 Rosegrant M., Svendsen M., Asian Food Production in the 1990s.
 Irrigation Investment and Management Policy, Food Policy, Feb2 Water for Sustainable Food Production and Rural Development, UNCED Agenda.
 Targets and Cost Estimates, Food and Agriculture3 Rosegrant MW et al., World Water and Food to 2025.
  Dealing with Scarcity, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, 2002, p. 41, available at http: // www.
//agritech.tnau.ac.in/pdf/World%20Water%20and%20Food%20to%202025.pdf․6 Assadourian E. et al., State of the World 2005.
  Redefining Global Security, The Worldwatch institute, Washington DC, 2005, available at http: // www.
//transboundarywater.geo.orst.edu/publications/abst_docs/wolf_sow_2005.pdf․7 Renner M., Fighting for survival.
 environmental decline, social conflict, and the new age of Insecurity, New York, 1996․8 Klare M․, Resource Wars.
  The New Landscape of Global Conflict, Capsule Review, May / June 2001 Issue, New York, 2001, available at https.
//www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review/2001-05-01/resource-wars-new-landscape-global-conflict․http.
//www.foreignpolicy.com/issue_SeptOct_2001/postel.html ․ available: water irrigation should be increased from 26% to 46%.
 For example, the production of crops will require three times more water than now 1.
One can assume that conflicts will start especially in countries with dense populations, which are endowed with serious military potential, which can lead to unpredictable consequences.
  Water geopolitics is clearly manifested in many regions of the globe, particularly in the Middle East, Central Asia, Africa, South America, the Caucasus (Armenian Highlands).
  Inequality in the "population" of water resources will be noticeable in Asia, where agriculture is highly dependent on irrigation.
 In countries such as China, India, Iran and Pakistan, large areas of irrigated land tend to consume surface water sources.
  In India and China, the problem of surface water consumption puts 10-20% of the grain crop at risk.
Despite the complexity of the problem, history shows that water disputes can be resolved through diplomacy.
  The first international treaty on water resources was signed 2,500 years ago, when the two Sumerian city-states, Laghash and Umma, signed an agreement to settle a dispute over the Tigris River.
  Since then, numerous contracts and agreements have been signed (in total, more than 3,600).
Current events in the world prove that the factor of water resources is of key importance in the settlement of international disputes.
  An example is the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
  The NKR authorities have repeatedly made a statement to use the water resources of Nagorno Karabakh as a basis for negotiations, noting that there are no permanent enemies and friends.
  The cooperation may include water for gas, water for oil, etc.2.
 However, official Baku refuses to negotiate with the NKR authorities.
Thus, in the 21st century, alongside the military threat, a component of security such as ecological, in particular, water security is gradually being introduced.
  States should make every effort to ensure their country's water security and to prevent the possible impact of external interference in this area.
Alvard Sargsyan WATER FACTOR IN CURRENT GEOPOLITICAL PROCESSES Keywords: water resources, security, military threat, geopolitical conflicts, unequal distribution of water.
