THE PRINCIPLE OF PROPORTIONALITY IN THE CONTEXT OF PROPERTY RIGHTS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE ADMINISTRATION Universal legal standards predetermine not only the essence of rights and freedoms, but also the key preconditions for their restriction.
  Ignoring these criteria can turn the institution of restriction of individual rights and freedoms into a target of arbitrariness.
 For these other reasons, in addition to the principles that express the essence of the law and are the basis of the latter, the legislator has envisaged the principles of prohibition of arbitrariness, limitation of discretionary powers, and proportionality.
 These are interrelated principles, the observance of which is one of the guarantees of ensuring legality.
 In this article we will focus mainly on the principle of proportionality as an administration, without ignoring, however, the importance of other interrelated principles in terms of the limits of its application.
The principle of proportionality envisaged by Article 78 of the Constitution has a universal direction.
 It refers to the basic criteria for the restriction of human rights and freedoms by public authorities in general.
 Due to the impossibility of studying it comprehensively in the framework of this article, it is expedient to pay special attention to the issue of the proportionality of the sanction in the field of administrative responsibility.
 Traditionally, this principle is perceived as a principle of criminal responsibility, while it has a significant application in its content, especially in the field of administration, moreover, not only within the framework of administrative responsibility.
 The mentioned principle is reflected in Article 8 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings", which follows that the latter refers to the activities of general administrative bodies, from the initiation of a case to the adoption of an administrative act.
The lawsuits of both Armenia and foreign countries, which are increasing day by day due to the fact that the principle of proportionality has been challenged, are not unknown to the judicial practice.
  The need to follow the principle of proportionality is a precondition for maintaining the necessity and legality of the coercive measures applied by the state in restricting the rights and freedoms of individuals.
 The study of this principle needs to be done in the context of the terms "necessity", "legality", "goals", "boundaries", "volume", "means" and "capacity".
V. V. According to Lapa, the legal logic of the Constitution, which proclaims human rights and freedoms as the highest value, implies that in the event of their restriction, the constitutional values ​​protected must be expressed through adequate rights.
That is, when examining the legality of the restriction of human rights and freedoms, the court cannot be satisfied only by arguing the need to protect constitutional values.
 It must justify which protection of rights and freedoms requires the application of this measure of responsibility.
 As a continuation of this position, it should be noted that according to some theorists, the principle of proportionality includes four main requirements related to restrictive purposes: 1) justification of restrictions (existence of rights and interests in need of protection, indication of means of restraint), 2) usefulness of restraint (protected) The importance of rights is that they are fundamental human rights and freedoms (related interests); together.
According to G. A. Haji, the criteria of proportionality of restrictions are outside the constitutional norms, which means that there is a need to develop such criteria [1] through the use of the powers of the National Assembly, the Constitutional Court (in the case of the Republic of Armenia).
The theoretical literature states that the principle of proportionality ensures a balance between the means of restraint and the means by means of such means as individualization and differentiation.
 Therefore, the principle under discussion should be examined from the point of view of the existing practical examples in the field of administrative liability and the interpretation given by the courts on them, in order to understand whether the above-mentioned methods are observed in the case law.
The principle of proportionality with regard to the means of administrative responsibility acts as a tool to ensure their compliance and reasonableness with the most well-known, legally based public-legal goals.
 Administrative liability leads to restriction of the rights and freedoms of the person, it should be called to ensure the implementation of the goals enshrined in the Constitution.
 Moreover, as stated in Article 78 of the Constitution, the means chosen for the restriction must be commensurate with the meaning of the restricted fundamental right and freedoms.
 It is noteworthy that the principle of proportionality enshrined in the Constitution applies not only to legal remedies, but also to any measure restricting the rights and freedoms of a person in comparison with the enactment of the Constitution.
The legal nature of the state predetermines its high level of responsibility when carrying out activities that limit its legitimacy.
 According to the Constitutional Court [2], the general principle of proportionality in the regulation of public relations based on the idea of ​​the rule of law derives from a combined analysis of Articles 1, 3 and 43 of the Constitution.
 It is natural that the legislator cannot provide all the details of the restrictive activity, that many questions are left to the discretion of the law enforcer, but the amount of liability should be differentiated based on the gravity of the act, the degree of public danger, the extent of damage, the degree of guilt or other significant circumstances.
 Accordingly, the legislator is required to establish a legal regulation of liability that will allow the competent authority to determine the specific amount of liability to be determined, based on the nature of the offense and the degree of public danger.
The Constitutional Court has also stated that the principle of proportionality requires a fair balance between the measure of liability established by the measure and the "legitimate aim pursued by the definition of liability".
 It should be noted that in international practice, taking into account the nature of the definition of various administrative offenses and the definition of liability for them, a wider range of discretion is provided for law enforcement, with the general rule setting the minimum amount of administrative fines (which, for example, exists). In Russia, Germany, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Moldova, etc.).
  As noted by the Constitutional Court, the RA Code on Administrative Offenses has not adopted a similar approach. [3]
The problem pointed out by the CC arises especially when the minimum threshold of punishment set for a specific offense does not correspond to the offender, the degree of guilt or especially the property status, և the mentioned sanction may create unfounded obstacles to the exercise of that right.
  A similar situation is created in the case of exercising the rights of assemblies, when the participants of the assemblies are also persons with unfavorable social status, the minimum threshold of the sanction (50,000 AMD), in fact, does not allow the principle of proportionality to be properly applied. կիրառ Application of personalization.
The possibility of the rights set aside by us imposes on the State Legislature the need to develop guarantees to ensure their proper implementation, while in the current legal regulations, cases are avoided when a person, for fear of a disproportionately imposed fine, refrains from exercising constitutionally guaranteed rights.
 We can not draw comparative terms between "criminal law" of administrative law, without ignoring, of course, the fact that administrative offenses are less dangerous than crimes under criminal law.
  Thus, if in criminal law there is an opportunity to impose less punishment than the punishment provided by the sanction of the article, then in case of an administrative violation the law enforcer is deprived of such an opportunity.
 As the Constitutional Court has rightly pointed out, in the face of such an approach to legal regulation, it may indeed be problematic to impose a fine of less than the minimum threshold for individual administrative offenses, a relative limitation of the law enforcer's discretion, which may preclude the imposition of a lower fine.
  However, the RA Code on Administrative Offenses did not provide for such an opportunity for legal regulation.
 It is noteworthy that when imposing a fine in criminal cases in Germany, the amount of the fine is left to the discretion of the court, based on the public danger of the act, the degree of guilt, and, of course, on the measure of the criminal's income.
To solve the above-mentioned problem, we can offer two equally acceptable options: envisage the possibility of imposing a smaller fine, impose on the court the obligation to impose a proportionate fine in each case (taking into account the property status) or set a so-called permanent table following the example of Germany.
 In Germany, for each of the actions included in the above table, a proportionate penalty is set, which in turn leads to penalty points.
 These are unique measures of liability after the fine, which lead to the restriction of this or that right.
 Moreover, in case of fines not exceeding a certain amount, the consequences envisaged by the penalty points are not reached.
 This is an effective way to prevent and warn people of new offenses, for example, the existence of eight penalty points leads to deprivation of driver's license.
The combined study of Articles 9, 32 and 279 of the RA Code on Administrative Offenses proves that one of the principles of administrative liability is the principle of "responsibility for guilt", which means that an administrative penalty can be applied only to a person guilty of committing an administrative offense.
  Articles 10 և 11 of the mentioned Code reveal the notions of intentionally or negligently committing the offense.
 From this point of view, in both criminal and administrative law, it is logical to differentiate legally according to the sentence of the horse.
  Guilt, as a mandatory element of the subjective side of the administrative staff, is the only legal precondition for administrative responsibility.
 Meanwhile, both in the RA Code on Administrative Offenses and in the laws of related branches, there are a number of offenses, in which case the egg of guilt is not differentiated, endangering the application of the principle under discussion.
This principle is closely related to another principle of administrative liability, namely, personal liability, according to which a person is liable only for a personal offense.
  It is one of the strongest guarantees of balance between the measure of responsibility and the legitimate aim pursued by the definition of responsibility.
 In case law, there are many cases when bringing another person to justice does not, in fact, fulfill the goals of responsibility, once again endangering the principle of proportionality, which is the subject of study.
There is another, no less important issue - the objective incarnation of a legal entity.
 Given that the legal entity, as a subject of administrative law, is deprived of the ability to have a psychological attitude towards actions, the terms "consciousness", "desire", "envisage" could not be applied to it, therefore, the guilt lies with the legal entity. They are not attributable.
 In this connection, it should be noted that the following approach prevails in the theoretical literature. The notion of "fault of a legal entity" is common; it refers to the possibility of observing the rules and norms established by it, as well as not taking possible measures to comply with them.
Only the simultaneous existence of legal-factual criteria can prove that the legal entity had the opportunity to observe the rules and norms, for the violation of which administrative responsibility has been established.
 The study of case law allows to separate the three liabilities of legal entities. Are all measures taken by the legal entity taken to comply with the legal norms? Did the latter have the opportunity or not? 2) The fault of the legal entity is determined by the fault of its employee; that is, the latter's actions are interpreted as legal acts, if it is not proven that the employee has acted outside his / her authority;
Here, of course, there are serious problems with the principle of proportionality, so the Code on Administrative Offenses should provide for the solution of this problem, excluding misinterpretations and opportunities for arbitrariness.
The above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court stipulates that in case of non-declaration or non-declaration of goods transported at the RA customs border under their name, the state budget does not provide for the goods, vehicles or a separate batch of such customs duties, taxes, duties and other obligatory payments to the state budget. Making the level of their social danger uniform.
 Meanwhile, in the part of the article under discussion, the legislator has clearly emphasized the fact that there is no under-calculation or non-calculation of customs payments.
  As a logical continuation of the issues raised in the article, the following solutions are proposed: - to establish a general minimum amount of administrative fine as a general rule in the legislation on administrative offenses, to impose a fine less than the threshold; - to review the provisions of some offenses;
Summing up our judgments on the perception and application of the principle of proportionality in the context of good governance, we find it expedient to note that the legal culture is not yet allowed to form a predictable and effective law practice to guarantee this principle. methodological support.
  In particular, it is expedient to develop and implement methodologically adequate manuals with complex approaches.
LITERATURE [2] The decision of the RA Constitutional Court on the basis of the application of the citizen Artashes Antonyan in the case of determining the issue of compliance of Article 203 of the RA Customs Code with the RA Constitution, URL.
 http:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=61436 (Accessed.
 06.08.2017).
[3] Decision of the RA Constitutional Court 1304, September 20, 2016.
Martirosyan TATTOO PRINCIPLE IN THE CONTEXT OF EXERCISING THE RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATION RIGHTS Keywords: administrative law, proportionality, principles, administrative differentiation.
