PROBLEMS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL AIR COMMUNICATIONS OF AN UNRECOGNIZED STATE The implementation of international air communication of an unrecognized state is one of the current issues of international law.
 In accordance with the spirit of international law, the declaratory theory states that recognition by other states does not impart any qualities to the subject of international law, but merely declares the existence of the necessary features for the subject of international law, the readiness to establish relations on that basis.
 From this point of view, the question of the extent to which the fact of non-recognition of the state can affect the fundamental rights of the population of that state, including the effective exercise of the right to free movement, becomes a subject of discussion.
The reopening of an airport in an unrecognized state is a sovereign right of the state; The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the violation of other fundamental human rights enshrined in other key international agreements1.
"On International Civil Aviation" 1944 The Chicago Convention (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) requires that aircraft have only the nationality of the State in which the aircraft is registered.
  The double registration of the plane is considered illegal.
  These norms establish the direct legal connection of the aircraft with the state where it is registered2.
 In this way, international civil aviation is directly associated with the aircraft, which the state 1 See D. И. Feldman, M. М. Avakov, International Law, Moscow, 1981, pp. 5-11.
2 See В. D. Bordunov, International Aviation Law, Moscow, 2007, p. 115.
Authorities are authorized to operate international flights under domestic law.
3 That is, the existence of an aircraft registration is a necessary precondition for the implementation of international air communication of an unrecognized state.
This problem can be solved by registering an aircraft belonging to an unrecognized state in the name of a State party to the Convention.
For the implementation of international air communication of an unrecognized state, we consider it necessary to address the next important factor: the discussion of the possibility of an unrecognized state acceding to the Convention.
4 In accordance with Article 92 of the Convention, accession to this Convention is open to United Nations member states and their associated States և States which have taken a neutral position in the world conflict.
The accession shall take place upon notification to the Government of the United States of America and shall take effect on the thirtieth day after the date of receipt of such notification by the Government of the United States of America.
5 We consider it necessary to refer to the analysis of the concept of "States Parties" referred to in the above-mentioned article from the point of view of NKR accession to the Convention.
We consider that the criteria for the connection of the Convention with a state that is a member of the UN, including other unrecognized states, can be geographical location, national-ethnic composition of the population, language, religious beliefs, legal, economic, cultural-cultural ties, military mutual assistance, etc. .
In our opinion, the above-mentioned criteria for considering NKR as a state connected with Armenia are the free movement of citizens through border crossings, the fact that the vast majority of the population are Armenians, the same as Christianity, the apostolic religion, the status of a state language and language. . А. Batalov, Problems of modern international law regulating air traffic. Moscow, 2004, pp. 123-126.
4 See A. Н. Brylov, Basic Agreements of Civil Aviation // Civil Aviation, 1994, pp. 88-93.
5 See 1944 Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation, HHAS PA 2004.12.20 / 5 (13).
Existence of legal entities in the sphere of legal, trade-economic, cultural-cultural relations of the two Armenian states, voluntary conscription of a large number of RA citizens in NKR military units, etc.
Based on the above, we believe that there are sufficient legal preconditions for the NKR to initiate the process of accession to the Convention.
At the same time, we consider it necessary to mention that the NKR authorities, in the person of the NKR Minister of Foreign Affairs Karen Mirzoyan, have taken steps to get the support of international structures in the operation of the NKR airport.
  In particular, the NKR Minister of Foreign Affairs on 26.10.2012 appealed to the United Nations, its specialized agencies, the UN Secretary-General, and all peace-loving member states to assist in the reopening of Stepanakert airport so that the people of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic could exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Karen Mirzoyan expressed confidence that the reopening of Stepanakert airport will contribute to the implementation of the goals and objectives of the International Civil Aviation Pact, can serve as a means of strengthening trust, contributing to the progress of the negotiations under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs.
  The belligerent statements of high-ranking Azerbaijani officials, in particular the threat of the destruction of civilian aircraft, are a serious violation of the international obligations assumed by the latter. Provisions of the Chicago Convention 7.
It is not ruled out that after some time the Stepanakert-Yerevan flight will be followed by the Stepanakert-Moscow or Stepanakert-Paris flights.
  Georgia was against the operation of Babushera Airport in the Abkhazian city of Sukhumi, but after the first Sukhumi-Moscow flight, Georgia did not raise this issue anymore.
6 See the letter of the NKR Minister of Foreign Affairs addressed to the UN Secretary General / electronic source, http.
//www.nkr.am/en/news/2012-11-12/465/, viewing date: 15.03.2016.
7 See the letter of the NKR Minister of Foreign Affairs addressed to the UN Secretary General / electronic source, http.
//www.nkr.am/en/news/2012-11-12/466/, viewing date: 15.03.2016.
Russian economist Beslan Tsnaria notes that the large Sukhumi Babushera airport, which was closed in 1992-1993. After the war, Russian aircraft could become a major transportation hub again.
 The planes of "Abkhazian Airlines" airline are stationed at the airport8.
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) (hereinafter referred to as ICAO) does not recognize Sukhumi Babushera Airport as an airport with international status, as it considers Abkhazia's airspace part of Georgia's territorial integrity. ICAO considers that The implementation of international flights will lead to the violation of the norms of international law 9.
 Nevertheless, Abkhazia is taking steps to carry out international flights.
In this scientific article we consider it necessary to discuss the issue of operation of Stepanakert airport in the conditions of Azerbaijan's consent.
The fact of international flights and landings at Stepanakert airport is the first step in the international recognition of NKR, as it means de jure separation of Artsakh airspace from Azerbaijan airspace.
Azerbaijan realizes that the operation of the Stepanakert airport without the latter's consent means de jure adding to the loss of NKR land territory - the loss of airspace.
However, if the Armenian side operates the Stepanakert airport with the consent or direct permission of Azerbaijan, which some of the Minsk Group co-chairs are in favor of, Azerbaijan will find itself in a rather favorable position.
First of all, Azerbaijan will speculate that its powers extend to the airspace of the NKR, in that sense, its territorial integrity has been accepted by the Armenian side.
  Second, Azerbaijan can use the operation of Stepanakert airport in accordance with Article 93 of the Convention to its advantage.
In particular, under Article 93 ենց 92 և (a) of the Convention, in addition to the States mentioned, other States 8 See Abkhazia Airport, http: // www.
//www.glebzverev.ru/abkhazia/aeroport-suhum.htm,/ electronic source, viewed on 25.03.2016.
9 See http.
//www.icao.int/Search/pages/results.aspx?k=abkhazia&s=All%20Sites.
may, if approved by any international organization for the maintenance of peace, accede to this Convention by a resolution adopted by four-fifths of the votes of the Members of the Assembly, subject to the conditions laid down by the Assembly. the consent of the state 10.
In other words, Azerbaijan is given an opportunity to exploit the fact that the latter has been repeatedly invaded or attacked by the NKR.
Based on the above, we find that the operation of the NKR airport with the consent of Azerbaijan is inadmissible, "groundless" on the following grounds.
Article 1 of the Convention defines the concept of "sovereignty of the State". "The Contracting States recognize that each State has full, exclusive sovereignty over its airspace."
Article 2 of the Convention defines the area of ​​full և exclusive sovereignty. "For the purposes of this Convention, the territory of States shall be defined as land territories and their adjacent waters which are under the sovereignty, protectorate or mandate of that State."
That is, within the meaning of the Convention, the status quo or de facto status is recognized as a source of exclusive sovereignty over the territory, and beyond that airspace.
The territory of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, the airspace of which has not been de facto found, is not under the sovereignty, protectorate or mandate of Azerbaijan.
According to the UN Declaration of Principles of International Law, "States have an obligation to respect the international demarcation-ceasefire lines to which they are a party" 11.
Accordingly, Azerbaijan's sovereignty over the NKR territory և beyond that airspace is limited not only in the sense of Article 2 of the Convention, but also, that it is extremely important, in the 1994 conflict zone. On the established ceasefire regime in Azerbaijan 10 See 1944 Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation, HHAS PA 2004.12.20 / 5 (13).
11 See http.
//www.un-documents.net/a25r2625.htm.
with full-fledged agreements, of which the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic is a recognized party.
12 The sovereignty, protectorate or mandate of a State over territory within the meaning of the Convention includes the definition of the sovereignty of a State over airspace above land.
  In other words, if the land territory is not under the subordination of any state, and in the case of the NKR it is so not only in fact, but also by the legal force of the ceasefire agreements, then the same applies a priori to the air space above the territory.
Thus, we can state that the reopening of an airport of an unrecognized state pursues purely civilian purposes, the realization of which is possible by registering an aircraft belonging to an unrecognized state in the name of a State party to the Convention or by initiating the process of acceding to the Convention by an unrecognized state.
Ani Khlghatyan CURRENT PROBLEMS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL AIR COMMUNICATIONS OF UNRECOGNIZED STATE Keywords: international air communication, unrecognized state, NKR Airport, 1944 Chicago Convention, ICAO Summary.
