PARTICIPATION OF THE TURKISH BRIGADE IN THE KOREAN WAR (1950-1953) 1950 UN Security Council Resolution 83 passed on June 27, 2006, providing for military assistance to South Korea in its fight against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Turkey became the first country after the United States to respond to the UN resolution.
  The sending of troops to the Korean War by the Turkish authorities actually solved a number of geopolitical goals.
First of all, the participation of Turkish troops in the Korean War stemmed from Turkey's national security, taking into account the Soviet threat to Turkey within the framework of the Cold War.
In addition, the above step was a pretext for Turkey to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on February 18, 1952.
 This is evidenced by the Turkish author Fahri Armaoglu in his work "History of the 20th century" 1.
  Another Turkish author, Ali Khalil, in his Ataturk Foreign Policy, NATO-Turkey, criticizes Turkey's membership in NATO, citing the fact that the then Turkish authorities used the "tragic events" on the Korean Peninsula to ensure their own security. .
A number of countries, mainly Turkey, gladly accepted the call for military assistance, as it would significantly increase Turkey's prestige in the world, և would be the basis for NATO membership, which was so much needed by Turkey in the framework of the "Cold War".
1 Armaoğlu F., 20. Yüzyıl Siyasi Tarihi (1914-1995) Istanbul.
 Timaş Yayınları, 2016, p.243. When then-Turkish Foreign Minister Fuat Koprolun spoke in parliament about his support for North Korea, lawmakers, including members of the opposition, accepted the fact with satisfaction, but only until they learned the extent of the aid.
  In particular, the opposition thought that Turkey's support would be limited to symbolic anti-communist statements or, at most, to providing humanitarian aid to South Korea, but never military aid, as there were fears that all this would pose a serious threat to Turkey by the USSR3.
  Nevertheless, the Turkish government had its own position on this issue; to some extent it went on an adventure.
Speaking about the decision to send a 5090-member Turkish brigade to South Korea called "North Star" (or a polar star), let's talk about the conditions under which that decision was made.
In this respect, there were both internal and external difficulties.
  At that time, the Democratic Party came to power in Turkey, winning in 1950. In the May 14 parliamentary elections in Turkey.
The decision on the participation of the Turkish brigade was approved by the government in 1950. on July 25.
 The sending of troops was first mentioned in the Turkish city of Yalova in 1950. During a meeting chaired by President Celal Bayar on June 18, 1945, the then Chief of General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces, the Minister of Defense, took part.
 This decision taken by the government on its own caused controversy in the Turkish parliament, particularly among the ruling party, the opposition Kemalist People's Party.
  Disagreements also arose among the press, a number of student and non-governmental organizations operating in Turkey at that time.
The Secretary General of the People's Party, Kasim Gülek, expressed his dissatisfaction with the mentioned issue. "Before making such a decision, the Democratic Party was obliged to consult the main opposition party, which received more than 3 million votes in the parliamentary elections.
//dergiler.ankara.edu.tr/dergiler/45/789/10123.pdf.4 Akkaya B., Turkey's NATO membership and Korean defense, Academic Peace Department, Issue.
28, January 2012., p. 5. http:
//www.acarindex.com/dosyalar/makale/acarindex-1423868057.pdf. Taking into account the fact that 5090 of our citizens are sent to the military front located thousands of kilometers away from Turkey.
  Why does the government avoid knowing the opinion of the opposition? ”5
And some other members of the People's Party considered that sending such a large number of troops was symbolic.
 The Secretary General of the "Azg" party (Millet Partisi) Hikmet Bayur did not agree with the decision of the government.
 The latter mentioned that instead of sending military personnel, one could be satisfied with sending several military planes.
  Even the chairman of the Turkish Barışsever Cemiyeti (Peace-loving Community) NGO, Behce Boran և, Secretary-General Adnan Çemgil, sent an application to the Turkish parliament to annul the decision, but to no avail.
 Later, the two leaders of the organization were arrested and sentenced to 10 to 15 years in prison, respectively.
  They were charged with "damaging national interests" 6.
After sending troops, 17 satirical magazines were published in the Turkish capital Ankara, publishing articles criticizing the government's decision in the city of Izmir.
 The latter were charged with "adhering to communist ideas."
In other words, the Turkish authorities made that decision on their own, without consulting any other political force or structure.
  They took a very tough stance towards those who thought differently about this issue.
Most of the Turkish press welcomed the mentioned decision, a campaign was launched.
 It was mentioned that Turkey, by sending a brigade to South Korea, first of all "defends its borders".
  In particular, the "Zafer" newspaper, which was close to the Turkish government at that time, praised the decision in its pages, emphasizing that with this Turkey secures its "future".
Despite all the discussions and disagreements, the government decided on July 25 to send military personnel to South Korea.
 Moreover, the decision was made when the Turkish parliament suspended its work in connection with 5 Yaman AE, note. op. cit., p. 236.6 Akkaya B., op. work, page 11. with summer vacations.
 This is proved by the fact that the authorities avoided including the discussion of this issue in the parliamentary agenda.
  It should be noted, of course, that the meeting was preceded by a meeting in Yalova, Turkey, attended by Turkish Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister Sameta Aghaoglu, Foreign Minister Fuat Koprolu, Chief of General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces Nuri Yamut, Minister of Defense Re. Engineer շարք a number of other officials8.
It is interesting that Turkish Ambassador to the United States Feridun Erkin also took part in the meeting.
 Although the Turkish authors do not provide any information on the topics discussed at the meeting, they do mention that a number of urgent issues were raised during the meeting.
  This raises the question of why Ambassador Erkin participates in the meeting of members of the government.
  It is very likely that the ambassador should have informed the American authorities about the decision made by the Turkish authorities in connection with the Korean War.
According to the order of the General Staff of the Turkish Armed Forces, the first Turkish brigade was to be recruited by August 30.
As a result, 5090 personnel were recruited, which included 259 officers, 395 non-commissioned officers, 18 servicemen and 4414 privates9.
It should be noted that during the 3-year war, about 3 different Turkish brigades left for Korea, replacing each other every year.
  In general, in Turkish brigades in 1950-1953. 14,936 people served.
  And after the war, 7 brigades were sent.
 By the way, the future President of the Republic of Turkey Kenan Evren was serving in the Turkish brigade in Korea from 1958-1959.
Major General Tahsin Yazic, who had served in World War I, was appointed commander of the First Brigade.
 The command staff included Lieutenant Colonel Selahattin Takay, who held the position of Chief of Staff of the Brigade.
 As soon as the first Turkish brigade arrived in South Korea, it was placed at the disposal of the 25th Rear Division of the US Army.
  It should be noted that 8 See 29 July 1950.
 War career Behice Boran and Adnan Cemgil tutuklandı.http.
//marksist.org/icerik/Tarihte-Bugun/2488/29-Temmuz-1950.
-Savas-karsiti-Behice-Boran-vehttp.
//www.ahmetakyol.net/19-kore-savasinin-sonuclari-ve-alinan-dersler/ The existing religious and cultural differences between Turkish and American soldiers had a great impact on the service of Turkish soldiers.
 Apart from the fact that the Turkish soldiers were inexperienced, they were taking part in serious military operations for the first time since the establishment of the Republic of Turkey.
 In addition, there was a food problem, as most Turkish soldiers, according to Sharia law, did not eat pork.
 The bad cooperation of the Turkish-American soldiers increased during the actual military operations.
  In general, the Turkish brigade took part in the battles near the Chonchongong river (November-December 1950), in the battles of the settlement called Kumanchanik (January 1951), as well as in the military operations for the Vegas base (May 28-29, 1953). .
  The biggest loss was suffered by the Turkish brigade in 1950. in the recent battles.
 In the Battle of the Chongqing River alone, the brigade lost 15 percent of its personnel և 70 percent of its ammunition10.
  In that battle, 218 members of the Turkish brigade were killed, 455 were wounded, and 100 were taken prisoner.
  In total, in the Korean War, which lasted for 3 years, the Turkish troops gave 721 killed, 2111 wounded, 168 missing and 11 captives.
Speaking about the combat readiness of the Turkish brigade, it should be noted that according to the information, the weapons and vehicles in the hands of the Turkish brigade during the actual hostilities were not modern, did not meet a number of criteria.
  As Turkish author Ahmet Akyol testified in one of his articles, the Turkish authorities did not make an in-depth analysis before sending military personnel to South Korea.
 At that time, they were thinking about joining NATO at any cost.
 In addition, a number of interviews were conducted with Turkish soldiers who took part in the Korean War, in which they expressed their dissatisfaction with the Americans for not paying enough attention to Turkish soldiers; it was not always the case that Turkish forces received air support from the US Air Force.
 In particular, this is what Ibrahim Artuj, a Turk who took part in the war, testified in his memoirs.
//bianet.org/bianet/siyaset/5682-eski-bir-askerin-kaleminden-kore-savasi11 See Türk Tugayı, https.
//tr.wikipedia.org/wiki/T%C3%BCrk_Tugay%C4%B1 A book entitled "The Soldier in the Korean War" was written12.
Referring to the issue of nationality of the Turkish brigade personnel, we should note that, unfortunately, we did not manage to find clear information about them in objective scientific sources.
  Some in some Turkish scientific circles state that there were a large number of Kurds in the military staff, not based on clear evidence.
They claimed that the Turkish authorities preferred to send the Kurds to the front or, as they say, a "meat grinder".
 Others refute this claim, noting that the Turkish authorities could hardly have trusted non-Turkish nationals to take a geopolitical step for Turkey.
A few years ago we witnessed one of the ridiculous "jewels" of the Turkish anti-Armenian propaganda machine.
  In particular, "Mehmetciktv.com.tr" website wrote that in 1950 On November 26-29, the Chinese army of several hundred thousand troops, together with North Korean units, began to advance in the direction of the Americans and the Turks.
 During this time, US forces began to retreat, but the Turkish brigade was not informed about it, as, according to the website, the Armenian translators deliberately did not tell them about it13.
As we can see, the Turkish propaganda machine even looks for an Armenian trace in the failure in Korea, blaming its own failures on the Armenians, as it was at the beginning of the 20th century, during the defeats of the Ottoman Empire in the First World War.
PARTICIPATION OF THE TURKISH BRIGADE IN THE KOREAN WAR Anushavan Melkumyan Keywords: Turkey, NATO, UN, Korean War, Turkish Brigade, Turkish Parliament (1950-1953) Summary.
