Plenum of the Caucasus Bureau of the RC (B) 1921 JULY 4 AND 5 DECISIONS ON NAGORNO KARABAKH IN THE 20S OF THE 20TH CENTURY Political processes developed between the Ice Caucasus republics, which, if on the one hand were aimed at the transformation of local regimes, on the other hand the territorial problems between them often turned into political-military confrontations.
  The new administrative-political unit that emerged in the Ice Caucasus in 1918. The proclaimed Muslim Republic of the Caucasus (later Azerbaijan) began to show territorial claims to a number of territories, including Nagorno-Karabakh.
 The latter in 1917. After the overthrow of the tsarist regime, it aspired to become an independent administrative unit.
  19181920 The Council of People's Deputies formed in Karabakh had taken on the task of governing the region.
1918 At the 1st Congress of the Armenians of the Territory convened in Shushi on July 22-26, 2006, Karabakh was declared an independent administrative unit, and the National Council and the People's Government were elected.
 With the military-political support of the First Republic of Armenia, the Armenians of Artsakh managed to resist the 1918-1920 to the fateful trials, to the destruction of the English invaders and the Musavat gangs.
  1920 The 9th Congress of the Armenians of Karabakh, held on April 23-29, declared the region an inseparable part of Armenia.
  However, at the same time, the developments in the region drastically changed the military-political situation.
1920 The establishment of Soviet rule in Azerbaijan on April 28, 1945 brought new disasters to the Armenians of Artsakh.
  Yesterday, the Musavat people were slaughtered and became Bolsheviks.
 On April 29, Sultanov established the Revolutionary Committee of Karabakh and proclaimed himself its president.
  The struggle of the Artsakh Armenians entered a new period.
  This time Azerbaijan was trying to take over Nagorno Karabakh with the support of Soviet Russia.
The Government of Soviet Azerbaijan և The 11th Red Army Command issued an ultimatum to the Republic of Armenia to immediately clear the territory of Nagorno Karabakh1.
  Thus, with this very demand, Bolshevik Russia went against its own principles, the right of nations to self-determination.
Soviet order was established in Nagorno Karabakh at the 10th Congress of Artsakh Armenians.
 The leaders of the Soviet government of Azerbaijan used this circumstance to their advantage, undertaking the task of annexing Artsakh to Azerbaijan.
 An opportune occasion was created. Azerbaijan was "Soviet" and Armenia was an "agent of international imperialism."
  And the Soviet Red Army was fighting against international imperialism.
 In the Karabakh issue, the Bolshevik party's some figures of the Soviet state, S. Kirov, G. Chicherin, B. Legrand rightly considered that Karabakh, Zangezur, Nakhichevan have historically been an integral part of Armenia, and that they should be reunited with it2.
The disputes over the Artsakh issue got a new course after the adoption of the Soviet regime in Armenia.
  On November 30, the day after the proclamation of the sovietization of Armenia, under the pressure of other political and military figures who were sent to Baku to Sovietize the Ice Caucasus of Kirov and Orjonikidze in Baku to the joy of the fraternal Armenian people, Azerbaijani leader Nariman Narimanov announced that Armenia-Azerbaijan inter-territorial disputes were disappearing.
  Nagorno Karabakh, Nakhichevan, Zangezur are part of the Socialist Republic of Armenia3.
The first and second republics of Armenia are decisive in preserving the territorial integrity.
 However, the events took a different course. The Turkish-Azerbaijani-Bolshevik group managed to stop the just solution of the problem և to separate Nagorno Karabakh from mother Armenia.
1921 The issue of Karabakh remained unresolved after Nakhichevan was ceded to Azerbaijan under the Russian-Turkish agreement signed in Moscow on March 16, 2006.
  To curb the situation in Armenia, the Caucasus Bureau was established in 1921. On June 3, 1945, he adopted a decision instructing Armenia to adopt a declaration by which Karabakh was to be included. Khor 1 Balayan V., History of Artsakh, Yerevan, 2011, p. 227.
2 Balayan V., ref. work page 229.
3 Ulubabyan B., The history of Artsakh from the beginning to the present day, Yerevan, 1994, p. 235.
within the borders of Armenia4.
 That is, that decision was made on the basis of an agreement between the two republics.
In connection with the declaration, an extraordinary authorized body was established in Nagorno Karabakh, A. Led by Mravyan.
 A. Mravyan և Alihaydar Kara's People's Naval Committee of Azerbaijan headed from Tbilissi (Georgia) to Nagorno Karabakh to settle the issue of giving the region to Armenia.
 However, when they reached Yevlakh, Kara announced that they had been ordered to go to Baku, as the issue needed a new clarification.
 It turned out that Narimanov and his associates refused the agreement and demanded that the Undersecretary address the Karabakh issue again5.
 This time the Azerbaijani side was sure that by referring to the mentioned issue again, it would be able to extort territories from Armenia with the intervention of Soviet Russia.
  And if Azerbaijan did not have a powerful ally at that time, such as Soviet Russia, it would hardly have dared to raise that issue again.
1921 At the first sitting of the special commission on the internal borders of the Transcaucasian republics convened in Tbilissi (Georgia) on June 25, 1945, the Azerbaijani side adopted uncompromising behavior in the Karabakh issue6.
  A. Bekzadyan, the only representative of Armenia in the commission, presented to the participants the losses suffered by the Armenian people in recent years, the current difficult socio-economic situation in Armenia, the issue of migration in the country, as well as the difficult situation created for Armenia by the Moscow-Turkey agreement.
  Bekzadyan suggested cutting Armenian territories from Azerbaijan and Georgia in favor of Armenia7.
The Azeri-Georgian representatives of the commission categorically rejected Bekzadyan's proposal on territorial changes, describing it as a nationalist position.
 The chairman of the commission was S. Kirov, who supported the Georgian-Azerbaijani conflict, in his words, "for political reasons, at present there could not even be talk of territorial divisions."
4 Ibid., P.
5 In the same place.
6 Khachatryan K., Sukiasyan H., Badalyan G., Territorial losses of Soviet Armenia Խորհ NKAO in 1920-1930, Yerevan, 2015, p. 119.
7 Khachatryan K., Plenum of the Caucasus Bureau of the RC (b) on Nagorno Karabakh in 1921. On the decisions of July 4 և 5, "Issues of Armenian History", No. 11, collection of scientific articles, Yerevan, 2010, p. 349.
It is appropriate to mention Stalin's reproach addressed to S. It is clear that there is no need to play tug-of-war between the parties. "
  It is necessary to resolutely defend one of the parties, in this case Azerbaijan together with Turkey 9.
I. These words of Stalin clarified the following: that regardless of the situation and the situation, this issue should have been indisputably resolved only in favor of Azerbaijan.
The sitting of the Caucasus Bureau started on July 2, 1921.
 The issue of Nagorno Karabakh's affiliation was examined at the July 4 sitting of the Caucasus Bureau.
 8 members were present (Ordzhonikidze, Kara! Makharadze, Kirov, Narimanov, Myasnikyan, Nazaretyan, Orakhelashvili, Figats).
 Based on the majority of votes cast, it was decided. "Incorporate Nagorno Karabakh into the USSR."
 N. opposed this decision. Narimanov, who demands that the issue be transferred to the RC (b) Central Committee, with the logic that it has caused serious controversy, so it should be moved to the final decision of the RCC10.
The next day, on July 5, the bureau with the same staff and with the participation of Stalin again referred to the Nagorno Karabakh issue.
  It was decided without voting. "Due to the need for economic ties between the Muslim և Armenians և the երին Upper և Inner Karabakh economic connection, its permanent connection with Azerbaijan, to leave Nagorno Karabakh within the borders of the USSR, giving it broad regional autonomy 11" 11.
In fact, the fate of Nagorno-Karabakh was decided by the arbitrary decision of the non-constitutional, non-constitutional party body, the Caucasus Bureau of the Russian Communist Party, on July 5, 1921.
 The words of the great Russian writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn are known on this occasion. "Ilyich was the first to consider the issue of borders" even tenth ".
 This is how Karabakh was cut off and annexed to Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani side had achieved its goal. With the support of Soviet Russia, he conquered the territory of Nagorno Karabakh.
 Thus, the further steps to be taken by the Armenian side were in vain. Azerbaijan 9 Ulubabyan B., ref. work., page 241.
11 Khachatryan K., Plenum of the RC (b) Caucasus Bureau on Nagorno Karabakh, 1921 On the decisions of July 4 և 5, p. 351.
12 Balayan V., note work page 229.
Jan stated that if Armenia demands Karabakh, it will not miss oil13.
 And in this case Armenia was powerless to fight, because both militarily and economically it was not ready to aggravate relations with Soviet Russia.
  In fact, the economic and political interests of Soviet Russia were opposed to all legal and moral norms.
Azerbaijani historiography, trying to present arguments for its ambitions towards Nagorno Karabakh, clings to the words "insert" and "leave" in the above-mentioned documents.
  According to him, the purpose of the trap prepared by the authors of the documents was to give a convincing look to the territorial ambitions of the newly created state in the Caucasus, Azerbaijan.
To date, Russia's position on Nagorno-Karabakh has remained unchanged.
 Regional interests force the Russian Federation to oppose the establishment of reality and justice in the Caucasus.
 And the lesson of history has taught Armenia and the Armenians that Armenia does not have, can not have sponsors or big brother, the country has friends and strategic partners, devoted Armenians in all parts of the world, that is the guarantee of our weapons victories.
Mary Sardaryan RC (b) 1921 CAUCASUS BUREAU Plenum 1921 DECISIONS OF JULY 4 AND 5 ON NAGORNO KARABAKH Bekzadyan, Bolshevik Russia, Soviet Azerbaijan, Soviet Armenia, RK (b) K Caucasus Bureau, N. Narimanov, In StalinSummary.
