THE COVERAGE OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC LIFE ISSUES OF OTTOMAN TURKEY IN THE PAGES OF "TRAVEL" Simeon the Polish also touched upon some issues of the socio-economic history of Ottoman Turkey in his "Voyage".
 As a traveler, he witnessed, heard, or directly carried out some actions, which describe the peculiarities of the socio-economic life of Ottoman Turkey in the first half of the 17th century.
Ottoman Turkey was an economically backward country.
  Particularly in the 17th century, the economic crisis of the Ottoman Empire found its expression in the revolts of large land-centered landowners.
  If we look at this issue from a political point of view, we should mention that Turkey, starting from the 16th century, provoked a war against Sefyan Persia, which lasted quite a long time and ended in defeat for Turkey, which, of course, had its irreversible consequences. on such a good life.
One of the reasons for the socio-economic collapse and deepening crisis of the Ottoman Empire was the rapid growth of the population.
 This meant that the lands could not be enough.
 There was a "land famine", and Anatolia was filled with, in fact, landless peasants who lacked livelihoods.
  As a result, a large number of "chiftbozans" appeared in the country, that is, peasants who were forced to leave their land.
  At the same time, in the cities, without finding any work, they joined the ranks of people who were addicted to lawlessness, riots and revolts, or simply engaged in robbery and looting caravans, or formed their own gangs2.
1 See Economic difficulties 16-17th centuries, Edited by Malcolm Edward Yapp, London, 2000, http.
//www.britannica.com/place/Ottoman-Empire/The-decline-of-the-Ottoman-Empire-1566-1807/02.02.2016/.
2 See Suraiya Faroqhi, Urban Space as Disputed Grounds.
 Territorial Aspects to Artisan Coflict in16-18th century Istanbul, Istanbul, 2002, pp. 222-232.
As early as the beginning of the 16th century, peasant uprisings and various manifestations of protest began in the Ottoman Empire due to the relentless pressure of the peasants.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the Ottoman sultans, from the 15th century (which continued until the 18th century), tried to make certain reforms in the socio-economic life of the three countries, in particular, to regulate the existing old rules and laws.
 They were trying to reduce 4 K. The inflated central bureaucracy of Constantinople, however, was not very effective5.
The popular opinion regarding those reforms carried out in Ottoman Turkey was put forward by B. Bartold.
 He noted that the reforms were even theoretically impossible, as "every innovation in state and public life is considered a crime against religion."
And already in the second half of the 16th century the state taxes increased quite quickly, new taxes appeared, forced sale of agricultural products began to be used, which, in fact, became one of the cruel means of robbing the peasantry.
 Bribery became widespread in the country, especially the appointment of positions with money7.
  And already at the end of the 16th century ին at the beginning of the 17th century a famine raged throughout Anatolia8
 Such a condition 3 Bartold's statement on these reforms is confirmed by the Turkish historian T. Tunayan, stating that the Ottoman, like any other Muslim state, did not consider any reform necessary, because its structure and human relations are always and invariably given in the Qur'an and the Qur'an.
 That is why they did not achieve results in that issue.
 See Inchikyan H., On some characteristic features of Ottoman feudalism, "Historical Journal", № 2, 1982, page 40.
4 See Suraiya Faroqhi, The Later Ottoman Empire 1603-1839, The Cambridge History ofTurkey, The administrative elites, Vol. 3, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 140-141.
5 See Sevket Pamuk, The Evolution of Factor Markets in the Ottoman Empire, 1500-1800, Economic Institutions, pp. 7-8.
6 See Bartholomew V., Turkey, Islam and Christianity. Soc., T. 6, M., 1966, p. 413.
7 In particular F. Bernie made it a well-established custom in the 17th century to sell the positions of heads of state, county, and other administrative services for cash.
 He recorded this phenomenon in India and Persia, noting that "more often։ it happens publicly" in Ottoman Turkey.
  He concludes from the facts presented that if in India and Iran "the children of governors sometimes inherit the positions of their fathers, as a result of which the people are not under such pressure as in Turkey."
 And indeed, in Turkey, the leaders were selling administrative positions, paying taxes and tying them up, and demanding that those who hold those positions pay a certain amount of cash to the state treasury.
  See Bernie F., History of the Last Politics in the Great Mughal Empire, M., 1936, p. 205-206.
8 For more on this see Suraiya Faroqhi, Seventeenth Century Agricultural Crisis and the Art of FlutePlaying.
 the Wordly Affairs of the Mevlevi Dervishes (1595-1652), Turcica. 20, Istanbul, 1988, pp. 43-70.
New turmoil հ peasant movements were born in the empire.
  It is true that all these uprisings were defeated, but, nevertheless, they left deep traces and undermined the foundations of the Ottoman Empire.
Turkey was most shocked by the movements of the Jalals10.
  These unprecedented uprisings, which began in the 1590s, spread rapidly throughout Asia Minor, reaching as far as Transcaucasia.
He also referred to the Jalal uprising11 in his work Simeon the Polish12, in which he spoke of their destructive actions, saying that "but more than forty thousand houses came to Istanbul and Galatasaray and Scutari.
 For the seven of them had destroyed Jelalik. and all who were persecuted and fled fled there. "
 Then the Polish adds that because of all this, from Pughtan to Istanbul, Urumeli, to Vanatik, there was no city, village or farm where Armenians did not live, that is, they were dispersed by this cruel movement13.
 In other words, Simeon the Polish once again confirms the fact that the Jelal movement is negative for the peoples subject to the empire, particularly the Armenians.
The process of disintegration of the military-evil system, the signs of which appeared in the first half of the 16th century, was a signal of the maturation of the internal crisis in Turkey.
 And Turkey was gradually losing its former military power, as a result of which it was defeated in various wars.
9 In particular in 1572. An uprising broke out in Moldavia, in 1594 in Wallachia, in 1596-1598 in Bulgaria, and already in the late 16th and early 17th centuries in southern Serbia, Montenegro, Herzegovina and other places.
  About this Новичев А. D., History of Turkey, M., 1965, p. 36.
10 Early 17th century Ottoman Turkey, as well as European sources on the history of Armenia, occupy a special place from 1605 to 1610. Letters of the French Ambassador to Constantinople Baron de Saliniac to the French King.
  The letters address the most important issues in the political history of Turkey in those years: the Jalal movement, the Turkish-Iranian, Turkish-Austrian wars, etc.
 The reported materials are absolutely accurate.
 The situation in the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of the 17th century was so dire that it seemed to Baron de Salinyak that the final destruction of that state was imminent.
 The collection of letters dedicated to Baron de Salignac also includes letters addressed to the ambassador by the King of France (March 26, 1607) and the Chief of the Janissaries (September 10 of the same year), which address issues related to the Jalal movement.
11 See Stanford J. Shaw, Social Unrest, USA, Minnesota, 2006.URL.
http:
//www.britannica.com/place/Ottoman-Empire/The-decline-of-the-Ottoman-Empire-15661807 (02.02.2016).
12 See George Bournoutian, op. work, page 302.
13 See ibid., P.
This socio-economic situation of the Ottoman Empire had a negative impact on the peoples of Transcaucasia, as already in 1590. The latter managed to establish its sovereignty, "began to impose its social-political system, as well as to severely oppress the peoples of the region."
 This first step was that the Turks divided the territory into sanjaks, vilayets and pashas14.
 In the occupied territories, Turkish officials conducted censuses, compiled tax lists, carried out both official and additional tax collection by cruel means, and so on.
At the same time, Ottoman Turkey, being in constant wars, paid great attention first of all to the military.
 That is why they created a large powerful army, high military equipment.
 At that time, the Janissary Corps, which was the core of the Turkish army, was playing big in the Sultan's army.
It should be noted that the predominantly Muslim invaders who invaded the region set themselves the task of forcibly Islamizing the indigenous Christian majority, which became the cornerstone of their state policy.
 Many methods have been used by them to carry out the latter (from the threat of death to the tax and legal threat).
 By accepting the forced Islam, that part of the Armenians, over time, for various reasons, voluntarily or involuntarily left their mother roots, their Christian relatives, which eventually led to their partial or complete assimilation.
  Armenians, being one of the main non-Muslim nations of the Ottoman Empire, were regularly subjected to forced Islamization, which had different volumes at different times.
14 See Bartold V. В., Место Прикаспийцких квастей в истории мусульманского мира, Баку, 1925, стр. 145.
 For details on these divisions, see Gabor Agoston and Bruce2009, pp. 14-15, Suraiya Faroqhi, Civilian society and political power in the Ottoman Empire.
 AUniversity Press, pp. 112-114.
 There is another article about the mentioned administrative divisions: Zulalyan M., Evliya Celebu "Seyahet Name" as one of the sources of the socio-economic history of Western Armenia in the 17th century, "Historical Journal", № 9, 1986, p. 132.
15 It should be noted that the Turks received huge revenues from the conquered regions.
For example, the Georgian author Bidlis mentioned that 15,000 ounces of gold (equivalent to 300 kg) was included in the Ottoman state treasury from the province of Tabriz (later Maragha) alone.
  And the total income from the newly conquered countries, according to the reduced numbers of Turkish historians, was about 25 million 200 thousand acres, that is, 420 thousand gold drams.
The pillar of the sultanate in the Ottoman state was the avatader class.
 The entire population of the country consisted of two main groups.
 Those included in the first group were called asks (that is, soldiers) 16.
 This group included all those who represented the sultan's authority.
 They were mainly military, service vassals, in whose hands were the central government bodies, the courtiers, the clergy - "ulema" 17.
 And the main role belonged to the military pimps.
The second group in the Ottoman Empire was the subjects (Raya) 18, who were despised (Christian-Jewish), not allowed to wear the clothes allowed for them, to wear what was intended for a Muslim.
 If this happened, the dependent would be threatened with conversion or execution.
  All this is confirmed by Simeon the Polish, who stated that he had no right in the Christian Ottoman Empire: but bosdel, charukh, and the old and one chulagan, but not free in their hands. only in the head… ".
 He adds that there was such an order in the whole country, but there was a little peace, K. was calm in that respect. In Constantinople, as he did in Aleppo20.
They were not even allowed to visit their sanctuaries or church, which in many cases had been turned into a mosque.
The Turks did not allow the construction or even renovation of churches. 16 For more details, see the article above: Suraiya Faroqhi, Political activityEconomic and Social History of the Orient, N. 35, Cambridge University Press, London, 1992, p. 1.
17 See Gabor Agoston and Bruce Masters, Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire, Old Bazaar, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA, 2009, pp. 577-578, see also SuraiyaFaroqhi, same article, pp. 20-24.
18 See Suraiya Faroqhi, ibid., P.
19 See E. Keomurjian, Blog, ed. Մ. Nshanyan, Jerusalem, 1939, page 66.
20 See Akinyan N., op. work, page 207.
21 This is evidenced by Simeon the Polish, that Christians, being constantly in a state of anxiety, needed hours to go and pray.
 But when they went to church to pray, the process was done very quickly, because if the Turks saw them praying in the church, they would be killed or, at best, tortured.
 Then he added that the Armenians "Likewise, the people did not go for hours, but forgot God in the face of many souls and taxes, nomos and other things. for they have no rest or peace.
 See Akinyan N., op. work, page 208.
22 See E. Keomurjian, Blog, ed. Մ. Nshanyan, Jerusalem, 1939, page 71.
  Evliya Çelebi also testifies to that that the Turks had turned the Armenian church in Kars into a mosque named "Suleyman Effendi".
 See Э. Chei Iran », M., 1983, p. 197.
the old 23.
 They used every pretext to demolish the magnificent religious buildings, and all the churches of the empire, which were higher than the mosques, the Turks ordered to erect the church or lower the dome24.
  In addition, after the defeat of the empire, especially after the defeat in the empire, violence and pressure intensified, and then they carried out a new census25, which was followed by the increase of taxes, they were forbidden to rejoice or go for a walk, even to visit the grave.
As the Pole mentions about the burial of the Christians, "Let the other and the dead not be taken with honor and by reading Mashtots, but as a corpse they should carry the plaque without grumbling. and he's also an inhuman street, like the Jew in Leh. that if one meets, extorts or wanders like the coffin of Our Lady, but also curses the believers by saying "Nasran, Zarpul, Kelb, Khindzire", which the Tajiks only say "kavur" and "tinsize" 26.
Christian subjects, even the spiritual leader, the patriarch, had no physical security.
  He could have been imprisoned, tortured, etc.27.
 All this spoke about the fact that the other Christian peoples of Armenia were completely disenfranchised in the Ottoman state.
It should be noted that the material deprivation was more severe for these Christian subjects, apart from the endless Turkish pressures and oppressions. Christians who conquered by force of arms paid a special head tax, the "jizyen" or "kharaj", which was levied in the Ottoman Empire instead of conscription (as in Iran), and Christian women and girls were exempt from that tax28.
At the same time, this deliberate domestic policy of the Turks towards the peoples subject to the empire led to the division of the world, deepening the enmity between Muslims and Christians.
  In the conquered countries, the Turks enslaved and enslaved the peasants and craftsmen29.
23 See V. Papazyan, The State of the Armenian Armenians According to Ottoman Farms (16-18th Centuries), "Historical Journal", 1976, p. 127.
24 In particular, according to Jeremiah Kyomurjyan, the Armenian churches of Evdokia and Brusa were attacked for that reason.
25 See Sevket Pamuk, The Evolution of Factor Markets in the Ottoman Empire, 1500-1800, Economic Institutions, Istanbul, 2005, p. 2.
26 See Akinyan N., op. work, page 207.
27 Speaking of the arbitrariness of the Turks, the Pole mentions that during his reign in Tokhat (1613) there was a bad order, according to which churches and monasteries should no longer light candles, but light oil lamps.
 And if they found a place, they were fined.
28 See A. Hovhannisyan, op. op. cit., p. 18, Papazyan V., The state of the Armenian Armenians according to Ottoman farms (16-18th centuries), "Historical Journal", 1976, p. 134.
29 See A. Hovhannisyan, op. work., page 21.
The Christian population of the Ottoman Empire (also in Persia) was not allowed to ride a horse, mule or camel, but was allowed to ride a donkey alone.
  In particular, on this occasion, Simeon the Polish mentioned in his work that it was connected with the tradition that "so that the camel may be said to have ridden Mahmat, so that they might honor the camel and glorify it. but also if they do not allow a Christian to wear a hat, shawl or anything else, let others put them on my head and throw them away.
 There is no other commandment to walk in front of a mosque, a mosque, or a city on a donkey, but on foot. and when I was unaware of my great calamity, I rode on a donkey to Msir. "
 It was then that the Turkish policemen reached Simeon the Polish and hit him hard on the head and threw him to the ground.
 And when the plague came on him, those present said to him, "You will not sit on a donkey anymore, for it is not a commandment, but a walk."
Then, on his journey to Mush, Simeon the Polish recounts a story about the Turks' policy of riding horses to Armenians (like the rest of the Christians in the empire) and their clothing, noting that a monk in Kharberd had a vardapet for two weeks. He said, "Maybe you will not take your horse with you, let it stay here with me, change your clothes, wear an old, dull woolen coat, because this is Kurdistan."
  And the Pole did as the disciple instructed him to avoid further trouble.
However, Simeon the Polish adds in connection with the latter, that the country of the Turks is completely like that, and Harput is more like all.
 He mentions that K. In Constantinople, Christians have a little consolation and elegance, because the local Armenians have bright churches, festivities with sound, they ride horses, wear a hundred kaj, say seventy kaj, eat, drink, rejoice 31.
 And already K. Before Amit, they were allowed to have a donkey and a camel in Constantinople, then he adds that there is not even a donkey in Sebastatsi's house, everyone is forced to make oxen and load salt.
 And this was the reason why Simeon the Polish paid a fine for his horse when he went to any city or anywhere.
The construction of the fortress carried out by them was a proof of the Turkish occupation policy.
  They needed fortresses to suppress the resistance of the people33.
30 See Akinyan N., op. work, page 207.
31 See Akinyan N., op. work., page 192.
32 See ibid., Pp. 193-194.
33 See Sevket Pamuk, op. work., page 9.
  On the construction of the Ottoman fortress, see A. Hovhannisyan, op. work., page 21.
The Ottomans had a huge, inflated bureaucratic system and a depraved state, which required huge expenses to meet the needs of the court, the army and the pasha's departments.
 And already the lack of the treasury34 threatened the rebellion of the Janissaries, the hired Sipahis, the ordinary Assyrians.
  This was the main reason for their constant robberies of the subordinate inhabitants of Shirvan, Aresh and Georgia35.
In the mentioned era, in the Ottoman state, the land was divided into three parts: oshriye, kharaji ևarz memleket36.
 The Ushriyah belonged to the Muslims, the Kharajiyya belonged to the non-Muslims, and the already memleket belonged to the state-owned lands37.
  Land tenure in Turkey was connected with the Turkish military dictatorship system, according to which it was divided into three groups: non-free vassals, free vassals, sultan viziers, khases.
 These groups differed in their tax rights38.
Thus, when the signs of the collapse of the Ottoman Empire were evident in the 17th century, as we have seen, there was a sense of alarm about the fate of the country in the vicinity of that state.
 The sultans and viziers could not comprehend the real causes of the collapse of the state, but the latter clearly saw its external manifestations, the reduction of tax revenues, revolts, riots, on the other hand, the selfishness of the pashas and suburban landlords, It was a country of classic bribery and corruption.
  The spending of treasury funds by the bureaucracy of the capital was becoming widespread.
  And in order to ensure the new replenishment of the treasury, the Ottoman ruling circles carried out the cruel tax policy of the peoples subject to the empire, which was a real evil for those peoples.
 K. During the bureaucracy of Constantinople, corruption was so widespread that it became so commonplace that even in the Ottoman treasury, there was a special structure called "bribery accounting" to deal with bribery.
In fact, with this the state treasury legalized the "distribution" system of bribes, taking a certain part of it.
35 See Sevket Pamuk, op. work., page 8.
36 See Zulalyan M., Evliya Çelebi "Seyahet Name" as one of the sources of the socio-economic history of Western Armenia in the 17th century, "Historiographical Journal", № 9, 1986, p. 130.
37 For more details on the land divisions of Ottoman Turkey, see Feridun Bey's "Sultans' Writings" section.
  See Safrastyan A., Turkish sources on the Armenians of Armenia, the peoples of Transcaucasia, vol. B, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 240-241.
38 For more on this, see the article above: Suraiya Faroqhi, Political activity4-6.
which Simeon the Polish mentioned in his work.
And since all of this had a direct impact on the state of the state-sultan treasury, at the same time threatening the steadfastness of their throne, Ottoman statesmen from time to time tried to find ways to improve the country's finances, military affairs and administration, but in almost all cases It was a failure that would later lead to the eventual abolition of the Ottoman Empire.
Melik Mkrtchyan QUESTIONNAIRE OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC LIFE OF OTTOMAN TURKEY IN THE PAGES OF "TRAVEL" Keywords: travel, Jalal rebellion, Ottoman Turkey Armenian of Constantinople.
