Sci. Head: Doctor of Technical Sciences, Prof. H. SargsyanThis article gives a comprehensive picture of the research field of constitutional economics in the form of the following question and answer1.A. What were the first steps of ST? Constitutional economics (CF) is a relatively young scientific direction, which was formed in the second half of the 20th century, already going through a rather serious path of development.
  Stezr was the first to put R. into scientific circulation. McKinsey to name the central topic of discussion at the 1982 conference, but not in terms of the content that ST has in the modern sense of the word.
 Eisezr borrowed J. Buchanan, initiating this new wave of the river of science, the assessment of which was made in 1986. The Nobel Prize was awarded for "laying the constitutional-contractual basis for economic-political decision-making theory."
B. What is ST? According to Buchanan? "ST examines the existing properties of the (constitutional) rules, the institutions within which individuals interact, the processes through which that 1 Mkhitaryan J., James Buchanan. The first constitutional economist // Modern issues of economics.
 Materials of the 3rd International Conference, 2015, pp. 98-104, Mkhitaryan J., Nahapetyan S., Constitutional Economics. Subject area և directions // Finance և Economy, N.9-10 (171-172), 2014, pp. 31-34, Mkhitaryan J., Theoretical-methodological aspects of the development և development of constitutional economics // Socio-economic development of the Republic of Armenia issues և priorities.
  Proceedings of the Conference, Eurasia International University, 2014, pp. 292-307, Mkhitaryan J., Methodological Toolkit of Constitutional Economics // Contemporary Issues of Economics.
  Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference, 2015, pp. 105-110, Mkhitaryan J., The Constitutional Way of RA Agricultural Development // YSU SSS Collection of Scientific Articles, 2016, Buchanan, James M., “TheDomain of Constitutional Economics,” Constitutional Political Economy, Vol . 1, No. 1, 1990, pp. 10-12.
rules and institutions arise և are elected. ”
  ST is defined as a scientific direction that "tries to explain the existing properties of alternative combinations of legal-institutional-constitutional rules, which limit the choice and activity of economic and political figures."
In the context of the above definitions, the word constitution is quite comprehensive. as in modern English, it is meaningfully applied not only to the state, but also to various organizational structures: companies, non-governmental organizations (in the sense of the founding document in the sense of the charter), social groups, etc.
Emphasizing the importance of the Constitution, the constitution of the state, ST can be formulated as: "Scientific direction, which studies the possibilities of maximum satisfaction of the economic and social rights of an individual within the framework of the national economic system, economic expediency through optimal combination with the current level of constitutional development."
Գ. What are the boundaries of the subject area of ​​ST? In general, economics is a science of choice.
  In unconstitutional economics, analysis focuses on making choices within existing constraints.
 The ST, on the other hand, directs the analysis towards the choice of constraints.
 This separation was made by J. Buchanan, following in the footsteps of his ideological predecessor, K. Wixel, called attention to the power of rules in which politicians make choices, arguing that reform efforts should focus on changing the rules rather than the expected results of influencing politicians' behavior. to change.
FT is a complex research area of ​​issues of application of constitutional law to economists, jurists, on the issues of institutional-normative provision of economic activity of the state, for the sake of economic development, ensuring general welfare.
D. What are the theoretical foundations of ST? ST is not a completely new scientific discovery.
  It originates from the common foundations of classical political economy and contractual political philosophy.
 Classical political economy (especially the Smithian approach) was aimed at understanding և explaining how the economy (markets as a whole) works in the absence of significant political (state) intervention բաց lack of control.
 Smith's theory described how the existing regime works and how the alternative regime can work.
  In other words, Smith uses the methodology typical of ST - comparative constitutional analysis.
The elements of classical political economy became the direct foundations of ST only as a result of intertwining with the contractual political philosophy, according to which state coercion should be based exclusively on the consent (contract) of the individuals subject to it.
E. What are the ideological pillars of ST? There are two pillars on which ST is anchored: methodological individualism and rational choice.
  The essence of the first is that whatever phenomenon we try to explain at the level of social cohesion, we must show how it stems from the actions and interactions of individuals who pursue their interests individually or collectively based on their perceptions of the world around them. .
 According to this principle. "Only individuals choose and act."
 Consolidated social outcomes are viewed only as the outcome of individuals' choices and actions.
  In addition to methodological individualism, there is the notion of normative individualism, according to which the assessments of individuals, their interests and values ​​provide the proper criterion according to which alternative (constitutional) sets of rules should be judged.
The second cornerstone on which the ST is anchored is the idea of ​​rational choice shared by all branches of economics.
Swiss scientist R. Schwer quotes J. in his article. The following words: "It seems that in the conditions of constant change of the object of study of economics, only one definition of economics can survive. "Economics is what economists do."
  Continuing, Schwerin writes: "We can argue that economics, having lost its object of study, has instead acquired a special approach, which can be applied to the analysis of both market and non-market segment.
 That is the mission of the theory of rational choice. "
  He goes on to mention the success of the "crusade" of economics aimed at "conquering" other social sciences, which some experts call "economic imperialism."
  According to him, the latter is conditioned by the fact that in the modern social sciences every inaccuracy must be replaced by an exact one, which is facilitated by the theory of rational choice, formulating the logic by which people are guided in different situations, whether it is daily choice of goods or spouse's party choice.
  Thus, the logic of market processes can be reflected in the "political markets", taking into account the other constitutional restrictions of the latter.
F. What was the development process of ST? It was recently started by the works of the first constitutional economist J. Buchanan, in that process the founder of Law Economics R. Pozner և Nobel Prize winner A. Sen, and the formation of the Russian school of constitutional economics has become one of the most significant milestones of development.
E. What are the methods of ST? The main method of ST is the method of comparative constitutional (institutional) analysis, which allows to understand how alternative constitutional arrangements affect the results (economic).
  The next methodological tool of ST is economics-mathematical և econometric (econometric) methods, the active use of which led to the emergence of a new direction of ST, empirical constitutional economics.
H. What are the main research directions of ST? The first is the normative ST, which focuses on the regulation of the actions of the state's representatives.
  The second is the positive ST, which focuses on the choice of constitutional rules, their emergence and change, as well as their (economic) explanation.
 The third is the empirical ST, which is interested in two issues. a) What are the possible economic consequences of constitutional rules? (b) Why do different countries choose different constitutions?
 The main difference between the Empirical ST and other areas of ST is the active use of the economic and mathematical tools in the constitutional-economic analysis, one of the current developments of which is the assessment of the level of constitutionality.
T. What are the related scientific directions of F?
 These directions focus on similar research objects, all of which have their roots in classical political economy.
 The main emphasis is on different directions, but each of them reflects the aspirations of Orthodox Nordic economics to move beyond the relatively narrow boundaries.
  These are the theory of public choice, the new institutional economics, the law of economics, the economics of property rights, the new economic history, the political economy of regulation, the ortholiberal order theory.
Ժ. How to apply the principles of ST in practice? Let us present the application of the principles of ST with the example of guiding the development of agriculture in the Republic of Armenia.
  The main problem of the RA agriculture is super-fragmentation, and the main way of development is the enlargement of agricultural lands, which can be effectively implemented only in the case of a mass transition to the model of agricultural cooperatives.
  Thus, reform efforts in this area should be aimed at changing the rules (transition from the rule of individual farms to the rule of cooperatives) and not to change the expected results by making changes within the existing rule (increasing state support to existing individual farms or introducing new support mechanisms).
Jirayr Mkhitaryan CONSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS. TEN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS Keywords: constitutional economics, subject, method, preconditions, directions.
