ON SOME PROBLEMS OF TERMINATION OF PROPERTY RIGHT Speaking of the termination of property rights, let us mention that it is a legal fact that leads to the cessation of property rights with material value
 Moreover, it can happen both by the will of the owner of the given material value, and against his will.
In the framework of this article we will try to discuss some features of the institutions of termination of property right, deprivation of property, restriction of property right միջազգային international practice on them.
From the beginning, the question may arise as to how the institutions of restriction of property rights and expropriation are demarcated.
First of all, we consider it necessary to emphasize that the restriction of property rights is a temporary restriction on the powers of management, use, possession, in which case the owner is not deprived of his property, ie continues to retain all the powers that constitute the content of property rights, but lacks the ability to exercise them1.
Second, let us mention comparatively that in 2005 The 2nd sentence of the 2nd part of the 31st article of the RA Constitution was fixed: "The exercise of the property right must not cause damage to the environment, violate the rights and legal interests of other persons, the society and the state."
 It should be noted that such a broad definition of legitimate interests has been repeatedly criticized, and such a reservation has been considered contrary to the requirement of certainty regarding the limitations of the right [1].
  The current version of the Constitution provides in Article 60 3 3: “Property rights may be restricted to only 1. to ensure the payment of customs fines.
by law, for the protection of the public interest or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others. "
 Obviously, the purpose of the change in this part was to clarify the previous "uncertain", "extensive" reservation.
 However, for the sake of justice, it should be noted that the current constitutional wording of "fundamental rights and freedoms of others" is no clearer than before.
  If in the previous edition it was clear from the content at first sight that the word refers first of all to the environment, then to the rights of other people, now it is not even obvious.
 We believe that the notion of public interest itself, as the interest of the state, community, includes the interests of the environment, other individuals, legal entities or other individuals, as it is a fairly broad concept in terms of its content.
 This is substantiated by the following circumstances.
"Public interest" in the Republic of Armenia can be manifested only in the form of state-community interests, otherwise, the public interest has no legal manifestation [2].
In addition, Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the European Convention) uses only the notion of the common good of the public.
 At the same time, the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR) has recognized in one case that the public interest may be the interest of another, a private individual.
 Therefore, in our opinion, the wording of the "fundamental rights and freedoms of others" enshrined in the current Constitution is, in fact, not clear enough, and the notion of public interest itself includes any state or community interest, and in some cases even the interest of the individual.
As for the issue of the legality of the restriction of property rights, analyzing the constitutional regulations, we see that its application is possible only on the grounds prescribed by law, ie, in such cases, the maintenance of judicial order, according to the Constitution, is not necessary2.
Referring to the institution of deprivation of property, the Constitutional Court in its decisions SDO-92, SDO-630, SDO-649, SDO-903, SDO-1009 found that it is characterized by the main "mandatory" elements: 1) in case of deprivation of property occurs at the will of the owner. gratuitous termination of ownership of the property in violation of the agreement; 2) in case of deprivation of property 2
has a simultaneous complete cessation of the owner's possession, management, use rights over the given property, without guaranteeing continuity; 3) deprivation of property is used as a measure of responsibility 3.
In its turn, in Chapter 17 of the RA Civil Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code) entitled "Termination of Property Rights և Other Property Rights", the legislator does not use the notion of deprivation of property, but only lists the cases when the owner's property is forcibly taken or confiscated.
 However, instead, in theory, the content of the concept of expropriation is often discussed.
 Thus, prof. T. Barseghyan rightly states: "J. The concept of 'deprivation of property' has a slightly different meaning in constitutional law than in civil law, in which it is traditionally equated with the compulsory termination of property rights.
In constitutional law, deprivation of property is given a much broader interpretation.
 Here it implies not only the termination of the right of ownership over a specific object, but also a restriction, as a result of which the owner is deprived of the opportunity to own the object at his own discretion, to use it for its intended purpose, to dispose of it ”[2].
 Ն. A. "Karapetyan is critical of the Constitutional Court for not considering the compulsory alienation of property as a type of deprivation of property," he said. "Կարծիքով In our opinion, deprivation of property is a type of category քերի for cases of forced alienation of property for the needs of the state.
  … Therefore, in our opinion, the second feature separated from the Constitutional Court narrows the legal content of deprivation of property. ”[4]
 In addition, it is stated in the foreign literature that the means aimed at the direct termination of the owner's property right are defined as deprivation of property.
 Moreover, the latter is used in cases of expropriation and nationalization, which includes the direct transfer of property title. 3 According to these clarifications, the Constitutional Court relied on the 2005 Constitution. Article 31 2 2 և 3 (which in substance complies with Article 4 4 ​​60 5 2015 5 of the 2015 edition of the Constitution), which distinguishes between deprivation of property and alienation of property in the public interest .
  Both the previous edition of the Constitution and the current Constitution, in their opinion, do not clearly define the relationship between the institutions of deprivation of property and alienation of property for public interests.
to a public body or other private person [5].
 And the alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state is more often found in the legislations of other countries (including the Constitutions), in international documents with the term "expropriation" [4].
We consider that deprivation of property in civil law implies all the cases when a person's property right is forcibly terminated, including the alienation of property in order to ensure the overriding interests of the society provided for in Article 60 մաս 5 of the Constitution.
  We do not agree with the mandatory elements given to the deprivation of property by the Constitutional Court, therefore, in case of deprivation of property we are dealing only with the gratuitous termination of the right of ownership over the property, that this termination is used as a measure of responsibility.
Therefore, Part 5 of Article 60 of the Constitution, as a type of deprivation of property, is in itself an exception to Part 4 of the same Article, "it can also be exercised" in a non-judicial manner.
 That is, the Constitution allows only two cases, that is, the cases provided for in parts 4, 5 of Article 60, when the will of the owner is not primary, ացումը the realization of the property right does not come from the discretion of the owner.
In fact, in the case of deprivation of property, we have the following consequence that the owner, regardless of his will, is in fact legally deprived of his title, loses the connection with him.
Problems with the termination of property rights arise in the field of civil law regulation.
 In particular, first of all we would like to refer to the provision of part 1 of Article 281 of the Code.
 Contrary to the will of the owner, the most common ground for restitution of property is the confiscation of property under the obligations of the owner.
 According to the mentioned provision. "By confiscating the property belonging to the owner under the obligations of the owner, the property may be confiscated on the basis of a court decision, unless otherwise provided by the contract for confiscation."
 It follows from the mentioned provision that the parties to the contract are free to envisage another extrajudicial procedure of confiscation by the contract.
  For example, Article 249 of the Code defines the right of the pledgee to satisfy his claim without going to court to confiscate the subject of the pledge, provided that it is stipulated in the contract.
As already mentioned above, it is accepted in civil law հավասարIt is accepted to equate the concept of deprivation with the forced termination of the right to property.
 In other words, it turns out that confiscation of property belonging to the owner's obligations is considered one of the methods of deprivation of property in civil law.
 At first glance, it seems that there are no problems with the cited article, based on the principles of autonomy, disposition, and contractual freedom accepted in civil law, it is quite natural and logical to give the parties the opportunity to confiscate property by contract.
 However, it should be borne in mind that in the sense of the concept of "expropriation", both in the sense we have discussed and in compliance with the mandatory components provided by the Constitutional Court, confiscation of property belonging to the owner's obligations should be considered a form of expropriation.
  A question arises. Does the legal regulation of Article 281, Part 1 of the Code correspond to the requirement of Article 60, Part 4 of the Constitution, to make expropriation exclusively judicial?
To answer the referred question, first of all, it should be noted again that Part 4 of Article 60 of the Constitution stipulates the possibility of exercising expropriation exclusively in court.
  It is noteworthy that the constitution does not provide for any other order, the quandatic, to make a reservation.
 The only exception is made in the 5th part of the same article, which has already been mentioned above.
 At the same time, it is necessary to consider Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the European Convention in a comparative manner. "No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by the general principles of international law."
  It is quite obvious that the Convention provision does not mention the requirement to carry out expropriation exclusively by court order.
 It is no coincidence that Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the European Convention does not deal with exclusively contractual legal relations between individuals.
 Thus, the ECtHR has repeatedly stated in its positions that in cases where a private person is obliged to transfer certain property to another private person in accordance with applicable law, such as contract law (confiscation-sale in the process of selling property), non-contractual law Family law (division of marital property, inheritance) is largely outside the scope of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 [7].
It is obvious that our Constitution has gone a few steps even conventionally, as well as from the guarantees of protection of property rights provided by the constitutions of a number of developed countries, as we have constitutionally enshrined the exclusively judicial procedure for the deprivation of property.
 In particular, we can refer to the constitutions of Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France.
  To make it clearer, we quote Article 17 of the French Constitution. "Since the right to property is sacred and inviolable, no one should be deprived of it, as long as such deprivation is not explicitly conditioned by the public need established in accordance with the law, until adequate, adequate compensation is provided."
It is clear that this provision is more like the article cited in the European Convention; it does not emphasize at all only the possibility of judicial expropriation.
 This is due to the fact that expropriation is considered by international standards to be a broad concept, which includes both confiscation of property, confiscation of property, and cases of compensatory alienation due to overriding public interests (for example, Articles 282, 284 of the Code). , 285th cases).
Thus, summarizing the above, we find that Part 1 of Article 281 of the Code does not correspond to Part 4 of Article 60 of the Constitution.
 We think that first it is necessary to clarify the criteria of deprivation at the level of official comments.
  In our opinion, if the state և the society deems it necessary to enshrine in the constitution the guarantee of the mentioned implementation in court, it would be more correct if in the same article of the Constitution there was a reservation, in cases provided by law, for extrajudicial settlement.
  Otherwise, it turns out that the legislation defines other legal regulations than provided by the Constitution.
Then, Article 279, Part 4 of the Code states: "Nationalization (nationalization) of property owned by citizens and legal entities is carried out on the basis of law, with compensation for any damage to the value of that property, in accordance with the procedure established by Article 286 of this Code."
 In its turn, the referred to Article 286 stipulates that in case the Republic of Armenia adopts a law terminating the right of ownership, the consequent damages caused to the owner, including the value of the property, shall be compensated by the state.
 First, it must be stated that the Code does not give the notion of nationalization or nationalization as well as the reasons.
 Secondly, it is obvious that nationalization must be carried out in the public interest, therefore it is a kind of alienation of property for the public benefit provided for in Article 60 5 5 of the Constitution.
  As we can see, Article 286 of the Code does not contain any mention of the value of the property, compensation equivalent to damages, but is only satisfied by stating that the compensation is provided by the state.
 Meanwhile, Article 60 5 5 of the Constitution itself speaks only about the implementation of alienation with initial և adequate compensation.
Based on the above, we believe that the content of Article 286 of the Code does not fully comply with the requirements set by the Constitution.
 One can only assume that when passing a law on nationalization or nationalization, priority will be given to constitutional regulations as having the supreme legal force.
In addition, in Article 285, Part 1 of the Code, entitled "Requisition", the issue discussed above is noted.
 Thus, according to the mentioned provision, in case of natural disasters, technological accidents, epidemics, in other circumstances of emergency nature, the property may be taken from the owner in the conditions and in the manner prescribed by law, by the decision of state bodies, on the condition of paying its value.
It turns out that in this case, in these civil law regulations, the legislator is silent about the constitutionally guaranteed initial equivalent compensation.
 We consider that this part of the article, in fact, does not correspond to the Constitution.
  Therefore, there is a problem of bringing the provisions enshrined in the mentioned articles in line with the constitutional guarantees.
In the same part of Article 285, problems arise that need to be clarified.
 In particular, it is established that the person whose property has been forcibly taken has the right to demand that the preserved property be returned to him, if the circumstances in connection with which the requisition was made have disappeared.
 There are no legal regulations in the Code regarding the legal relations between the parties in case of protection of property.
  It is not clear how the restored property should be returned in cases where the property has been permanently worn out as a result of use or has lost the necessary features for its intended use.
 It is also noteworthy that in such cases, there may be a problem of compensating for the damage caused to the returned property or the reduced value due to depreciation [9].
 Russian jurists also expressed their concern over the issue raised. "The article does not specify the relations between the parties in connection with the return of his property to the owner.
 It must be assumed that the owner has the right to repay the compensation received for the property, offsetting the damage caused by the reduction of its value as a result of using the property during the requisition. ”
 We agree with the above-mentioned position; we find that it would be more expedient if the settlement of the mentioned relations was clearly defined by the civil legislation.
In this scientific work, we have referred to the peculiarities of the legal regulation of its "doctrine of necessity" in case of alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state.
 We consider it necessary to mention that this doctrine has been reflected first of all in the codified acts of the USA, in court precedents.
Worth mentioning is the City of Las Vegas Downtown Redev. Agency v. Pappas case decision, according to which: "The problem of necessity arises from the alienation of property for the needs of the society or the state, when it is necessary to find out whether the perspective program or project adopted by the state for the above needs is to promote public goals or not, which in turn ensures the ownership of the individual ».
  That is, in such cases the following question should be clarified. Is taking the private property of a given person necessary for the implementation of a public purpose?
 Therefore, in such a situation, the choice of the location of the property to be alienated is considered essential [10].
  The "doctrine of necessity" itself seems to contradict the "doctrine of public or public interest", because if, at the discretion of a state body, the recognition of property as an overriding public interest is an unavoidable necessity, for the rest of society need not be seen և rejected.
In addition, American jurisprudence considers the following three situations as violations of the criterion of necessity: 1) when the alienation of property to meet the needs of society or the state is carried out in the absence or uncertainty of state perspective programs; other conditions, which in turn do not indicate the need to alienate the property belonging to the person.
Noteworthy in connection with the 1st situation is the Port of Umatilla v. The legal position expressed by the Oregon Court in the Richmond case, which established that the competent authority which made the decision on the alienation of property must in each case be obliged to effectively prove in detail not only the present but also the future needs.
 Moreover, when assessing the good faith of a state body անհրաժեշտ the need for the public interest, the steps to be taken by the state to meet that need և the existence of future needs should be taken into account as soon as possible [11].
 The Delaware Supreme Court took a different position on State v. In the case of Acres of Land in Christiana Hundred, the state body decided to alienate the property in order to build a modern highway in the future.
  It is noteworthy that the state body did not have a specific plan for the implementation of this program, ie during what period the road construction will be carried out, what route it will take, it did not even present concrete arguments whether certain projects will be drawn up or not.
 Moreover, by the above-mentioned decision, the state body noted that "the construction of the highway will contribute to the development of road transport, at the same time collecting taxes from the citizens using that highway."
  However, the Delaware Court found that no matter how "praiseworthy" the above measures were, the failure to submit a timetable or design for the highway could not be considered an effective need to alienate the disputed property.
In connection with the second situation, the courts paid attention to the issue of possible deadlines for the implementation of measures to be taken by the competent state bodies.
 In one case, the conclusions were that the longer the period of measures to be taken under a specific project, the more the state body is obliged to substantiate the need to take the given alienated property with more solid arguments and evidence4.
4 A Pennsylvania court has ruled that the alienation of a new school building construction block cannot be based on a theory of probable need, that is, a court claiming that a person wishing to alienate property for state or societal needs cannot be based on assumptions or probabilities.
 The construction project of a new school building should be based on a more sound territorial development perspective; no assumptions can take precedence over the interests of the private owner.
  See Condemnation byOctorara Area Sch. Dist., 556 A.2d 527, 527, 531 (Pa. Commw. Ct.1989).
In the case of the third case, the American courts will emphasize the geographical location of a specific property and the special significance of that property during the implementation of programs of national significance developed by the state5.
It should be noted that the doctrine of necessity has been manifested not only in the precedent decisions of American courts, but also in the case law of the ECHR.
 In this regard, the ECtHR found that the State has a wide discretion in its actions և choice of means, as well as in determining whether the consequences of such actions are directly justified by the common good or not [13].
 In developing this position, the ECHR has found it necessary to be guided by the principle of "best governance" of public authorities and their officials, while noting in which cases this principle may prevail in situations where a person has a heavy burden of proof. danger of carrying [14].
 According to the ECtHR, the above-mentioned goal can be achieved if in each case a number of issues of interest are discussed comprehensively [15], which in turn requires a detailed analysis of issues such as compensation terms and the conduct of disputed entities, including state-initiated measures և their implementation, the duty of state officials to act in a reasonable և time, in accordance with the law, with maximum consistency [16].
Based on the above, we believe that the alienation of property should be conditioned by the need for it, which implies: • The nature of the measures taken by the state in the alienation of property, ie their implementation, ie state perspective projects should not be unjustifiably interfering with property rights; It's the duty of individuals to act reasonably և at the right time, ie the action taken or its implementation should not be permanent ”, uncertain or intended 5 In one case, the court found that although the plan submitted by the property alienator was quite promising, it was aimed at creating an environment և community development,However, the alienation of the disputed property does not represent their necessity for the simple reason that it is geographically far enough away from the projected location; its location could not interfere with the "obstruction of construction" community improvement activities.
 See City ofHelena v. DeWolf Id. at 128.
• The duty of state bodies and their officials to act in accordance with the law, ie a law whose regulations are predictable, accessible to each individual չեն there is no room for disagreement, be it for such a long period of time that its practical implementation makes the project developed by the state unrealistic. Gives, • The duty of state bodies and their officials to act with maximum consistency, ie to make the necessary efforts to serve the property alienated by the state for the common good, for the needs of the future generation.
As a result of our research, it becomes obvious that the above-mentioned legal criteria are not observed when the government of the Republic of Armenia alienates property with a superior public interest.
 In particular, in a number of decisions, the Government of the Republic of Armenia substantiates the recognition of this or that property as a public interest with the following arguments: underground parking… "[17] or"… the alienation of certain land plots is conditioned by the significant national importance in the field of entrails use, or will ensure a significant increase in the export of industrial products in the Republic of Armenia ... "[18] և other justifications, which are quite similar in nature.
  In fact, in the current situation we have a situation that the decisions of the Government of the Republic of Armenia do not substantiate the need for this or that property, do not specify for what specific state programs, in what terms it will be implemented, but simply focus on future speculative needs, which we think is so legitimate. no.
We can not disagree with the famous American lawyer F. Nichols's unique position that "existing legislation does not contain provisions that would allow a person to dispute whether the expropriation of his property for the sake of public life is a matter of public necessity or convenience, or whether it is necessary or expedient for his property to be alienated for such public improvement." on the agenda, whether it is simply an arbitrary discretion or a sham on the part of the state. "[19]
  We consider that the domestic legislation, including the by-laws, should comply with the international legal standards we have referred to, excluding the unfounded violation of the owner's rights.
LITERATURE [1] Luchterhandt O., Critical Expert Considerations on the Current Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, 2013 October, page 12, Poghosyan V., Sargsyan N., Republic of Armenia 2015 edited Constitution, Brief Clarifications, Yerevan, 2016, p. 71.
[2] Harutyunyan G., Vagharshyan A., Comments on the RA Constitution, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 366, 371.
[4] Karapetyan N. A., Property inviolability. From domestic regulations to the European Court, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2014, pp. 150-151, 157.
[6] Barseghyan T. K., Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia.
The first part, Yerevan, 2009, page 300.
[14] Օ sipkovs and others v. Լ atvia, № 39210/07, § 80, 4 May 2017, Vukušić v. Croatia, № [15] Օ sipkovs and others v. Λ atvia, № 39210/07, § 80, 4 May 2017, Perdigão v. Portugal [16] Beyeler v. Italy [GC], № 33202/96, § 114 and 120, ECHR 2000-I), O sipkovs and othersv. Λ atvia, № 39210/07, § 80, 4 May 2017. [17] Decision No. 638-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of June 8, 2017 on recognizing the area enclosed by Abovyan և Aram streets in the city of Yerevan as an overriding public interest, 1 (A).
[18] Government of the Republic of Armenia On May 21, 2015, within the administrative borders of Artsvanik, Schakar, Achanan, Chapni and Syunik rural communities of Syunik marz of the Republic of Armenia, point 1 of the decision N 791 was recognized as exclusive, overriding public interest in some areas.
[19] Nichols P., The Law of Eminent Domain.
 a Treatise on the Principles, Which Affect Stepanyan Martun, Galstyan Kristine ON SOME PROBLEMS OF TERMINATION OF PROPERTY Keywords
