THE POST-WAR Diaspora Armenian claims ARAJINTARINERIN AND RETURN TO FIGHT HAYKAKANTARATSKNERE (1945-1953) at the end of World War II, when it was clear the Allies defeated Nazi Germaniayiev its inevitability, rose in Armenia and the Diaspora intellectuals demand the return of Western Armenia and Karsimarze Soviet Armenia Armenians worldwide unite their homeland for.
 According to the archival documents, in 1944, considering the moment convenient, the issue of unification of Western Armenia with Soviet Armenia after the victorious end of the war against Germany was touched upon in Yerevan by Armenian intellectuals (Avetik Isahakyan, Nairi Zaryan, Derenik Demirchyan, etc.).
 1944 On September 14, the editor of "Soviet Armenia" newspaper H. Mamikonyan addressed a letter to the Secretary of the Central Committee of the Republican Party of Armenia G. Harutyunyan, with whom he informed his "Av. About the conversation between Isahakyan.
 The poet expressed the idea that many issues would be resolved after the war, including the issue of Western Armenia.
  He considered it necessary to apply to I. To Stalin to know his opinion.
 The letter writer at the same time informed that Av. Before that, Isahakyan had met A. in Moscow. Mikoyan և the latter confirmed that after the war the issue of Western Armenia will be resolved1.
During those years, the idea of ​​"unity of national forces" was formed and widely spread in the Diaspora.
 First of all, the international situation and Turkey's anti-Soviet policy under the guise of neutrality contributed to that.
 Following the behavior of Turkey, the Diaspora Armenians came to the right conclusion that it was time for them to act. The future of Armenia was on the "table", that is why after the battle of Stalingrad they took active measures to present the issue of Armenian lands to the international community2.
1943 The members of the Armenian Democratic Liberal Party, the American Armenian Progressive League, which has been operating in the United States since October 8, 2006, started working to unite Armenian organizations operating abroad.
 As a result, national councils were established in the Diaspora.
In contrast to the Soviet society, where the problem of Armenian territories in 1944. It was discussed only during intimate conversations, the Diaspora Armenians, especially after the battle of Stalingrad, were active 1 See Virabyan A., Armenia from Stalin to Khrushchev, Yerevan, 2001, p. 34.
2 See Melkonyan K., The Diaspora Armenians խնդիրը The Problem of Solving the Armenian Question (1945-1947), "PBH", 2010, № 2, p. 41.
He took measures to present the issue of Armenian lands to the international community.
  Already in 1943 The Ramkavar Liberal Social-Democratic parties have stated that they will seek "human justice" from Turkey with the help of the United States and Britain, and expect the USSR to take part in the discussion of the issue1.
The movement was led by the ARF on the one hand, and the ADL on the other, along with other pro-Soviet organizations, such as the SDHP and the Progressive League of Armenian-Americans.
 National councils were established in the Armenian colonies, the work of which was coordinated in 1944. The American-Armenian National Council was established in New York in March 2006.
  1944 At the end of March, the political program of the American-Armenian National Council was approved, according to which the goal of the council was to create solidarity, cooperation within the colony, as well as to work for the protection of the supreme interests of the Armenian people.
The program priority was to "assist (the allies) in the war effort", "organize events, assist in events in favor of the Soviet Union, Soviet Armenia", "protect the rights of deported Armenians by all necessary means, work to resettle them on Armenian soil."
 It was said at the end of the document. "The American Armenian National Council will recognize the Armenian government as the owner of Armenian rights" 2.
Some time later, national councils were established in other Armenian colonies.
 The National Council of French-Armenians was headed by writer, critic, philologist, journalist and public figure A. Chopanyan, the Egyptian-Armenians, famous satirist Al. Sarukhanyan.
 National councils were formed in Syria, Lebanon, Greece, Palestine, Uruguay and other Armenian colonies.
Both American-Armenians and French-Armenians began to act on the issue in question during the war.
 1944 In February-August, a group of young Armenians from Paris distributed 4 leaflets.
They said about the Armenian question. "The reparations for the 1915 massacre committed by the Turks will be perfect on the day when Armenians scattered around the world have the opportunity to return to their ancestral homeland. year after year, with great sacrifices ”3.
Diaspora Armenian organizations had high hopes for 1945. with the United Nations Conference to open in San Francisco in April.
 Both Armenian organizations operating in the United States addressed the conference with memoranda.
  The first major appeal of the Diaspora to the Armenian issue was the memorandum submitted to the UN in San Francisco by the Armenian National Council of the United States, which included all American-Armenian public, cultural, and religious organizations and parties except the ARF Dashnaktsutyun.
  The memorandum begins with the following words: "The Armenian people are appealing to international justice, they demand the elimination of the cruel injustice that was allowed to them for centuries, an injustice that continues to this day.
 Hayka 1 See Virabyan A., page 34.
2 See Melkonyan K., page 42.
3 See G. Aharonyan, On the Road to the Great Dream, Beirut, 1964, p. 195.
The issue is gaining great importance because the Armenian people have a great contribution to the world civilization and culture.
  Armenians are one of the oldest peoples in the world.
  Their history coincides with the emergence of civilizations in Mesopotamia.
 Politically, the Armenians in ancient times organized a powerful state, established ties with the empires of the "powerful states of the ancient world".
Armenians were the first people to convert to Christianity.
  That is why the application mentioned by the Armenian people deserves special attention of international justice. ”1
The memorandum states that the time has come for the Armenian territory under Turkish rule to be annexed to Armenia, which would allow 1.5 million Armenians living in different countries to return to their homeland.
 Then it is mentioned that the allies promised the Armenians liberation after the First World War, and the US President V. Wilson decided the borders of independent Armenia, which, however, did not happen.
  Successive promises were forgotten or sacrificed in the interests of powerful powers.
Emphasizing the achievements of the Armenian people who defended democracy and progress during the Second World War, the memorandum points to: "During the war, Armenians once again proved their commitment to democracy գործ to the cause of the United Nations.
 They fought again, in the ranks of the American army, in the other armies of the United Nations.
  In the Red Army alone there were 50 Armenian generals, more than a quarter of a million Armenian soldiers. "
  Assessing Turkey's behavior, it was noted that the latter "sought refuge under the guise of false neutrality, at the same time providing all possible assistance to the Nazis."
The Armenian Diaspora had high hopes for the next conference of the heads of state, which started in mid-July in the Potsdam suburb of Berlin.
  The Armenian National Council of America in 1945 On July 17, he sent a telegram to the leaders of the three powers to include the Armenian issue in the conference agenda.
  The telegram said: "We believe that you will make a decision to meet the just demands of the Armenian people.
  Armenians must be given the opportunity to relocate to their historic homeland, the Armenian states currently part of Turkey, which must now be returned to their sole rightful owner, Soviet Armenia. ”3
Telegrams were sent from other Armenian colonies.
 On July 31, representatives of the Armenian community of Romania convened a rally in Bucharest to demand the annexation of the Armenian territories occupied by Turkey to the leaders of the Great Powers.
 On August 3, the Executive Committee of the Armenian Colonies of South America addressed the conference with a request to annex the Armenian states to Soviet Armenia.
In their applications, the Armenian progressive organizations mainly posed two questions to the Great Powers և international organizations.1 See "Armenia and Soviet-Turkish Relations in Diplomatic Documents 1945-1946", ed. A. Kirakosyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 154.
2 See "Soviet Armenia" daily, June 15, 1945.
3 See A. Virabyan, p. 52.
a. To return the historical lands of the Armenian people, which were forcibly confiscated by Turkey after the First World War, to annex it to Soviet Armenia, b. thus giving an opportunity to one and a half million Armenians who were forcibly deported from Turkish Armenia by the Turks to return to their homeland, Armenia1.
It was mentioned in the applications that the Armenian people have always stood by the progressives to fight for justice.
  Proof of this is the fact that during both the First and Second World Wars the Armenian people actively participated in the struggle against imperialist Germany within the framework of the federation of major powers, sacrificed for the victory of democracy.
 The investments of the Armenian people were accepted both by the allies and by the progressive humanity.
That is why after the First World War the powers promised the Armenians freedom - the formation of an independent Armenian state.
  But those promises that were made officially were forgotten or sacrificed to the selfish interests of powerful powers.
1945 The Armenian National Council of Syria և was established in Beirut on August 31, 2010 under the chairmanship of Adam Manuelyan, with the support of the Armenian Communists, the Hunchakians, the Ramkavars, the Lebanese-Armenian Renaissance Union, and many other unions and factions.
  From the very first day of its establishment, the council has carried out a wide range of activities, mainly continuing the tradition of organizing rallies.
  By the way, before the establishment of the organization, thousands of rallies had already been held in Beirut demanding the return of Armenian lands.
  The press of the time covered them in detail.
 The most memorable on July 29 under the auspices of national parties ար Archbishop Khad. It was the meeting held under the leadership of Ajapahyan, after which the participants sent a telegram to I. Stalin 3.
On September 23, the council simultaneously held thousands of rallies in Beirut, Aleppo and Damascus.
  In Beirut alone, 10,000 Armenians took part in it.
 At the end of the rally, on behalf of 200 thousand Armenians living in Syria and Lebanon, the USSR leader I. Stalin, US President H. Truman վարչապետ Prime Minister of Great Britain K. The application addressed to Etli, where the latter were asked to hand over the Armenian lands in Turkey to Soviet Armenia.
  Later similar events were organized.
It should be emphasized that all the national councils, guided by the slogan "Armenians for Armenians", started their activities with great devotion and hope, published books, booklets, published articles, leaflets, prepared memorandums, applications, organized rallies and rallies in favor of the Armenian Cause. .
 However, it should be noted that in this struggle, the American Armenian National Council became the force that united all the Armenian organizations around the world and assumed the helm of their management.
1 See "Armenia and Soviet-Turkish Relations in Diplomatic Documents 1945-1946", p. 155.
2 Ibid., P.
3 See Msirlian Z., The Issue of Occupied Armenian Lands 1921-1971, "Haykazian Armenological Journal", Beirut, 1971, p.
If we refer to the territorial claims, then all the foreign Armenian organizations demanded the return of the Armenian territories occupied by the Turks - Kars, Ardahan, Van, Erzurum, Trabzon, Bitlis - to join Soviet Armenia1.
1946 Armenians continued to cherish hopes, trying again and again to raise the Armenian issue during the meetings of the leaders of the three allied countries.
  In this regard, the first session of the UN General Assembly convened in London in January was no exception.
  In those days, many Armenian organizations flooded London with their telegrams and messages.
  As always, the Armenian-American National Council was the first to address the issue, hinting that the UN is the body committed to restoring historical justice.
 The Armenian National Council of Lebanon, in its turn, on behalf of the 200 thousand Armenians living in Syria and Lebanon, demanded the annexation of the territories occupied by Turkey to Soviet Armenia.
 The Armenian National Council of Egypt wrote in its message. "The Armenian question is not a propaganda.
 It is a just demand that mankind will ever know. All the Armenians of the world demand that the Eastern states occupied by Turkey be annexed to Soviet Armenia.
  These lands were inhabited by Armenians for 4000 years, until 1915, they flourished.
 If these lands are not Armenian because of the massacre of the Turks, then they are "deprived of the right to live here".
  In any case, the massacres did not allow them to own these territories.
 The annexation of those territories to Soviet Armenia will put an end to injustice, will solve the issue of the return of Armenians scattered all over the world. "
  Representatives of the Armenian colonies of Uruguay, Argentina and Switzerland, as well as the "Committee for the Defense of Turkey-Armenia" operating in Paris also addressed the session2.
Despite the 1945 resolution of the Armenian question. The actions in the Diaspora did not have a positive result, but in those years the Armenian Question not only united the Armenians around the world around the American Armenian National Council, but also a new strategy of actions was developed by the Diaspora to give a final solution to this problem.
  The Armenian National Councils have started cooperating with the members of the government of the given country, legislators, representatives of science and art.
 Such a policy started in the post-war period was the basis for the process of recognition and condemnation of the Armenian Genocide in the foreign parliament3.
During the beginning of the Cold War, every land claim against Turkey was considered as a "volume of communism".
 Thus, the Western powers defending Turkey և the United States again become arch-enemies of the just demands of the Armenians.
Summarizing the above, it can be unequivocally stated.1. The Armenian organizations in the Diaspora realized that the issues of post-war world peace and security depended on the cooperation of the three great powers, the USSR, the United States and Great Britain, so that all possible international issues could be resolved. documents 1945-1946 ”, page 159.
2 See Melkonyan K., page 47.
3 Ibid., P.
by their agreed actions.
  That is why they attached special importance to sending messages to the leaders of the Great Powers, because they were sure that the just demands of the Armenians would be taken into account, this time the great injustice done to the Armenian people in the past would be finally eliminated.
2. The documents show that these organizations believed that the USSR would play a major role in resolving the issue of Armenian historical lands.
  They declared that the USSR was the only defender of small nations, in particular, the savior of the Armenian people.
  The Diaspora was convinced that the Soviet government would not only defend the demands of the Armenian people, but also fulfill its centuries-old dream.
3. All Armenian organizations, without exception, demanded that the Armenian territories of Kars, Van, Ardahan, Erzurum, Trabzon, and Bitlis be reunited with Soviet Armenia, that is, included in the USSR.
4. All these demands were connected with the repatriation of 1.5 million Armenians scattered around the world.
 In their messages, they mentioned the fact that Soviet Armenia was too small to accommodate more than 1 million Armenians, that the repatriation of Armenians was possible only if the Armenian territories were liberated from Turkey.
5. These messages show that the Diaspora Armenians sincerely wanted to live and create in the USSR, to unite their work and energy with the work of the population of Soviet Armenia.
6. The uncoordinated activity of the Armenian forces played its negative role. The Diaspora Armenians were divided into two opposing, intolerant forces, and Soviet Armenia, not having the status of a subject of international law, was unable to influence the course of events in any way.
7. The Soviet government, by bringing the issue of the status of the Black Sea Straits in line with the territorial claims from Turkey, internationalized the issue of the relations between the two countries, thus leaving the issue of the Armenian territories.
8. The just demands of the Armenian people were again sacrificed to the interests of the powers.
Gohar Baghdasaryan THE ISSUE OF ARMENIAN CLAIM FOR THE FIRST YEARS OF THE DIASPORA IN THE FIRST YEARS OF THE DIASPORA Stalin, Kars, Ardahan, Van, Erzurum, Trabzon, Bitlis.
