THE THOUGHT OF ETERNAL RETURN IN HOVHANNES GRIGORYAN'S POETRY The period of independence posed the task of valuing a new reality before poetry.
There was a certain transition, tensions were set, which had to be overcome.
 Some orphan had come to an end, something had died, something had to be born, transferred, transformed.
 H. goes through those transfers. Grigoryan's poem.
Grigoryan is one of the writers who create a system, build their own world.
  Accordingly, each poem should be considered as a building block of that world.
 It is not by chance that the same theme, the same motives are manifested in his works written in different years and included in different series and collections.
Scholars have noted և emphasized a number of features of Gregorian poetry.
Particular attention was paid to the decay of the horse, the narrative, the Gregorian irony1, the existence of the intertext 2, the creation of the "average statistical" type of intellectual 3, the existence of a small costume 4, etc.
Nevertheless, almost no strong motive has been noticed, which, in our opinion, is key in H. Grigoryan's poetry system.
 It is about the motive of eternal return.
This thought from the ancient period (Sophocles) has interested the thinkers of different times.
 The topic is not exhausted.
 Each thinker comes to interpret the problem in a different way.
In the 19th century, the German philosopher, poet, and philologist Nietzsche had the Epiphany of the Eternal Return in Switzerland5, and he considered it his deepest thought.
In the Armenian reality, this topic was in the center of Vardan Grigoryan's attention.
 He tried to solve the problem through historical themes, writing a novel with that very title, "Eternal Return".
Everything in the world is in eternal return.
 But does this not contradict our notion of time, because in our imagination the processes must move forward, therefore one must be different from the other?
 But in fact a point of view is put forward, according to which there is a return, and that is eternal.
  If eternity, then the beginning և the end are in each other.
  If the beginning and the end are separated from each other, then we have an end, we have mortality. this contradicts eternity.
Our goal is: • to find out the essence of the Hovannisian Gregorian perception of eternal return, • to observe և to study the poetic "translation" of that perception, • to examine the means and "tools" by which the motive is constructed.
1 Researcher Tat-Soghomonyan notices. "Hovh. In Grigoryan's narrative poems, there is the phenomenon of presenting the material with irony, irony, under which sadness - even tragedy is hidden, easy and light - speaks about the most difficult. "
 See Soghomonyan T., Armenian modernism և Armenian postmodernism, http.
//grigornarekatsi.info/2013-01-30-12-19-47/2013-01-31-07-19-51/87-tatev-soxomonyan, 11.03.2014.
2 In this respect, the substantiation of the history of world culture and its reinterpretation is noticeable.
For example, in the poem "Paris, Paris again" the references to famous French artists are clear:… Everything happened exactly as destiny had planned, Hugo, Balzac, Dali, Picasso ոլ Apollins crowned with fan lights… (Grigoryan H., Gisherahavasar, 2006, p. 199).
3 See Ghazaryan N., Poetry drama, Literary newspaper, 15.12.13, available at http: // www.
//www.grakantert.am/%D5%A2%D5%A1%D5%B6%D5%A1%D5%BD%D5%BF%D5%A5%D5%B2%D5%AE%D5%B8%D6 % 82%
% D5% B6% D5% B8% D6% 80% D5% A1% D5% B5% D6% 80-% D5% B2% D5% A1% D5% A6% D5% A1% D6% 80 /, 11.03.2014 .
4 For more details, see Nikoghosyan A., The Poem of Parodic Imagery, Notes from the Process, Yerevan, 2007.
5 In August 1881, on his way back from the Swiss village of Sils-Maria, Nietzsche sat down to rest on a rock, at which point the epiphany of the Eternal Return appeared.
 See http for more details.
//ecdejavu.ru/v/Vechnoe_v.html, 11.03.2014.
The fact that the motive of eternal return was not transient և accidental in Grigoryan's poetry, but, on the contrary, was a deeply conscious principle, is clear from the study of poems written in different years.
 Let's start with the poetics of the title.
 The titles chosen by Grigoryan are remarkable: "Everything returns", "Endless return", "New return", "Slow repetition", "Circulation", "Every morning".… As we know, the title plays a big role among the "text" of the reader.
  It creates a certain regulation of perception, opens a "horizon of expectation" to the reader.
 In addition, the title gives the work completeness, completeness 1.
 Especially in the case of Grigoryan's poems, the titles give a certain direction, point out the starting point from which we should start the interpretation of the given work.
  Especially in the case when the poet gives new content and idea to the text through only one stroke, in this case the title.
 Here is the poem entitled "Every morning". In the morning you are not yet old, every morning you wake up in the crib, և with your eyes closed, you feel the pleasant coldness of your mother's right hand on your forehead.
And then the door slams shut, your father went to work, և then the door will open and close again, your sisters went to school… And then there will be silence և only your mother's footsteps will remain at home ը the sound of crying, And while your eyes are closed sobering up a little, your crying The voice… your daughter is crying… the footsteps of your cradle… some doors close and open inside the kitchen… And you finally sober up in the moment of aging… 2 In fact, here the writer creates an interesting situation. It condenses the whole human life in one day.
 And the title, "Every Morning", refers to the idea of ​​eternal return. The same thing is repeated every morning.
Those transitions, the repetition of the same are outlined in the poem with the beginning "I know". I know, this is another day, which makes desperate efforts to make the daily newspaper memorable, with some colorless energy.
I was reading a book about people who live in a certain country, where some things happen, some events happen, after all, without a headache, without the sadness that, here, another day ended .
 (Emphasis is ours-SK.) (Pp. 72-73) This time we are reminded of the idea of ​​eternal return, of repeating the same thing, the word "regular" used at the beginning and end of the poem.
  In other words, the eternal cycle will make one more cycle, then another and so on.
H. The thought of eternal return in Grigoryan's poetry has two types of representations in the stage.1. eternal return as a recurring story, 2. eternal return to the beginning.
1. The eternal return as a repeating story.
  Poems about it, in fact, fall into this type.
 But the idea takes on a whole new dimension in the "Wonderful Repetition" series of the "Angels from Childhood Heaven" collection.
  Random 1 For more details, See Introduction to Literature, below. Chernets LV, Moscow, 2004, p. 106.
2 Grigoryan H., Angels from the sky of childhood, Yerevan, 1992, p. 124.
 From now on, the citation pages from this collection will be marked in parentheses on the spot.
Of course not the title of the series.
  And here in the very first poem we see the motive of the continuous repetition of the seasons. Slow repetition: spring, summer, autumn, winter… (p. 101) Here is a remarkable circumstance. The poet called the series "Wonderful Repetition", but in this particular poem he describes the calculation of "slow repetition" as "unbearable". Slow repetition: one hour, two, three և more The calculation of this intolerable 101 (p. 101) The lack of uncertainty has forced the poet to give such a description, because nothing is more terrible than uncertainty.
 But soon this mood gives way, admiration is noticed in the next poem of the series. My God, I stand staring and look. How wonderful you are repeating your endless spring.
 (p. 106) The perpetual cycle of the seasons, as a metaphor for eternal return, is emphasized in a four-part poem (Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter) entitled "Circulation".
  Moreover, each part of this poem contains micro-plots, in the unity of which the circulating modes are depicted, as a metaphor of the eternal cycle of the course of human life.
Flowering tree, small and white crib, white diaper, blue flowers. The image of spring is built with these keywords.
  Summer is depicted as a rose painted with the brightest red lipstick secret from her parents, a garden bursting with anxiety, a glowing peach.
  Autumn is characterized by a day as delicate as velvet, as transparent as the glass of glasses, the despairing yellow masters, the dog lying in the centuries-old dust under the wall of the church.
  Symbols of the coming winter are the trees, in white bandages from head to toe, the man holding a suitcase on an unfamiliar street in a foreign city, the man trying to warm his frozen hands to the happy laughter of children jumping under the window և "on the bonfire of screams and calls".
Sometimes the thought of eternal return is put in a personal, to some extent, national costume.
 Here is the poem "New Return". Do you know that you will be born again and again in the cold city, you will spend sleepless nights under a caterpillar tent, գիտ You know that you will be born again and again in this gray city, because ծ his emaciated body is before the eyes of the crucifix, և His pain will sparkle in your inflamed brain when you say goodbye and part… (page) 171) 2. Eternal return to the beginning.
  There is an obvious reference to the biblical phrase "You were dust, you became dust" in the works of this type.
  Thus, in the poem "Mysteries of the Mystery of Heaven" begins, the writer comes to the following conclusion: "After a long flight, everything falls to the ground" (p. 26) And he goes on to write that "those who are divided, // they are divided are // irreversible ", however, this" irreversible "already contains the eternal return. return to the land, to the beginning.
 In that case, eternity will take place. The summer sun warms the millennial tombstones, a couple, father and son, talking side by side peacefully under them… (p. 46) The artistic means and "tools" with which H. Grigoryan creates the motive of eternal return.
 First, the way of depicting repetition through sequential time - morning, afternoon, evening - is noticeable.
 Thus, in the poem "Some Truths" we read:… but the most difficult is the first thousand years, then everything becomes normal, then it starts to repeat endlessly: morning, afternoon, evening… (page 18) Line (morning, afternoon, evening) , which is repeated several times in the course of the poem, becomes a solid axis on which the whole work is built.
The same method is used in the case of "Slow Repetition" (spring, autumn, summer, winter or an hour, two, three or more) և "Round" poems.
The use of the symbol of water as a symbol of eternal return is remarkable. In this state we photographed our long memory with shadows on the river զ (p. 68). , which flows through ordinary fields, the most ordinary mountains, but is the only one in the world that is full of tears, completely salty (p. 19) The river formed from tears is a symbol of the eternal suffering of the Armenians.
Thus, Grigoryan opens his own perception of the idea of ​​eternal return in various ways.
The thought of eternal return is in itself a complex phenomenon. This forces me to make a way of intentionally or unintentionally complicating the style of the poet1.
 Nevertheless, we think that such a complication of style is in a sense a shortcoming, because a kind of rift arises in the trilateral connection between the poet and the text-reader.
Thus: • The thought of eternal return plays a key role in Hovhannes Grigoryan's poetry system, • it is first manifested in the poetry of the title.
 The choice of titles is not accidental. The poet tried to guide the reader with them.
  Often it is the author of the title who adds new content բովանդակ idea to the text.
H. The thought of eternal return in Grigoryan's poetry has two types of representations in the stage: 1. eternal return as a repeating story, 2. eternal return to the beginning.
To build the motif, the poet uses the following means և "tools" - a sequence of intermittent times (spring, autumn, summer, winter or an hour, two, three or more), the use of the symbol of water as a symbol of eternal return.
On the way to the poeticization of the thought of eternal return, the writer often intentionally (or unintentionally) complicates the style.
 In our opinion, it causes a rift in the trilateral connection between the poet and the text-reader.
1 This has to do with the aesthetics of postmodernism.
 Minor. see Soghomonyan T., Armenian modernism և Armenian postmodernism, http.
//grigornarekatsi.info/2013-01-30-12-19-47/2013-01-31-07-19-51/87-tatev-soxomonyan, 11.03.2014.
Satenik Karapetyan THE THOUGHT OF ETERNAL RETURN IN HOVHANNES GRIGORYAN'S POETRY Keywords: eternal return, thought, poetry, motive, title poetics, symbol, beginning, repetitive story.
