LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF ESCRO SPECIAL BANK ACCOUNT IN RA On November 11, 2015, the RA Law No. HO139-N "On Making Amendments to the RA Civil Code" came into force.
  One of the changes made is the introduction of a new 50.1 chapter in the Code, called Special Bank Accounts.
 Article 928.1 stipulates: "Special bank accounts" escrow account, social package account, nominee account, notary deposit account, special account of the developer, state support account, as well as other bank accounts envisaged by law or by the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia "special bank account.
 This work is aimed at covering one of them, namely the escrow account, its relationship with other civil law institutions and its main features.
According to Article 928.2 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, “an escrow account agreement is an agreement under which the bank, as a escrow agent, undertakes to accept ագրել to deposit the funds transferred for the execution of a certain transaction to a special bank account և Transfers related to those funds Execute the orders on carrying out, giving appropriate sums, carrying out other operations at the expense of the person who has deposited funds on the escrow account only in the contract, terms and conditions specified in the contract concluded by the addressee of those funds or in the escrow account contract.
  It should be noted that this type of account is used before the relevant legislative regulation is given.
  Thus, in 1997, the Government of the Republic of Armenia made several decisions on the privatization of state shares of various companies through an international tender, instructing the Ministry of Finance to select an "escrow" agent bank within one month and open a special "escrow" type account 1.
The word "escroue" comes from the Old French word "escroue" (1590), which means a piece of paper, a letter, a piece of paper or parchment. It is an activity, the implementation of which is assigned to a third party, is directly related to the condition to be performed in the future.
  This later led to the concept of "insured or trust deposit" 2.
  In essence, it almost entirely expresses the meaning given to it in the legal literature, which follows as an agreement by which an object (funds, documents or property) held by an impartial third party is kept until a condition is reached that will allow it to be handed over. to the relevant party to the contract.
  For example, in the case of an escrow, the final payment is kept (mainly by a realtor or a lawyer) until the real estate transfer agreement is executed3.
In the theoretical literature, this form of transaction is often referred to as conditional deposition.
  Depositing is the transfer of funds, securities to a bank or other specialized organization to ensure their protection.
  Being conditional already determines the main feature of the contract. The bank is obliged to transfer the deposited funds only when the conditions under which the contract is concluded have been fulfilled.
The Escrow account, originating in the countries of the Anglo-American system, has experienced considerable development and is currently used in countries around the world.
 Interestingly, Section 6 of the California State Financial Code, dedicated to this institution, is called Escrow Law (Article 17000) 4.
  The efficiency of Nadra use is quite high.
 For example, studies in the US state of Chicago have shown that in the case of transfer of property without Escrow accounting, the probability of going to court is more than twice as high.
  Thus, according to 2010 data on the ownership of property without opening an escrow account 1 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=24661 (as of 16.04.2016).
2 See http.
//www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=escrow (as of 16.04.2016).
3 See Susan Ellis Wild, Webster's Law Dictionary, Wiley Publishing, Inc., New Jersey, 2006, p. 135.
4 See http.
//www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=fin&group=1600117000&file=17000-17010 (as of 16.04.2016).
0.37% of the owners and only 0.16% of the escrow account holders applied to the court with lawsuits5.
The mechanism of the escrow can be presented as follows: An agreement is concluded between the parties, by choosing the escrow account as the means of its execution, an agreement is concluded with the escrow agent (EscrowAgreement) or only one direct escrow account agreement is concluded, such regulation also follows from Article 928.2. The bank, as a escrow agent, undertakes (to perform certain actions) in the cases, terms and conditions specified in the contract concluded by the person who deposited funds on the escrow account, the addressee of those funds or in the escrow account contract.
 The escrow agent then opens the account to which the predefined funds are credited, the account is frozen, և the transfer, other operations are performed in case of a pre-agreed condition, reaching the event, presenting the package of documents6.
  Moreover, if funds are deposited, based on the way they are written off, the accounts are divided into 2 groups with regular payment, in which case the payments are made mostly monthly, one-time or final, which is made, for example, when buying an apartment.
  In the latter case, the payment consists of 2 parts. The first is the reserve, which is equal to the price of 1 or 2 months of regular payment, which allows the agent to pay the relevant taxes, insurance premiums, if the debtor avoids it, the second part already makes the rest of the amount7.
Opening an escrow account presupposes the signing of a tripartite agreement.
The parties to the contract are the depositing party - the depositor, the bank - the escrow agent - the beneficiary.
 The escrow agent is of greater interest with its unique legal status.
  International practice shows that only banks can act as such.
  Thus, the right of escrow in the state of California, USA, stipulates that he can act as an escrow agent. • Any bank, trust, credit, insurance company, 5 See Andrew T. Hayashi, The Legal Salience of Taxation // The University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 81, Number 4, Fall 2014, p. 1478.
6 See http.
//fregat51.narod.ru/Escrow.html (as of 16.04.2016).
7 See Edwin S. Mills, The functioning and regulation of escrow accounts // Housing Policy Debate, Volume 5, Issue 2, Fannie Mae, 1994, p. 204.
• any licensed attorney who conscientiously participates in a contract for the transfer of immovable or private property without being an active party to it; • Title Bureaux (an organization that specializes in real estate title testing 8); only in cases where he / she acts as an agent-mediator in the transfer of ownership of real estate 9.
In many countries the notary acts as an escrow agent.
  Thus, in 6070% of real estate transfers in Austria, the purchase amount is transferred to a notary escrow account10.
The main feature of the legal status of an escrow agent is to be a fiduciary in a contractual relationship.
  The escrow agent has an obligation to provide fiduciary liabilities to the buyer or seller of the property, including full disclosure of impartiality, as well as to assume a high degree of care for the assets held in the escrow account only to the person specified in the contract.
  In its contractual relationship, the escrow agent must not only have fiduciary obligations to all parties to the cryptocurrency, but must also act in good faith to avoid actions that would lead to a conflict of interest with the beneficiary's obligations12.
  The fiduciary duty of full disclosure requires the escrow agent to fully disclose to the parties all information known to him that is in their best interests13.
  At the same time, failure to provide clarification on the legal consequences arising from certain clauses of the contract is not a violation of that obligation, as otherwise an agent, an impartial third party, will be violated.
//definitions.uslegal.com/t/title-company/ (as of 16.04.2016).
9 See Wayne S. Bell, Summer B. Bakotich, Surviving the Real Estate “Escrow” Process in California.
 Important Things and Tips You Should Know, and Mistakes to Avoid »California Bureau of Real Estate, State of California, 2010, p. 6.
10 See Rudolf Kaindl, Real Property Law. National Report, Austria, 2004, p. 14.
11 See Holder-McDonald v. Chicago Title Ins. Co., 188 SW3d 244, 248.
12 See Gonzales v. American Title Co. of Houston, 104 SW3d 588, 598.
13 See Huie v. DeShazo, 922 SW2d 920, 923.
the obligation to be d14.
  The envisage of such obligations and restrictions has one main purpose - to ensure the effective fulfillment of the basic obligation.
  One of the principles of Escrow is its secrecy, according to which no information related to the contract can be transferred to third parties without the consent of the parties.
  The principle of confidentiality is envisaged in the Code. Special bank accounts are subject to the rules of pre-bank accounts, including the regulation of banking secrecy.
It should be noted that the legislature has significantly limited the scope of persons authorized to act as agents under the escrow contract, providing for appropriate authority only for banks, and for the purpose of regulating the above bank accounts, also for other credit organizations while performing / 912.4 /.
The logic of the legislator in this sense is not unambiguous.
By envisaging a completely new institution, it was included in the bank account, which, at least, explains the limitation of the permissible subjects.
  However, taking into account the experience of foreign countries, as well as the prospects for its development, the scope of the settlement should have been wider.
 This is due to the fact that the signing of an escrow contract is also applicable to concluding more household contracts, such as car sales, and the main motive for applying to the institute is the lack of trust between the parties, and in such cases it is not advisable to apply to the bank.
Speaking of the limitations of the envisaged settlement, it is necessary to address the question of what is the subject of the escrow contract.
  Article 928 2 provides for the deposit of funds into a special escrow bank account without interpreting the term "funds".
  Article 928 of the Civil Code 1 provides that the requirements set forth in Chapter 50 apply to special bank accounts insofar as they do not contradict the provisions of Chapter 50 1, from which it can be concluded that the term "funds used" in special bank accounts corresponds to monetary bank accounts. means. the same follows from the norms 14 See Bell v. Safeco Title Ins. Co., 830.
From the proportional analysis: payment of interest (9281.7), deposit of funds to the bank account (9282 .2).
In fact, there is the following problem. The Civil Code, defining the concept of "escrow account" separately, excluded the circulation of securities in that context.
  If the settlement is interpreted within the limits of the following article, when special bank accounts (…) he's by law or other bank accounts provided as a separate bank account of the Government or the Central Bank, it will be possible to ensure such turnover by adopting a relevant normative legal act. The implementing account operators are mostly banks15.
 However, a clear definition of the concept of "means" is still necessary.
 Here we can also refer to the fact that in 2011 The rules for the provision of additional services of the Depository were adopted, point 2.2 of which defined the "escrow" service, և it completely coincides with the content of the escrow account (has expired) 16.
Section 17003 of the California Financial Code provides a clearer definition of a contract. "Escrow" means any transaction by which a person intends to sell, transfer, encumber or lease real estate or personal property to another person, securing the transfer of written documents, cash, proof of title or other valuables to a third party prior to safekeeping. the occurrence of a certain event or the fulfillment of a pre-determined condition when it is to be transferred by that third party to the contractor17.
The Civil Code does not define the form of the contract separately, but applying the rules of the bank account, it turns out that the gold account agreement is concluded in writing.
 This issue was also addressed in "La Roe v. Davis ”case, emphasizing that the agreement of the parties on the escrow must be fixed in writing, otherwise the protection of the rights of the parties will, in fact, be possible18.
 It should be noted that the provision of such services via the Internet has recently begun to develop.
  It is interesting, for example, that this practice has become so widespread in the USA that at present 15 See https.
//nasdaqomx.am/am/account_operators.htm (as of 16.04.2016).
16 See https.
//www.cba.am/AM/laregulations/lracucich%20carajutjunneri%20matucman%20kanonakarg.pdf (as of 16.04.2016).
17 See California Financial Code.
18 See La Roe v. Davis, 333 SW2d 222, 224.
Unlicensed websites are also quite effective, which, however, gives rise to many scams.
The Code defines the grounds for early termination of the contract at the request of the client: • there is a written agreement of the person who deposited funds on the escrow account, the addressee of those funds on the account less than 10 days, but not more than the deadline for writing off all funds in the escrow account.
The first basis expresses one of the important features of this horse of the contract. Termination of the main contract leads to termination of the escrow contract.
 At the same time, the termination of the escrow contract does not cause such an effect on the main contract.
This issue was referred to in “Cohen v. Shearer 's case, in which the Court of Appeal held that, by mutual agreement of the parties, the termination of the escrow contract could not terminate or invalidate the relevant sales contract between them19.
Escrow account settlement has a lot in common with a letter of credit, but the differences are quite deep, namely: • The letter of credit usually works regardless of the main obligation. Thus, if a sales contract is concluded, its validity does not lead to the invalidity of the letter of credit, and the termination of the main contract is not envisaged as a basis for closing the letter of credit. in case of presenting the defined package, while in case of escrow account it may be envisaged to achieve a separate condition, event, for example, to make a certain change in the management body of the legal entity; Escrow 19 See Cohen v. Shearer (1980) 108 CA 3d 939.
In case of an account, both parties, the depositor and the beneficiary, have the right to get acquainted with the movement of funds in the account, the operations performed, • the letter of credit is opened on the payer's instruction, a one-sided obligation relationship arises. the possibility of unilateral closing, while the escrow contract is multilateral. can be settled by agreement of the parties, • the letter of credit is highly regulated at the legislative level, while the escrow is mostly dispositive, the principle of contract freedom applies, • in case of a letter of credit, check the composition of the submitted documents ական their formal requirements;
Thus, it can be concluded that the escrow account, with the aim of minimizing the possible risks associated with the execution of transactions, is a fairly secure way of fulfilling obligations, which, in fact, contributes to the stabilization of civil turnover.
Luiza Meliksetyan LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF SPECIAL BANK ACCOUNT IN ARMENIA Keywords: special bank account, escrow account, conditional deposit, letter of credit Summary.
