APPLICATION OF DATA GAME AS A DATA COLLECTION TECHNOLOGY IN SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH "Your country is in danger of war.
  The enemy is preparing to destroy the entire population by using nuclear weapons.
  You, the twelve, have managed to reach the only shelter in the country, which is designed for seven people, so you have the opportunity to decide, taking into account the professional characteristics of each of you, to determine who are the seven most useful and useful people who can take refuge in the shelter until the end of the war. »1.
  This is the situation presented to the participants of the "nuclear survival" game, who accidentally get certain professional roles, undertake to play it throughout the game, and behave accordingly.
 During the group discussion, each participant presents the significance of his / her profession, based on his / her perceptions of the profession, notes the importance of survival for others, after which the seven winners are selected by a general vote, who are "taken to a shelter." to live. "
Here is a brief description of the game "Nuclear Survival", which at first glance is an ordinary entertaining board game with its content և procedure very similar to other model games.
From a sociological point of view, "nuclear survival" can be considered not only as a game, but also as a technique that can be used in sociological research.
  As we know, the latter uses two strategies for collecting information: quantitative and qualitative.
 When using quantitative research, it is possible to identify the quantitative indicators of the characteristics of the study phenomenon, to present them in the form of numerical patterns.
  Qualitative research is based on the 1 For more details on the game, see the following link: http
//hrsbstaff.ednet.ns.ca/jmontgom/Law%2012/Old/Intro/Post%20Nuclear%20War%20Survival%20
Activity% 20 (Full) [1] .pdf.
on the principle of channeling and commenting.
 During the mentioned research, the researcher's attention is focused on the individual, the social actions of the people, the meanings that underlie them2.
 The target of the research is the subject and his practical activity in a specific social situation, because it is based on situational microanalysis, then "nuclear survival" is the very technique that can be used in these researches after certain elaborations. The game will allow you to observe individual behavior during social interactions, as well as to easily change the situation, to try to bring out individual behavioral changes accordingly.
Referring to the theoretical sociological side of the game, it can be noted that it indirectly expresses a number of propositions and concepts put forward by the representatives of micro-sociological theories (particularly I. Goffman և H. Garfinkel), which are the theoretical basis for qualitative research.
Thus, the acquisition of certain roles by the participants during the game, the manifestation of the corresponding behavior, in other words, the organization of the role play, are entirely within the framework of Goffman's dramaturgical theory.
 In this theory, the author likens social reality to the performance of a theater, where each member of society has a certain role, acts accordingly.
3 Every individual in society always և everywhere, sometimes consciously / unconsciously plays the role that was either given to him by birth (daughter, son, sister, brother, etc.), or he acquired it during his lifetime (e.g. professional roles).
When answering the last question of the game ("Why should I stay healthy?") Each participant subconsciously performs an action that Goffman called "role idealization" or "you are idealized" when the actor shows only his good, positive, social more acceptable sides.
 In other words, idealization is the essence when the actor deliberately tries to emphasize his role values, which are the basis of his behavior և society's expectations.
 The actor tries to assure the audience that his "their connection" is more ideal than it really is.
 This idealization is done during the game on the same principle, when the participants try to present the advantages deriving from their role և 2 See G. Tadosyan, Qualitative Social Research, Yerevan, 2006, p. 18.
3 See E. Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, University of Edinburgh, 1956, pp. 10-12, 22-25.
The opportunities that will be needed both during the resettlement and when moving out of the country.
Goffman put forward the idea of ​​naframe։ keys.
 The framework is the definition of the situation in which he is, and the key is the means by which he tries to understand the situation 4.
  The change of situation during the game, the transition from peaceful to war, shows the transformation of the frame, and the corresponding change in the behavior of the participants is the transformation of the keys.
  Thus, for a participant in a peaceful situation, the frame is his / her participation in the conference, according to which he / she chooses the key: to enter the role of the given profession, to participate in the group discussion, which is aimed at exchanging professional skills.
  After learning of a war situation և lack of resources in the shelter, the frame changes for the participant, becoming a situation where he is between life and death և, here մասնակից the participant chooses the appropriate key to introduce himself so that he can show everyone the need and necessity of survival.
In sociological research, the game-technique model can be applied by the following procedure.
1. Preparatory stage (selection of participants) Twelve participants are selected in advance to participate in the game.
 Here a purposeful selection is made, when the group of participants is formed not by random principles and methods, but by a purposeful egg.
Another mandatory condition for forming a group of participants is to ensure the homogeneity of the group by certain criteria: age, sex, education, profession, occupation, etc. (the choice of the criterion is directly related to the research problems և hypotheses). on a combination of other machines. in this case a standard sample is performed.
The number of groups is determined by the researcher in the field phase, and the game technique is used until there is information saturation և and / or the results are repeated.
2. Distribution of Social Roles (Introduction of the 1st Independent Variable) Each participant is given an appropriate social role to play during the game, with the researcher deciding in advance what role each participant should play, taking into account 4 See E. Goffman , Frame Analysis. An Essay on the Organization of Experience, US, 1986, pp. 21,43-44.
both the real social role of the participant and the extraneous knowledge and skills.
 For example, if professional roles are divided during the game-technique, then the participant who is a sociologist by the real profession, at the same time participates in economics courses, does not assume either a sociologist or an economist during the game.
 This must be taken into account to exclude alternative sources of information on the role.
After the distribution of roles, the actual game begins.
3. Stage of the game 3.1 Peaceful situation. The situation is presented to the participants as if a conference was organized when specialists from different fields gathered in the same place to exchange professional knowledge.
  Each participant has 2-3 minutes to introduce themselves, what profession they have, what activities they carry out in the camps, where they work under what conditions.
  This peaceful self-presentation will help participants adapt to their newly acquired social roles, and allow the researcher to develop and understand the insights and derivative information about each role.
3.2 War situation (introduction of the 2nd independent variable) Participants are informed that while they are there for 3 days, they are participating in a conference;
  The entire population of the world was destroyed in three days due to radioactive rays.
  Only 12 people participating in this game survived due to being in the underground hall of the conference.
  There is a shelter next to the conference hall, but there is not enough water, food, or other necessities for all of them.
  It is designed for 7 people who can live there for 6 months. Why 6, since it has been calculated that it will take so long after the explosion to be able to resettle safely on earth again?
 Therefore, if there are 12 left in the shelter, the means of subsistence cannot be enough even for 3 months.
Each of the participants is given the opportunity to answer the following two questions, after which, as a result of group discussion and voting, it is decided that there are 7 participants who will be able to enter the shelter.
"Why can I stay alive?" Here, each participant mentions reasons why, as a professional, what he / she can give, what he / she can do, which none of the other participants can do.
"Who will I take with me, why?"
 Who will I not take, why?
». New questionnaires are distributed to the participants, where they mention that they take the specialist with them, why, who they do not take, why.
It does not matter who will win the game.
 The researcher focuses on the game-building procedure, as verbal analysis will be used as the main research method5.
This method is a study of conversational interactions "relies" on the following 3 principles: 1. structural organization of the conversation, 2. organization of sequence, 3. empirical substantiation of the analysis, for which the analysis is done by means of shorthand.
The possibilities of game equipment, what can be explored with it, can be understood through the following scheme, where P is the bearer of the property, a member of society, who, for example, is a sociologist by profession.
 Information about his own profession comes out of him, performing a certain behavior (function) in accordance with his social role in society, for example, in the profession of a sociologist6.
5 See G. Tadosyan, Qualitative Social Research, Yerevan, 2006, p. 90.
6 It should be noted that the first information can be obtained in two ways by forming a group of bearers of the given traits (for example, real specialists - doctor. is undergoing changes.
 Because the factors influencing the perception system are primarily related to criteria such as gender, age, education, profession, occupation, etc., then the standard selection of participants is done, group homogeneity is maintained based on the listed criteria.
The game technique "takes place" in the left part of the scheme.
 Thus, P 'is one of the "spectators" chosen during the game-technique, for example, to be a sociologist actor, and I''m the information about a sociologist by a given participant-actor.
Depending on the factors influencing SP (gender, age, education ...), participants are selected P ', P ", Pn - actors who provide I', I", In derivative information, respectively, each being included on the basis of its own characteristics in a group.
Game-equipment The և P-SP-I 'model has ethnometric methodological traps.
 Ethnomethodology is a sociological theory founded by Harold Garfinkel.
 According to this theory, the everyday world is constructed, and the normative order of the society is maintained on the basis of actions և expectations, everyone assumes that the action he performs, of which he has a certain idea, is "perceived" by others in the same way.
 This is the model of background expectations, which introduces a certain order in human interactions.
  The whole section from P to I 'in the game technique diagram shows the background expectation model, when the bearer of the feature, performing certain functions deriving from his social role (sending information about his role), expects that the derived information of others will be equal in the information sent by him.
 It can be said that when using game-equipment, the degree of "justification of expectations" of the actors is taken out.
Thus, through the use of game technology, it is possible to understand whether the information provided by the property holder corresponds to the information provided by the participating actor.
economist, psychologist) by giving everyone their professional role during the game or simply by interviewing real actors.
If the information provided by the property holder does not correspond to the information provided by the participant-actor, it is possible to understand the deviation between them by means of reprocessing techniques.
If we have the properties P1, P2, P3 և the corresponding participant-players P'1, P'2, P'3, then with the help of game equipment we can find out the differences between the information deviations in the case of these different properties.
How will the game technique help to understand the difference between the I's given by the participants-actors selected based on different criteria from the SP system, as a result of which it can be deduced how much each criterion has an impact on the deviation of information.
One can add to the game technique - the 4th stage, during which the roles of the participants who won in the 3.2 stage are attached to certain features (for example, ethnicity, race, religion), which allows the post-participants to review their answers.
  Depending on the size of the response, stereotypes and prejudices about social status may be removed.
Manya Kirakosyan "NUCLEAR SURVIVAL" GAME AS APPLICATION OF DATA COLLECTION EQUIPMENT IN SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH.
