Sci. Head: Candidate of Technical Sciences, Assoc. Գ. Galstyan In the conditions of a developed exchange economy, stable prices are a necessary condition for the normal operation of the economy.
    According to the monetarist concept, ensuring price stability, which is the main task of the Central Bank, will contribute to long-term economic growth, and consequently increase the living standards of the population.
 In the conditions of high fluctuating inflation, which, by the way, is accompanied by an increase in prices, real incomes and savings, as well as investments, are reduced.
According to the modern interpretation, price stability literally means unchanged prices, but means slow and stable price growth.
 From here, the Central Bank aims not at zero, but at moderate inflation.
 The latter is a normal phenomenon, caused by the following factors.
  First, inflation is measured by the consumer basket, in which the weights of the goods included are kept stable for a period of several years (several years) according to the standard methodology of inflation calculation.
 In this case, if the price of the product included in the basket increases, the population can reduce the consumption of the reduced product, increasing the consumption of the replacement product, the price of which is lower.
  As a result, inflation will be recorded statistically, but in reality, the consumption of expensive goods will be replaced by the consumption of cheaper goods, without raising the real basket of consumption.
 Second, inflation can be conditioned by a qualitative change in the goods included, when the population begins to consume the highest quality items in the basket included in the basket.
  Third, moderate price growth contributes to the production of the economy; on the contrary, deflation can reduce the expansion of production.
  The price level, which is more in line with the above definition of price stability due to the peculiarities of the economy of a stable economic growth, is selected as the target level of inflation or inflation target due to the peculiarities of the bank-centralized guarantee of sustainable economic growth.
 Since 2007, the target of inflation in Armenia has been set at 4% with a range of ± 1.5% to allow fluctuations.
  The target level of inflation is set by the Central Bank in cooperation with the Government 24.
 Ensuring price stability for a long period of time is a short and favorable environment for the problem.
  It is to ensure economic growth during the term of the government.
 This is one of the current priorities of government policies, the regulation of which is the independence of central banks.
    In 2013-2015, the Central Bank of Armenia, in general, weakened and eased the monetary conditions, expecting to contribute to the stabilization of the inflation rate (4 ± 1.5) and the expansion of aggregate demand.
  However, the end of 2014 can be specially mentioned as a period of tension in the financial and foreign exchange markets, which is expanding from the direction of the policy-making of the Central Bank to the restraining one.
Deflation was registered in the RA consumer market in December 2015. The 12-month index was -0.1%.
The latter was mostly conditioned by 3.7% deflation of food products (including tobacco) (negative contribution to inflation - 1.8 percentage points), non-food inflation - 3.4% (positive contribution to inflation - 0.7 percentage points) - positive increase in services provided by the population (positive 3.2% increase in services) inflation - 0.98 percentage points).
 In 2015, the average inflation was 3.0%, which was mainly conditioned by a 2.2% increase in food prices (contribution to inflation - 1.2 percentage points), 1.7% growth (contribution to inflation - 0.3% 24 http.
//www.cba.am/en/SitePages/mpobjective.aspx Alcoholic beverages ևRespond by adjusting the external) և 5.1% increase in service tariffs (contribution to inflation - 1.6 percentage points).
In 2016, the Central Bank of Armenia carried out a continuous weakening of monetary conditions, while inflation expectations eased at a faster pace.
One of the contributing factors was the reduction of natural gas tariffs.
  Since the beginning of 2016, a pricing environment has been registered in the RA consumer market.
 In July, the deflation was 1.3% compared to the previous year, which was conditioned by a 2.2% deflation in the food product group, a 3% deflation in non-food prices, and a 0.9% increase in service tariffs.
Armenia, having a small open economy, with regard to the signals transmitted from the most sensitive sector.
  During the last 15 years, the dynamics of economic development coincided with the trends of world economic growth.
  Until 2007 inclusive, double-digit economic growth was registered in Armenia.
  2000-2008 The average annual growth rates were 11.2% 25.
  It is noteworthy that the economic growth of each post-Soviet country is based on specific combinations of different factors, which have shaped the external and internal demand for products and services.
 The demand for real estate in Armenia became such a growth factor, especially from the Armenian Diaspora և labor migrants.
 In addition, in the economic growth of Armenia, the help of "entrepreneurship liberalization" played a role.
The high rates of economic growth were maintained mainly due to investment activity.
  In the conditions of Armenia, construction became such a powerful sector of the economy.
 2000–2008 The share of construction շ real estate transactions in value added increased from 16.2% to 34.9%.
  Growth at such an impressive rate was not recorded in any other branch.
  Already in 2008 the economic growth rate is significant 25 Tavadyan A., Macroeconomic analysis, modeling և forecast, Yerevan 2014, p. 9.
The large-scale internationally conditioned global policy saved the stimulus policy, slowed it down due to the financial and economic crisis, as a result of which the annual growth made only 6.9%, and already in 2009 a 14.1% economic decline was registered.
International experience shows that the most effective measures against the crisis are those that stimulate aggregate demand in the United States.
  The injections into the համակարգի initial industry և financial system, in fact, did not lead to positive results.
Bankruptcy and monopoly companies could not provide economic growth in the conditions of low level of demand.
  Later, consumer permits and small business lending paid off.
  The United States was followed by France, Germany, Japan, China and a number of other countries.
 1.5 billion in Armenia as well. The first inflows of $ 1 million of foreign debt were directed to the Agarak Copper and Molybdenum Industrial Center, to the developers of enterprises as loans and state guarantees.
In conditions of low demand, such a policy can not be effective.
  However, since 2009, the increase in the share of consumption has to some extent contributed to the increase in demand; since 2010 the economic growth has accelerated to 2.2% in 2010, 4.7% in 2011 and 7.2% in 2012
According to 2012, the economic growth of the country was ensured by 4 main branches.
The real growth of industry was 5.7%, contributing to economic growth by 1%, agriculture - 9.5%, contributing 1.9% to economic growth, services - 8%, contributing to economic growth by 3.2%.
 In the post-crisis years, for the first time, growth was registered in the construction sector by 0.2%, which contributed to economic growth by 0.1%.
Zangezur offers 26 RA 2014-2016 2 Medium Term Expenditure Framework, p. 18.
                       Economic growth price level Chart 1. 2000-2017 Dynamics of economic growth in Armenia 27 Today, Armenia continues to suffer from external shocks, in particular, from the end of 2014, the outflow of money will significantly decrease, the price of copper, which is the main export item.
 It has seriously affected economic growth, negatively affecting the fiscal position, as well as the purchasing power of consumers, as a result of which domestic demand and consumption have weakened.
  Due to the above-mentioned developments, the GDP growth in 2016 was 0.2%, deflationary pressures were maintained, and the budget deficit increased to 5.6% of GDP.
  The chart above reflects the price level և dynamics of economic growth in the Republic of Armenia.
 According to the head of the Armenian mission of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Hossein Sami, however, in 2017 27 https.
//www.cba.am/en/SitePages/statspannualbulletin.aspx, CB statistical publications, annual bulletins.
by performance.
  Besides, the economic growth of the first Armenia will make about 3%, and the inflation - about 2%.
  This will be due to higher-than-expected data on capital projects financed from external sources, with economic growth of 6%.
 Transfers are expected to increase, and Russia's economic growth will be higher than forecast 28.
  The intensification of economic activity in Russia is mainly conditioned by the rise in oil prices.
The geopolitical situation, including regional military-political instabilities, as well as political confrontations with neighboring countries, can pose significant risks to economic growth.
Conflicts, PRICE LEVEL AND ECONOMIC GROWTH DYNAMICS IN ARMENIA Keywords - inflation, economic growth, stable prices, deflation.
