EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF TRANSFORMING THE PERSONAL EXPECTATIONS OF ARMENIAN YOUNG PEOPLE Recently, the public's attention to the social expectations, life prospects and attitudes of the youth has become more frequent.
 This is due, on the one hand, to qualitative changes in socio-political conditions, economic instability, international fermentation, and, on the other hand, to the demographic studies, global aging, and the revision of age limits.
  These circumstances affect the perceptions of young people, interpersonal relationships, perceptions of themselves, which do not always correspond to reality or the capabilities of the person.
 Recently, specialists in various fields are raising the issue of social and psychological problems of the young people of the 21st century, even the peculiar crisis of the youth.
 Thus, Tim Urban made an interesting observation. He notes that the generation born in the late 1970s and early 1990s, now 25-40 years old, has extremely high expectations1.
 He calls that generation "a generation of young urban specialists."
 Of course, this phenomenon has its socio-psychological justification, which was a signal for us to find out what transformations are taking place in the content aspects of personal and social services throughout the youth.
Today, the latest age restrictions are expanding the boundaries of youth more and more.
  Thus, in 1982, the United Nations in its "Interim Guideline for International Age Regulation" notes the adulthood of young people aged 15-24. Boundary 2, and World Health 1 See Tim Urban.
 Why Generation Y Yuppies Are Unhappy, Wait but Why, 2013.
2 See World Youth Report, Young People's Transition to Adulthood.
  Progress and Challengess, UNITED NATIONS, 2007.
In 2009, the organization set the age group of 25-44 for the youth.
We have accepted V. as a methodological basis for our research. Quinn age regulation 3, in which the youth is defined as 18-40 years old.
  GraceCraig calls this same age stage early maturity (20-40) 4.
As the youth is quite large, we found it inexpedient to divide it into the following age sub-phases: the beginning of youth - 18-25 years, the actual youth - 25-32 years. Ghush youth, 33-40 years old.
Youth is the period of acquiring one's self, establishing a person as an individual, realizing the uniqueness of a person.
  During this time the person begins to look for his own unique way of life, thinks about achieving success and achieving goals.
  However, while setting goals, he is not yet safe from mistakes, obstacles, and consequences, he still does not have enough experience to face them, to make the right decisions.
However, the realization of these mistakes and the tendency to play further lessons from them shapes the young man's life experience.
  If we consider the philosophical interpretations of the youth, we will see that in these sciences youth is considered a period of opportunities, of a future orientation.
 Youth is a time when nothing has been done yet, when everything can be achieved 5 5.
These assertions were the basis for conducting this research in order to be able to find out the expectations of the future of the Armenian youth, their realism, certainty, the quantitative-qualitative peculiarities of their manifestation in different sub-stages of youth.
In our research, expectations are presented at three levels: expectations of interpersonal relationships, expectations of life prospects սպաս expectations of personal potential or, in other words, expectations of oneself6.
  The question of the formation of expectations is to some extent related to the role behavior of the person.
 That is, the person, in order to have the existence to exist in society, then 3 See Quinn V. N., Appropriate Psychology, SPb., 2000, Page 118.
4 See Kraig G., Psychology of Development. SPb., 2000.
5 See the same place, v. 543.
6 See Карина О. V., Kiseleva M. А., Шустова Н. E., Conceptual study of the author's academy of science, vol. 12, №5, 2010, 118-125.
The opportunity to shepherd, to cooperate with other people, such cooperation presupposes mastery of norms of behavior.
 American psychologists D. Jackson and L. Kohlberg, studying the mechanisms of role-accepting, came to the conclusion that the mastering and acceptance of the role takes place only in interpersonal relationships, which take into account both role assignments and inspections, incentive-punishment sanctions, control, similarity, and similar aspirations. .
  And here is A. A. Bodalyov believed that social expectations are related to stereotypical behavior, in the framework of which they play dual, opposite roles7.
  Thus, knowing the expectations of significant people about their own person, the person strives to meet them և to build their own business in their likeness.
 On the other hand, socio-psychological expectations are reflected in consciousness, they form their own unique normative notions.
A. Schutz believed that a person, by performing certain actions, proceeds from his expectations կանխ predictions of actions.
Waiting for events ումը forecasting allows you to determine the horizons of significant events.
  Such expectations outline the boundaries of future experience, which are constantly changing and enriching.
  At present, literate targeting predicts the course of events quite accurately.
 That is why a person can clearly realize what social roles he needs to implement his inspection models.
 B. Lomov believed that the expectation of vital prospects gives an opportunity to act, to make this or that decision on future, expected events8.
  In other words, these are the expectations that a person fulfills by being a member of this or that society.
 These are: education, family, work, intergenerational relations, etc.
 And you. Leont believed that these expectations included certain circumstances և living conditions which, in the case of other equal conditions, ensure a person's subsequent progress.
  But the expectations from the personal potential refer to the person's ability. 7 See Бодалев А. A., Personality and society. - M.
  International Academy of Pedagogy, 1995, 328 p.
8 See Chrestomathy in psychology. Lomov B. F., Problems of generality in psychology, - M., 1987, pp.108-117.
9 See Leontyaev A. А., Психология общения. - 2 & е изд., Испр. and more. - M.
 Smysl, 1997. - 365p. - (Ser. "Psychology for the student", issue 4).
as well as the expectations that the individual ascribes to himself by society.
  This is called "waiting expectations" in the literature.
The aim of our study is to reveal the peculiarities of the content-expression of the socio-personal expectations of the youth, the quantitative-qualitative characteristics of their components, as well as their possible transformations throughout the youth.
  Thus, as we can see in the histogram below, the expectations of interpersonal relationships have the highest expression at the stage of youth itself, which can be explained by age peculiarities in their communication with their peers and adults.
  Thus, this is the main age for acquiring professional orientation և professional knowledge, abilities մտ skills, when a person, by communicating with other people, is able to establish himself in a certain field in his chosen field.
  After all, adolescence is considered to be the beginning of adulthood, when a person acquires all the rights and responsibilities typical of an adult սոցիալական the corresponding social expectations.
 The society expects from him law-abiding, defense of the homeland, education, professional training, taking care of adults, etc.
 It is at this age that a person's social roles increase to some extent, at the same time increasing their typical social expectations.
 It is at this age that the young Armenian forms his own family, starts a professional career, acquires the appropriate competence, recognizes in the path he has chosen.
As we can see from the histogram (See Histogram No. 1), these expectations decrease in the next sub-phase (33-45 years), which can be explained by the fact that at this age the young man, bearing social responsibility towards society, has already mastered certain behaviorally acceptable նել to assume the expected relevant roles, և that is why the social expectations attributed to those roles are no longer so relevant և are clearly manifested.
 It should be noted, however, that expectations here, having quantitative regression, undergo qualitative transformations.
 That is, the person himself becomes the one who forms the expectations of the interpersonal sphere, he transmits his expectations to the growing generation, to his children, to the subjects of the sphere of work, it can be said that the person becomes not a master of behavioral patterns, but a transmitter.
10 See Hell L., Ziegler D., Personality Theories. - SPb.
 1997.
As for one's own personal expectations, which refer to the limits of one's own capabilities, expectations from one's own person, situational and general expectations from one's own person.
  This is more connected with life experience և psychological maturity.
 It is predicted that the expectation of early youth will be lower than in other sub-phases, as it is assumed that a person at the age of 18-25 does not yet have sufficient life experience, corresponding to personal maturity.
  And in the next two stages, respectively at 26-32 և 33-40 years old, they are manifested by collapses.
  Thus, at the age of 26-32, they are the highest, which can be explained by the fact that a person's success in personal and professional spheres raises his self-esteem, as well as society's expectations of him, which directly affects this increase.
  As for the last sub-stage of youth, the expectations of vital potential at this age decrease, reaching the indicators of early youth.
  We substantiate this with the age crisis բն with the typical psychological features of maturity.
  It should be noted that in terms of expression of expectations, the highest are the expectations from vital perspectives.
Thus, in the answers of our subjects we can notice the following features.
 Expectations of life prospects for 18-25 year olds are relatively low, which suggests that the prospects for a more uncertain future in this age subgroup, of course, he imagines the big events that await him in life, but he does not predict their specifics yet. .
 He realizes that he has to study, get a profession, start a family, a professional activity of a large scale, but he still has no idea how, under what conditions, in what spheres.
11 See Harutyunyan N. S., The ratio of adult reflexivity և expectations Kh. Materials of the conference dedicated to the 90th anniversary of the ASPU after Abovyan, Pedagogue 2013, pages 143-146.
Histogram N 1 But in other age stages, especially in the middle stage, a person has clearer expectations from the events of his future life.
 He is already a specialist or has his own family, carries out relevant work activities, therefore, has real expectations about this or that sphere of life.
All types of expectations are combined with common criteria that make it possible to determine the specifics of a person's expectations.
 These are the positive or negative coloring of expectations (positivism / negativity), flexibility or rigidity, realism or unreality, diffusion or concreteness.
Expectations of interpersonal relationships are mainly positive in all sub-phases, but are relatively more flexible for young people aged 26-32, while expectations for young people aged 33-40 are rigid.
With age, interpersonal expectations become more realistic in the same middle age, in contrast to the early-late sub-phases, where expectations are relatively more unrealistic.
 And here the criterion of diffusion-specificity finds its manifestation in different sub-stages as follows: At the age of 18-25 սպաս At the age of 33-40 the expectations are more diffuse in interpersonal relations, while at the age of 26-33 they are more specific.
 Here the expectations are clearer and more purposeful.
  They refer to specific work activities, implementation of specific goals, that is, expectations are no longer vague and faceless.
If we refer to the expectations from the vital perspectives, here the picture is the same only with the expression of the first criterion - positivity or negativity.
  There are significant changes in the other criteria.
 Thus, the expectations of vital prospects are more realistic for 33-40 year olds, and more unrealistic for 18-28 year olds.
 This is predictable և naturally.
 The fact is that the plans for the future at the age of 18-25 are still uncertain, often exaggerated, they usually rarely correspond to the real situation.
 On the other hand, after accumulating a certain life experience, realizing one's personal potential to a certain extent, a person has a clearer idea of ​​what he needs from the life prospects, what he can aspire to.
 The regularity of the expectations is related to the previous criterion.
 The older you get, the more specific the expectations become in the field of life expectancy forecasting.
 The picture is completely different in case of expectations of personal potential.
 Thus, if in the previous two blocks of expectations no special collapses were observed in the positive or negative coloring of the expectations. If they were mostly positive, then they are already present in the expectations from their own potential.
 Thus, the expectations of a 26-32-year-old person from the owner are more optimistic than in other age sub-phases.
 We think that this is explained by the fact that 25-32 years old is the most productive, busiest age of a person's life, when a person realizes his potential, succeeds at this or that stage of life, makes plans, sets his goals.
 However, the expectations from the personal potential are relatively rigid than the expectations of the previous bloc.
Interesting data were received on the realism և unrealism of the expectations of this bloc.
  A person's self-imposed expectations are more unrealistic than expectations from another person or life prospects.
Meanwhile, the expectations of this block are more diffuse among 26-32-year-olds than in other age stages, although at the end of the age stage these expectations become more specific.
 Thus, we can summarize that expectations are dynamic and variable in different sub-phases of youth. They undergo both quantitative and qualitative transformations, depending on the social situation of the young person's development, professional activity and personal characteristics.
  In this sense, youth is a constant search for instability, change, criticism, novelty, which finds its expression in the expectations of ideas and vital prospects.
Naira Harutyunyan EXPERIENCE EXPERIENCE EXAMINATION OF ARMENIAN YOUTH PERSONAL EXPECTATIONS Keywords: youth, inspection, vital perspective, vital potential, interpersonal relationship expectations, expectation, expectation, expectation, expectation, expectation, expectation, expectation.
