SEPARATE COMPONENTS OF PAGANIC IDEOLOGY IN CHRISTIANITY IN 301 Christianity is officially accepted in Armenia.
  The adoption of Christianity in Armenia had both foreign and domestic political reasons.
 In this way, Armenia tried to preserve its independence from the "Sasanian Persia" of the Roman Empire, as well as to stop the centrifugal aspirations of the ministers in terms of domestic politics and to promote the unification of the country.
 However, this new teaching had a lot in common with the caring perceptions of our people, which had been formed for centuries.
 The nation, which is considered to be the unbreakable follower of its faith, could not have converted so easily, abandoned its centuries-old, if not millennial, religious beliefs, and obediently accepted another religion imposed on it.
 A number of peculiarities that existed in the entrails of the ancient Armenian religion testify that the cult elements that brought it closer to monotheism were quite active in the Armenian beliefs.
  They are seen as older, initial perceptions, to which certain polytheistic stratifications were later added.
 "Like all pagans, the ancient Armenians believed in many things, and the Christians in other things, but neither of them would accept them if they had inner knowledge or motivation."
 The position of our country, national and ancient histories prove that piety must have been the faith of our ancestors, the confirmation of which is the name and meaning of religion.
Not far from the south-eastern side of the Van Sea is the half-ruined village called Hayka Berd Աստված Astvatsashen village, which still has inhabitants in the early XX century.
  In the manuscript of Akhtamar Church it is written in the manuscript that "under the influence of God they built the great hill [Haykeank], an impregnable fortress against the enemy… And after him (Hayk)'s nephew, they remained in the fortress of Astvatsashina".
The fortress mentioned twice is the same, now named after Hayk, after whom the natives named the village Astvatsashen.
 In the Christian ages such a name could not be given, և this is the oldest preserved record of the name of God2.
  It is difficult to say what the ancient Armenians thought about the supreme being who called themselves God, because there is no known pagan Armenian writing or memory about it.
 But "Kondak adds that from the sky Hayk was shown the bow and arrow in a dream, which և he built and used them to persecute the enemy.
Again, by the inspiration of God, he built the impregnable fortress; with worthy gratitude and obedience, he calls his handiwork in the name of his God ”3.
 Christianity in Armenia reworked, reinterpreted the pagan notions, rituals and holidays, as evidenced by the other holidays "Vardavar", "Tsaghkazard", "The Lord and Ahead" and others.
 The three state monasteries (Armenian, Urartian-Armenian pagan) formed in the Armenian Highlands at different times reveal certain hereditary relations with each other, especially connected with the worship of the main deities4.
  The main deities of both Hayasa and later formed Urartu և Armenian pagan mythologies have a multifunctional nature. they are endowed with the functions of fruitfulness, war, the underworld, and the dying-resurrected god.
 Of course, 1 Alishan J., The Old Armenian Faith or Pagan Religion, Yerevan, 2002, p. 11.
2 Ibid., Pp. 13,18.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Petrosyan A., The origins of the Armenian mythology, Historical-Philological Journal, 2004, p. 206.
In some cases, one of these attributes is not obvious, but the function of fertility is common to all, and the deities that follow them embody one of the aspects of the supreme deity: the attributes of lightning, aria, fertility.
 The latter follow the main divine pair in all three pantheons: in Armenia [d] U.GUR և dIŠTAR, in Urartu - Khaldi և Varubani, in Armenian - Aramazd և Anahit.
What they have in common is that in these pantheons the main theological role is especially emphasized, besides, the main deities with their multifunctionality are very close to the monotheism, which was typical of Christianity.
 The former supreme deities, being reinterpreted, continued to live in the worship of God the Father, Christ և the Virgin. Aramazd - God the Father, Mihr - Christ, Mother Goddess (Anahit) - the Mother of God.
 Some pagan deities became Christian saints: Ara the Beautiful, St. Sargis, the dragon-slaying hero Vahagn, St. George, etc.
 Moreover, even the Armenian Christian poetry was a continuation of the ancient religious traditions.
  This is how the famous Armenian Armenologist Leon describes it. "… It lives completely with the sanctity and purity of light. It creates hundreds of wonderful textures from different positions of light, from celestial lights, most of all, of course, from the sun.
 We do not notice such a thing in Persian poetry.
 And this magnificent cultism was inherited by Christian Armenia, of course, from the pagan one ”1.
 It is well-known that the formation of Christian ideology was greatly influenced by the worship of the dying, resurrected, fertility deities of the ancient world.
  These features were characteristic of the main Armenian արտ Urartian deities, dU.GUR-Ara և Khaldin, and in the Armenian pagan mythology the deity Mihr ar դարձել became the bearer of the functions of a dying-resurrected god.
 Armenians should celebrate Mihr Day in the month of Areg.
  The worship of Mihr-Mitra is very reminiscent of Christianity.
  The pagans celebrated the birth of Mihr on December 25, and the birth of Christ on January 6, but later, at the end of the 3rd and the beginning of the 4th century, the Western Church began to celebrate it on December 25.
 One of the reasons for this was that Christians (for example, in Rome) also took part in the festivals dedicated to Mihr, which prompted the Western ecclesiastical authorities to move Christ's birthday from January 6 to December 25 2 (unlike the Apostolic Church, which celebrates January 6). -in).
The most influential religion in the Middle East was the widespread Zoroastrianism in the Iranian world.
 The factor of fertility underlies the cosmos of all pagan religions.
 In contrast, in the Armenian pre-Christian religious notions, as in the Zoroastrian one, the fact of creation is promoted. Aramazd is described as "the creator of heaven and earth."
3 Zoroastrianism և paganism were distinguished by the partial coincidence of the names of the gods.
 Thus, the names Aramazd, Anahit, Mihr obviously coincide with the names of the Zoroastrian Ahura-Mazda, Ardvisura-Anahita և Mitr-Mihrastuden.
  In terms of genealogy, both Ahura-Mazda and Aramazd act as father-gods, like the Zoroastrian Ardvisura-Anahita, Mitr are the children of Ahura-Mazda, and the Armenian Anahit and Mihr are Aramazd.
  Functionally Ahura-Mazdan և Aramazd are both thunder gods (equivalent to Zs), Ardvisura-Anahita և Anahit - goddesses of fertility, Zoroastrian Mitr is a sun god, Armenian Mihr is a god of heavenly light.
 However, it is not a question of the identity of religious concepts, but of the similarity of the many elements that exist under each other.
The above-mentioned commonalities have often been the basis for claims that Armenian paganism in its entirety is the product of borrowings from imitations from Parthian or Persian4.
  According to Leo, "for centuries, Armenians borrowed, on a large scale, from this Persian Zoroastrianism."
  Adjacent spiritual-cultural systems, no matter how unique, can not be isolated from each other և this 1 Leo, Collection of Poems, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1966, page 386.
2 Fraser J., The Golden Branch, Yerevan, 1989, p. 426.
3 Agatangeghos, Armenian History, Yerevan, 1977, p. 45.
4 Papayan R., The precise preconditions for the adoption of Christianity in Armenia, "21st CENTURY", № 1 (7), 2005, p. 6.
5 Leo, p. 378.
or to the extent that they do not influence each other.
 It is natural that the Armenian paganism, being a religion rooted in this Middle Eastern area, should have included many elements that were common to the region.
 However, if Zoroastrians and other religions worshiped ar as a spiritual but cosmic body, Armenians worshiped as a pure being, a spiritual light, a "just sun", it was with this perception, with this "status" that ar was considered at the same time the Armenian ethnos. The Armenians called them "arords".
  This is almost a Christian meaning, with which the address addressed to God, who is described as the "Righteous Sun", becomes equivalent to "Fathers".
  Our Anahit, being connected to water and the moon, was nevertheless neither water nor the moon, a symbol of fertility և motherhood, with the predominance of a predominantly careful layer of those concepts.
 Due to the priority of this semantic layer, what has passed into the background of the neighboring religion in the name of the Armenian goddess has become "Anahita" makdir1.
  For the Armenians, the cult of fire was more a cult of local, private areas than a general one, the center and beginning of which should be sought in the mountains of volcanic provinces.
 From this we can assume that the worship of fire among Armenians is much older than the Zoroastrian religion.
  And the fire-worshiping Canaanites and the Semitic peoples became different in principle and knowledge, the Persians and the Medes as different as the more prudent nations, the Greeks and the Romans.
 If we look at the ancient religious history of mankind as a process from monotheism to polytheism, if we agree that idolatry is the result of more superficiality, we should note that the elements of monotheism are more preserved in the Armenian religion, for the same reason that denies the Christianization of Armenians. .
 It is on this basis that Ghazar Parpetsi considered that with the adoption of Christianity we again recognized "our patriotic law" 3.
 One of the modern interpretations of this thought of Ghazar Parpetsi states that "the historian here means the ancient national evidence of true Christian theology, the roots of which go back to BC. The 4th-3rd millennia ”4.
In the dynasty of the Armenian Arshakun, after some change, the worship of the Lord continued to exist.
  The names of the Christian kings of the Armenian Arshakun և princes Trdat, Tiran (Tiran) և Tirit (Tirit) are the best evidences of that.
  The following circumstance is also noteworthy from this point of view.
 At his baptism, Trdat III was named John in memory of John the Baptist, Garabed.
 And it is known that in popular Christianity, St. Garabed was credited with such lines as sponsoring the arts, endowing him with musical ability, and endowing him with philological gifts, which were characteristic of the God-caring sphere.
 It is not excluded that Trdat III had introduced the light-sun lines related to the worship of the Lord God into the worship of his new god, Christ, thus giving a new ideological justification to his personal-dynastic interests (cf. Lord)
 As for, for example, the descriptions of the events of the adoption of conservative Christianity by Agatangeghos ներից, another Armenian historian, then, according to H. Hakobyan և S. According to Petrosyan, in the historiography the events of the beginning of the 4th century are attributed to a much more violent-dramatic nature than it really was6.
  Pagan sanctuaries in Armenia were destroyed before Christianity was declared the state religion, and they were destroyed by Zoroastrian magicians (not Gregory the Illuminator and his descendants) 7.
  Agatangeghos mentions that there were huge destructions in Taron, in the sanctuary of Ashtishat on the bank of Aratsani (Euphrates).
 It is noteworthy that the only case when Agatangeghos mentions human victims ("Many of the people who served the priest in that place were killed") refers to this very sanctuary 1 Papayan R., page 10.
2 Alishan J., pp. 30, 31.
3 Ghazaray Parpetsu, History of the Armenians and the Letter to Vahan Mamikonian, Tpkhis, 1904, p. 161.
4 Danielyan E., The Caring Sources of the Proclamation of Christianity as a State Religion in Armenia ական Historical Significance, Yerevan, 1996, p. 17.
5 Petrosyan S., page 36.
6 Hakobyan H., Some details of the history of the destruction of the Mehyans և Armenian conversion, Armenian saints և sanctuaries, Yerevan, 2001, p. 145; S. Petrosyan, The Tormentor of Gregory the Illuminator, Historical-Philological Journal, 2001, page 33.
7 Danielyan E., page 15.
in 1.
 In fact, it can be said that in the process of accepting Christianity, the main struggle was between the pagan priests, the "bearers of the new teaching", and the people did not show wide mass participation in that struggle.
Thus, it can be concluded that the transition from paganism to Christianity was a new meaning of the old traditions, religious and cultural values, our whole culture, formed thousands of years ago, being reinterpreted in Christianity, survives to this day, preserving the ecological ideas handed down from ancient times.
  Therefore, the adoption of Christianity in Armenia as a state religion should be described as a return to the original monotheism, which, although lost, distorted, but still not completely erased from the historical and genetic memory of the Armenian people, found itself in a qualitatively renewed state through the doctrine of Christianity.
  And this circumstance, the meaning of return, to rediscover the original, was confirmed in the Armenian language, where in 301 The event, the adoption of Christianity as a state religion, is expressed by the phrase "Armenian conversion".
 And as Agatangeghos mentions, with the adoption of Christianity, the Armenians "were again firmly established in the faith."
Elena Shahinyan PERFECT IDEAL COMPONENTS IN CHRISTIANITY Keywords: Christianity, monotheism, paganism, godliness
The aim of the article is to show the newly reinterpreted old traditions, ecological ideas, religious and cultural values ​​transferred from paganism to Christianity.
