THE APPLICATION OF EUROPE'S "SOFT WAY" THROUGH EDUCATION States use different strategies to spread their influence in international relations, combining economic, military and normative technologies.
 Europe, more specifically, the European Union, is considered a normative force (civilizational force) because it has set itself the goal of influencing states through the dissemination of norms.
  The European (EU) cornerstones are enshrined in the acquis communautaire and the acquis policy, namely peace, freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
 The EU prefers the "soft power" strategy for the dissemination of these norms, which corresponds to both the adopted value system and is applied mainly within the framework of the EU foreign security policy.
 According to Joseph Nye, "soft power" is a political strategy that, in contrast to "hard power", uses the methodology of dissemination of values ​​and creation of alliances to achieve the desired goals.
 "Soft power" is a strategy aimed at the formation of a de facto state, which should be capitalized in the field of foreign policy in the future.
  The technologies of the "soft power" strategy are mainly aimed at the socialization of the societies of other countries in order to consolidate their positions in international relations in the future.
The "soft power" ensures the realization of "Europeanization", that is, the spread of cultural values, social norms, and forms of institutional organization outside Europe.
  The aim of "Europeanization" is to expand the borders of influence, as well as to increase the number of European supporters in other countries.
  Europeanization is a broader concept than European integration; it focuses not on the ruling elite of the EU's states, but on society as a whole.
  Therefore, one of the mechanisms to implement Europeanization is socialization, that is, the spread of European values ​​in society.
 Lucas attributes the "soft power" strategy to the legitimation of the actions taken by the subject using force.
  It makes it possible for the object to accept the subject's ideology.
 The EU now has the authority to act as a single player in international relations through its European Neighborhood Policy.
 It has Eastern Partnership երկրների Mediterranean Cooperation Programs through which its influence is institutionalized.
The EU has a number of tools for using "soft power" in foreign policy, such as economic attractiveness, investing in EU member states that are members of an EU foreign policy program.
One of the methods of launching the "soft power" of the EU is the policy implemented in the field of education, especially in the field of higher education.
 The strategy of spreading values ​​through education used to be actively used by the USSR to spread a new communist ideology among its citizens.
 It is also used by the United States to preserve its image.
In the age of globalization, the economies of post-industrial societies have a tendency to transform into a knowledge-based economy, so education can be used to enrich the human capital of the state.
  Besides, it is in the system of higher education that individuals receive professional competencies.
  Taking into account the demand for new competencies in the labor market (soft skills - intercultural, team, communication competencies), the internationalization of education became the imperative of the time. From now on, the universities are trying to internationalize their educational programs due to "inbound" and "outbound" means.
  In addition to being the main guarantee of economic progress, education is also used for the creation and dissemination of intangible values, that is, for state-building.
 At the same time, education is a means of "exporting" the value system of the state in international relations.
 Education is a system of endowing an individual with knowledge, abilities and skills, which is capitalized during the life of an individual.
 But education is also a process in which the past is incorporated into the present, helping to build the future.
 In addition, it imparts to the individual the knowledge accumulated by society.
Education, as a "soft power", is implemented through three mechanisms: the dissemination of values, the dissemination of resources, and the achievement of certain policy goals.
 As a mechanism for achieving political goals, higher education provides an opportunity to further influence the state policy of their homeland through guest students.
The beginning of the application of the EU "soft power" policy in the field of education, in particular in higher education, can be considered the Grand Charter of Universities (MagnaCharta Universitatum) adopted in 1988, signed by 388 rectors.
 This document is a cornerstone, as it expresses the EU's readiness to adopt a common approach to higher education, where universities will be established as strong institutions that spread culture and respond quickly to global economic challenges.
 The subsequent Sorbonne-Bologna Declarations further specify the purpose of Europe (Council of Europe), making the impact on education more institutionalized - a clear strategy for the implementation of institutional processes.
  The primary goal of the Bologna Process is the creation of a Common European Higher Education Area (EHEA), enabling students, alumni and higher education staff to be able to receive high quality and accessible education in universities in EEU-integrated countries.
  In order to make European higher education more attractive beyond Europe, there was a need for the comparability of education systems within countries.
 To solve this problem, the credit system, three-level education, the possibility of exchange programs and scholarships were introduced.
  Thus, the Bologna Process, which now has 49 member states, not only contributes to the spread of the European education standard, but is also a platform for intercultural communication that creates an opportunity for the spread of European values.
 However, the success of the use of education as a "soft power" depends on the context in which it is used, that is, the extent to which assimilation of values ​​contributes to the improvement of their (object's) quality of life.
According to OECD research, the United States was the leader in the education export market, followed by the United Kingdom.
 However, with the facilitation of the Bologna Process ծրագր exchange programs, the number of US and European Asian students was equalized.
The agenda of the European Council meeting in Lisbon in 2010 states that Europe should strive to become the world's most efficient knowledge-based economy.
  The EU Commission links the future development of the EU with young people embracing European values.
 It is noted that educational programs in the European environment contribute to the socialization of young people, and in the long run - the success of European integration policy.
The use of "soft power" requires internationalization programs that will create opportunities for mobility of students, faculty, and alumni.
 One of the exchange programs is Erasmus (Erasmus +, Erasmus Mundus), which has been implemented and funded by the EU Commission since 1987.
  It is a component of the EU's continuing education policy.
 Erasmus is guided by the motto "Bring students to Europe, bring all students to Europe".
  Despite the fact that the Bologna Process is not a program of the European Union, the Erasmus programs are the main mobility programs in the EBRD, funded by EU sources.
 In addition to mobility programs, the EU funds state education reform programs (eg TEMPUS).
 EU to Erasmus program 2007-2013 [3.1 billion], and € 16,174 billion for 2014-2020.
  Since the beginning of the program, about 3.3 million students և 470,000 people from the PD have participated in the mobility programs.
 Contacts have been established with 1,423 universities outside the EU.
  One of the goals of the Bologna Process is to ensure that at least 20% of all graduates of EBT universities participate in any movement program by 2020.
Erasmus provides mobility throughout the EEB, ie "between EU states" and beyond.
 The EU has the task of instilling the idea of ​​a united Europe and European identity among EU citizens.
Research shows that exchange programs instill a "European consciousness" in young people, helping to develop intercultural competencies.
  According to empirical research, non-EU citizens associate themselves with Europe after the mobility program.
As a result of interaction with different cultures, the so-called "we-feeling" phenomenon is formed.
  Those who participate in mobility develop the following competencies: tolerance, ability to communicate in a foreign language, communication skills.
In addition, mobility can affect their ability to work.
Studies have been conducted among EU students and Turkish students to find out how much their cultural perceptions have changed since participating in the Erasmus + movement.
  88% of Turkish students changed their perception of Europe, and only 49.4% of EU students stated that they changed their perception of EU countries.
  76% of Turkish students answered that they had given up their prejudices, while only 54.5% of EU students -
[16]
  The difference in numbers may be due to the fact that European students, in addition to Erasmus mobility programs, have wider opportunities to learn about other cultures.
EU education programs are implemented both within the EU and within the framework of the EU's policy, without neglecting other countries.
 In particular, the EU Commission for the Improvement of the EU Image in Asia launched the Towards a New Asia Strategy in 1994 to strengthen EU-Asia cooperation in higher education.
The EU uses not only formal but also non-formal education to spread its values ​​և European culture.
 2014-2020 10% of the budget for "Erasmus" programs will be directed to non-formal-informal education of the youth.
  EU provides non-formal education through Youth in Action ․ the latter in turn funds short-term training programs.
One of the most important mechanisms of the "soft power" strategy is education, which is not only a system of acquiring knowledge, but also a social system.
  The EU uses education both for the Europeanization of its citizens in the EU and for the spread of European values ​​beyond the EU.
 To achieve this goal, the EU uses the European Higher Education Area created by the Bologna Process to fund the education and training of students, faculty, staff and staff.
  Thus, the EU develops their professional competencies and makes them more competitive.
  From the research it can be concluded that "Erasmus" mobility programs contribute to the academic development of the participant, have a great impact on the change of his / her value system, communication, development of linguistic and intercultural competencies.
LITERATURE [5] Tomusk, V., 2006a, Pizza Bolognese à la Russe.
 The Promise and Peril of the BolognaProcess in Russia. In.
  Tomusk, V. ed., 2006, Creating the European Area of ​​HigherEducation.
 Voices from The Periphery. Springer. Ch. 11, pp. 227-49. [6] Inglehart R., Welzel CH, Modernization, Cultural Change and Democracy.
  TheHuman Development Sequence, Cambridge.
 Cambridge University Press. 2005. [7] N'Diaye P., Culture Development.
 Some Regional Experiences, UNESCO, 1981, p. 42. [9] Baldwin D., 'Power Analysis and World Politics.
 New Trends Versus Old Tendencies', [11] The Lisbon Special European Council.
 Towards Europe of Innovation and Knowledge. [15] The Erasmus Impact Study.
  Effects of Mobility On the Skills and Employability of [18] European Commission, URL.
  www.ec.europa.eu/youth/success-stories/youth-inaction_en (Accessed.
 14.06.2018) .Derzyan THE APPLICATION OF THE "SOFT WAY" OF TATZEUROPE THROUGH EDUCATION Keywords: soft power, normative force, education, European Union, Council of Europe, Europeanization, EBRD, Erasmus, mobility, comedy.
