MANIFESTATIONS OF THE IMAGING MOVEMENT IN ARMENIA In the history of the Armenian Church, a detailed study of the pictorial movement in Armenia is of special importance with a multi-layered and comprehensive examination of the event.
 In the course of time, many movements have arisen in the history of the Christian Church, the origin of which was not accidental.
  The Armenian Apostolic Church, as a part of the cosmic church, was not left out of such movements.
 Such events intensified their activities when public relations, pressures on ordinary people and harassment intensified.
  In the first three centuries, Christians used various images (fish, boat, harp, dove, anchor, especially the cross) to express their ideas.
  The latter, in contrast to a number of modern false Christian denominations that reject the cross, has a biblical basis (Matthew 16:24, Mark 10:34, Luke 23).
 There are also many testimonies about images in the Bible, which contain ideological roots of idolatry (Exodus, 31, 3 Kings 23-24, Ezekiel 18-20).
Even before the iconoclasm, Christians were denounced by the Jews, accusing them of materialism.
 The Jews believed that Christians worshiped the very image of God.
 They ridiculed Christians for their reverence for the relics of the saints.
  In this they saw only respect for bones.
  All those who kissed the image of Christ, His Most Holy Mother or any other saint, were called idolaters.
 In time, power was attributed to images, and the material from which the image was made was considered sacred and became a cult object.
Nevertheless, the respect for painting in Christendom was not uniform.
  The battles were against evangelical paintings.
 According to them, the depiction of Christ, his disciples, and saints in general was idolatry.
  A movement with a penchant for imagery was formed in the first century.
This movement, which arose out of the personal desire of the Byzantine emperor Leon Isavratsi (717-741 ․), as a revival of the pagan worldview, was also reflected in Armenia.
  The Armenian Church has adopted a moderate approach to images.
  This restrained approach was typical of all the fathers of the Armenian Church.
  The image-fighting movement in Armenia is spread mainly among sectarians.
 Among such sects were the Mtsghneans, the Pavlikyans and the Tondrakyans.
Iconoclasm և Iconography is born in Armenia in the context of the Armenian-Byzantine churches.
The introduction of such phenomena takes place exclusively in a scientific way [2].
 Nevertheless, it should be noted that the Armenian Church did not go to any extremes, keeping the sense of proportion.
  With his approach to images he was closer to the image.
 Idolatry first erupted under the influence of the cult of the cross.
 The reason for the restrained position of the Armenian Church in the issue of icons was due to the popular understanding, according to which "iconoclasm" and "idolatry" are alien phenomena, typical only of the Chalcedonians.
  This was the reason why the Armenian Church was satisfied with the disruption of the iconoclasm, just as it silently bypassed the propaganda of images and the encouragement of their worship.
Several sources inform us about the manifestations of the image movement in Armenia.
 One of them is the famous work of Vrtanes Kertogh from "Yaghags picture".
 Vrtanes Kertogh is one of the prominent figures of Armenian church history.
  Maghakia Ormanyan, based on the name "stripper", considers him a student of the famous Syunik monastic school [3].
  Yervand Melkonyan mentions in his work "Vrtanes Kertogh the Fencing" that the "stripper" was used for educational purposes.
 During the reign of Catholicos Movses II Yeghivardetsi (574-604 ․) Vrtanes was his assistant, and when the bishop died, he was appointed Catholicos vicar և 604-607 7, when the patriarchal throne was vacant, he conducted church affairs.
 Later, when Catholicos Abraham of Aghbatan (607-613 է) was confirmed to the Catholicosate, Vrtanes continued to be active in the Armenian Church.
 This was the period when there was a dispute between the Armenian and Georgian churches, which led to the split of the two churches.
  According to the paper, the images were intended for "worship of the glory of the Godhead".
  As we know, the battles were hostile not only to the images and relics of the saints, but also to the cross, while the battles mentioned by Vrtanes Kertogh respected the cross and worshiped it.
 The themes of the paintings depicted in the church are also noteworthy.
  The memory of saints was typical of Armenians.
 Christ, the Cross, the Virgin Mary alone or with the baby in her arms were often depicted.
  The Armenian people had fresco churches in different places.
 As such churches, the image of the Holy Mother of God, Akhtamar St. is mentioned. Khach Church [2], Mren, Ani St. Gregory the Illuminator [4].
 The reflection of the images is noticeable on the gravestones.
  The color standards were used: red, green, blue, which symbolized the four elements of the earth: light, earth, water and air.
 According to Grigor Tatatsi, gold is also used as a doctrine of color.
It is considered the "incorruptible fifth essence of the heavens", which is above all matter.
 In general, our medieval churches, especially those built in the 7th century, were mainly frescoed, which was disrupted by the establishment of Arab rule in Armenia.
 Iconoclasm, as a religious dispute, is also closely related to the history of the development of art, as it was by nature opposed to paintings.
Pictures have never been aimless.
  Through images they tried to make the believer understand the divine, the incomprehensible and the invisible.
One circumstance in the emergence of idolatry is the influence of pagan religion.
 It should be noted that in case of preservation of the original, undistorted meaning of idolatry, such phenomena would not have taken place.
Information about the painting has also been preserved in the letter of Movses Kagankatvatsi's "History from Aghvan to the World" to Hovhan Mayragometsi's letter to Bishop David of the Great Side [6] Manucharyan clearly shows that it is about Hovhan Odznetsumas. [7]
 According to K. Melikyan's name "Mayragometsi" was an adjective that originated from Mayrots Gom.
 It was the contemptuously used version of the place-name MayrotsVank by Ezr I, Catholicos of Parazhnakert (630-641 ․). [8]
 Հ ․ Kenderyan gives another coverage of the place name "Mayragom", և notes և the author of the explanation, Byzantine scholar H. Bartikyan's name.
 He notes that Mayragom is similar to the Greek word "Metrocome", which translates as "Mayravan", և does not resemble the modern meaning of the word barn [8].
 The famous 7th century theologian, theologian, sworn anti-Chalcedonian Hovhan Mayravanetsi invented false and imaginary stories about the Armenian diaspora, according to which Hovhan Mayragometsi later opposed the Armenian Catholicos, the reason for which, first of all, became his Armenian heretical views.
 He was exiled to the Caucasus Mountains with a "fox stamp" on his forehead, according to the decision of the assembly.
  Later, however, he returned to his homeland and died in the province of Gardman.
 Whereas in reality Karin 633 ․ After the joint Armenian-Byzantine meeting, Hovhan Mayravanetsi criticized the Catholicos Ezr I of Parazhnakert, saying that he had overthrown the Armenian Apostolic religion.
  Persecuted by His Holiness, he was temporarily taken to Kotayk Mayravank, due to which Ezr despised him as Mayragometsi.
  As Mayravank was close, և Hovhan was constantly persecuted by Ezr, so he left for his native Gardman province.
 There are different opinions about his return to the homeland.
  Instead of the priest Hovhan Mayragometsi, however, we should mean Hovhan Odznetsi, to whom Bishop David had applied.
  This fact is evidenced by the fact that Hovhannes Odznetsi was well aware of the sects, he has anti-sectarian writings, "Against the Pavlikians", "Against the Apparent".
Hovhannes Vardapet's letter containing information about the battle consists of two parts երկու One part presents the modern events that worried Bishop David of Metskven, while the other part presents the propaganda of people named Joshua, Thaddeus and Gregory in Armenia.
 The paper states ․ "Some do not accept my image, some do not baptize, do not bless with salt, do not crown the bride հարս At this time, heresy has risen to the earth. "[6]
 Bishop David informs Rev. John about the activities of such people, asking them to clarify the story.
It is known that Joshua and Thaddeus և Gregory the priests left the church [4] and left the capital Dvin to reach the Sotk province of Syunik for preaching.
  The Armenian Catholicos Movses Yeghivardetsi forces them to return to the capital, to him, but they reject the Catholicos' demand.
  Then they moved to Artsakh again for propaganda purposes and caused a riot in the neighboring country of the Aghvans.
  Then, at the request of Catholicos Abraham I of Aghbatan, Lord Gardmana arrested them and sent them to Dvin, where they "persuaded the sectarians to convert."
 The fact of being arrested by Gardman's master speaks about the fact that after carrying out a campaign in Artsakh, they moved north to Utik.
There are fragments of the problem that worries us in the "Code of Armenians".
  It mentions baptism here [7] ․ "It is obligatory for the baptismal priest to bless the anointed with oil one after the other, to baptize the blessed one with a sufficient amount of time and at the same time to bring the blessed one to life, and not to rule over the blessed once and for all." and to anoint the newborn and the baptized with baptism in the pool, and not to give any more counsel to him. "[9]
 From this we can conclude that the sectarians of Artsakh refused to be baptized.
 In contrast, the "Armenian Codex" clearly shows the manifestations of crucifixion: "If a person makes a cross of wood and whatever it is, and does not allow the priest to bless and chase him with a drunken drunkard, he should not be honored or honored. for it is empty and vain from the divine wrath of the apostolic church of the earthly tradition. ”[9]
Thaddeus, as a preacher of iconography in Armenia, is mentioned in the letter of "Vardapet Hovhan" by Vrtanes Kertogh.
 Isaiah can be identified with Joshua.
  These two names gave rise to confusion in Armenian texts.
 However, it is clear that the two authors are talking about the same movement.
Hovhan Odznetsi, who campaigned against the Pavlikians, the ideological bearers of the iconoclasm movement in Armenia, in his "Opposition" speech also spoke of a movement that was widespread in Armenia, whose ideological roots were iconoclastic and directly inoculated into the realm of iconoclasm.
  According to H. According to Kyesoyan, not only the iconoclasm movement but also the danger of Islam was the basis for the spread of this sect.
It is natural that the Armenian Church, based on its national-religious problems, should have come out against the Pavlikyans, who, according to Hovhan Odznetsi, were the same Mtsghneans.
 They could not distinguish between Christian theology and pagan polytheism.
  Odznetsi also refers to the cult of the cross and its significance.
 Odznetsi mentions that they do not accept the image and oppose the cross.
 The cult of the cross was nationalized in the 7th-8th centuries and had a pre-development period.
  In this period, a struggle begins between crusading and "idolatry".
  The cult of the cross, which had its initial form in the 6th century, reaching the 8th century, is becoming more popular.
 Since the issue of the worship of images appeared in this same period, it is natural that the most widespread phenomenon among the people would have achieved a positive result.
  Both crusade and idolatry met the same demand of the society and had the same goal.
  Terrorism, as a bearer of iconography, was a gnostic phenomenon. The zealous pursuers were ready to mislead the ignorant.
 Information about the cross։ blessing of the cross presented in the "Armenian Code" is extremely important.
  A. Manucharyan also refers to this, noting in the above-mentioned article that, according to Odznetsi, the iconoclasm could lead to "crucifixion and Christianity, and ungodliness and demon worship." [7]
There was another possible circumstance in the spread and development of idolatry.
  The picture, which was intended to present the life story of Christ, was available to many people.
That is, there was no need to make great efforts to understand the meaning of the image.
 This allowed all members of society, regardless of their level of education, to understand the subject matter explained through the image.
The effectiveness of the image is conditioned not by his realism, but by his advice.
  The members of the society with low level of education preferred realism.
  One fact is undeniable: miniature painting originated in the pagan era, but was mastered in the Christian environment.
 In a Christian environment, the art of painting has a purpose other than making the content accessible to believers. Decorate the book nicely.
 The tabernacles in the Armenian Church were also presented in the form of images.
 This thought came from a dilemma ․ The first is the sensual, positive feeling, and the second is the hidden meaning of the images depicted in the tabernacles, from which the mysterious essence of the images derives.
 The Armenian Church once again showed its uniqueness with its special approach to images.
  Iconoclasm was an important part of the Armenian Church's creed and remained steadfast.
LITERATURE [1] Sedrakyan I, The Iconography of the Armenian Church, 1904, page 9.
[2] Sahakyan I, The Armenian version of medieval iconography, "Historical-Philological Journal", 1987, pp. 151, 150.
[3] Ormanyan M ․, Azgapatum, volume A, S ․ Etchmiadzin, 2001, page 689.
[4] Melkonyan V ․, Vrtanes Kertogh և iconography, "Echmiadzin", 1970, pp. 94, 87.
[5] Nersesyan N ․, The Bible և Armenian culture, Yerevan, 2001, p. 74.
[6] Kaghankatuatsi M., "History from Aghvan to the World", Yerevan, 1983, Chapter XZ, pp. 266-8.
[7] Manucharyan A. Who is, in fact, the Armenian Archimandrite Hovhan, "Yearbook", Z, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 117-122, 121.
[8] Melikyan K ․, "Narratio de rebus Armeniae" Armenian Chalcedonian song Source of the History of the Early Medieval Armenian Church, Yerevan, 2007, p. 136.
[9] Kenderyan H., Hovhan Mayragometsi, Yerevan, 1973, p. 30.
[10] "Armenian Codex", Volume A, Vol. Վ ․ Hakobyan, Yerevan, 1964, pp. 520-1.
Narine Grigoryan MANIFESTATIONS OF THE IMAGING MOVEMENT IN ARMENIA Keywords: iconoclasm, Armenian Apostolic Church, crusade, iconography, religion, sacrament, Armenian, essence, material, approach.
