CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF GLUCOSE DENSITY WITH MICROWAVE SENSITIVITY In the 21st century, there is a great demand for accurate biosensors in both clinical monitoring and biological research, as well as in the food industry.
  During development, glucose biosensors have adopted several forms of operation based on electrochemical, optical, piezoelectric, thermal, or mechanical principles.
In order to better characterize the glucose concentration in the solution, the near-field microwave microprobe (NFMM) capability of non-touch penetration was used instead of conventional methods.
 High-sensitivity MDM has been developed for microwave և millimeter range measurements, the potential of which is to determine glucose-electromagnetic properties, in particular glucose density, in an aqueous solution of glucose without penetration.
 Continuous monitoring of glucose concentration is of significant clinical significance.
 In this work, glucose concentration was monitored by MDMM method.
 The MDMM glucose biosensor consists of a high-quality dielectric resonator to which a metal-edged probe is connected for a working frequency of 4-5 GHz, respectively.
 Due to the change in glucose density, the change in the dielectric permeability of the solution was studied by measuring the S11 coefficients of microwave reflection of the resonator.
  As a result of the experiments, a minimum glucose concentration of 0.5 mg / ml was obtained.
Theory. In the work the glass stand - aqueous glucose solution - air system with three environments was studied.
 The principle of operation of the phenomenon can be explained by the flat wave model [4].
  The reflection coefficient S11 with the intermediate wave resistance is interpreted as follows: where S11 is the microwave reflection coefficient, Z0 is the ultra-complex probe wave resistance, Z0 = Z0
I, Zin is the input-complex wave resistance of the system, which can be written as follows: where KS is the wave vector of the substrate (103 m -1, εS = 5, 2 GHz), t (cid).
2911) - the air wave resistance (377 ohms) and the wave vector (46 m-1 at 2 GHz, respectively).
 From the expressions մուտ (3) քային for the input-complex resistance we can write where ε (cid.
2917) is the dielectric permeability of glucose.
  (1) The equation has the following final form: the complex resistance is regulated by Z (cid).
Եւ Theoretical calculations of measurements fit well at the end of the probe. Thus, as the glucose concentration increases, the reflection coefficient decreases according to (4) և (5).
 The dependence of the dielectric permeability on the concentration of glucose in the solution is linear և is often expressed by the increase of δ molar.
  The relative dielectric strength of an aqueous solution of glucose can be written as ε (cid).
4593) increase in dielectric permeability for real աս counterfeits when glucose density increases by one unit (δ (cid).
Experimental circuit of the device ․ The basic experimental scheme of MDMM used during the experiment is shown in Figure 1.
  The glucosensor sensor consists of a high-performance dielectric resonator attached to the end of a probe.
 Using the feedback system via tuning fork, the probe-sample distance is adjusted to a distance of approximately 0.5 μm from the surface of the glucose solution.
 The diameter of the gold probe used in the experiment is 50 microns and is attached to one of the legs of the tuning fork.
  Samples with a glucose solution of 20 microns in different densities are placed on an energy scale.
 To determine changes in glucose densities, the reflection coefficient of the microwave resonator S11 at a frequency of 4.5 GHz was resonated.
Picture 1 ․ MDMM block diagram used in this research.
All tests were performed at a temperature of 25 0C.
 TE01 mode was used, for which the unloaded quality of the resonator is 24000.
  A network analyzer was used to measure S11 reflectance coefficients.
Applications ․ Figure 2 shows the dependence of the glucose density on the microwave reflection coefficient of distilled water up to 300 mg / ml at 50 mg / ml.
  As the glucose concentration increases, an increase in the S11 reflectance of microwave resonators is observed.
Picture 2 ․ Dependence of S11 microwave reflection coefficient on frequency: (a) distilled water, glucose solution: (b) 50 mg / ml, (c) 100 mg / ml, (d) 150 mg / ml, (e) 200 mg / ml, (f) 250 mg / ml, և (g) at concentrations of 300 mg / ml.
The change in the S11 microwave reflection coefficient is due to the change in the dielectric permeability of the glucose solution.
Figure 3 shows the glucose-dependent behavior of the S11 microwave reflection coefficient.
  In case of distilled water, the value of S11 is -52 dB.
As the glucose concentration increases, the dielectric permeability increases, hence the reflection coefficient.
  The reflection coefficient S11 has the lowest value in distilled water.
Picture 3 ․ The dependence of the S11 microwave reflection coefficient on glucose concentration.
The maximum value of the reflection coefficient was observed in the case of the sample with the highest glucose concentration, ie 300 mg / ml.
  To characterize glucose sensitivity, the S11 coefficient was measured at low concentrations up to 5 mg / ml in the range of 0.5 mg / ml.
  Due to the increase in dielectric permeability of the solutions, the S11 reflection intensity increased (as expected).
Conclusion. The results show that the reflection coefficient S11 of the microwave resonator at a resonant frequency of 4.5 GHz is definitely dependent on the glucose concentration in the solution, and the MDMM method can be used for continuous glucose monitoring.
LITERATURE Resonator Biosensor for Aqueous Glucose Solution, Rev. Sci. Instrum, 2008, 79.
086107.Hovhannisyan CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF MICROWAVE GLUCOSE DENSITY Keywords: glucose, microwave microscope, reflection FACTOR, ripple resistance.
