STRUCTURAL AND CONTENTS FEATURES OF WILLIAM SAROYAN'S "ARMENIAN AND ARMENIAN" STORY TOWARDS 20th-Century Armenian Writer of Armenian Literature .
 In his stories, the idea of ​​the homeland has the images of people who have preserved centuries-old traditions as opposed to living standards.
 His unique means of presenting the moral and psychological inner world of the heroes stand out, which can be studied in more detail in the story "The Armenian և the Armenian".
Structurally, the work differs from the title!
 By specially titling it "Armenian և Armenian", not "Two Armenians", "Surprise meeting of Armenians" or in another alternative, the author simultaneously separates և combines the idea of ​​"Armenian".
  He promotes the idea of ​​adapting to the conditions of the environment, even identifying himself, but at the same time not losing the Armenianness of the Armenians.
 He attributes the tendency to feel far away to his compatriot to the Armenian type.
  Saroyan shows that the Armenian inexplicably distinguishes and recognizes the Armenian from all other people with high and crooked noses, wide eyes, thick curls, even if one of them's clothes is American and he has a whole America on his face.
The duality of the Armenian description is also noticed in the story, when Saroyan describes "our amazing race" only in appearance, as if showing our external "disadvantages": a puffy face, a high and crooked nose, thick and dense curly, deep eyes.
 But next to this description, in the other part of the story, he also expresses the nature of clinging to life full of Armenian life. "And our Armenian movement" that says so much, hitting the knees and bursting with laughter. ծաղ The mockery of life and big ideas. և The Armenian word, look, smile.
In the story, Saroyan, developing and enriching the egg of the story, while describing the unusual meeting of the two compatriots, voices his inner monologue, at the same time turning that monologue into a conversation with the reader, and in the end this conversation becomes a call to the whole world, a reminder of the Armenian Genocide.
Here the author makes an order to eliminate the Armenians, which is nothing but a play on words, to show, to emphasize more the impossibility of the idea of ​​the complete annihilation of the Armenians, which is the main goal of the story.
In a conversation with the reader, when he is sincere, saying that he had set out to find Armenia, Saroyan at first confesses with pain և he declares that, nevertheless, there is no Armenia.
 The reader, involuntarily accepting this point of view, is convinced that really. "There is a small plot of land in Asia Minor, there are valleys, mountains, lakes and cities, which are good mountains and cities, they are not less than other places in the world, but Armenia is not that, that there is no Armenia.
  There are only people who live in this world as their own country. ”
 And the author universalizes his own truthful assertion, attributing the non-existence of homelands to other countries. "And there is no America, there is no England, there is no France, there is no Italy, there is only the land of the people, gentlemen."
 By putting this small comparison mark between the "big states" of Armenia, he seems to inspire calm and confidence in the Armenian reader, so that the latter does not feel homeless and homeless, but is sure that all other countries and nations are like him.
And as long as Armenians meet in one end of the world, then a homeland can be created in any country.
Continuing the series of comparisons, Saroyan even touches upon the seemingly trivial phenomena, even finding in them the expression of the Armenian essence.
  For example, when tasteless beer is served in a pub, he mentions that even the taste of beer is the same for him. "You can not even imagine how good it is for an Armenian to meet another Armenian in a lost corner of the world, in a pub, a place where people drink.
 What is the taste of beer to us, what is the dictatorship to us?
 They are like that and they should be like that.
 "There are things in the world that are impossible to change."
We tend to assume that the author makes this comparison by contrasting the habits of Russian (since the meeting was in Russia) or American carefree American people with the pleasures of the day with the typical Armenian's caring nature.
  In other words, the author presents the different sub-layers of Armenianness through metaphors in each part of the story.
On the other hand, Saroyan reveals himself in the story not only as a hero of the patriot, but also as an individual William Saroyan, who has lived in America all his life, but considers himself "a stranger in a foreign world."
 From this point of view, the image of the author formed in the turmoil of American life and way of life, which in fact corresponded to William Saroyan's human type.
 He is the American-Armenian man who loves Mush, the city of his father's youth, where he has never been and has never seen.
  It was only the call of blood that made him love that distant, unseen, but so dear to the soul!
Even those who have not studied Saroyan's work can be familiar with the last lines of the story, when the author says: "I would like to see a world on the face of my world that could disrupt this tribe, this cod and a tribe of proud people, whose story is told, all battles are fought and lost, whose buildings are destroyed, books are not read and songs are silent."
 Turning once again to the method of comparison, juxtaposing the losses and deprivations of the Armenians, their aftermath and the pride of being able to live, Saroyan raises before the world that this tribe is not disturbed.
The idea of ​​raising the voice of the Genocide is reflected from the very beginning of the story. The reader mentally understands as a result of which the author appeared in a foreign country, how it is that Saroyan has not seen one of the cities of his country, but he wants to at least hear about it.
 However, in 1915 He testifies about it in the last part of the story.
Calling for the elimination of the Armenians again, contradicting his words of his real wishes, the author wants to emphasize even more the idea that in the worst case, the Armenians will find strength to survive even from this Genocide.
 It is through the contrast of his words, the real thoughts and desires hidden beneath them, that the writer emphasizes the completeness of the losses of the past of our country, the longing he has now, the dreams of the future.
In the content of the story, Saroyan emphasizes the cheerful nature of an Armenian, thanks to which twenty years after the Genocide, two Armenians, when they met each other while wandering in foreign countries, laughed at the supreme happiness of meeting each other.
Thus, William Saroyan, enriching the genre-socio-psychological issues of the story in his works, living throughout his life, creating far from the homeland, especially not in the Armenian language, but in English, was able to present the patriotic ideas of the Armenian people.
Structurally enriching the characters of the story, he was able to express the description and spirit of an entire nation with a simple description of a hero's life, a seemingly ordinary incident in a small story, to speak about the Armenian Genocide, to show the strength of the pride of the Armenian nation.
 From the genre point of view of the story, the essential aspects of the life of the fictional hero are reflected, which in the story is mainly the expression of longing and love for the homeland.
Lilit HarutyunyanVILYAM SAROYAN STRUCTURAL AND CONTENTS FEATURES OF "ARMENIAN AND ARMENIAN" STORY Keywords: conversation with the reader, inner monologue, real thoughts and
opposition of desires.
