PROBLEMS OF APPLIED ACCELERATED PROCEDURE The essence of applying an expedited trial procedure (hereinafter referred to as an expedited trial) is that the court does not conduct a substantive investigation of the criminal case if the defendant agrees with the accusation.
 The purpose of the expedited trial is to facilitate the prosecution of cases of minor, medium and serious crimes in order to ensure the speedy and effective administration of justice as soon as possible.
 In establishing this procedure, the interests of the parties, first of all, the defendant, were taken into account.
 The latter is interested in the court exercising the protection of rights և legal interests without unjustified delays կիրառ applying various legal measures (especially detention as a measure of restraint) 1.
One of the peculiarities of the accelerated trial is the procedure of imposing a punishment in case of application.
 The court shall impose a sentence of less than two-thirds of the most severe punishment for the crime committed as a result of an expedited trial, and if two-thirds of the more severe punishment is less than the lesser punishment for the crime, then the lesser punishment (RA criminal Part 6 of Article 375.3 of the Code of Procedure (hereinafter CCP).
A special procedure for imposing a sentence is envisaged by Article 67.1, Part 2 of the RA Criminal Code, according to which, “The sentence imposed for recidivism of crimes may not be less than half of the maximum sentence envisaged by the relevant article of the Special Part of the RA Criminal Code.
1 See Ghambaryan A., Problems of simplification of criminal proceedings, Scientific-practical manual, Yerevan, 2011, p. 106.
The punishment imposed for dangerous recidivism of crimes may not be less than the maximum two-thirds of the punishment provided by the sanction of the relevant article of the Special Part of the RA Criminal Code.
The punishment for particularly dangerous recidivism of crimes may not be less than three-quarters of the maximum punishment envisaged by the sanction of the relevant article of the Special Part of the RA Criminal Code. ”
The existing contradiction between the above-mentioned two norms was resolved by the RA Court of Cassation in the criminal case TD / 0071/01/13 on 31.05.2014. According to Article 24, Part 3 of the RA Law on Legal Acts, the newly adopted legal act of the same body should not contradict the previously adopted legal acts with equal legal force.
  In case of contradictions between legal acts adopted with equal legal force, the norms of the legal act that entered into force earlier shall apply (...).
The Court of Cassation stated that Article 375.3 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code is in force as amended by the RA Law HO-93-N adopted on February 21, 2007 "On Amendments to the RA Criminal Procedure Code", while Article 67.1 of the RA Criminal Code is " Amendments to the RA Criminal Code "On Making Amendments" to the RA Law HO-143-N adopted on May 23, 2011.
 That is, Section 9.1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, which provides for an expedited trial, entered into force earlier than Article 67.1, which stipulates the rules for imposing punishment in case of recidivism of crimes.
Assessing the above-mentioned conclusion in the context of Part 3 of Article 24 of the RA Law on Legal Acts, the Court of Cassation stated that the earlier legal act “On Amendments to the RA Criminal Procedure Code” should be implemented in February 2007. Article 375.3 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, supplemented by the RA law HO-93-N adopted on the 21st. "
Accelerated trial is used in the current legal framework in the presence of clear legal conditions developed in the case law.
  In the absence of any of these, the use of an expedited trial is inadmissible.
The first condition is that the defendant (accused) agree with the accusation against him / her and request a motion for an expedited trial.
 The main feature of this institution is that priority is given not to a comprehensive and thorough examination of the circumstances of the case in court, but to the consent of the accused (accused) to the accusation leveled against him.
 Such a structure for resolving a case in court is based on the provision that when a party admits a disputed fact in a competitive trial, its examination is not required.
The expedited procedure shall be applied only if the accused or the defendant agrees with the assumptions contained in the indictment on the factual circumstances of the act, the horse of guilt, the motives, the legal assessment of the act, as well as the nature and extent of the damage caused.
 In criminal cases in which the property damage included in the subject matter of the civil suit coincides with the property damage included in the scope of the charge, the full or partial acceptance of the civil suit by the defendant means that he does not fully or partially agree with the charge.
 Therefore, in such cases, the court should consider the defendant's disagreement with the claim as a complete or partial disagreement of the defendant or the accused with the accusation, and on that basis reject the motion to apply an expedited procedure.
  In other words, if during the expedited trial the court finds that the defendant does not agree with the assumption in the indictment concerning the nature and extent of the damage caused, the court must decide not to apply an expedited trial և to hold a general trial2.
The second condition is to realize the nature and consequences of the motion submitted by the defendant or the accused.
  This means that the defendant (the accused) realizes the nature of the motion to apply for an expedited trial. the decision.
The essence of the trial (the examination of the evidence obtained in the criminal case is not carried out in accordance with the general procedure), the consequences, the procedure for passing the verdict սահմանափ the limitations for appealing the verdict ( the envisaged ground on which the appealed judicial act is overturned or amended if a judicial error is committed (that is, the court's findings on the factual circumstances of the case do not correspond to the evidence examined by the appellate court).
The third condition is to submit the motion voluntarily, after consulting with the defense counsel, from the moment the criminal case is sent to court until the beginning of the trial.
  The voluntary submission of the motion presupposes that there are no reasonable grounds to doubt the suitability of the defendant's expression of will.
 In this case, the presumption applies, according to which the defendant's expression of will corresponds to his bunkam.
 However, this presumption can be overcome if the court finds that the defendant (defendant) submitted the motion under the influence of threats.
  In such a case, the court rejects the motion, և the trial is conducted in a general manner.
The purpose of consulting with the Defender is to explain in detail to the defendant (the accused) the essence of the expedited trial, the consequences, the procedure for making a verdict and appealing it.
 Moreover, before consulting, the defense attorney must get acquainted with the materials of the case, be sure that the accusation against his client is grounded, be confirmed by the evidence gathered in the case.
The next condition is the lack of grounds to terminate the criminal case.
  It is also necessary that the sentence for a crime committed against a person does not exceed 10 years of imprisonment.
One of the conditions of the accelerated trial is the non-objection of the accuser against the application of the expedited procedure.
 The RA Court of Cassation expressed the following legal position on this issue. "Objection to the expedited procedure by the accuser precludes its application by the court, and non-objection presupposes its" tacit "consent of the accuser to apply it.
  (...) The Court of Cassation considers that in case of objection to an expedited trial the relevant arguments must be presented by the accuser, otherwise endowing the accuser with such a right may lead to arbitrariness, violate the principle of equality of all before the court, The above-mentioned goals, which are inadmissible, do not follow from the logic of that institution.
 (...) ».
3 The CCP does not establish any rules or procedures for resolving the issue of whether or not to enforce the involvement of the aggrieved party (including the victim, the victim's legal representative, the victim's legal successor).
  In other words, the requirement to take into account the position of the aggrieved party is not enshrined in the CCP either in resolving the issue of whether or not to object to the expedited trial for the accuser, nor in deciding whether to pass an expedited trial for the court.
 The Court of Cassation expressed the following legal position on this issue. The constitutional wording "(...) [to] restore [his] violated rights" refers to the victim in the criminal case (also the legal successor of the victim), as the victim is the person whose rights are violated by the crime.
  Moreover, within the framework of the legitimate interests of the victim, the restoration of the damage inflicted on him, the full disclosure of the circumstances of the act that caused him harm and the correct criminal legal qualification, the conviction of the person who committed the crime և the imposition of a just punishment.
  One of the guarantees of securing those interests is the right of the victim to have his / her case tried "in compliance with all the requirements of justice."
19. The examination of his case "observing all the requirements of justice" for the victim, inter alia, presupposes that: a. When deciding whether or not to object to an expedited trial, the prosecutor (accuser) should take into account the position of the victim as a subject of the prosecution (Article 6, Clause 21 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code), b. The court may not pass an expedited procedure without finding out the position of the victim on that issue, c. The court may reject the defendant's motion to apply an expedited trial if the victim objects.
  In that case, the court makes a separate decision, in which 3 See the criminal case LD / 0019/01/14 of the RA Court of Cassation on 05.06.2015. decision.
justifies the fact that the legitimate interests of the victim are endangered as a result of the expedited judicial examination.
20. For the prosecutor (accuser) և the court, based on the previous point of this decision, when resolving the issue of objecting to the expedited procedure of the trial համապատասխան rejecting the relevant motion of the defendant, the position of the victim must be decisive, especially when the victim: a. reasonably substantiates that the damage caused to him is not fully compensated, b. substantiated objection against the factual circumstances of the case (…) ”4.
It follows from the above decision that the position of the aggrieved party (hereinafter referred to as the aggrieved party) is not binding on either the prosecutor or the court (the prosecutor must take the aggrieved party into account when deciding whether or not to challenge the expedited trial, and the court may reject motion if the victim objects to it).
 They have discretionary power over this issue.
At the same time, an exception is envisaged from the general rule. The position of the victim is decisive when the latter reasonably substantiates that the damage inflicted on him is not fully compensated or argues against the factual circumstances of the case.
We consider that giving decisive importance to the position of the victim only in the above two cases does not derive from the right of the latter to examine his case "in compliance with all the requirements of justice", as it is within the legitimate interests of the victim not only to recover the damage caused by the crime. the correct criminal qualification, the conviction of the person who committed the crime against him ումը the imposition of a just punishment5.
 Thus, envisaging such a restriction violates the right of the victim to have his case examined "in compliance with all the requirements of justice", therefore it must be abolished.
Resolving the issue of whether or not to apply an expedited trial predetermines the outcome of the criminal case.
 Failure to make the position of the victim mandatory, when the position of the accused is of such a nature, violates the principle of equality of the parties.
 According to the case law of the European Court of Human Rights, 4 See the criminal case of the RA Court of Cassation, ESHD / 0097/01/09, 26.03.2010. the decision.
5 See RA Court of Cassation criminal case ESHD / 0097/01/09 dated 26.03.2010. the decision.
Equality of the parties is one of the components of a broader understanding of a fair trial. It requires each party to have a reasonable opportunity to present its case in a situation where neither party has a clear advantage over the other party6.
The position of the victim is made obligatory by the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation, according to Article 314, Part 1 of which, in order to apply an expedited trial, only the motion of the accused is not enough, but the consent of the state or private prosecutor is required.
 According to Part 4 of the same article, if the state or private prosecutor և (or) the victim objects to the accused's motion, the criminal case shall be examined in a general manner.
  Thus, according to the criminal procedure legislation of the Russian Federation, the objection of the victim is sufficient to reject the motion even in cases when the victim does not substantiate his objection.
Based on the above-mentioned arguments, we consider that it is necessary to establish as a mandatory condition for an expedited trial the non-objection of the victim against the application of an expedited trial.
The condition of an expedited trial is that the accused or the accused is eighteen years old at the time of committing the alleged crime.
  This condition was set by the RA Court of Cassation7.
The next issue that arises in practice in connection with the application of this institution is whether the court has the right to examine evidence in the event of an expedited trial.
According to Article 375.3, Part 5 of the CCP, “When conducting an expedited trial, the court does not conduct a general examination of the evidence obtained in the criminal case.
 However, it studies the data characterizing the personality of the defendant, the responsibility և the circumstances mitigating and aggravating the sentence. ”
According to Article 107 of the RA CCP. "Only on the basis of evidence is it confirmed: 6 See the case of Cress v. France, 07.06.2001 of the European Court of Human Rights. the decision.
7 In the criminal case TD / 0145/01/11 of the RA Court of Cassation on 08.06.2012 the decision.
5) mitigating or aggravating circumstances envisaged by the criminal law.
 (...) »Although no general examination of the evidence is carried out during the expedited trial, this cannot be interpreted as a prohibition on the examination of evidence.
  During the expedited trial, the data characterizing the defendant, the responsibility, the mitigating and aggravating circumstances of the sentence should be examined, which can be confirmed only on the basis of evidence.
 Thus, in the case of an expedited trial, the evidence is examined exclusively to record the identity of the defendant, the responsibility և mitigating and aggravating circumstances of the sentence.
 It should be noted that Article 375.3 5 5 of the CCP does not prohibit the acquisition of new evidence, so the court may, through the mediation of the parties or on its own initiative, obtain new evidence to confirm or refute the above circumstances.
The next issue that has arisen since the introduction of this institution has not yet been finally resolved is whether the court has the right to make a verdict of acquittal in the event of an expedited trial.
The view of the court to have such jurisdiction is substantiated by the following arguments.
When administering justice, the judge և members of the Constitutional Court are independent, subject only to the Constitution և law (Article 97, Part 1 of the Constitution, as amended in 2005).
In an expedited trial, a court shall impose a sentence that does not exceed two-thirds of the maximum sentence for the crime committed, and if two-thirds of the more severe sentence is less than the milder sentence for the offense, then the more lenient sentence (Article 375.3 of the CCP). Part 6).
According to the supporters of the above-mentioned point of view, the mentioned norm of the CPC does not oblige the court to make an accusatory verdict.
  It only mentions the order of imposing a sentence when making a guilty verdict.
  That is, the court is not obliged to make a guilty verdict, the latter has the right to make a verdict of acquittal.
 Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online.
In such a case, if the court is deprived of the opportunity to pass a verdict of acquittal, a guilty verdict must be rendered, which contradicts the issues of criminal proceedings, which include the inadmissibility of convicting an innocent person (Article 2, Part 2, Clause 2 of the CCP).
We think that such an interpretation of the norms of the Code is not derived from the essence of the institute of trial.
  In this institution, the "deal" is between the two parties to the criminal proceedings, the "defense parties", in which the accused agrees with the accusation, in return for which a more favorable sentence is guaranteed, as the defendant is acquitted under Article 168, Part 1 of the RA CCP. From the court expenses envisaged by points 2-8.
 By agreeing to an expedited trial, the defendant also voluntarily renounces a number of constitutional guarantees, namely the principle of the presumption of innocence, other rights to a public hearing.
On the other hand, the accuser refuses to carry out the function of defending the accusation in full, thus being able to save his means, as well as to encourage the accused (defendant) to cooperate with the criminal prosecution bodies8.
  Thus, the accused renounces his constitutional guarantees, and the accuser renounces the function of defending the accusation in full, having the conviction that the court cannot make a verdict of acquittal.
  In such circumstances, by examining, evaluating and acquitting the evidence in full in accordance with the principle of competition during the trial, making a verdict of acquittal, the court violates the legitimate interests of the state, society, the rights of the victim (if the latter is involved in criminal proceedings).
  The existence of such uncertainties contradicts the principle of legal certainty.
  According to the European Court of Human Rights, “One of the fundamental aspects of the rule of law is the principle of legal certainty, which, inter alia, guarantees a certain stability. 8 See the decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia SDO-931.
in legal situations և promotes public confidence in the courts.
  Contradictory judicial decisions, on the other hand, create a state of legal uncertainty that is likely to undermine public confidence in the judiciary, which is clearly one of the most important components of a rule of law. ”9
As a result of the expedited trial, the risk of being convicted of an offense for a crime has clearly decreased in the current legal framework.
  The Court of Cassation envisages the absence of grounds for dismissal of the criminal case as a condition for expedited trial10.
 We consider that this condition refers to both justifying and non-justifying grounds.
 After accepting the criminal case, the judge examines the case materials, discovering a circumstance that excludes the substantive proceedings, the application of which is not possible without a trial, means a judicial examination.
 In such a situation, if the defendant submits a motion for an expedited trial, the other conditions are met, the court is obliged to reject the motion on the grounds that there is no circumstance excluding the criminal proceedings;
 When a justification is established during the trial, the court must make a verdict of acquittal, and in the case of a non-acquittal, a decision to terminate the criminal proceedings.
 Abuse of the defendant's (defendant's) motion to dismiss an expedited trial on this ground has negative consequences for the defendants' sentencing, especially when there is a recidivism of the offenses.
  The most effective way to rule out misconduct by the courts is to establish the following procedure: In cases where the court rejects the defendant's motion for an expedited trial on the grounds that the criminal case is unlikely to appear, but this fact is not established during the trial, the sentence shall be imposed in the same way as in the case of an expedited trial.
9 See the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights, Mecdet Sahin և Perihan Sahin v. Turkey.
10 See in the criminal case of the RA Court of Cassation EKD 0209/01/10 24.02.2011. the decision.
Such a sentence should be applied only if the remaining conditions of the expedited trial are met.
  In cases where, in addition to the above, one or more of the conditions for an expedited trial are absent, this sentencing procedure should not apply.
  The mentioned procedure not only protects the rights of the defendant և legal interests, but also follows from the requirement to examine the criminal case within a reasonable time.
Circumstances precluding criminal proceedings may also arise during an expedited trial (for example, an amnesty act has been passed or the statute of limitations for criminal liability has expired).
 In such cases, the court must make a decision to terminate the criminal case or to terminate the criminal prosecution.
  This is the reason why the CCP lacks the obligation of the court to make only a guilty verdict as a result of an expedited trial.
It follows from the above arguments that as a result of the expedited trial, the possibility of acquittal is ruled out.
Arman Babakhanyan TASKS OF APPLICATION OF ACCELERATED PROCEDURE Keywords: expedited trial, sentencing, examination of evidence, acquittal Summary.
