GRABARY WORDS IN THE "EXIT" BOOK OF THE OLD TESTAMENT It is a well-known fact that controversial topics prevail in all scientific fields, which have been and remain the subject of discussions.
There is no lack of such realities in linguistics.
 Controversial topics were noun stems, noun gender, verb gender, modes, form, sequence, act-status status, derby part, pronoun part, phrases, etc.
In this article we have presented the Old Armenian translations of the book "Exodus" of the Old Testament, aiming to show the whole richness of this masterpiece of Armenian translated literature.
 It should be added that the phrases in this book are not included in the "Old Armenian Dictionary" [1].
 Since it was mentioned above that the phrase is one of the controversial topics of the language, we can not stay away from the existing contradictions about it, without referring to the details that will take us away from our riot.
Let us refer to the views on the definition of the phrase in Armenian studies, so that our position is clear.
The general definition is as follows. "Phrase is a stable, complete, reinterpreted connection of two Javelin words in structure, which is reproduced in speech as a linguistically ready unit" [2].
The term "phrase" is considered in linguistics in a broad sense.
 As mentioned by P. Bediryan. "In a broad sense, the phrase is, after all, a stable word combination with four separate expressions for the Armenian language: the original phrase, the phrase expression, the relative verb, the compound name.
  By "original phrase" we mean those who have reinterpreted stable relations, endowed with a metaphorical-allegorical meaning, which in Armenology is also called a "feature" [3].
 It is not difficult to notice that the common definition corresponds to the first of the four derivations of the phrase.
  If we take the above definition of the "original phrase" as a basis, it will mean that the proverbs are these phrases.
 These opinions are contradictory.
  Some linguists include these in phrases, while others do not.
 Controversy is caused by the fact that proverbs are used in speech as ready-made units, like phrases, but, as A. Sukiasyan notes, with syntactic incompleteness "[2].
  A. Sukiasyan notes that "the proverbs and sayings that express a figurative general meaning, are in the structure of a sentence or a phrase, logically correspond to either the judgment or the concept, և are classified as phrases.
 In this case, their linguistic features, structure and general-figurative meaning are taken into account, ignoring their other genre-scientific-literary genre features [2].
noting ․ "In order for the proverbs (other proverbs) to be called a phrase, they P. Bediryan does not show an unequivocal approach to this issue, they must be transformed in some way and to some extent.
 First of all, they must "get rid" of their generalizing meaning, and then acquire a relatively free form.
 In a verbal environment, a proverb or saying can be used in the same way in such a way that they lose their generalizing meaning and are again perceived as a phrase. ”[4]
Our view on this issue is unequivocal.
 Based on the fact that proverbs are mainly instructive-allegorical in nature, and phrases lack these characteristic features, we are convinced that these are different linguistic realities, they cannot have beggars.
 The main reason for the identification of these two different linguistic realities is the semantic classification of phrases, the main criterion of which is the degree of integration of the components of the phrase, which, in our humble opinion, has been mistakenly transferred from Russian to Armenian.
 According to that, phrases in Armenian are divided into four groups: phraseological convergence, phraseological unity, phraseological connection, phraseological expression [2].
We know that the components that make up a phrase are reinterpreted - they do not retain their original lexical meaning in this connection, so what is the point of categorizing phrases based on the unity of words?
The Old Armenian և Old Armenian չեն phrases do not differ from each other in terms of the content of their expression.
 Therefore, we have fully applied the understandings of the above-mentioned theory in the analysis of the Grabar phrases taken from the book of Exodus.
The book of Exodus is the second book of the Old Testament, one of the first in its ideological significance, for it describes the desecration of Abraham's descendants from Egyptian slavery under Moses, the story of the revelation of God's commandments and laws on Mount Sinai.
Let's present the phrases of the book "Exodus" selectively. Our sample is based on the frequently used phrases, which stand out in terms of imagery and are unique in terms of worldview thinking.
 It should be noted that the content of most of the phrases we have extracted is conditioned by ancient testamentary events, ancient Jewish traditions, the deeds of biblical heroes, especially Moses, to go out to water, to eat meat in the evening and to give bread in the morning, to drink water, to be blue and apricot and red. To draw water from a rock, to taste like a bee, to take it out of the desert, to enter the tabernacle of the testimony, to be forty or forty nights, to eat manna, and so on.
 The other part is based on the grammatical realities of the Old Testament, such as putting the object (case) with the verb with the same or a synonymous noun, sometimes with the practical conjugation of the verb, emphasizing the predominance of action, plurality, for example, to act, to kill, to sacrifice You have entered into wisdom, you have become an architect, you have been hired, you have been hired, you have been hired, you have been hurt, you have been hurt, and so on.
 We have presented a total of sixty-five phrases.
1) To pass through a hole - to encounter difficulties, 2) to cry out to God, 3) to visit, to meet, to see, 4) to take as an eagle-winged guardian, to become a guardian, in power), 6) to get atonement-to get rid of sins, to be forgiven, 7) to take the obligee-innocent to make the sinner innocent, 8) to put an eye on the eye, 9) to get good-consent, 10) to rise by hand-with difficulty to achieve results, 11 (d) to commit adultery, to forgive sins, to be forgiven, 12) to lower the price, to bargain, 13) to be brutally raped, slaughtered, 14) to work hard, to bury in bed repentance, repentance, 17) to get out of the water, to come to innocence, 18) to be long-lived, to live long, 19) to be intimidated,20) be careful of the person - be careful, 21) sacrifice my victim - countless, countless sacrifices, 22) put my hand on my head - sponsor, 23) fall into the game - play, cooperate, 24) eat meat in the evening and bread in the morning 25) to take care of daily needs, 25) to get out of the water - to get out of trouble, to increase, to sponsor, 26) to get out of the water - to find a way out of a hopeless situation, 27) to be selfless - to dedicate oneself to someone, 28) to wash my hands - get rid of sins; 29) to be the enemy of the enemy - deep, to be filled with unceasing enmity, 30) to speak secretly - to convey secret thoughts, 31) to humble my hand - to beg, to beg, 32) to be wise - to guess, to think, 33) to be strict, to be demanding, to be strict 34) to oppress, to torture, to force, 35) to harden, to harden the heart, to be cruel,37) bread from heaven-manna, goodness obtained through God, 38) to take out of the desert-misfortunes, 39) as a beehive-sweet, honey-sweet, sweet, 40) to extend a hand-to help, to support, 41) to build with skill-to create a masterpiece, 42) to make manna, to do charity, 43) to die, to die, to die, 44) not to give in to idolatry, not to create false authorities, 45) to offer burnt offerings, to offer sacrifices, 46) to hand over to the slain to surrender, 47) to enter into wisdom, to judge very wisely, to be prudent, 48) to enter into the tabernacle of testimony, to be sanctified, to become wise, 49) to speak from heaven, to prophesy, 50) to gain, to gain, 51) not to add too little; not lack - the provision of care is unchangeable, 52) to build a table - to worship, to worship,to glorify, 53) to be a worm - to rot, to rot, to decay, 54) to drink any water - to be inhuman, to be in a difficult situation, 55) to be judged by the merciful - to be merciful out of fear of God, 56) to keep orders - to obey, to obey, 57) to wipe out the earth to abolish, 58) holiness of the saints-exclusive, holy, 59) wipe away-atone for sins, sanctify, 60) hire rent-compensate after the crime, 61) plant in a mountain-uninhabited place, 62) suffer-suffer great losses , 63) to spread-sponsor, 64) to stone, to stone, to persecute, to persecute, 65) to be forty days and forty nights - to be in a very long and torturous time.56) keep my commands - obey, obey, 57) erase from the earth - completely eliminate, 58) sanctify the saints - exceptional, holy, 59) wipe away - atone for sins, sanctify, 60) hire mercenaries - compensate after the crime, 61) plant in the mountain - to live in an uninhabited place, 62) to suffer, to suffer great damage, 63) to spread, to sponsor, 64) to stone, to kill, to persecute, 65) to be forty days and forty nights - to be in a very long and torturous time.56) keep my commands - obey, obey, 57) erase from the earth - completely eliminate, 58) sanctify the saints - exceptional, holy, 59) wipe away - atone for sins, sanctify, 60) hire mercenaries - compensate after the crime, 61) plant in the mountain - to live in an uninhabited place, 62) to suffer, to suffer, to suffer great damage, 63) to spread, to sponsor, 64) to stone, to kill, to persecute, 65) to be forty days and forty nights - to spend too long and torturous time.to persecute, 65) to be forty days and forty nights - to be in a very long and torturous time.to persecute, 65) to be forty days and forty nights - to be in a very long and torturous time.
The mentioned phrases are not proved by R. Ghazaryan's first "Grabar's Phrasebook", so we think that our work can be a practical help in compiling a new Grabar's Phrasebook.
LITERATURE [1] Ghazaryan R., Grabar's phraseological dictionary, Yerevan, 2012.
[2] Sukiasyan A., Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2008, pp. 296, 305, 301307.
[3] Bediryan P., Extensive Explanatory Dictionary of Armenian Phrases, Yerevan, 2011, p. 5.
[4] Bediryan P., Phraseology of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1973, p. 55.
Christine Aghabekyan GRABARYAN WORDS IN THE BOOK OF THE OLD TESTAMENT Keywords: Bible, Exodus, Old Armenian, phrase, definition, broad understanding, plan of expression, plan of content, imagery, reinterpretation, metaphor, metaphor.
