COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN BUNDESTAG ARMENIAN GENOCIDE RESOLUTIONS (2005 AND 2016) The process of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide began in 1965, when the 50th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide
  During the following decades, in particular, the parliaments of various states - governments, states, cities, interstate - non - governmental organizations, after the independence of Armenia, adopted various resolutions, declarations, laws, laws, which, objectively, subjectively, with many reasons. are different from each other.
        The current German Empire, the successor to the Federal Republic of Germany, was a military ally of Ottoman Turkey in World War I and, of course, was aware of the policy of extermination of the local "Armenian Progress" party and other state apparatuses.
Given the inferior status of Ottoman Turkey to Germany, it can be argued that the German Empire had all the levers to prevent the Armenian Genocide, but, in its military-political interests, nevertheless preferred to remain silent in order to commit this greatest crime against humanity.
        For the first time after a long silence, the German parliament passed a resolution on the Armenian Genocide in 2005. on July 15.
 The process began on January 24 of the same year, when the section on the Armenian Genocide included in history textbooks in the Brandenburg Territory was canceled.
 This caused a stir in the German media, and on February 22 it continued politically, when the opposition CDU / CSU faction "Germany should support the reconciliation of Turks and Armenians on the occasion of the commemoration of the 90th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide on April 24, 1915" [1 ] submitted a petition to the parliament for discussion.
 The Armenian community and the progressive public and political figures of Germany joined the work.
Finally, after putting it on the agenda, the resolution of all the factions was adopted unanimously.
        When reading the text of the resolution carefully, it is impossible not to notice that there are many non-Armenian terms and phrases.
 From the calls and proposals contained in the resolution, it can be concluded that its purpose is not so much the recognition and condemnation of the Armenian Genocide, but the normalization of Turkish-Armenian relations through mutual concessions, in which Germany was willing to play the role of mediator.
        The biggest shortcoming of the resolution is that it is never directly mentioned that the actions that took place in the Ottoman Empire before and after 1915 were genocide against the Armenian population.
 Instead, the terms "massacres", "violence", "deportations", "atrocities" were used, which have no serious legal significance.
 However, it should be noted that in the "Reasons for Mediation" section of the resolution, the fact that the above-mentioned cases are described as genocide is directly quoted as follows: "Many independent historians, parliaments and international organizations describe the deportation and extermination of Armenians as genocide."
        The text quotes the term "Anatolia" instead of "Western Armenia", which was artificially put into circulation by the Turks, aiming to forget the place-name given to the natives of the region.
        As it is known, in 2005 In April 2007, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sent a letter to Armenian President Robert Kocharian proposing, among other things, the creation of a so-called "joint commission of historians" to finalize the Genocide issue.
The interesting thing is that before the letter reached President Kocharyan, it had already been spread through official channels in the US legislature ևdifferent media.
  This shows that the letter was not a real attempt to start a dialogue, but to deceive and distract the international community on the eve of the 90th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide.
Unfortunately, that letter also left its mark on the Bundestag in 2005. because it gave vain hopes that a Turkish-Armenian dialogue was possible.
 The text mentions the need to convene a meeting of historians several times, while it was clear that the issue of the Armenian Genocide had long since left the field of history and required legal and political solutions, which historians, of course, could not provide.
        The resolution also attempts to link the Armenian massacres to the Young Turk Party, its leadership, which is clearly in retrospect. "The resistance of high-ranking Turkish officials to these actions, as well as the criticism of the Ottoman Parliament, was brutally suppressed by the Young Turk regime."
Meanwhile, it is known that the Young Turks had already joined the state apparatus; in the case of a one-party system, there could be no talk of resistance, even from high-ranking officials.
        In parallel with all the shortcomings, there are a number of statements in the resolution that indirectly confirm the genocidal nature of the massacres of the Armenian population in the Ottoman Empire, the fact that they were premeditated and pre-organized.
        In the "Reasons for Mediation" section of the resolution, a historical overview is made, during which the 1915 on the assassination of Armenian cultural and political figures in Constantinople on April 24, 1945, on the recruitment of men to the Turkish army, their placement in labor camps, and then on the killing of special units (such as Teshkilat Mahsuse), etc.
 It is noteworthy that in addition to blaming the Young Turk Party for organizing and carrying out the Armenian massacres, it is also noted that "to date, contrary to the facts, the Turkish government, as the successor to the Ottoman Empire, denies that the atrocities were well-planned." The massacres and massacres that took place during that time were desirable for the Ottoman government. ”
  In other words, this passage first mentions that modern Turkey is the legal successor of the Empire; second, it speaks of the well-planned and organized facts of the massacres, which are denied by the current Turkish government.
        Special attention should be paid to the fact that the Bundestag accepted the partial complicity of the German Empire in the Armenian massacres.
 The resolution states that the German Empire, as a key ally of Ottoman Turkey, was aware of the events from the outset, and that reports from the German embassy and consulates in Turkey reiterated the planned nature of the massacres.
        Thus, it can be noted that the resolution of the German Bundestag in 2005 is not extremely contradictory in nature.
 There are controversial wording և terms. The mass killings of the Armenian population are not directly described as genocide, the need to convene a "commission of historians" that excludes a constructive solution that is practically unrealistic is constantly stressed.
  However, for the first time, there is talk of Germany's complicity in the Armenian Genocide, of repression by impartial investigators of the Armenian Genocide in Turkey, and of the allegations in the Reasons for Mediation cast doubt on the place of Armenians in the Ottoman Empire during World War I. The annihilation was a genocide.
  Besides, it is possible that for the first time in 90 years Germany has actually recognized the Armenian Genocide at such a level.
        Already in 2016 On June 2, 1945, the German parliament voted in favor of the draft resolution "On the Genocide of Armenians and Other Christian Minorities in the Ottoman Empire 101 Years Ago" [4].
  The resolution was jointly developed by the ruling Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the Christian Social Union (CSU), the Social Democrats (SDP) and the opposition Greens.
2005 Compared to the resolution, the 2016 resolution was fundamentally different. First of all, the resolution, except for Armenians, is dedicated to the memory of the genocide of other Christians, which was not clearly emphasized in the previous resolution.
  Second, instead of other formulations, the word genocide (German: Völkermord) is already clearly mentioned.
 Third, the term "Anatolia" is missing, which has been replaced by the general name "Ottoman Empire".
  It would be desirable to emphasize the name "Western Armenia" as well, as this option, of course, is more preferable than "Anatolia" in the historical context.
        In contrast to the previous resolution, which mentioned "before the First World War" [2] the memory of those who were subjected to violence, massacre and deportation in 2016, in 2016. The chronology of the Armenian massacres in the resolution is limited to 1915-16, which did not take into account the crimes of the de facto leader of Turkey Mustafa Kemal after the World War, directed not only at the Armenians of Cilicia and Armenia, but also at the Armenians.
        The resolution again mentions the tragic events of the German Empire's complicity, as well as the importance of the responsibility of modern Germany.
  A few paragraphs below state that "the guilt of the perpetrators must be distinguished" and the responsibility of the people living today.
 This is a bit strange, because when it comes to the modern Republic of Turkey, the question arises: why the Federal Republic of Germany, the successor to the German Empire, can be held responsible for the actions of its ancestors, and the Republic of Turkey, the successor to the Ottoman Empire, can not?
        It also sounds a little strange - the Bundestag's call to the Republics of Armenia and Turkey to ratify the Zurich Protocols, while Turkey, violating all the agreements, put forward new preconditions for the ratification of the Protocols.
        The part of the resolution that deals with the process of preservation of Armenian monuments in the Republic of Turkey is interesting, which again indirectly hints that before that the Turkish authorities, deliberately not taking care of the Armenian historical monuments, were committing cultural genocide.
        2005 These were the main differences compared to the resolution.
 The rest of the passage, with slight differences, duplicates the text of the previous formula.
 Of course, it should be noted that despite the number of shortcomings in the new resolution, it, in a positive sense, significantly exceeded the previous one.
        If we compare the resolutions adopted by the German Bundestag in 2005-2016, the last formula is more complete and accurate in terms of giving legal assessments.
 Of course, the above-mentioned resolutions are inferior to the South American states (Argentina, Uruguay, Bolivia) in terms of ease of giving historical and legal assessments of the Armenian Genocide, but there are objective reasons for that, which are far from the world. is located.
 The shallow level of economic, political, and social relations between the countries of geographical distance is a significant factor that allows South American countries to act more freely on the Genocide issue, without paying attention to Turkey's interests and the negative impact of Ankara's possible countermeasures.
  Based on this, it should be noted that despite the contradictory and ambiguous wording in the text of the resolution, the German Bundestag in 2016 The adopted resolution is more valuable from the political and legal point of view of the aftermath of the Armenian Genocide for the following reasons: 1. Germany is one of the leading countries in the world from the political, economic and cultural points of view.
2. By his own confession, he is partly guilty, if not of committing the Armenian Genocide, then, at least, of not preventing it.
3. To this day, Germany has political, economic and other ties with Turkey, so in this circumstance, the adoption of the Armenian Genocide Resolution by the Bundestag is more valuable.
        Undoubtedly, in adopting these resolutions, Germany was primarily guided by its own interests, again using the recognition of the Armenian Genocide as a tool against Turkey (thus, the 2016 Bundestag resolution on the Armenian Genocide was adopted in response to the EU's blackmail policy against Germany). ].
  In this case, the task of the Republic of Armenia, the Armenian Diaspora, is to accept this reality, to try to play as flexibly as possible on the geopolitical contradictions of Turkey, other states, in this case, Germany.
 After all, if in the future a law is adopted on the basis of this resolution, which will happen again only in the case of geopolitics, it may become a precedent for other powers to make more relaxed and objective assessments of the Armenian Genocide.
LITERATURE [1] Khachatryan A., Discussion of the resolution on the Armenian Genocide by the Bundestag of the Federal Republic of Germany, p. 200URL.
 http:
//www.ysu.am/files/21A_Khachaturyan.pdf (Link made: 15.12.2017).
[2] Kocharyan V., Collection of Materials and Materials in International Legal Documents, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 37, 41-2.
[3] Again "Commission of Historians", "Open Archives", URL.
   http:
//www.1in.am/1546005.html (The link was made on 08.01.2018).
[4] Full text of the resolution on the Armenian Genocide adopted in the German Bundestag, URL.
 https:
//news.am/arm/news/330248.html (The link was made on 11.12.2017).
[5] Turkey puts forward a new precondition, URL.
 http:
//www.a1plus.am/52129.html (The link was made on 12.01.2018).
[6] Europe powerless against Turkish blackmail, URL.
 http:
//galatv.am/en/inozlmn/le-figaro-4/ (The link was made on 08.01.2018).
COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN BUNDESTAG OF THE GERMAN BUNDESTAG (ARMENIAN GENOCIDE RESOLUTIONS (2005 AND 2016) Keywords: German Bundestag, Committee on the Armenian Genocide, Turkish Genocide, Armenian Genocide
