PORTRAIT IN EDUARD ISABEKYAN'S ART Eduard Isabekyan in the 20th century. He is one of the bright representatives of the Soviet-Armenian fine arts of the second half.
  The artist's contribution and merit in the field of Armenian painting and graphics is great.
  The great master was born in 1914. In Igdir, he later moved to Yerevan.
  He received professional education at the "Geghard" technical school in Yerevan (1927-1931), where he was taught by S. Arakelyan, G. Fermanyan, S. Stepanyan.
 Then he studied at the Tbilisi Academy of Fine Arts (1935-1941).
Ed. Isabekyan's artistic heritage is of great interest.
  He referred to almost all genres of painting: historical, portrait, landscape, still life, compositional thematic images.
 In the artist's art we can see realistic, romantic Impressionist lines, which unite the artist to create his own unique language.
 Some of his works show the influence of romantics, in particular, Jericho ել Delacroix.
  The Armenian artist was fascinated by the dynamic compositions created by them, the strong-fighting characters of the people, the unique play of light and shadow, the intense distribution of colors.
One of the unique pages of the artist's creative heritage is his portrait works.
  The master created the features of most of his characters with memory, and some of them based on the preserved photos.
 Over the years, from time to time he returned to the processing of his large and small hundreds of paintings.
 In his portraits, he put the main emphasis on the expression of the inner, psychological side of people, tried to capture the distinctive features of irbodgers.
 It was facilitated by the pronounced brush strokes of the chosen color range, which are often thick and tangible.
His portraits can be called somewhat intimate, as they have an internal connection with the viewer.
  The artist denies the figurative exaggeration in portraits, presents his characters in different positions, in different environments and at different ages.
 Ed. Isabekyan worked mainly with oil paint, nasangina, coal, pastel, mascara, watercolor, gouache, and recently with colored felt-tip pens.
In the portraits of the early period (1940-1950) the painter mainly referred to the depiction of his relatives, people he knew ("Gypsy with a parrot" 1939, "Georgian old man" 1941, "Portrait of a mother" 1944, "Portrait of a father" 1946, " The portrait of R. Muradyan "1945," The old man from Martuni "1957," The old woman from Bjnetsi "1958).
  During these years Ed. Isabekyan created Armenian portraits, where he conveyed the naive, innocent character corresponding to their age ("Portrait of a Kurdish Boy" 1941, "Portrait of Arik" 1943, "New Year Candles" 1968).
1944 The painting "Portrait of Morse" (see Fig. 1) is considered to be one of the best works of the Armenian nationalist portrait1.
 It is the generalized image of a compassionate, tender, Armenian woman living with her children.
The image is distinguished by simplicity and directness, which is facilitated by the modest color combination of gray, brown, dark blue and their shades2.
  The artist in "Portrait of a Father" (1946, see Fig. 2) "remained faithful to the preservation of individual lines."
 The picture is distinguished by a thoughtful self-summary.
 Unlike the portrait of the mother, here the depth of the image has a more open solution.
1940-1950s The portraits of Father Abraham (1946) and Father Moses (1958) stand out among the portraits (see Figs. 3, 4), who are the fathers of Dgher ջ Bjniivan.
 These works can be considered Ed. Descriptive examples of portraits of spiritual figures created by Isabekyan.
  The painter brilliantly expressed the dim light of the church interior.
 In these two images, he carefully created the gray hairs and hairs of caring fathers, gave them the accentuated individual description of their features, the snow and the expression of their eyes.
 Ed. Isabekyan sees the truth of the image of the abbots in the caring features that determine their physical appearance.
  In the images of the fathers of the Armenian Church, the artist has completed the secular and the caring.
Ed. Isabekyan in the 1960s. In the works we see portraits of contemporaries and celebrities.
 The heroes of these pictures are people with complex and strong character.
 Such are the portraits of Khachatur Abovyan, Axel Bakunts, Derenik Demirchyan, Hrachya Kochar, Avetik Isahakyan, Sayat-Nova and other prominent representatives of Armenian culture.
The "Portrait of Axel Bakunts" (1960, see Fig. 5) is a deep psychological canvas.
In Armenian painting Ed. Isabekyan was the first to refer to A. Bakuntsikerparin 3.
  The young writer is standing with his hands in his pockets, full of thoughtful looks, worries and dreams.
  A. Bakunts is presented on the lively, eloquent depth of the Zangezurib image, which the poet praised with such love and skill in his works4.
  This picture harmoniously depicts man and nature, the highlands and history, thoughts and thoughts.
  A. Bakunts, as if it were the spirit of those mountains, assimilated to the enormity, անս the unusual rocks of Zangezur, skillfully depicted in the complete canvas with him, embody A. The originality of Bakunts art 5.
  Ed. Isabekyan A. Bakunts presented in the right part of the picture: 1 See Haytayan P., Eduard Isabekyan, Yerevan, 1985, page 6.
2 Art critic M. In one of his articles, Mikaelyan mentions that this portrait of the artist's mother has a special place and significance in the paintings created during the war, because in the image of the mother there is "the horror of war," the fate of the people.
  See Mikaelyan M., The Analytical Talent of the Painter, "Soviet Art", Yerevan, 1985, N 7, p. 35.
3 Mher Isabekyan writes that A. Bakunts was Ed. Isabekyan's idol, the artist felt the works of the famous writer with his soul, blood, with every nerve.
 See Isabekyan M., Eduard Isabekyan's genre-style peculiarities of painting, dissertation, Yerevan, Institute of Art of NAS RA 2003, page 80.
4 Vahagn Davtyan writes. "What Bakunts sculpted with his amazing" Buryan "words, Isabekyan handed over to the equally amazing canvas."
  See V. Davtyan, Patriotic Inspirational Art, "Soviet Armenia", Yerevan, July 23, 1965, N 172, page 3.
5 Referring to A. On the portrait of Bakunts, M. Potskhishvili noted. "When you look at the portrait of the shining star of that timeless Soviet-Armenian prose, your faith deepens, giving priority to its image of the noble soul, and deep down, in the left part of the picture, is the landscape.
 He uses such a construction in the paintings "David of Sassoun" (1956), "The Morning of the Old Man" (1964), where the characters, as conservationists, look deeply at the landscape.
It should be noted that, as A. In the painting dedicated to Bakunts, the principle of combining landscape and portrait is present in Ed. In Isabekyan's other portraits.
With such a combination, the painter created mainly the images of Armenian greats, creating certain emphases for both ideological and pictorial integrity through the landscape.
  In these works, Ed. Isabekyan presented the landscapes that complement his characters to their characters with the same color combination.
The "Portrait of Derenik Demirchyan" (1960, see Fig. 6) is based on the same principle, where the writer is represented in the depths of the panorama of the Caravan Gorges of Yeraskhavan, between two opposite high cliffs.
 Those rocks and the image of Derenik Demirchyan complement each other.
  The writer put his hands on his back և bent a little under the weight of his enormous glory1.
 At the same time, these petrified rocks embody the difficulties that the great writer overcame on the way of presenting his talent to the people.
1960 Among the painted works is the "Portrait of Khachatur Abovyan" (1960, see Fig. 7).
  In the first part of the canvas, almost in the center, the great writer and patriot stands proudly, leaning on a rock with his right hand, and a book in his left hand.
 Kh. Abovyan looks at the viewer with a thoughtful, thoughtful look, and the height of Masis presented in the depth of the image is separated by fog.
The artist seems to have tried to emphasize his inaccessibility with that horse.
 It becomes a unique symbol of the height of the human mind, from which new thoughts, feelings and emotions towards the fate of the homeland are born.
  Ed. Isabekyan in the picture gave a broken relief solution in separate parts of the rock, which has a rhythmic repetition. In the coat parts of Abovyan.
  Kh. Hovhannes Zardaryan has a similar portrait dedicated to Abovyan - "Nakhashavigh", where this writer was presented against the background of Ararat, but, in contrast to that. Isabekyan's work, which has a mysterious and expressive nature, H. In Zardaryan's work, the writer looks more vivid, he is presented with a natural movement, the colors are brighter.
Ed. Isabekyan portrayed Georgian prose writer Konstantine Gamsakhurdia in different years (1961, see Fig. 8).
  In the series of portraits dedicated to him, he captured the majesty of the outstanding "eagle-eyed" posture of the Georgian artist, the elongated egg of the head, the individual features of the nose, eyebrows and eyes.
 Ed. Isabekyan expressed his will, confidence in the activities of his forces2.
1960-1980s in the genre of portrait Ed. Bright examples of Isabekyan's paintings are "Hasmik" (1962), "Curly Boy" (1964), and their majesty.
  Such a person can be physically destroyed, but it is impossible to overcome.
 See Potskhishvili M., The Song of Colors, "Literary Newspaper", May 6, 1966. 19, page 4.
1 See Sanoyan R., In the Artists' Studio, "Lraber" newspaper, New York, 1960, August 18, page A.
2 Gamsakhurdia himself said: "Many people painted me, but only Isabekyan is me, the outburst of my psychology."
 See S. Khanzadyan, Our Master of Fine Arts, "Soviet Armenia", 1984, N 11, page 17.
"T. Gharibjanyan "(1966)," Chinese Liu Hini "(1970)," Portrait of painter Azizyan "(1970)" George of Ashtarak "(1979)," H. Matosyan "(1983) և many wonderful portraits.
An integral part of the portraiture heritage of the honored painter are his self-portraits, which the artist created in different years, from early youth to old age, 1939-1990. (See Fig. 9).
  In most of these works, the artist is represented from the waist to the waist, sometimes the whole height.
  The artist presents himself with a combination of a painting, sometimes in a studio or just something in color.
  The self-portraits stand out from the depths with the expression of eyes bowing to the viewer, which further emphasize the character and will of the artist.
 The self-portrait of each period reflects the artist's life path, thoughts and difficulties.
These self-portraits are a "unique test of his self-disclosure in front of the public."
The portrait "My Mother and I" (1983, see Fig. 10), which was made 6 years after Emor's death, is noteworthy.
 Preserving the individual features of the mother's image, it gives a slight stretch to her body, giving a certain solemnity to her posture.
 Mrs. Satenik is presented in a special outfit.
 In the picture, the author is presented in a relatively small size, half-face, with drama inappropriate for a young age.
 The dramatic nature of the artist's image is enhanced by the shadow treatments combined with the dark skin tone.
 Ed. In this picture, Isabekyan expresses the eternity of motherly and filial love.
 It can be said that the general compositional structure stands out with static solemnity.
The work "I drink your toast" (1995, see Fig. 11) has a similar solution.
 The 81-year-old artist presented the young characters of the dead parents on the carpet-like depth around the table, which he made based on the photos.
 On the left side of the canvas, near the table, sits the gray-haired artist with a cup in his hand.
  In the above two works, the figures are connected by care, genetic connection, kinship, love and warmth, but there is a temporal-psychological separation between them: the parents posthumously, the son during life.
Of particular interest is the group portrait in "Peaceful Igdir" (1994, see Fig. 12), which is both incomplete, but ideologically clear and complete.
  The main emphasis in the canvas is on the similarity of the image.
  Not only people from Igdir, but also people with family ties are represented.
  The artist presented different age groups, emphasizing the change of generation.
 At the bottom of the picture, a flat mound stands out with a horizontal outline, with three white doves on it.
  It does not have a clear affiliation, it points to the inevitable end of human life and the passing of time.
This large group portrait painting depicts 45 people, each arranged individually on a viewer-oriented basis.
 In the background, the majestic peak of biblical Ararat is a church with a monumental "generalized light".
 These images are more symbolic, as the artist meant the Armenian world in general.
  Two angels soar in the sky, as if descending from the sky to bless or glorify rather than mourn.
 The incompleteness of the great work can be considered symbolic, as the history of the family, dynasty, nation is continuous and endless.
Ed. Stands out with the plasticity of the line, with complex and dynamic transformations of movements, with a sharp sense of character, with the certainty of the characters. Isabekyan's graphic portraits1.
  In these works we can see the expression of the personality typical of the artist's paintings and the psychological depth of the image.
  The master of the line has achieved the original expression of the characters through straight and oblique lines.
  The faces are mainly worked, and the parts of the clothes are just outlined.
The artist has many works dedicated to his wife, painter Arpenik Nalbandyan (1944-1964), which stand out with subtle changes in the mental state and image of the character.
  Although colorful, the shades of the human soul are revealed (see Fig. 13).
No portrait of Arpenik repeats the other, they are Ed. Like Isabekyan's self-portraits, they express the mental state of different periods of life.
 In one of the pictures, the woman is depicted at an older age, her eyes half open, leaning on her head.
 It can be assumed from the work that probably Ed. Isabekyan painted a sick woman here.
 This is the only one of Arpenik Nalbandyan's portraits in which there is a sad dramatic mood (see Fig. 14).
Ed. By creating portraits of famous and unknown people, Isabekyan was able to achieve their psychological perception and unique expression through his unique painting and compositional tricks by preserving their essential features and similarity of features.
The artist was helped in this matter by his unique talent for creating landscape images.
  Each of the portrait works created by the artist (like all the works of the master) is uniquely interesting and deserves a detailed artistic study.
During his creative life, working in different genres in different years, receiving different titles and awards, the talented painter has earned the most worthy award of his art - the high appreciation of his people.
Arևik Prazyan PORTRAIT IN EDUARD ISABEKYAN'S ART Keywords: Eduard Isabekyan, Impressionists, Romantics Jericho "Delacroix, portrait"
