PUZZLES OF INNERY GRADUATIONLight, not hidden, High, I saw the whole. Whatever he speaks individually, He will scatter the earth in my universe.
This is what Nerses Lambronatsi, Shnorhali, thought in a hymn dedicated to his contemporary, teacher.
The person and work of Shnorhali, their weight are generally known.
Nerses Shnorhali was from the famous Pahlavuni dynasty.
 He was born in 1100.
  Shnorhali was the grandson of Grigor Magistros.
  He left a very rich, multi-genre and multi-content legacy to Shnorhali: prose works: speeches, papers, commentaries, mostly verse works: poems, banks, hymns, riddles, hymns, melodies, treasures, lines of fiction, poems.
Shnorhali is one of the writers whose works were published at the dawn of Armenian printing in the 16th century.
 A number of works dedicated to him have been preserved in the bibliography.
Nerses Shnorhali saw the title of literature in serving the welfare of the people, awakening "dormant souls", educating people.
  He revived cherished memories in the reader, which were of educational significance in connection with the problems of the time.
 As an advocate and defender of Christianity, N. Shnorhali had a religious worldview.
 According to him, a person is endowed with free activity, thus influencing the life of the society.
  Therefore, in the interests of the common good, he attaches special importance to the ideas of human moral improvement.
 He introduced a new type of literature - "The proverb of the man of joy".
  The word "parable" should not be understood here in a literal sense, but as "riddles".
Shnorhali used folklore a lot, so the folklore genre entered Armenian literature for the first time, was developed and became a new literary genre.
  For educational purposes, Nerses Shnorhali wrote more than 300 verse puzzles, which, according to Kirakos Gandzaketsu, the author created for the laity so that people would have more useful means of entertainment instead of engaging in meaningless conversations.
The material of Shnorhali puzzles is nature, human life, Armenian folklore and mythology.
  The riddles were written in the colloquial language of the time, which is known today as "Middle Armenian".
 Now they are translated world-wide and that is how they are presented.
 Their material partly refers to religious things և persons (monk, monogamy, paradise, repentance, apostle, candlelight Abel այ Cain, Abraham, Adam, David, Lot, etc. also from Armenian history: Varazdat, Torq, Trdat).
  Most interesting are the many puzzles, which, like folk puzzles, are invented about animals, fruits, four seasons of the year - non-religious, such as snow, sky, sun, moon, rain - world, trees, scales, lamp, pomegranate, pumpkin, grapes, apples, pears, nuts, wheat, mill, crow, goat, fox, bear, donkey, cat, turtle, camel, mule, goose, peacock, parrot, artisan, beetle, bee, ant, wine, book, knife, door, tower, bow, sword, sand և etc.
In this respect, Shnorhali's riddles are one of the first manifestations of the secularization of Armenian literature.
 Shnorhali has, of course, mastered this new literary genre from folklore.
 The material of some of his puzzles is taken from popularity.
  It is known that by raising the puzzles to the level of a literary type, Shnorhali at the same time pursued a practical goal, entertaining to teach especially the masses of the people.
  And it is not accidental that in the riddles Shnorhali used the colloquial language of the time, that in them he "knew how to sum up the Sephic beauty of folk poetry with dexterity" [2].
 Judging by an accurate testimony of Kirakos Gandzaketsi, when inventing the works in question, the author meant one of the most common ways of living puzzles in the Armenian secular life and the way of practical application, when .
Ն. Shnorhali deepened the Armenian national content and patriotic spirit, brought it closer to real life, gave them luxury and diversity.
The fact that there are so-called "song" puzzles in folk art is already recorded in the literature, and such are really found in various collections of folk songs.
Researchers, however, have touched on it, examining the Armenian folk riddles, showing that they are begged in different ways by fairy tales, proverbs, magic formulas-prayers, as well as song clips.
 Shnorhali has created almost all types of Armenian sizes, some of which he is the creator of.
 Following Grigor Magistros, he wrote the works of large and small volumes in rhymes, and as for the riddles, judging only by the published ones, they are generally scaled, according to which they are mostly 4 + 4.
 It is noteworthy that in puzzles of this structure sometimes a syllable is missing at the beginning of the first member.
 Finally, a special fact should be mentioned.
 As can be seen from the manuscript data, in the 17th century, in the Armenian-preserving regions, there was a notion that Shnorhali, with his riddles, also acted as a "sherasats", that is, a songwriter.
 One of the most thought-provoking manuscripts of the century is a mysterious controversy.
 The disputing parties are Shnorhali's "Lame Alor", who at the end of the dispute says Shnorhali with ridiculous anger ("Alor answered and said to St. Nerses"). I knew you, glorious lord, And master of the universe. Thou hast smitten me, thou hast smitten me, thou hast smitten me.
Thus, in all probability, Nerses Shnorhali, following the folk-folk-specialized art, invented almost a part of his riddles as secular songs, which have a fundamental significance.
As already mentioned above, Shnorhali has certainly mastered this new literary genre from folklore. The material of some of his riddles is taken from the folklore.
 For example, the last line of the bear's puzzle, likened to a Muslim sheikh / = abbot / ֆ Catholic Freer / = brother in a religious sense /, is taken from a popular proverb: "The bear's eye is our pear." Shykhuk was standing on a stool, And he had a fur coat from the top, Khaghayr, he was a coyote and he was up, And he was carrying the pear crosses with him.
                                                                          / The bear's eye is our pear / The god of thunder and lightning, Vahagn, according to our folk beliefs, was replaced by the prophet Elijah, the latter, Elijah, is described in the riddle with the lines of the mentioned deity. Next to them are puzzles that are more complex, metaphorical, allegorically given, that require more mature thinking and judgment, they are solved by a more complex chain of comparisons or combinations. The boy did not eat, but only fire. The Great Crow gave him soup, a horse on a fiery horse, and he went to the sword.
No matter how popular the element is in a few "fables", nevertheless these, like the others, are supposed to have been created by Shnorhali.
 Expanding the type of folk riddles, he turned them into identical verses (one is eight), նկար to describe some typical aspects of fables in a carefree and concise style, but with precise similarities, և to produce real little poems full of exact reality.
  Thus, this simple type of folklore has acquired a certain beauty, a special taste and attractiveness, especially when it is invented in the spoken language.
  Let us bring some examples.
  In the riddle written at the very beginning, we see the monk alive while praying separately. One hen was a small hen, she had a scaly scalp on her head, she was sitting in silence, she was praying very scurvy.
Here is the stony poor goat, which with its body serves "the robbers," the drunkards, "everyone. Yamen surrounds himself with stones, He has hair brushes for sale, Wine has salty hairs, As a gift of his dagger.
 The long-legged caravans of voracious ants resemble the caravans of deep-loaded donkeys. I saw a large seamstress, which was coming down to Khorasan, Ishu was bloated and unkempt, they grabbed a grain and came.
                                                                            / ant / Beautiful green spring with herds of grazing khashs with many fat horses, on the contrary, the burning autumn of the "totagin cave" in Hromkla, which dried up the river water, scorched and overflowed the grass of the field, depriving the grass of the field.
                                         A child stood by a mighty fire, He drank, he drank the water from the river, The horse, he made a donkey from you, He reaped, the grass above the field.
There are riddles that, in addition to sharpening the mind, shape the child's artistic taste, influencing the imaginary and emotional world. This is how spring is with its pastures, herds of khash and herds of horses. The king boy is a kind of salt, Zamen wears a green cloak, Khashink has an innumerable army, A very fat horse is a sheep and a goat.
A child stood by the mighty fire, He drank the water from the river. He made the horse and the donkey from you.
                                        He handed over the hay from the field.
  (spring) He saw a child born, and died on the same day. He would rise again after the burial, and show him another beautiful one.
/ sun / Here are the puzzles representing spring.
 They are written in average Armenian, they are so simple that there is no need to analyze them globally.
His "riddles-fables" are purposeful, which in the history of literature are mostly viewed as works directly related to life, expressions of the secularization of literature along with the use of folklore.
  Of course, in "Riddles" there is some educational purpose - to give knowledge of the history of religion, Armenian history, Ukrainian flora, natural phenomena, but the problem here is not only the material to be taught, but the ways in which the author sharpens the reader's mind. attention to the essential aspect of the story, develops the ability to guess, etc.
  Thus, there are a number of puzzles where the author gives two or three features of the object, և it is up to the child to bring them together to synthesize the solution of the puzzle.
  Thus. Listen, brother, be strong. The sign to you is all. He has an oak, a peeled bone, Ktuea ը eats an octopus of salt / walnut / It is a foam in the mouth, Sometimes it is a powder. He designs as cotton, aids the seeds of the earth.
 Or / snow / There are riddles containing satire that reflect an entire epoch and psychology.
 For example, who would dare to say something to a tyrant, but there is something amazing about a bird's claws, he jumps on the tyrant's face.
Come on, dear, I'm not to say that it 's amazing. One has a chicken collar.
                                                            (Sandr) In the riddles, too, Shnorhali left the love of education and books out of the mind of a child, a person.
 The book also becomes a subject of enigma. I did not see a white-robed house, And chickens crouched inside. They brought you from tribe to tribe, They spoke the language of reason.
                                                                            (book) As already mentioned above, Nerses Shnorhali's riddles are mostly 4 + 4, or invented in the size of the natives.
 In cowboy art it was customary to tell riddles by singing.
  From this it is supposed that the Shnorhaluhaneluks must have been sung with their scrambled eggs.
 Shnorhali did not forget the fluid fate of a transient human being in the riddles that "the world is a hotel, people are guests. They will come and go. " A tavern on the wrong side of the earth. That strangers may come unto him, And acquaintance shall go away.
                                      While the guest was coming, they were honoring him, and while he was leaving, they were robbing him.
  He wrote his riddles for everyday entertainment.
 "And because Nerses was a genius in everything, he created a mysterious fable in a book, a riddle, because instead of a myth, he was told in a drunken wedding", writes the 13th century historian Kirakos Gandzaketsi.
  In order for entertainment not to be meaningless or an end in itself, the poet tries to use it with them.
   Here is the mulberry, with the owners of which the sheram worm prepares a "priceless snake". See that tree that blooms, May the Lord bless you, May the people dress nicely, Very pleasing և desirable.
                                                                          In the seemingly clever and lively puzzles, sometimes spiced with subtle humor, Shnorhali tells the story of biblical and historical figures and animals, plants, natural phenomena, and the culture of literature.
  Riddles are difficult to solve ևThey are addressed to readers of different levels.
  In order to solve the riddle dedicated to the Armenian alphabet, for example, one had to be literate. Out of four ten to four years, Yrayl was always on the lookout. Everything is ten thousand, one less, etc.
He closed it four times, so that the clever people would know. Half of it would take eight or ten, So that the stupid people would not know.
                                                                              (alphabet) Another puzzle emphasizes the importance of grammar. You see, you are a craft, small, very fit and beautiful. It had two doorways, a window with eight numbers.
As already mentioned above, Nerses Shnorhali wrote his riddles, which stand out with the structure of a simple folklore work, in the colloquial language, Middle Armenian, which later became the language of lyric poetry.
 Of course, as in general, in this field of children's literature "Shnorhali հ had" followers. A well-known example is Tiratur (in the 14th century).
  But in the following centuries most of their works were attributed to Shnorhali.
 One of the followers created a puzzle about Shnorhali in the form of puzzles. I stood in a princely church, "to a higher degree than anyone else, a singer, a hymn."
As for the Armenian troubadours, they have even preserved the beautiful tradition of offering and solving riddles in song to this day, especially in their impressive competitions, according to all data, borrowing this experience from folk art in advance and developing it.
  By comparing and condensing the condensed features of an object or phenomenon, Shnorhali expands his world-knowledge, develops ingenuity, and the ability to guess.
Here is what a charming poetic picture the "Heaven" puzzle is. The church was high and wide. It was built wide.
                                                   / heaven / We inadvertently remember the folk tradition and Hovhannes Tumanyan's "Lantern of the Enlightener".
 Despite the complete metaphorical nature of the puzzle, there are hints for solving ․ The incandescent lamps և the chandeliers immediately push the mind to the world of illuminating bodies, to the sky.
These allegorical quartets, which are about the sun, the moon, the stars, the bird, the wolf, and finally man and his life, try to discover the mysterious phenomena of nature and the universe by looking at man as a miracle of nature, for which life is a hotel-band, where When he enters, he honors him; when he leaves, he robs.
There are riddles in which the element of cognition of life is the source. The secret of the solution, such as "Surprise I tell you dear", - the author draws attention to the abnormal course of life, prepares the philosophical-allegorical way of solving it. "When he grows old, he turns to it" (the clever solution is grapes).
  As already mentioned, the role of Shnorhali in the history of Armenian lyric poetry is very big.
  According to Manuk Abeghyan, a great historian of Armenian medieval literature, "Our poetry had already descended from heaven to earth in the middle of the 12th century, becoming a reflection of life and nature not only in its general essence but also in its details, as natural and simple." with sad or serious hope ուշ sweet, with heart-warming accents. ”
  Shnorhali resorted to many means of expression and imagery.
  He especially preferred the invention of personification or resistance, breathing and speaking to inanimate objects.
  Shnorhali expands world knowledge, develops ingenuity.
   The historical-political authority occupies a place in the literary diversity of the poet's work.
 He wrote his riddles with warmth and pride.
 He chose the most rational way with a free and open-minded approach.
 He depicted the heroic deeds of the heroes of his time, striving to keep alive the fighting and heroic spirit of the people.
    After Grigor Narekatsi, Nerses Shnorhali occupies the second largest height of Armenian poetry.
 After that, with the benevolence of his work, the secular moods and the national-patriotic spirit deepened in the Armenian literature.
  In the form of the great poet's riddles, others were writing riddles about him!
 Here is one of them, a very honorable housekeeper, he made very different dinners, they ate my childhood, had fun and became rich with knowledge.
  Nerses Shnorhali is one of the greats of Armenian literature who has taken upon himself the task of enlightening, teaching and educating the people; he has used his natural gifts to serve the moral education of generations.
 Centuries have passed since the birth of the poet, but his legacy is still very instructive not only in the fields of literature, but also in the fields of pedagogy and pedagogy.
LITERATURE [1] Abeghyan M., works, volume D, Yerevan, 1970.
[2] Tahmizyan N., Nerses Shnorhali, composer and musician, Yerevan, 1964.
[3] Shnorhali N., Riddles, Yerevan, 1984.
[4] Shnorhali N., Collection of Articles, Yerevan, 1977.
[5] Mnatsakanyan A., Armenian Medieval Riddles, Yerevan 1979.
Yeghiazaryan SamvelS PUZZLES OF CONGRATULATIONS Keywords: Gifted, puzzles, medieval, poet, Pahlavuni, period.
