DEVELOPMENT OF ECOLOGICAL AWARENESS IN OTOGENESIS The interaction of man and nature has led to a number of ecological problems of world importance: ecological crisis, destruction of nature և culture.
 Nature conservation has turned into a political, economic, social, pedagogical, psychological problem.
  For this reason, the new form of attitude towards nature, harmony with nature, has become one of the main problems of upbringing and education.
In addition, ecological conditions and factors of the surrounding reality have a great impact on a person's mental health.
 Ecological pollution, changes in climatic conditions lead to an increase in the number of stress factors.
The surrounding reality is also quite important in the development of the psyche, as well as in the perceptual, cognitive processes and emotional systems.
 All this is summed up in the field of ecological consciousness, which is the proportion of ideas about nature, attitudes and behavioral models [1].
Attitudes and interactions with nature are a complex system that has certain age dynamics of development.
 The environment and conditions play a big role in the formation and further development of a person.
Each age stage is characterized by unique features of the development of ecological consciousness.
Ecological psychology, being a relatively new field, is experiencing rapid development.
 It has a rather wide field of study, it refers to the discovery of deep solutions to a number of psychological problems.
Being a new field, it includes a number of psychological, sociological, philosophical, ecological provisions, developing in parallel with these very disciplines.
The subject of study in ecological psychology is ecological consciousness, which is considered in sociogenetic, ontogenetic-functional aspects [2].
The problem of ecological psychology is the study of the impact of the most significant ecological factors on the human psyche from a psychophysiological, biological or biopsychological point of view և the study of the impact on human mental health.
 Ecological psychology was developed in the 1990s, based on the assumption that the ecological crisis could not be overcome without a change in traditional thinking, in other words, a change in ecological consciousness.
The concept of "ecological consciousness" has been commented by a number of authors.
 Sociologists, historians, ecologists, psychologists and philosophers have referred to the concept.
 Naturally, the representative of each sphere interprets the concept within the given sphere.
 Sometimes, in order to interpret the concept more accurately, it is necessary to give the concept an interdisciplinary definition.
  Before defining ecological consciousness, we consider it necessary to consider the definition of consciousness.
Consciousness is the highest level of mental reflection of objective reality, self-regulation, which is specific only to man as a social being.
 It is a proportion of constantly changing sensory-mental images.
  Consciousness is characterized by activity և direction.
 The psychological reflection of objective reality is passive in nature, as a result of which all the objects reflected by the psyche are differentiated according to their degree of efficiency.
 As a result of all this, human consciousness is always focused on an object, object or image, that is, it is endowed with direction.
The concept of "ecological consciousness" is multifaceted.
 It includes the assessment of one's own capabilities in the use of natural objects to satisfy needs, such as the determination of the limits of anthropogenic permissible influence, the realization of further consequences of the intrusion on world processes, as well as self-knowledge as an element of the ecological system.
Ecological consciousness is a system of attitudes towards the external connections of man, the probability and sequence of the change of those connections, proceeding from the interests of man or humanity, as well as the dissemination of concepts and ideas of social origin based on natural phenomena, objects and human relations. .
The structural characteristics of ecological consciousness are the volume, the attitude towards the objects of nature, which is a possible factor in the choice of the strategy of interaction with nature during ontogeny, the ecological position as a dynamic whole state of the subject. identification, subjectification, empathy, reflection.
A number of factors contributing to the formation of ecological consciousness can be distinguished.
 These include the level of development of cognitive, emotional, behavioral perceptions about objects of nature, the subjective attitude towards nature, which is characterized by the eccentric orientation, the position of interaction with it [6].
From an early age, the child's interaction with the "surrounding world" becomes the basis for the formation and further development of ecological consciousness.
 As a child, the child still does not separate himself from the environment.
  Subjective attitude towards nature begins to develop on the basis of life experience, which appears at pre-school age.
 The child's attitude towards nature gradually turns into a separate category և becomes predominant.
 Ն. Katamadze observed more than 500 preschoolers aged 5-7 in experimental situations.
The children to be examined had to choose between "people", "animals" and "objects".
 In 50-60% of cases, the selective activity of preschoolers was focused on animals - only 20-30% - humans - on inanimate objects.
 Based on certain criteria, children attribute this or that object to the category of being alive.
  Almost all preschoolers are guided by the standard of movement.
  If 3-5 year old children consider alive everything that moves, including mechanical toys, then schoolchildren consider alive only what moves on its own.
 For example, D. F. Petia reported that, in general, 30-40% of preschool children think that there is a possibility of visiting TV, "the same number are confused about giving a positive or negative answer."
 Only 10% of children at this stage give a negative answer, which indicates the gradual elimination of anthropomorphism, which eventually ends in primary school age [1].
The anthropomorphic way of thinking typical of preschoolers leads to the fact that various objects of nature are perceived as subjects, who are also capable of thinking, feeling, having their own desires and goals.
  There is no difference between "human" and "non-human" in preschool [2].
The perception of the phenomena of nature as a subject does not mean that the temples are equal in value.
  Another characteristic of pre-school thinking is artificialism, that is, the idea that man created all the objects and phenomena of the world around him to achieve his goals.
 Artifactism determines the pragmatic nature of attitudes toward nature.
Sometimes preschool cognitive activity is "overly exploratory."
 In this case, the children pluck the flowers, the butterfly wings.
  This attitude towards nature objects is explained by the fact that preschoolers do not consider nature to be a phenomenon of equal value.
 Therefore, the attitude towards nature in preschool age can be described as subjective-cognitive, subjective-pragmatic [1].
During socialization, the pre-school self-centeredness is overcome, the self is separated from the environment, the subjective from the objective.
  Due to all this, a weakening of anthropomorphic attitudes is observed in the attitude towards nature.
The primary school student distinguishes between "human" and "non-human" spheres.
In any case, after the elimination of anthropomorphism, the subjective perception is still preserved.
  The increase in the life experience of the primary school student leads to the fact that the objects of nature are more and more perceived as subjects in the process of interaction with him.
 All this in turn leads to the formation of a subjective position, which becomes the basis for the understanding of natural phenomena as subjects.
 Most elementary school students show empathy for their pets, an emotionally charged interaction.
 T. K. In Nesteruk's experiment, schoolchildren were asked to list the environments with which they interact, which have a certain influence on them.
 It turned out that 62% of the eight-year-olds and 41% of the 9-year-olds named more animals than their grandparents, brothers, sisters, classmates, teachers.
 In that list, the animals gave way only to the mother, the father և a close friend.
 It is noteworthy that the research was conducted in an elite school, where "children from well-off families" studied.
The subject-cognitive type is typical of the primary school age.
At the same time, the practical component begins to develop in the elementary structure of elementary school students.
 From an early age, children persistently ask their parents for pets.
The attitude of nature among primary school students is mostly in the field of cognition.
 Two main factors contribute to that.
 The first is the capacity for educational activities.
 Most first- and second-graders are absorbed in cognitive activity, which leads to certain behavioral tactics. They are interested in learning something new!
 The second is the acquisition of the ability to read. Primary school students have the opportunity to find answers to their questions on their own.
Thus, at the elementary school age, there is a disagreement between the two factors that determine the nature of attitudes towards nature.
 On the one hand, there is the need for psychological connection with nature, on the other hand, pragmatism, which is transmitted from adults, բաժ psychological separation from nature.
 This disagreement has a negative effect, first of all, on the development of the stability of the attitude towards nature, leading to a number of negative developments in the later stages of ontogeny, particularly in adolescence.
According to a number of authors, the reconstruction of the cognitive field is a central event, which becomes the basis for a series of behavioral changes in adolescents.
 In particular, it is essential to discover the "I" as the author, creator or owner of one's own life.
 Children begin to "realize" that their goals and values ​​are interconnected.
 In this period there is a feeling of opposition to what others expect from them and what he aspires to.
 At the age of 10-11, this opposition is already felt in external behavioral manifestations.
 According to B. T. According to Likhach, adolescence is more sensitive to ecological perception.
 Younger and older adolescents have the highest level of intensity of attitudes towards nature, which is the maximum in the whole process of ontogeny [6].
The non-pragmatic nature of the relationship with nature is typical of junior և middle teenagers.
 38% of children aged 10-11 46 46% of children aged 12-13 are willing to participate in nature conservation և only 2 և 6% refuse [2].
Subjective-non-pragmatic modality of nature's junior to middle adolescents is typical.
  The age of middle adolescence is characterized by the subjective-ethical nature of the relationship with nature.
In adolescence there is a radical change in attitude towards nature.
  This attitude acquires a pragmatic nature.
  For most adolescents, nature is, first and foremost, a source of material production.
Interestingly, the low level of attitude towards nature can be combined with higher ecological education.
  According to research data, in all age groups of adolescents and adolescents, there is a lack of correlation between the level of intensity of attitude towards nature and "ecological education".
The high intensity of subjective attitude towards nature is characterized by subjective-non-pragmatic modality.
 Given the predominance of the practical component, this type of attitude is subjective-practical.
 In addition, the high level of development of attitudes towards nature is accompanied by an increase in all indicators: breadth, emotion, consolidation, dominance, principle, stability, awareness, coherence [1].
High school pragmatism in the field of nature objects is significantly different from the pragmatism observed in preschool age.
 In preschool, it is the result of pragmatic thinking, while in older adolescents it is a pragmatic attitude towards nature, while other attitudes may differ in non-pragmatic modality.
Like preschoolers, older adolescents are “cruel” to plants.
 If child abuse is a result of ignorance, then senior adolescents are a relief from the aggression accumulated due to social difficulties.
Such a transformation takes place only with those whose natural objects were not fully revealed as subjects in the previous stages, to whom the experience of subjectification is insignificant as a result of non-pragmatic subject-subject interaction.
  The child, who had dreamed of having a dog for a long time, finally convinced his parents, who had taken care of him for several years, played with him, and he would hardly be inclined to treat other animals and plants cruelly.
 The attitude based on the stereotyping mechanism of contact with his beloved dog will spread to other living beings [1].
Thus, older adolescents are characterized by the objective nature of the modality of attitude towards nature.
 Therefore, at the age of 14-15, the subjective modality of attitude towards nature is objective-pragmatic, which և determines the object-pragmatic attitude, in particular, in older adolescents it is often considered an "ecological crime" [1].
In the structure of the intensity of attitude towards nature in adolescence, as in older adolescents, the perceptual-affective component continues to prevail, which significantly exceeds the others. It reaches the highest level in the process of ontogeny.
 The practical, then the behavioral, and the cognitive component, which is leading in the initial stage of ontogeny, takes the second place and passes to the last place.
This hierarchy of intensity components remains characteristic of adults.
At the age of 16-17, the ecological positions of the aesthetic type reach the ontogenetic maximum, and the action of an aesthetic nature becomes more preferable towards the objects of nature.
 In general, the attitude towards nature in adolescence is defined as object-aesthetic [1].
In the next stage of a person's development, no significant changes take place in the ecological consciousness.
 The changes that took place during adolescence are made possible, which become the cornerstone for the emergence of ecological consciousness in the later stages of life.
In summary, two major stages in the development of ecological consciousness during ontogeny can be distinguished.
 The first is characterized by a subjective modality of attitude towards nature.
 It covers the pre-school, primary school, junior և middle age stages.
 The second stage is the period of formation of object modality.
 It includes senior adolescence և adolescence.
Accordingly, the nature of the correlation with the characteristics of each age stage can be distinguished.
  Initially, the child does not separate himself from the environment.
 Then, knowing that all the subjects have names, he calls himself by the same name as the others.
 The development of ecological consciousness takes place as a result of the enrichment of life experience.
Preschool students are characterized by the subjective pragmatic nature of subjective attitude, junior high school students are characterized by the cognitive-subjective-non-pragmatic nature of subjective attitude.
  The junior-middle-aged adolescents are characterized by subjective-non-pragmatic attitude, in middle-aged adolescence by the practical objective-pragmatic attitude, and by the age of puberty the subjective-aesthetic type.
LITERATURE [2] Глебов В. V., локологическая психология.
 Учебное пособие, Москва, РУДН, 2008, [4] Маклаков А. G., General Psychology.
 Учебник для вузов, СПб, 2008, сс. 88-89. [6] Makarova L. M., ecological psychology and pedagogy.
  learn books, Movsisyan Sianna DEVELOPMENT OF ECOLOGICAL AWARENESS IN ONTOGENESIS Keywords: ecological consciousness, ecological psychology, ontogenesis, preschool age, primary school age, adolescence.
