THE PERCEPTION OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH IN THE CENTURY OF THE EASTERN AND WESTERN THEOLOGY OF THE 19TH CENTURY With the spread of Protestantism, the notions of the Christian Church, of the general relationship between the Christian Church, the Christian God, the Christian dogma, the rite, the Christian
  The perception of the Christian faith in the West and the East changed, which was especially evident in the early 19th century.
 Priority was given to the individual's personal experience in religious life, to the freedom of will, to the denial of the need for mediators in the "God-man relationship".
At the same time, the traditional Catholic "Theologians of the Orthodox Churches" have the task of preserving and at the same time presenting a new understanding of the Christian Orthodox faith.
  The latter realized that the spread of these tendencies, first of all, poses a threat to the dogma of the Christian church, the role of the church and its existence in general.
  Thus, from the 19th century onwards, a process of preservation of the faith began in the Catholic and Orthodox Churches.
  This process was carried out in different ways in the traditional Armenian churches.
 The Christian faith was church-centered in the Eastern Church, in contrast to the Christian Church, which was Christian-centered.
Why did the orthodox և Catholic Church adopt different policies to uphold the traditional view of the faith?
Carl Rahner, a prominent Catholic theologian, builds his theology on faith.
 Being a clergyman, his task was not only to strengthen the position of the Catholic Church, but also to bring believers to the faith and keep them in the church.
  The issue of discussion of the clergy-theologians of the Russian Orthodox Church was the issue of preservation of the Orthodox faith, in which the prominent theologians of the Orthodox Church, Sergey Bulgakov and Pavel Florensky, played an important role.
The task of the priests was to show that the Christian faith is true when the idea of ​​the divinity of Christ is at the center.
  A true Christian must recognize Christ as God.
 In the theology of the rabbis, the true Christian faith is connected with the Church.
 For him, the Church definitely has its important role in the religious life as a structure founded by Christ.
 It leads the believer to salvation.
The fact is that Rahner developed his theology at a time when issues related to the person of Christ were widely discussed.
  Protestant theology developed a theory about the "historical Jesus" that գաղափ doubted the idea of ​​the divine nature of Christ.
  Rahner therefore aimed to defend Christ's idea of ​​being God.
The Protestant Church's overemphasis on individual faith, the orthodox rejection of God-man relations, challenged the Orthodox Church to show the primacy of the Church's role as the only and true means of recognizing Christ's salvation.
 In the forefront, defending the role of the church, orthodox theologians developed the church-centered model of the Christian faith.
Of course, both Eastern and Western theologians did not ignore the individual's personal experience ազատ freedom of will in religious life, but at the heart of it all were the Gospel և The Church.
In an effort to emphasize the individual and at the same time universal nature of the faith, the Priestly Faith called it an anonymous faith.
  In this case, the faith is true but not definite.
  Whereas faith is certain when the believer recognizes Christ as God է attains true Christian doctrine1 and the true Christian faith is kept in the church.
Bulgakov describes faith as follows: it comes from within, it is subjective, but it is directed towards the objective reality2.
  Therefore, true faith can not be individual, because it is given not only to individuals, but also to all mankind.
The theologians of the Eastern Church based their theology on the patriarchal doctrine of the Church, according to which the Church is the body of Christ, and Christ is the head of it, therefore, there can be no true Christianity outside the Church, միայն only the Church can lead to salvation.
 Every individual can know Christ վելConnect with God only in the Church.
 Therefore, he who knows Christ cannot reject the creed of the Christian Church3.
Both sides referred to the divine Revelation given to mankind as a source of true faith.
 Rahner explained it as follows: Christ, the incarnate God, is Revelation itself.
 Through Christ in a certain historical period God dealt with man 4.
  For today's man, divine revelation is contained in the Gospel, in the Christian Church.
  The Revelation of Christ is first given to man. Through the book as divine truth.
 Revelation is present in church life, in prayer, creed, ritual, church sanctities, and so on.
Unlike Eastern theologians, Rahner distinguished between transcendental and categorical revelations.
 For him, the Revelation given through the Gospel of Christ is categorical է kept in the Church, and the transcendental is again the divine Revelation, which is given to man individually 5, at some point in his life.
 According to Rahner, without categorical Revelation the individual cannot attain true theology, and without transcendental Revelation the God-man personal relationship cannot be fully realized.
  Pointing to the transcendental revelation, Rahner tried to show that the traditional church does not reject the idea of ​​the individuality of the faith, the personal experience of the individual in the life of faith.
According to Bulgakov, everyone has an individual religious feeling in the case of their individual experience, while in this case the universal Divine Revelation, which was given to all mankind, is ignored.
 Guided by personal experience, the idea of ​​the unity of the Christian church is disturbed, the believer loses the ecological logic, is guided only by emotion.
  According to Bulgakov, being guided only by emotion in religious life is a danger not only for the Christian religion, but also for the Christian.
 In this way, in the end, one can reach religious subjectivism, while religion is objective.
It is no coincidence that Eastern theologians have always emphasized the concepts of religion, belief, and differences between them.
 This, of course, does not mean that Bulgakov rejected the religious feeling; he did not consider it necessary in the religious life, just that he, like Florensky, associated it with dogma.
According to the theologians of the Orthodox Church, in the case of the supremacy of the ideas of individual faith, personal experience and freedom of will, the Christian religion was pushed into the plan: the dogma of the church, the doctrine, the ritual of Gyle.
 And all this can lead to a number of negative phenomena in the religious life, which can lead to a departure from the Christian doctrine.
 According to Arelyan 2 Bulgakov S., World of Nights.
 Contemplation and Disgust, Moscow, 1994, ch. 5, http.
//vehi.net/bulgakov/svet/index.html.3 Ibid.
5 Ibid., Pp. 87-88.
According to theologians, religion has a historical nature, during which its dogmatics, rituals, etc. were formed, but this does not mean that it is not true.
The Church gives orthodoxy to man, which is formulated through dogmas.
Faith presupposes the revelation of a transcendental reality for man և worships that Reality.
 Both God and the believer do not lose their identity when a person logically distinguishes between the Deity he worships.
To refute the notion that dogmas force a believer to lose his free will, to mold the Christian faith, Florensky explains that dogmas are a guide to eternal life.
 They determine the Christian faith, and true Christianity does not enslave but liberates.
  It is just that modern man, according to Florensky, has lost the living perception of dogma1.
Florensky distinguishes between dogmatics and dogmatism.
  When faith is given from human beings, it becomes a slave to dogma, ending in its worship, which is dogmatism.
 Dogma should be perceived by the believer as much as possible, so as not to become an inanimate reality.
 It must be alive, it must be lived in the soul of the believer և leading to salvation.
 This is what Florensky calls dogmatics, which is the true Christian faith.
 It makes the subjective objective and the objective subjective2.
Returning to Rahner, it should be noted that the latter, based on the principle of love and freedom in Christian creation, develops a scholastic thinking of achieving true Christian faith through the cooperation of divine grace, individual freedom, ending with the grace of faith, not excluding individual freedom.
  According to him, the gift of faith is given only through the knowledge of Christ-God.
It is interesting to understand the role of the Holy Spirit in the Christ-centered, church-centered versions of the faith.
  According to the Christian doctrine, St. The soul is seen as a gift-giver, a divine person leading to salvation.
 In Western theologyS. The soul functions in the world in general, it is everywhere, and the Eastern theologians especially emphasized the existence of the Holy Spirit in the church environment, emphasizing the point of view according to which St. The spirit leads the church, so the church cannot be untrue.
Both Eastern and Western theologians ultimately view faith not only in the God-man relationship but also in the Christian value system combined with hope and love.
 True faith in God is the hope of salvation; love not only of God but also of God.
Summarizing the approaches of these authors, we can say that the differences in the perception of faith in the Western and Eastern Churches depend on the fact that Karl Rahner focused more on the starting point of being the God of Christ, trying to find reconciliation between the parties, pushing the idea of ​​the deity of Christ. և looking at the issue not only from the point of view of a Catholic Christian, but also from the point of view of a simple Christian.
As for the theologians of the Eastern Church, the latter not only tried to enliven the perception of the early Christian faith, not to deviate from the principles of patriarchal ecclesiology, but also, pointing out the three roles of the church, sought to show the infallibility of the Orthodox Church.
2 In the same place.
3 Ս. Bulgakov և P. By "church" Floresnki meant the Orthodox Church, in contrast to K. Rahner, by which he meant the Universal Church.
By Arpi Aleksanyan PERCEPTION OF CHRISTIAN FAITH IN THE EAST AND WESTERN THEOLOGY OF THE 19TH CENTURY Keywords: Traditional Church
