SOME PROBLEMS OF SECRET INVESTIGATIVE OPERATIONS There are certain dangers from the point of view of violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of a person, which are enshrined in international and domestic legal acts.
  The implementation of operative-investigative activities should not violate the legal basis of the state, it should be carried out in full in accordance with the requirements of international and domestic legislation.
1 Given the fact that operative-intelligence activities imply significant restrictions on the fundamental rights and freedoms of a person, there is a need to establish serious systems of control over their lawful application2.
  Judicial control is defined as such a structure by the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia.
  In particular, Article 278 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter the Code) stipulates that: 1. The court examines the constitutional rights of a person to carry out investigative, operative-investigative actions և aza 1 See: Ghazinyan G. ելյան Danielyan A., Some issues of judicial control over operative-investigative activities, State և Law magazine, Yerevan, 2016, p. 39.
2 See Kovtun N. N., Judicial control in the main court production of Russia.
 Monograph. Н.ля в уголовном судопроизводстве.
 question theories, legislative regulation and practices.
motions to apply restrictive legal measures.
2. The court, in the cases defined by this Code, in accordance with the procedure, examines the appeals on the legality of the decisions of the bodies of investigation, investigator, prosecutor, bodies carrying out operative-investigative activities.
It follows from the content of the above-mentioned norm that the court also exercises control over the legality of operative-investigative activities within the framework of pre-trial control, as it examines other motions on applying coercive measures restricting the constitutional rights and freedoms of a person. also և petitions for the implementation of the OGP համապատասխան relevant complaints against the decisions of the above-mentioned bodies.
 In addition to the above, Article 281 of the Code stipulates that: «1. According to the court decision, the operative-investigative actions are carried out, which are connected with the restriction of the right to privacy of citizens' correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other messages.
2. The types of operative-investigative measures carried out on the basis of a court decision are defined by the Law on Operative-Investigative Activities.
As it is rightly stated in the theory, as a result of the literal interpretation of the above-mentioned legal norm, we come to the conclusion that only those TSOs related to the restriction of the right of citizens to correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other messages are subject to judicial control. The types are defined by the measures envisaged by the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities (hereinafter referred to as the Law) 3.
  In agreement with them, it should be noted that according to the first part of Article 34 of the Law, with the permission of the court, "Internal monitoring", "control of correspondence, postal, telegraphic, other messages", "control of telephone conversations", "financial data" 3 See Ghazinyan G. ելյան Danielyan A., Some issues of judicial control over operative-investigative activities, "State, Law" magazine, Yerevan, 2016, p. 40.
գաղտն Confidential control of financial transactions ", as well as" external monitoring "operative-investigative measures, if it is not possible to fix the results of external monitoring without the use of technical means, և the person (persons) against whom the external monitoring is carried out was not reasonable ( could not) have assumed the possibility of holding it.
  That is, the Law includes court-based ODGs, including ODCs that are not related to the restriction of the right to privacy of a person's correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic, or other communications.
  It should be noted that the law does not provide for a separate procedure of judicial control over the implementation of the above-mentioned operative-investigative measures as based on a court decision, but only provides that the decision to conduct an operative-investigative measure (hereinafter referred to as OSH) is submitted to the court. The head of the body carrying out operative-investigative activities in accordance with the procedure established by the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia4.
  We conclude from the above that this procedure has an exclusively criminal procedure nature.
  With regard to the procedure of judicial control over OGPs, it should be noted that the content of Part 1 of Article 290 of the Code stipulates that complaints against the actions of operative-investigative bodies can be filed by both participants in the criminal proceedings and non-participants in the proceedings. persons.
 At the same time, the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia expressed its position in the Judicial Act on the case of Valeri Grigoryan that if the Criminal Procedure Code does not provide for direct appeals against the decisions of investigative bodies, investigators, prosecutors, operative-investigative bodies. The actions violate the rights of the person. Legal interests, then by the force of the right of judicial protection enshrined in Article 19 of the RA Constitution, they are subject to appeal in court5.
4 See Article 34 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities.
5 See V. In the case of Grigoryan, the RA Court of Cassation, 2008 Decision No. EKD / ​​0031/11/08 of July 25.
However, it follows from the above-mentioned norms, the precedent position of the RA Court of Cassation, that both the legislator and the case law did not envisage certain restrictions due to the types of operative-investigative actions for their implementation, as a result of which a situation may arise when Article 290 of the Code Article 28 of the Criminal Procedure Code, which was carried out for a purpose not related to the detection, prevention or suppression of crimes (for example, obtaining information for national security, etc.), which is not subject to the Criminal Procedure Code 6, may be appealed.
  In other words, a situation may have arisen when, based on the above-mentioned legal regulations, a subject of judicial appeal in accordance with the procedure established by the Criminal Procedure Code becomes an OGP that does not have a criminal procedure nature for the purposes pursued.
In order to avoid the above-mentioned problem, due to the goals pursued by the specific OCT, it is necessary to separate the OCTs stipulated in Article 14 of the Law from those with or without a criminal procedure nature.
 Due to this division, those OCTs that have a criminal nature nature, judicial control over them will be carried out in accordance with the RA Criminal Procedure Code, and those OAAs that do not have a criminal procedure nature, due to the purpose pursued by them, should be separated "On operative-investigative activity". In the RA law, as OYPs aimed at the realization of separate goals.
  This may raise the question of the body's "procedure for exercising control over the merits" of the lawfulness of their implementation.
 In connection with the mentioned issue, we propose that the procedure for the implementation of non-criminal procedural controls, legality and substantiation be regulated in detail by the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities as a separate institution.
  In other words, the latter, having a special nature և independent goals, should have a special control procedure և should not be identified with criminal OGPs of a criminal nature, because, in our opinion, it is not acceptable that the real goals of independent goals 6 See Ghazinyan G. ելյան Danielyan A., Some Issues of Judicial Control over Operative-Investigative Activities, State և Law Magazine, Yerevan, 2016, p. 41.
The control over the designated OHLs will be carried out by the same procedure.
 Otherwise, a situation may arise when the effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation of the MDGs aimed at achieving certain goals will suffer, which in turn will lead to the improper implementation of the MDGs' goals set by law.
  We consider that by the Law, by defining a separate procedure for the implementation of non-criminal proceedings, control over legality and substantiation, we will promote the effectiveness of their implementation and avoid giving them an unnecessary judicial nature.
As for the implementation of the right to judicial protection enshrined in Article 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, we believe that the separate procedure of control provided by law, however, should be carried out by the court.
 In other words, we propose that the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities should separate the criminal justice systems, which will be controlled in accordance with the procedure established by the Code, and the other law enforcement agencies, by separating them, should be provided for a separate procedure by law. For the purpose of exercising control, that is, the Law envisages ինը the body exercising control, բովանդակ the content of exercising control,։ the procedure of implementation.
It should be noted that, legally, criminal proceedings have been included in the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) as covert investigative actions.
As such, Article 241 of the Draft envisages internal monitoring, external monitoring, control of correspondence այլ other non-digital communications, control of digital, including telephone communication, control of financial transactions, imitation of bribery 7.
  However, for the complete solution of the issue, as we have already mentioned, it is necessary to make legislative changes in the Law.
In the framework of this work, we consider it necessary to refer to the probative significance of the data received as a result of the OHL.
 First of all, it should be noted that the RA criminal trial Article 104 of the Code of Criminal Procedure defines the concept of "evidence" և provides that as evidence 7 See the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code, the official website of the RA National Assembly, http.
//www.parliament.am/draft_docs5/K-084lr.pdf.
The testimony of the suspect, the testimony of the accused, the testimony of the victim, the testimony of a witness, the testimony of the suspect or accused or defendant in another case, the testimony of the convict, the expert's report, the material evidence, the records of investigative or other judicial actions are allowed.
  That is, after the literal monologue of the Law, only the evidences of the mentioned list of the Code are considered evidence.
 It follows from the above that the Code exhaustively lists the types of evidence, except for the latter, no other information can be evidence.
  At the same time, it should be noted that according to Article 40, Part 1 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activity, the results of operative-investigative activity, which were obtained in the manner prescribed by this law, are evidence, except for the following Acquisition of operative information, examination of items և documents և identification of a person.
 That is, the Law considers the results of the OGP as evidence, except in some cases.
 The existing contradiction must be resolved by virtue of Article 9 9 5 և 6 of the RA Law on Legal Acts in favor of the existing regulation in the Code8.
  However, in such a case, the question arises as to the extent to which it is lawful not to consider the data obtained as a result of the OGP as evidence in terms of carrying out the criminal proceedings set forth in Article 2 of the Code in the fight against justified crime.
 First of all, it should be noted that Article 4 of the Law, which defines the objectives of the implementation of the OGP, provides for such objectives as, in particular, the detection, detection, prevention-prevention, detection of persons preparing, committing or committing a crime, avoiding criminal liability Search for persons "discovery, as well as" search for missing persons, discovery of witnesses, corpses, traces of crime, objects, material evidence, other items, documents, etc., which in some way are identical with the implementation of the tasks set forth in Article 2 of the Code.
 In other words, there is a situation when, in some sense, 8 խնդիրների 5-6 ի 6 of the RA Law on Legal Acts are aimed at the implementation of criminal proceedings.
The data obtained as a result of identical targets have no probative value.
In the presence of the above-mentioned circumstances, this approach of the legislator is unacceptable, as the data obtained as a result of criminal proceedings have the same objectives as criminal proceedings, and despite the fact that the latter can be obtained extrajudicially, they are still subject to judicial review. the institute of control.
 It is another matter that judicial control should be carried out more effectively against the OGPs, thus ensuring the objectivity, legality and justification of the OGPs.
It should be noted that, as the implementation of the OGP implies a restriction of individual constitutional rights and freedoms, in addition to the exercise of effective judicial control over the latter, it is necessary to provide clear conditions under which the ODI will be implemented, as well as appropriate guarantees of disproportionate human rights. with a view to enforcing restrictions as well as exercising a balanced protection of public-private interests.
  Otherwise, there is a situation when the relevant state bodies, by carrying out OCT, obtain data relevant to the detection, detection, prevention, as well as the detection of perpetrators, but the latter, due to the direct requirement of law, can not be considered as evidence.
It should be noted that the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR) in a number of other decisions "Sefilyan v. Armenia", addressing the legality of wiretapping, established a stable case law, which set the minimum standards shall be established by the laws of the States with a view to preventing the abuse of power by the competent authorities or officials in their respective activities.
 In particular, the ECtHR notes that domestic law should specify the nature of the offense in which the relevant OCT can be carried out, the categories of people against whom the relevant OCT can be carried out, the period of the OCT implementation Գ the procedure, and some preventive measures. In order to prevent the data obtained as a result of the OSH from being passed on to other persons, հանգամ the circumstances under which the data obtained as a result of the OSF are subject to destruction 9.
 It should be noted that in the same case "Sefilyan v. Armenia", the ECHR noted that the RA legislation does not regulate issues such as regular review of the ODC by a court or other independent body, nor is it regulated by law. Specific maximum timeframes for the implementation of the types, such as the types of specific crimes շրջանակ the scope of persons, in the presence of which a specific type of OSH can be implemented10.
In order to avoid the above-mentioned problems, in order to make the use of state funds more purposeful and effective, as in terms of the effectiveness of the fight against crime, we propose criminal proceedings in the Law, in addition to being isolated in the Code, to consider evidence obtained as evidence.
  Given the evidence obtained as a result of the OGP, in order to exclude disproportionate restrictions on the rights of the individual, to ensure a balanced protection of public and private interests, we propose to establish the following guarantees in connection with the implementation of ODCs of a criminal nature.
1. First of all, the latter are enshrined in the Code and, being of a judicial nature, we propose that they be carried out exclusively within the framework of criminal proceedings.
 That is, in the framework of initiated criminal proceedings, only the investigator, as the person conducting the proceedings, will be authorized to make a reasoned decision on the implementation of the current OGP.
 With this step, the first criterion of the objectivity և legitimacy of the implementation of the OGP becomes that it can be implemented only in the framework of the initiated criminal case և only on the basis of making a reasoned decision by the investigator, which will contain a justification for the need to implement a specific type of OGP.
  If, according to the current legal regulation, the court gives permission to implement the OHR 9 See Sefilyan v. Armenia, judgment of 2 October 2012, case no. 22491/08, paragraphs 124-125.
10 See ECtHR Judgment of 2 October 2012 in Sefilyan v. Armenia, Case No. 22491/08, paras 130-132.
Based on the motion of the head of the body, in some cases without the existence of initiated criminal proceedings, then in the proposed version, the investigator reserves the right to make a decision on the implementation of a specific OGP; only within the framework of the initiated criminal proceedings will he be held responsible for the legality of the OGP.
  In other words, we will have a more professional entity responsible for the legitimacy of the OGP implementation.
2. Implementing the above-mentioned types of OSHs within the framework of a criminal case already initiated, the latter will be fully included under the prosecutor's control as a subject exercising control over the legality of the investigation.
3. After the implementation of the TSOs, the implementation of which did not yield the expected result expected from the proceedings, notify the TSO of the implementation of the TSO, in respect of which it has been performed, as well as establish a legal obligation for the TSOs to implement such TSOs. in terms of destroying the data obtained as a result.
  This provision will have a deterrent effect against unnecessary, unsubstantiated ODCs.
4. We consider that in order to prevent disproportionate restrictions on the lawfulness of the execution of the OGP, it would be more expedient to provide in the Code for a system of regular court control over the implementation of the OGP.
  That is, the court, giving permission to implement this or that OGP, should have the opportunity to regularly monitor the implementation of the latter.
 By exercising regular supervision, the court will be able to stop the implementation of the OGP, if the need for its implementation has been eliminated, to prevent the disproportionate restriction of the rights of the person.
Some questions may arise due to the secrecy of the implementation of the OGP.
 In particular, Article 41 of the Law establishes the confidentiality of information on the above-mentioned activities and secret staff of the bodies implementing the OGP11.
  However, in connection with the above-mentioned, we would like to mention that by giving a judicial nature to the CSOs, the latter investigate some 11 See part 1 of Article 41 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities.
Do not imply that the latter does not imply the disclosure of the terms of secrecy established by law, or the introduction of operative-investigative measures in the field of criminal proceedings for the purpose of gathering evidence, does not mean that the investigator or prosecutor will be informed of confidential information.
 Investigative bodies have the opportunity to carry out operative-investigative measures on the instructions of the investigator without disclosing the data of persons cooperating on a secret basis12.
In our opinion, in the presence of the mentioned guarantees, it will be possible to fix the data obtained as a result of the OGP as evidence, thus taking a step forward towards the implementation of criminal proceedings.
 It should be noted that the approach of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, which differs slightly from the current legal regulation in this respect, is progressive.
  In particular, the Project, separating the secret investigative actions from the other operative-investigative actions, fixed the latter in the Project.
  At the same time, Article 242 of the Draft states that a covert investigative action may be carried out only if there are sufficient grounds to believe that evidence relevant to the proceedings may be obtained as a result of which, at the same time, it is reasonably impossible to obtain such evidence. .
 That is, according to the Draft, the factual data obtained as a result of intelligence activities are evidence, but at the same time the Draft stipulates that obtaining evidence in this way is not a main, alternative means.
 At the same time, Article 86 of the Draft, which defines the types of evidence, Part 2 directly stipulates that the documents drawn up as a result of operative-investigative measures, that the data fixed on the carrier are not evidence in the criminal proceedings.
 Article 96 of the draft, which deals with extra-curricular documents as a type of evidence, provides in Part 3 that video-recordings, recordings obtained as a result of operative-investigative activities outside the scope of criminal proceedings and 12 See A. Ghambaryan A., Investigation-operative-investigative Reforms of activities in the field of legal realism, Yerevan, 2013.
Other objective documents can be recognized as extra-curricular documents; they can be attached to the proceedings only if the relevant measure has been taken to prevent, prevent or immediately disclose the alleged crime.
 The analysis of these regulations shows that, as a general rule, the data obtained as a result of operative-investigative measures carried out outside the framework of criminal proceedings are not evidence; at the same time, the general rule excludes that under certain conditions these data can be recognized as a foreign currency document. It is evidence by virtue of Article 86, Part 1, Clause 10 of the draft.
 Such conditions The draft sets out the court's pre-determined permission նպատակ the purpose of the operative-investigative measure to prevent, deter or identify the alleged perpetrator at or immediately after the commission of the offense.
 In other words, the Draft, taking one step ahead of the current legal regulation, envisages the possibility of the data obtained as a result of the ODC carried out outside the criminal proceedings, as evidence, in the presence of certain circumstances.
Hrant Jilavyan SOME PROBLEMS OF SECRET INVESTIGATION ACTIONS Keywords: operative-investigative measure, secret investigative action.
