RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXCEPTIONS IN LAW AND RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LEGAL NORMS ությունը The ratio of exceptions in legal norm և law. Currently, the role of law is quite high.
 The impact of law on the social environment not only includes gaps in legal regulation, but, most importantly, within law, it creates an opportunity to satisfy the heterogeneous and multifaceted interests of many public relations entities.
The main characteristic of law is the legal regulation of diverse public relations.
 The legal norm is a rule of certain, obligatory behavior created by the public authorities, of a sanctioned, granting-obligatory nature.
No legal norm is able to fully regulate the diversity of life situations, to include all subjects of public relations, therefore, in order to avoid dangers threatening the integrity of society, to give flexibility to social regulation, exceptions to the law are necessary.
"It is the diversity of interests, the impossibility of completely limiting them, the need for a combination that determines the emergence of exceptions to the law."
 An exception means an action that deviates from the general order, a phenomenon [2].
Exceptions can exist in any sphere of life, in the norms, rules regulating relations.
"Norms-exceptions are a definite, obligatory, definite order of the government, approved or sanctioned by the state, provided by state coercion.
Right and exception act as a single system, mutually complementing each other և relating as a whole (right) և part (exception).
 It is unity that explains the idea that exceptions cannot violate the law. ”[1]
Due to the exceptions, the law reaches versatility.
This can explain the integrity of the law, the ability to adequately respond to the ever-evolving ambiguous life events.
 Thus, the exceptions, without violating the law, offer an alternative settlement, contributing to the effective and targeted implementation of the functions of the law.
 For example, the RA criminal Article 16 of the Judicial Code, "Publicity of the Judicial Examination", stipulates: "1. The judicial examination of criminal cases shall be open in all courts, except for the cases provided for in part two of this article.
2. By the decision of the court, a closed trial may be held in cases of crimes related to state-official secrets.
  In exceptional cases initiated by the court or mediated by the participants in the trial, if it does not harm the administration of justice or does not lead to an unjustified restriction on the principle of publicity of the trial, a closed trial may be held by a court decision. in cases of crimes related to personal, family life, honor of a person, dignity 2; In cases of crimes against sexual freedom of a person և sexual inviolability, 3. in case of need for protection of persons participating in criminal proceedings or their relatives.
The court may conduct a closed-door trial for reasons of national security or protection of public order, as in other cases provided for by this Code.
  If the court is obliged to disclose the source of information to the media operator or journalist, then the court hearing is conducted behind closed doors through the mediation of the media operator or journalist.
 The exception is the result of the reflection of a legal necessity in such a context, which is conditioned by the requirement to regulate a certain part of public relations. ”
Thus, this article establishes a general rule, that is, the trial of criminal cases is open in all courts, then the separate cases are mentioned in separate points, during which court hearings can be held behind closed doors, as it is mentioned in "other cases provided by this Code".
 This means that due to the need to constantly regulate public relations, other exceptions can be set, which will allow the main norm to regulate a wider range of public relations.
Sumenkov, a Russian lawyer, states in his work "Exceptions in Law" that "on the other hand, issues related to exceptions to the law raise doubts about the capacity of law as a universal normative regulator.
  Moreover, it raises the fear of justification for failing the general legal norms with exceptions, և, as a result, the possibility of abusing the exceptions during their implementation.
Exceptions should never replace legal norms, as the supremacy of exclusion will inevitably lead to the destruction of the integrity of the legal structure and the collapse of the legal system. ”
Then he justifiably adds that "Ignoring the need for exceptions to the right, the right loses the quality of its universal normative regulator.
 The essence of the existence of exceptions in law is that exceptions do not disrupt the normal process of law, but together are aimed at the regulation of social relations. "[1]
It should be noted that in order to avoid the supremacy of exceptions to the law, as well as their abuse, it is necessary to adhere to the principle of legal certainty, as well as, using special means of legal technique, to define as clearly as possible the unique, exceptional cases. Deviations from the general rule - exceptions.
 Collisions of legal norms.
 At the same time, conflicts between legal norms may arise when regulating public relations.
  Collision means a conflict of conflicting interests, aspirations, views [2].
 Different norms seem to enter into a "struggle" in an attempt to regulate the same public relations, while it is necessary to choose and apply one of the legal norms regulating the same relations.
  This issue is specific to all branches of law, but the problem is more difficult within the framework of criminal law.
 As mentioned by M. D. According to Shargorodsky, "According to one of the rules of legislative technique for the creation of criminal law, each article must be worded in such a way that the intended crime is precisely separated from the crimes provided for in other articles."
Thus, especially in criminal law, which is conditioned by the peculiarity of public relations regulated by this branch, the legal norms should be more logical, systematic and clear.
Legal conflict is the contradiction or inconsistency (difference) of legal norms governing the same or similar public relations conditioned by objective-subjective factors [4].
 In case of contradiction of the legal norm, the prohibiting and authorizing norms clash, which exclude each other [4].
 For example, according to Article 42, Part 1 of the RA Constitution, everyone has the freedom to seek, receive and disseminate information and ideas, and according to Article 115.2, Part 10 of the RA Judicial Code, entitled "Written Qualification Exam", "Psychological test results" They have a consultative significance only, are not subject to publication; they are provided only to the members of the Justice Council, after the interview in the council until the final discussion.
 The results of the psychological test, the list of candidates for judges are subject to destruction after being approved by the President of the Republic. ”
Then, the Constitutional Court by the decision 20.06.2017 SDO-1374 approved the following: "Part 10 of Article 115.2, in the part according to which the results of the psychological test of the candidates included in the list of candidates for judges, which relate to the qualities of their assumption of public-legal responsibility, are not subject to publication. Part 1 of Article 42 of the Constitution, in particular, contrary to the provision stipulating the freedom to seek, receive and disseminate information, is invalid. ”
 Thus, this decision of the Constitutional Court confirms the contradiction between these two norms.
I think that by using legal means it is possible to state that Part 10 of Article 115.2 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia was considered as an exception to Part 1 of Article 42 of the Constitution, in particular: “Everyone has the right to seek and receive information and ideas. ազատ Freedom to distribute, except for the results of the psychological test of judges obtained during the qualification examination. "
  Therefore, the conflict of legal norms may be caused by the rules of legislative technique.
  In this respect, their role and significance during the creation of law is greatly emphasized.
  Exactly in this case, the exceptions can act as tricks of legal techniques, serve as a special legal means aimed at improving the legislative activity, optimizing the implementation of the law, ensuring the effective and purposeful activity of the law.
In case of non-compliance, the norms are of the same nature, but have different content or cause different consequences.
 For example, the RA criminal trial Pursuant to Article 141։ 12 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it is the duty of the administration of the place of detention to release a person from detention immediately if the bail set by the court for release has been paid in full.
 According to Article 142, Part 1, Clause 6, the accused is subject to release on the basis of the decision of the relevant body conducting the criminal proceedings, if the bail set by the court for the release of the person has been paid.
 Pursuant to Article 143 5 5, upon receiving evidence of payment of bail, the body conducting the criminal proceedings immediately instructs the accused to release him from custody.
Thus, the discrepancy in the mentioned three articles is as follows: On the one hand, the legislator has established the direct responsibility of the administration of the place where the detainees are detained, ie to release the accused, if the bail imposed by the court has been revoked, on the other hand, the decision to release the accused should be made by the body The representative of the penitentiary institution is endowed with authority.
 As a result, there were inconsistencies in the articles proposing three different arrangements: և In practice, the penitentiary does not release the accused from detention until the decision of the prosecuting authority has been made, even if the documents proving the paid bail are available.
 If there is a need for the body conducting the proceedings to be released from detention in one case and the administration of the place where the detainees are being held from detention in another, a general rule should be established.
For example, the decision to release the accused is made by the body conducting the proceedings, except in cases when, for example, the mentioned authority needs to be given to the head of the penitentiary institution.
Thus, this is the possibility of separating exceptions in law հակ contradictions in law as separate categories.
The ratio of exception in law հակ contradiction of legal norms. Exceptions, without violating the general rule, offer another version of the settlement, at the same time not going beyond the scope of the general settlement of the law, and in case of collisions, there is one relationship, the settlement of which is aimed at more than one, different norms.
Legislative means play a key role in the separation of these phenomena.
 Unlike exceptions, collisions are self-negative phenomena. complicate the process of exercising the rights of legal entities and fulfilling their responsibilities.
 Collision solutions contribute to the development of the legal system.
An important role in the separation of these phenomena is played by the RA Law on Legal Acts, the title of which is more systematically defined in Article 24 under the heading "Subordination of RA Legal Acts", such as different legal force, equal legal force, different the norms resolving the conflicts of legal norms fixed in the sources.
 Only part 9 of this article stipulates that the definition of an exception to the general norm is not considered a contradiction in the legal act.
  Thus, according to Article 24, Part 9 of the mentioned law, the exception is not considered a collision, because the "exception" presupposes the separation of a certain legal relationship from the regulation of the general legal relationship.
 If it is not excluded, it will be regulated by the same general rule, but in this case the general rule will not ensure a fair and purposeful settlement of the given relationship.
 The law provides for this separation, but how, through what structures or what rules of legislative technique to separate these concepts are not provided by law.
The problem is of not only theoretical but also practical significance, because in order to ensure a fair settlement of a given public relations (needs legal regulation) in practice, it is necessary to first understand how clear, concrete and logical the norms governing that relationship are regulated by exception. that there are contradictions.
 However, any legal regulation of public relations, whether in the form of exceptions or collision solutions, must be based on the principle of protection of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
LITERATURE [1] Суменков С. Ю., Exclusion in the right.
 Public Analysis, Saratov, 2016, [2] Aghayan E., Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian, Hayastan Publishing House, Yerevan, 1976, pp. 182, 746.
[4] Danielyan E., Khachatryan M., Khzmalyan A. և Others, State և Law, textbook, scientific editor: A. Ghambaryan, M. Muradyan, 2nd revised edition, Yerevan, Lusabats Publishing House, 2016, pp. 508-509.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXCEPTIONS AND LEGAL NORMS IN ANAHIT LAW Keywords: legal norm, exceptions in law, contradictions of legal norms, inconsistencies.
