LEGISLATIVE REGULATIONS OF FREEDOM OF INFORMATION Freely seeking and receiving information is a constitutional right of everyone.
  It, being the main և main component of the creation of a democratic society, strengthens any other freedom.
 Freedom of information can control government agencies, becoming a very powerful tool in the fight against corruption and other evils.
  At the same time, it can be beneficial for the government, as openness and transparency lead to gaining public trust.
Freedom of information is vital, especially in creating a free and independent press.
 Freedom of speech is one of the most important preconditions for the formation of a civil society.
  The right of a person to freedom of expression and information derives from the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as from the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which (Article 19 և 10) respectively stipulates that a person: The right to have an opinion includes the freedom to receive and impart information and ideas.
Taking into account these international acts, a number of democracies have adopted laws on freedom of information, which define և regulate the right to freely seek, receive and disseminate information.
The history of FOI law dates back to the 18th century1, which is known in the history of European culture as the Enlightenment.
 International humanitarian organizations, such as the United Nations, have been instrumental in spreading the idea of ​​FOI.
 The best evidence of this is the fact that the tendency to adopt a law on FOI grew, especially after the Second World War.
  Thus, overcoming long and difficult historical paths, the FOI law spread and was adopted in more than 70 countries2.
 And that in the legislative sphere the FOI law has a history of two centuries, but it is still in the development stage, still inaccessible for some countries.
The Armenian chronicle of the Freedom of Information Law dates back to 2003, when the parliament unanimously decided on its adoption.
 Prior to the adoption of the FOI law, Article 27 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia explicitly stated that everyone has the right to freedom of expression, including the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media, regardless of frontier.
  Thus, the RA Law on Freedom of Information, deriving from the RA Constitution, entered into force on November 15, 2003.
The Freedom of Information Center played an active role in the development and adoption of the RA Law on Freedom of Information.
  The FOICA's role was great both in the adoption of the law and in ensuring freedom of information.
After the adoption of the law on FOI, the requirement of transparency of publicity in the Armenian press had already gained legal force; public relations related to freedom of information, the procedure for obtaining it, rights and conditions were regulated by the RA Law on Freedom of Information, which stipulates that A person has the right only to apply to the information holder with a request in the manner prescribed by law to get acquainted with the information he / she seeks or to receive it.
This law defines two main ways of receiving information: written and oral.
 The law, depending on these forms of information request, separates 2 groups of information seekers: a) orally requesting, b) written requesting.
According to the specifics of the above-mentioned groups, the law defines the regulation of the provision of information, in particular, clearly states the deadlines for the provision of the answer to the written-oral inquiry.
The RA Law on Freedom of Information separates two entities in information operations: the information seeker and the information holder.
  Boundary by this law 2 See ibid.
It has a number of responsibilities for both the information holder and the searcher.
  Before moving on to the responsibilities, let us first understand who can be the information director.
 Thus, the law stipulates that state - local self - government bodies, state institutions, organizations financed from the budget, as well as public organizations - their officials are considered to be holders of information3.
The law regulates the procedure for providing information by the information holder, according to which the information holder can develop the procedure for providing information by him և post it in a place visible to everyone4.
  Due to technological progress, the above-mentioned article can already be considered invalid.
  The information holder is obliged to publish at least once a year a certain group of information related to his activity, the changes made in them.
The law on freedom of information is quite outdated, and the practice of its application has developed.
  Years have passed since the adoption of the law, situations have changed,։ it turns out that just fixing the right is not enough yet.
  Therefore, there is a need to develop constructive mechanisms to protect the right to freedom of information.
  Due to this circumstance, a group of problems existing in the law can be singled out.
To clarify and substantiate the said, let us consider a court case, which was spread among us under the name of "cadastre case".
 As we know, the Freedom of Information Center applied to the RA Administrative Court in 2013, asking to oblige the staff and technology center of the State Committee of the Real Estate Cadastre under the Government of the Republic of Armenia to provide the necessary information free of charge or under the RA Law on Freedom of Information.
  As a result, the court rejected the FOICA's claim, based on Article 71 of the RA Law on State Registration of Property Rights.
  The FOICA appealed the decision to the RA Constitutional Court, which declared the provision of payment of information by the cadastre unconstitutional.
Thus, according to the law, the amount charged for providing information should not be the so-called selling price of information, but the amount spent for providing information.
3 RA Law on Freedom of Information, Article 3.
4 RA Law on Freedom of Information.
A person has the right to receive information,։ it is not wise to provide information for money.
  Information is recorded, classified և stored by the information holder to serve the public, so it is unwise to sell it.
In the concepts of the RA Law on Freedom of Information, it is necessary to increase electronic inquiries as a way to receive information.
  Due to technological development, a number of tools have been created that allow the information holder to save time and transfer the information to the seeker.
  However, electronic inquiries have not yet been brought to the forefront of the law, which can cause a number of inconveniences and problems, so it is time for the law to define the regulations related to electronic inquiries.
To substantiate this, we conducted a small study to understand whether our citizens can use the latest technology to get the information they are looking for, or deprived of their right to use the latest technology to get information.
On April 14, we applied to 10 state bodies with electronic inquiries to receive information.
  In conducting the survey, we aimed to find out from our own experience how the state bodies apply the RA Law on Freedom of Information, do they ensure the equal right of each of us to receive information?
In order to receive information, we asked to inform: • Does the department carry out the registration of electronic inquiries sent to it, and if so, how many inquiries has the department received since 2016?
It should be noted that the electronic inquiries were sent by us in accordance with the law, to the e-mail addresses mentioned on the official website pages of the data bodies.
  The RA Ministry of Diaspora, the RA Ministry of Agriculture, the Abovyan Municipality responded to the sent inquiries within the terms defined by law.
 Only the municipality of Yerevan sent a belated response.
 The electronic inquiries were silently rejected by Gyumri և Vanadzor Municipality, the RA Ministry of Culture, the RA Ministry of Nature Protection, the RA Prosecutor's Office.
 The Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia rejected the answer on the grounds that the electronic inquiry had not been signed.
Here the justification of the RA Ministry of Education and Science for rejecting the electronic request can be considered.
 As we know, the draft law on making changes in the RA Law on Freedom of Information envisages bringing electronic inquiries to the legal field, և according to that draft, the information seeker can also apply to the information holder with an electronic request to get the information he / she is looking for.
  If in case of a written request the signature is obligatory, և its absence may be a ground for rejection, then the electronic request may not be signed. It is enough to have only personal data.
 Due to various technical reasons, not all groups of society today have electronic signatures. It turns out that they should be deprived of the right to receive information using the latest technology.
 This testifies to the lack of a culture of communication with citizens through our inter-electronic version.
Another important issue that we registered is the disregard of the law by the state bodies operating in the regions, as a result of which the constitutional right of citizens to receive information is violated.
 This, of course, is a clear evidence that there is a low level of legal awareness in the regions today.
  This is a serious problem, which will be solved only by conducting systematic training courses, due to FOI law և training programs.
 This should be of concern to the state not only in terms of ensuring freedom of information, but also in terms of protecting the rights of other citizens.
Thus, the requirements of the law in response to the inquiry may be amended, formulated more clearly, more effectively stated, and the information holder's responsibilities more fully stated.
  In the law, in the definitions related to the terms of the answer to the inquiry, we can find the terms "in a short time" or "proper answer".
These are legally applicable, but as such they include a wide range of interpretations that push the law into the field of subjectivism.
 Meanwhile, the law should be enacted as clearly as possible for the simple reason that it should become a guarantee for everyone.
Any kind of freedom has its counterbalance, which balances the two scales of the scales.
 Freedom of information is no exception.
  Our constitutional right to seek, receive and impart information may be subject to certain restrictions in cases prescribed by law.
  The other relevant laws on Freedom of Information, Mass Media, State Secrets of Service, as well as the RA Criminal Procedure Code define the cases when freedom of information may be restricted.
Article 201 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code directly stipulates that the preliminary investigation data are subject to publication only with the permission of the body conducting the proceedings.
  According to the mentioned provision, the legislator has already predetermined the definition of the secrecy of the preliminary investigation, considering in the latter mode any information obtained during the instrumental examination, which will refer to the detection of the crime and the detection of the perpetrator.
 It follows that the law not only prohibits the provision and dissemination of information obtained during the pre-trial investigation without sufficient grounds, but also imposes certain obligations on the relevant officials (investigator, prosecutor, etc.) directly or indirectly communicating with them. to keep the information with Jdran and to ensure the confidentiality of the preliminary investigation.
Here, as an example, we can consider a well-known case when in 2013 the inspector of the Garni barrier was killed in Khosrov reserve.
  The police spread a statement that there were cameras at the place of the murder, ումը the identification of a possible criminal by identifying his image is possible in the near future.
 As it turned out, it was the operative trick of the investigating body, which, however, failed, as the director of the reserve, in an interview with the media, stated that cameras were installed, but they did not record the perpetrator.
  Thus, an important secret of the preliminary investigation was inadvertently published, which hindered the work of the preliminary investigation body.
For the same reasons, the law establishes complicated legal regimes for the privacy of a person և family's privacy, personal liberty և inviolability, inviolability of the home, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic և other communications, as well as state, service, banking, commercial, notary, medical, Advocate այլ for other secret restrictions protected by law, to ensure their access only by a relevant court decision.
As for the RA Law on Freedom of Information, which regulates public relations related to freedom of information, the procedure for obtaining it, the rights and conditions, it defines the right to receive information and the structures for its implementation, at the same time stating that everyone has the right only in the manner prescribed by law. To request information from the information holder to get acquainted with the information he / she is looking for և or to be educated5.
LEGISLATIVE REGULATIONS ON FREEDOM OF INFORMATION Keywords: Freedom of Information, Legislative Regulations, Restrictions on Freedom of Information Gohar Julhakyan Summary.
