THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ANTI-UTOPIA AND UTOPIA IN THE CONTEXT OF THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIAL REALITY
 On this path, human hopes, lofty ideas and ideals shine like stars, which from time to time rise from the ashes of fire, illuminating the centuries-old path of civilization.
  One of the many means of striving for the ideal is utopia.
 Utopian projects are alternatives to the existing social reality, in which all the details of the construction and regulation of the future society are outlined, creating an opportunity for a new perception, approval, teaching a person to want the best and hope.
In utopian projects, a person's hopes and expectations for social progress are very clear.
  However, as that hope seems to fade, utopia turns into anti-utopia.
  Western philosophy was characterized by a belief in human development, in creating a just world, in building an ideal society, but since the last century, such sentiments have faded, almost ending the parade of centuries-old hope, paving the way for despair, which would continue to deepen as the world moved forward. The expected new disappointments.
  E. According to Fromm, this transformation was the most paradoxical in human history, because man, having achieved almost everything he dreamed of, faced the loss of hope of that dream.
10 If utopia is the expression of hope, then anti-utopia completely abandons that hope, becoming an indicator of social hopelessness.
Anti-utopia is the logical development of utopia, on the basis of which it should not be opposed to utopia, but should be considered a variety of it, 10 See Fromm м., Комментарии к «1984», // http.
//orwell.ru/library/novels/1984/russian/rnt_ef/24.12.2015.
where the perfect society of classical utopia takes place, where the author applies the basic provisions of positive utopia in his own way.
 There is definitely a utopia inside any anti-utopia, without that internal structure there will be no anti-utopia.
 Anti-utopia, in fact, also presents a perfect society of the future with its social institutions and operating systems, but here the positive ideal offered by utopia turns into a negative one.
  It seems to be a mockery of utopia, a condescending attitude to its eternal aspirations - equality, happiness, freedom, etc.
  Anti-utopia is the critique of utopia in terms of striving for the utopian ideal և to achieve perfection, in contrast to which it models a perfect negative social world.
 Here, in fact, everything is perfect, final, which becomes the source of evil. perfection, standing in front of a crooked mirror.
 In terms of time, anti-utopia creates a picture when the course of social time moves after the already established "ideal society", emphasizing the inability of that society to continue in the process and the stereotype.
Anti-utopia as a literary genre developed in the conditions of the social experiments of the 20th century, the consequences of which were discussed in advance in these works before they were clearly noticed.
 Thus, anti-utopia became one way to emphasize the complex consequences of social crises.
  At the height of the glory of anti-utopia, various circumstances immediately contributed to the creation of fertile ground for the seeds of frustration and fear.
 The scientific and technological progress of the 19th and 20th centuries, the improvement of the quality of life, the pursuit of universal prosperity, instead of optimism, increased the pessimistic, dying moods, which became the reason for the rooting of anti-utopia.
  Scientific and technological progress, of course, has made life easier and more comfortable, but it has thrown man into the clutches of freedom.
  Anti-utopias consider the consequences of the development of scientific and technical thought and the ways of their use already in the "good future", which for various reasons do not coincide with the best goals.
  In other words, through the model of this society, an attempt is made to show how the ordinary citizen pays for the implementation of a progressive idea.
One of the main reasons for the spread of negative future expectations is the socio-political situation and the contradictions in that field.
 In particular, the establishment of the USSR created the spread of dissent, as the once utopian incredible projects, in which the pervasive prosperity, happiness and freedom envisaged, seemed to have gone in the opposite direction.
  Human dreams of creating a paradise on earth turn it into hell, the process of which is becoming increasingly uncontrollable.
  The perfect գեր super-accurate system in all spheres of life was a source of horror, the possible future consequences of which are presented very realistically in anti-utopias.
  Anti-utopia in some cases is the refutation of the utopia idea. It is not by chance that it became more widespread in the period of substantiation of fascism-communism, as a critique of the realized utopia, emphasizing its bad consequences.
  Hakutopia is a negative image of the future, in which there is a belief in the impossibility of a sharp establishment of an ideal society, as it is almost impossible to find a method in politics that will allow transforming the socio-political field without sacrificing.
  Anti-utopia seems to be the rejection of utopian spirit, utopian hope, because it is supernatural to destroy the old with one blow and create a completely new social reality.
  Anti-utopias emphasize the fact that the so-called utopia of life does not bring progress, but regression.
 So, on the one hand, there is a critique of classical utopia, on the other hand, a utopia that has already been realized, which has crossed the line between the present and the future.
 Despite the belief that any idealized future described in utopian projects would certainly be worse than the present, utopian thinkers were guided by the best of intentions, it is hard to imagine that they could remotely calculate the shortcomings of their program in the social space of the future.
  In all eras, various projects have been put forward in the pursuit of fundamental transformations, which have promised a very brilliant development perspective from the depths of history, but it is very likely that the truth for a given period may later become a source of error.
  Guided by the best ideals, the aspirations to change the world, to make it better, the society often does not notice that its expectations do not justify themselves.
 F. Von Hayek notes that the source of any crisis is trying to find everywhere, but he does not want to admit that the pursuit of certain values ​​and ideals has led to this situation, that their consequences do not coincide much with expectations.
11 This insufficient impulse of civilization to the eternal ideals turned against humanity over the centuries and became the beginning of the formation of a totalitarian system.
 In this context, K. Popper notes that utopian attempts to create an ideal state through a complete transformation of society require centralized minority power, largely leading to dictatorship12.
In fact, on the one hand, the implementation of utopian projects, on the other hand, their incompleteness or failure, increased the anti-utopian approaches.
 The pillars of the model of the future put forward in anti-utopias are anchored in the present, revealing the upcoming events in dark-condensed colors, which aims to arouse dislike in a person's life.
  Indeed, many arguments presented in anti-utopias became a reality, and therefore it became a unique tool for predicting the future.
  Being literary-social works, anti-utopias raise deep social problems. They have a serious impact on the formation of critical and social thought of the given period.
 Anti-utopia, like utopia, notices և means the still newly defined diseases of the society, which will be realized and evaluated by others years later.
  Negative utopia is an unwanted, sick worldview, a world that rolls down the mountain with no obstacles in its path13.
The inseparable trinity of this current of public thought forms Ev. Zamyatin "We", O. Huxley's "Wonderful, New World" Ջ J. Orwell's "1984", which made anti-utopia popular.
  These works motivate the ordinary citizen to look into the depths of his own life and look for himself and his image in the models of the society of that future.
 Through the social models presented by them, for example, Ev. Zamyatin fights against the "loss of the human world", O. Huxley against the "consumer society", J. Orwell against the "society of ideas" against forced life.
  These are warning utopias, where the mockery 11 See Hayek F., Дорога к рабству, М., 2005, pp. 38-39.
12 See Popper K., The Discovered Being and His Doors, M., 1992, p. 203.
13 See Баталов Э. Я., В мире утопии.
 Book dialogues on utopias, utopian knowledge and utopias // http.
//www.marsexx.ru/utopia/batalov-v-mire-utopij.html12.01.2016.
The inverted image of the social order presented in the classical utopia is shown in this way, there is no aspiration for the best of the ideal at all.
  But the negative utopias that inspire fear in this future, nevertheless, have the same goal as the positive ones. that is, the attainment of the necessary happiness.
Indeed, the ultimate goal of these two works is to motivate people to change the existing reality.
  In both cases, the effect is the same: to remove the defective և affected areas of the society.
  Utopia և anti-utopia are combinations of desirable և undesirable worlds, which have functional similarities: on the one hand, prediction of the future, on the other hand, warning. These are essential for both.
 Anti-utopia is also the criticism of the given society, showing everything that disrupts the normal functioning of the society, puts it on the wrong path, warning that we should not continue to live the way we live.
 These seemingly contradictory works perform the same functions.
  As E. Batalov, anti-utopia is a utopia with only a negative sign14.
The model of anti-utopian social reality is usually a state with a revolution, a war, a totalitarian system, which is still in the modeling stage.
Here, social institutions are the best hidden representatives of the use of dictatorial force.
 And in such a society, a person becomes faceless, just a part of a huge "we", which provides a favorable environment for turning into a crowd.
 Here "we" is everything, and the individual is nothing.
 These worries about the future were accompanied by fear, as on the one hand the totalitarianism of the 20th century was threatening, on the other hand the consumer society, which on both sides was killing the "human" existing in man.
The society had entered a qualitatively new stage of development, which O. Huxley calls it the "stage of Fordism" 15. It was an era of consumerism, mechanization, machine-human sacrifice, where the creative-thinking man dies.
  The transformations of the epoch, which caused the formation of a "new" man, the change of his image and character, are discussed in depth in anti-utopias.
  In the worst models of this society, the struggle is against a lifeless, mechanized society, against the loss of humanity.
14 See Баталов Э. J., note work.
15 See Huxley Ol., On the Wild New World, M., 2014, p. 6.
Anti-utopias raise various issues, which relate to the system of government, economy, domestic foreign policy, as well as the deep problems of the society, the relations that take place in it, the proper place of man.
 Usually, the hero of anti-utopia presents the mental state of the person living in that society of the future, the feelings of feelings.
 Here, the issues of the individual, its annihilation and violation of freedom are widely discussed, in contrast to the classic utopia, where it seems that there is a society of identical individuals, there are no individual desires, aspirations, the focus is on the harmonious peaceful functioning of society.
 In Hakutopia there is a struggle against the oppression of the individual, the leveling of the identity, the regime that kills everything for its eternity.
  Unlike utopia, there is a contradiction between the person and the "system".
 The anti-utopian hero fights against the utopian order, that is, here he comes out against the pressure of the top (power, individual opposition).
 If the classic utopian traveler admires the structure of society, happy, carefree people, then in the case of anti-utopia, the hero living in a happy country resists the order that destroys him, seeking to restore his freedom, to break the shackles of seeming happiness.
 Let us add that in classical utopia the social order is represented by an outside observer, and in anti-utopia the hero is internal, the person who is an element of the given system, who, despite the individual influences, has not lost his individuality.
  However, the problem is that the members of the society do not notice or realize this extremely bad situation, living in seeming freedom.
  These models of society especially emphasize the oppression of the person by the state machine, the rebirth of the animal in man, the changes in human relations, which are accompanied by the loss of feelings, attachment, love.
  Through their works, the authors show the image of the man of the future, believing that man is increasingly forgetting the qualities that make him a human being and the essential features.
  The reason for this situation is that the person is supposedly under control, when everything around him reminds him that he is nothing like a son, that "the older brother is looking at you" even in the course of your thoughts.
  In this world, in fact, human nature creates the system, և man is transformed into a puppet, whose vital activity is completely controlled by the system, վել it is impossible to deviate from the predetermined and ugly, even if the desire is great.
 If Winston (hence the name of the hero of "1984") believed that it was impossible to create a civilization based on fear, hatred, cruelty, annihilation, that it could not be viable, then he was opposed to the fact that the death of the individual is so It is no longer death, for all this will not happen in the near future.
 Man is nothing if his thoughts are under control.
  The meanings of all the basic words were changing in the "new language" created in Orwell's world. Its purpose was to narrow the horizons of thought and to kill the imagination.
18 This is a clear irony in modern societies, as the manipulative means used to crush imaginative victory, society is filled with unwilling, completely controllable subjects.
  In contrast to utopia, it shows the sacrifice that man makes for the sake of happiness.
 The ideology necessary for the given state has been formed in the human consciousness since childhood.
  The ideological basis of such a society is the slogans that destroy human reality, such as: "War is peace, freedom is slavery, ignorance is power."
 The source of evil in anti-utopias is the state, the egg and the system of government, which in the future leads to technological, psychological control, increasing consumerism and ignorance.
  For example, O. In the society presented by Huxley, the destruction of a person takes place with "sweets", and J. In Orwell's world, with a "whip".
Anti-utopia as a diagnosis of "social self-consciousness" as a reality of social reality is quite widespread, in a sense it helps people and society in the issue of self-knowledge, because the problems presented here stem from the present gaps.
 Like utopia, it is the birth of a critical attitude towards the present, a ruthless, extreme representation of everything that disturbs the harmony of social life.
 Anti-utopias are about the present, in the solid foundation of which some tendencies seem to be embedded, which, by undermining the foundation of the present in the future, will change the whole reality, life, that is why it is necessary to change something before it happens.
 Therefore, in these social models one can recognize one's own society, system of government and social institutions in general.
  Yes 17 See ibid., Pp. 274-275.
18 See ibid., P. 54.
19 Ibid., P.
The urgency of catapult is due to the fact that the social and anthropological changes presented here are felt by modern man on his own skin, they are warnings of the future, which are a vivid display of the features characteristic of today's society.
 It should be noted that in the anti-utopias of the early 20th century we find "we not only notice" the totalitarian societies of the time, there are clearly presented features of the Western society, which seemed dangerous to the authors, which, especially O. Huxley, very clearly foresaw.
  As he notes, in the near future totalitarian states will not be forced to use force, as they will more effectively govern a society composed of slaves who love their slavery very much.
 It is possible to teach the love of slavery, which is done with great success at all levels, from school to the media.
 All that is needed is to inject a person from childhood with what is necessary in order to fully obey or not to oppose. This is possible only through profound changes in human nature.
 And in order to achieve a positive result, it is necessary to satisfy the physical and material needs of the members of the society.
 In such societies, the creative-thinking person dies, who turns into an exclusively performer of a certain function, a doer of good work.
 It seems that completely similar people are coming out of the incubator20, who exhibit mob behavior, do not even try to change their social environment.
 Man does not aspire to the top. There is no self-awareness, the vertical construction of the world disappears; a widespread civilization becomes dominant, which, instead of a thinking person with values, offers a carefree machine that performs only the functions reserved for it.
  For example, in the society presented by O. Huxley, everyone feels happy, because the thinking is disconnected, the person does not suffer, nor has any opportunity for self-awareness.
  And instead of the drug invented by the author, modern society absorbs a huge amount of manipulative influences that transform its consciousness and behavior.
  Mass information occupies an important place in this case. It is the best way for the government to communicate with the society, to spread the state ideology.
In anti-utopias, the dissemination of information is given a rather big role, which, in fact, was justified in today's society.
20 See Huxley O., op. work., page 7.
Both utopia and anti-utopia are forms of utopian consciousness that are activated in crisis situations.
This consciousness constantly drives in search of solutions, which is manifested in different ways.
  The latter has a tendency to repair or regenerate the social world in any case.
  Be it through the construction of a new, improved reality, which is fundamentally different from the existing one, or through the presentation of an absolutely bad society, which in turn is a demonstration of a mistake.
  Activation of utopian consciousness can help to re-evaluate, to perceive the reality in which we live from a radically different point of view, to go beyond its borders, to objectively analyze the deep foundations of the created situation.
  Through anti-utopia, the author tries to influence people's consciousness, worldview, makes them understand their own life from another point of view, notices details that change themselves և the reality in which they live.
In the models of a negative society, the author is presented with modern life in extreme tragic shades, but no new structures are created here, no alternative is built.
If utopia offers something new, then anti-utopia does not have that function.
  The model of an undesirable society presented in the anti-utopia is by no means desirable to be realized, but the realization of utopia is desirable.
  Utopia is the project of the future society, and anti-utopia is mostly a model.
 In other words, the future in this case will have a positive color, if the proposed model does not become a reality, not to inspire hope, but to give willpower to avoid its implementation, the undesirable developments arising from it.
Anti-utopia is quite widespread; if the modern world seems to need no more utopias, that all possible social projects have already been embodied, or have failed, then without utopia it will not be possible to explain such attempts as the aspirations of superpowers, the tendencies of globalization. The search for national ideas, the creation of a civil society, etc.
 It is just necessary to look at the flashes of utopian consciousness from the right angle.
  When there is another way out, you have to think և create a new one. This is the real utopia.
 In other words, utopia in this case means doing what seems impossible in the given symbolic coordinate 21.
 Utopia and anti-utopia dialogue with each other, leaving the traces to the next generation.21 See Philosophical Nabrosky skif utopias by Slav йiжеeka. // http:
//newskif.su/2012/skifskai-utopii-slavoy-jijek/ - 11.01.2016.
Fear or hope? This is the question facing the modern man, who, having witnessed utopian projects and anti-utopian models that have already become a reality, nevertheless seeks solutions for the future.
 The strongly negative anti-utopian attitude towards social ideals does not justify itself, especially in the ideological struggle.
  The masses find the ideals driven by the positive more attractive to the masses, because pessimism can not always have a positive effect in the social field.
 If we approach the issue from the point of view of the consumer society, it becomes noticeable that that society is based on desire, creation of demand.
  From this point of view, utopia is first of all the absence or the cessation of desire, its production, its enduring or self-movement22.
  And anti-utopia is the impulse of that desire, the breaking of the chain of individual desires.
Anti-utopia և utopia seems to be parallel worlds, which, crossing a section of the road, deny each other, but later, in parallel, raise complementary issues that may be dangerous in the future.
 By the way, if utopia, by showing the reality, pushes a person out of the realm of reality in order to create something new, then the utopia returns him to that reality, showing its not so obvious, but alarming state.
 If utopia is the manifestation of humanity's dream, then anti-utopia is a bad dream that makes one not dream at all, because it can come true someday.
Meri Mikayelyan THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ANTI-UTOPIA AND UTOPIA IN THE CONTEXT OF THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIALIZATION Keywords: utopia, anti-utopia, ideal, undesirable society, future, social system.
