ABOUT SOME PLACES OF SHAMUKHA 1 [1] The western part of the Highlands, the areas west of it in BC At the beginning of the 2nd millennium they were in the sphere of trade and cultural influence of the Ancient Assyrian state.
[2] BC From the middle of the 3rd millennium, due to the deteriorating climate conditions in the Arabian Peninsula, the mass movement of Semitic peoples began to the northeast of the Euphrates.
  The northern group of those emigrants included the Assyrians, who spoke one of the Akkadian dialects.
  By establishing their political centers, the Assyrians then established their kingdom.
 During the reign of Puzur-AshurI, the Assyrian Empire began to expand its territorial dominance in the region in parallel with it2.
Many texts in the Assyrian dialect were written in cuneiform in the region of Asia Minor (hereinafter referred to as PA).
 The texts were written both by representatives of the Assyrian trading companies and by the inhabitants of Asia Minor for their own purposes.
The corpus of ancient Assyrian texts consists of about 23,000 tablets, most of which were found in Kültepe (modern-day Kayseri, Turkey).
 About 4,000 boards were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by local villagers, so archeology soon turned its attention to this area.
  In 1925, Cultepe's Czechoslovak expedition discovered about 1,000 new boards.
[3] In Central Asia Minor, until the penetration of the Indo-European (hereinafter referred to as H-e) Hittite-Kuwaiti speakers, Khater was the predominant language.
 The material and caring heritage of the Khats has been talked about since the birth of the Hittites, but until now it has not been finally determined the geographical distribution of the Khats in the east and west, even in the north, where later Hittite sources refer to the Casks.
Thus, the Akkadian sources, written in Kanesh at the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC, transparently testify to the existence of several linguistic and ethnic units in the region.
 They are: Khater-Khater, Luver-Louver, Hittite-Kheter և Akkadian-Assyrians3.
[4] The UAE tiles provide valuable information about the extreme western history of the highlands, but in this article we will focus only on some of the issues of uhaamuha's economic and ethnic history.
[5] Famous shopping centers in Asia Minor, interconnected in various ways, formed a complex system.
From the analysis of the information stored in the Cappadocian tiles, we can assume that Šamuha was connected with Hurama by trade and economic ties, from where the road to uhaamuha passed through the land of Luhuzattiya.
Kt92 / k 34, 5 serves as the key text for the approximate location of uhaamuha.
1 The author expresses his gratitude to H. Khorikyan (Institute of Archeology of NAS RA, Armenia, PhD, Associate Professor), M. Badalyan ("Erebuni" historical-archaeological reserve museum) և H. Martirosyan (Institute of Iranian Studies, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria, PhD), L. Yeganyan (Shirak Museum of Geography, Ph.D.) for providing literature and making a number of valuable remarks.
2 Veenhof KR, Traveling in ancient Anatolia. Two new sources from karum Kanesh, in:
 Erkanal-Öktü, A. et al. (eds.) Hayat Erkanal'a1. I paid half the sheqel for Hurama's palace number.
2. I paid Daya's son Ikun-piya 12 shekels for smuggling Luhuzattiya fabric.
3. I paid for the donkey 3 shekels of tin և GÍN for their place.
4. I paid x blonde for a tin bridge.
5. I paid x to buy a tin Ša⌉-mu-ha.
6. I paid the porter 1 shekel of silver to reach uhaamuha.
7. I paid 3 shekels for tin Hatikaitra.
8. I paid 1 K tin to Kutiya's elder.
9. I paid 12 shekels of tin for Karahna rabisikkitimin.
10. Kuburnat 3 blonde silver came from Karahna for the porters.
11. I paid 6 shekels of silver to nishātum-tax at the border.12. I paid 3 shekels for the palace.
It is clear from the text that the road passes from Hurama to uhaamuha via Luhuzattiya.
Of the toponyms listed in the text Kt 92 / k 3, only Karahna has been identified with any settlement.
  It is identified with the settlement of Sulusaray, north of modern Akdağları, which is mentioned in later sources (Greek, Byzantine) as Sebastopolis 1, 2.
These data greatly help to determine the location of Šamuha, which և is clearly located in Sebastia (near modern Sivas) 3.
 In the following table we will present the toponyms of the Šamuha area, then we will try to verify some of them.
Source: Additional information about the regional cluster is provided by the texts AKT 4, 71 և TC 1, 10.
[6] uhaamuha ․ The identification of Karahna with this site allowed archaeologists to conduct research in the region to find uhaamuha.
 Recent studies have allowed uhaamuha to be located in the state of Sivas 1, on the north coast of Halis2.
1 Barjamovic G., pp. 152, 505; Mitford TB, Inscriptiones Ponticae - Sebastopolis, Paperback on Papyrology and Epigraphy, 87.
2 Compare the Dvin-Satagh-Ebastapolis road on the Pևttinger map Manandyan H., The main roads in Armenia according to the Pևttinger map, Yerevan, 1936.
4 Müller-Karpe A., Kayalıpınar in Ostkappadokien. EinneuerhethitischerTontafelfundplatz. In.
 Mitteilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft 132, 2000, p. 355-365., Müller-Karpe A., Untersuchungen in Kayalıpınar, 2005. In.
 The identification of the Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient Gesell uhaamuha with the Kayalıpınar site is well-founded for several reasons: in the stratigraphy of the Kayalıpınar site, layer V dates back to the ancient Assyrian trade colony (Karum Zeit).
  About a meter of preserved buildings with clay walls belonging to this period have been preserved. One is Tamuru's house / Haus des Tamura (commercial, engaged in the production and sale of wool3), the other is the building preserved on the eastern slope.
In so many northern regions, pottery like Assyrian pottery is not known from any other ancient site except Zalpa, which has a clear location.
Thus, the dating of the 6th-5th layers of Kayalıpınar through the UAE period allows us to raise a number of issues related to the commercial activities of the latter.
  In particular, the trade route from uhaamuha to the east, production անումը export և finally the ethnic composition.
[6.1] The wool trade և uhaamuha.
  The ancient Assyrian sources on Šamuha are very poor.
  A merchant named Amur-šama is mentioned in connection with uhaamuha, and the text AKT3, 77 indicates that the merchant Šalim-ahum was also from there.
Only the kt 93 / k archive provides information about Samuha at regular intervals.
 The archive belongs to a family engaged in an active wool trade in Anatolia, which exported wool from Shamukha ուհ Luhazatiya to the southern regions4 (Fig. 1).
Thus, the evidence of written sources that uhaamuha was the largest wool-making center in the region is supported by archeological-etymological data.
[6.2] Several etymologies have been suggested for the toponym uhaamuha, all of which we do not think are valid.
At one time G. Ghapantsyan expressed an opinion that the toponym uhaamuha is composed of the Asian sam (m) "reed" և ha - sam (m), which he compares with the Armenian word shamb5.
  Ս. According to Petrosyan, the toponym uhaamuha is etymologized to "uhaamuha" with the root Samha "lion" (hmt. Sans. Siṁhá "lion"), the latter being placed in the Aghun province of Upper Armenia6.
In our opinion, the "Hittite" etymology of the name uhaamuha is very flawed, because if the oldest mention of this place name was in Hittite sources (XVII-XIII centuries BC), then such an approach would be logical, but since the name Šamuha begins to be mentioned In the period (XIX-XVII centuries BC), then in the issue of the etymology of the latter one should turn to the clearly defined ethnolinguistic environment, that is, to the Khatakan.
We share O. Soysal's opinion, according to which the place-name uhaamuha is divided into the prefix գոյa of the noun 7a: ՚ Collectivity, Map 1. Ancient Assyrian trade routes. Uhaamuha-Tegarama1 For another approach compare Bobokhyan A., Communication and Austausch im Hochland zwischen Kaukasus und Taurus, ca. 2500 -1500 v. Chr. BAR International Series 1853 2008, page 619 map.
2 There are many views on the location of uhaamuha.
But before Mueller-Karpe discovered the Canalipinar, Forliani յ Goetz uhaamuha was stationed in the state of Sivas, in the upper Euphrates of Halis.
  For a discussion, see Kosyan A., Armenian Highland Names (According to Hittite Cuneiform Sources), Yerevan, 2004, p. 88. RGTC 1, S.338ff, RGTC 6.2, S.137 3 This name of Ta-mu-ura Asia Minor origin is mentioned in the texts kt 87 / k 316 և TC3, 237.
 Ta-mu-ur-ia is also mentioned by IC1, 117; ICK1, 129; kt 94 / k 463` Rieken E., Die Tontafelfunde aus Kayalıpınar ', Central-Acts of the International Conference held at the University of Florence (7-9 February 2007), (Studia Asiana 5). (Rome).
 2009, 119-143, 119-120.4 Lassen AW, Wool trade in Old Assyrian Anatolia, JEOL 42.
 2010, 168.6 Petrosyan S., The origins of the worship of the Mother Goddess of Samukha, Historical Journal, 2004, № 1, pp. 160174.
7 Hmmt. Šapinuwa (* ša – pinu – a; zu? Khat .. pinu "son, child", HTWT 238. grouping around something և Khat. Muh "Herd / stove, hearth" 1 root: * ša = muh = a2 "Around the hearth."
Examining the written sources concerning Shamukha, we can conclude that the latter had the importance of the most important trade and economic center in Asia Minor during the Middle Bronze Age. h).
[7] The toponym Kutiya appears in the text kt 93 / k 3.
 The known etymology does not yet exist, so we suggest the following verification: The toponym Kutiya is split into the suffix ut -iya of the root Kut.
 The first part is Khat. Kut ՚ soul / Seele։ և - * iya (* yay on the principle 3) "give, provide" in the semantically justified sense of "give soul, provide".
[8] The name Hatikaitra is mentioned only in the sources known to us as kt 93 / k 3, where it is mentioned in connection with the uhaamuha route.
  The latter was engaged in the import and export of tin.
In our opinion, the toponym Hatikaitra should be broken down into hat (t) i և kait + ra particles.
The first part of the toponym, hat (t) i, is the self-name of Khater.
 In Hittite and Khatan bilingual inscriptions, Khater was written hattili, "Khater" 4.
  Khat. kait "grain / Getreide" և -ra suffix: խաթ. hati "khatakan" + kait "grain" + ra.
Benik VardanyanKeywords: old Assyrian colonies, old roads, Shamukha, wool export։ import, AROUND SOME PLACES OF SHAMUKHA.
