THE PRESCRIPTION OF INNOCENCE BY THE NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS The presumption of innocence is one of the basic democratic legal principles necessary to limit possible abuses of power in order to protect a person from baseless accusations.
  This crucial principle is enshrined in the basic law of the Republic of Armenia, the Constitution, according to Article 21 of which, “A person accused of a crime is presumed innocent until proven guilty in accordance with the law by a court judgment that has entered into force.
  The accused is not obliged to prove his innocence.
  The unresolved suspicions are interpreted in favor of the accused. "
  This constitutional principle of justice is enshrined in a number of international instruments.
 Thus, according to Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial.
 According to Article 6։ 2 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), anyone charged with a criminal offense is presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.
We will not be mistaken if we say that there is no more reliable guide for the practice of fighting crime than the unconditional acceptance of the presumption of innocence.
  The existence of this principle is conditioned by the status of the individual within the society-state, it depends on its correct functioning whether the rights and freedoms of the individual are considered the highest value in the given state1.
Article 17 of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) contains the following principle: “A person accused of a crime shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a court of law which has entered into force.
Unproven guilt equals proven innocence.
The accused is not obliged to prove his innocence or to show any support to the body conducting the criminal proceedings.
 The obligation to prove the innocence of the accused may not be imposed on his / her lawyer, legal representative, property defendant or his / her representative.
  In case of public criminal prosecution, the prosecutor's responsibility for the defense of the accusation in defense of the accusation's defense, and in the pre-trial proceedings, also the investigator.
 In case of private criminal prosecution, that responsibility is borne by the victim and his / her representative.
Reasonable doubts about the fact that the accusation has been proven, which have not been dispelled within the framework of a proper legal procedure in accordance with the provisions of this Code, shall be interpreted in favor of the accused. ”
From the above definitions of the presumption of innocence, in particular, from the notion of "considered innocent" in them, it follows that a person is innocent, "no trace of his guilt" has any legal significance before the verdict enters into legal force2.
In addition to the legal aspects, which are first and foremost distinguished by the principle of the presumption of innocence, the ethical side of the issue may be taken into account.
 Npata 1 Savitsky V., Presumption of Innocence, Moscow, 1997, p. 2.
2 See Problems of Access to Justice in the Republic of Armenia (Scientific-Practical Analysis), Yerevan, 2013, pp. 89-106.
We do not find it convenient to address this issue in detail in this paper, but it is necessary to make a hint, as a study of the very essence of that phenomenon is a necessary precondition for effectiveness in making observations of the phenomenon.
Some jurists believe that the moral aspect of the presumption of innocence should play a secondary role, but we agree.
 In essence, the constitutional enshrinement of the presumption of innocence means the acceptance by the legislator of the value of each person և being moral.
The ratio of the presumption of innocence to the obligation to prove it.
The rules for the distribution of the burden of proof are often determined by presumptions.
  Thus, for example, one of the requirements of the constitutional principle of the presumption of innocence is that the accuser must prove the guilt of the person.
 At the same time, in the current context of the development of procedural law, the issue of the distribution of the burden of proof is perceived slightly differently. The issue of the admissibility of imposing the obligation to prove certain hypotheses on the accused is often discussed in cases provided by law.
It is necessary to clarify the question whether in the context of modern tendencies in the development of litigation, the presumption of innocence is permissible to impose the responsibility of proving certain hypotheses on the accused.
In criminal proceedings, the rules for the distribution of the burden of proof through presumption provide various benefits, the first of which is the competitive equality of the parties.
  The side that is objectively weaker than the other side, that is, in an unequal position, can be defended by the presumption.
  The latter relieves the weak party of the need to prove circumstances that are important to him1.
Thus, the presumption of innocence protects the suspect նելով the accused by placing the responsibility for proving guilt on the accuser, as the defense usually has more limited opportunities compared to the public prosecuting authorities, which can use the organizational and material resources of the state.
  However, the situation changes radically in special cases, when the defense is objectively in a much more favorable position than the prosecution.
  This usually happens when the accuser has to deny the so-called negative facts (absence of any fact) on which the defense relies, especially if the negative facts are at the same time the facts establishing a circumstance relevant to the case.
  Negative facts can be proved when it is confirmed by other positive facts, for example, the fact mentioned in the case of illegal carrying or possession of a weapon can be confirmed by the fact that another person illegally acquired the weapon2.
The theory states that in this case the application of the traditional presumption of innocence is limited, as the accused is obliged to present evidence that is easier to obtain for the defense than for the accuser3.
According to the presumption of innocence, the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR) has developed certain approaches to the obligation to prove evidence.
Some analysis of the case law of the ECHR indicates that there is a general approach that the burden of proof lies with the prosecution (for example, in the case of Barbara et al. V. Spain).
 Given that the theory discusses the possibility of imposing the burden of proving his innocence on the accused in certain cases, we think it is necessary to address the question of whether the obligation to prove certain facts does not contradict the requirements of the Convention ին the case law of the European Court.
Thus, the defendant in the case of "Pham Hoang v. France" was arrested while importing heroin across the border into France.
 French law stipulates that the importation of prohibited goods, including heroin, is considered illegal if that product 1 Ghambaryan A., Karapetyan N., The problem of the ratio of the presumption of innocence to the obligation to prove evidence in the context of the development of law pp. 20-25.
2 Kalinovski K .., Smirnov A., Presumptions in the Conversational Process, Russian Justice, No. 4, Moscow, 2008, p. 68-74.
3 Ghambaryan A., Karapetyan N., pp. 20-25.
The importer has not proved the opposite, for example, when sufficient supporting documents are presented, or when it is proved that the action was taken in an emergency or as a result of an error that cannot be avoided.
 In the present case, the defense did not present any justifying evidence, and the accused refused to give any explanation.
  The ECtHR, after examining the case, found that there was nothing inadmissible, that the person in possession of such property, which is prohibited, should explain that fact in a sufficient way, otherwise the person will be found guilty.
The positive facts, which presumably could refute the possibility of the accused refuting or confirming the fact that the drugs were accidental or legal, were practically inaccessible to the French authorities.
 In the absence of explanations from the accused, they had to be sought in the territories of foreign countries for an indefinite period of time.
 On the contrary, the disclosure of positive facts allows the prosecution to ensure the main duty of proof1.
According to the case law of the ECHR, Article 6 of the Convention does not in principle preclude the existence of legal or factual presumptions in national law, the burden of proving which falls on the accused.
  Whereas any provision which imposes a transfer of the duty of proof of innocence or which deems it possible to apply the presumption against the accused must be limited to "reasonable limits, taking into account the necessity of what is on the defendant's table, which provides his defense" (Salabiaku v. France, October 7, 1988, Complaint No. 10519/83, paragraph 28).
It is noteworthy that the ECHR takes a very cautious approach to factual presumptions, which are enshrined in the laws of individual states; in each case, the defendant is given the opportunity to defend himself effectively, that is, to refute the presumptive facts (which are considered to exist). until proven otherwise).
 In these cases, the court pays special attention to providing quality legal assistance3.
 The so-called "right to remain silent"'s presumption of innocence needs to be discussed in the context of the issues under discussion, when a person's failure to present evidence of his innocence cannot serve as a basis for concluding his guilt.
 In general, since the accused is not obliged to prove his guilt, the latter's silence cannot be interpreted to his detriment.
From this point of view, the case of "John Mayer v. The United Kingdom" is worth discussing, where the ECHR referred to the right of the accused to remain silent.
 In this case, the ECHR has expressed a legal position that the "right to silence" is not absolute.
 The court noted that even though his incompatibility was based entirely on the defendant's attempt to prove the accusation based entirely on the defendant's silence or refusal to answer his questions, it was clear that this advantage could not prevent the defendant from remaining silent in situations that needed explanation.
 The court found that the law applicable to the present case had not violated Article 6 of the Convention: the applicant had not been subjected to direct pressure, had not been fined, and had not been threatened with imprisonment.
  The ECtHR further stated that the application of reasoning was considered to be outside the scope of common sense when the applicant had refused to give a reasoned explanation for his actions.
 The act of certain presumptions, which impose the obligation of proof on the accused, in our opinion, does not lead to the act of the presumption of guilt, that is, the imposition of the obligation of proof on the accused does not mean that the latter is considered guilty until proven otherwise.
 The problem is that in some cases the evidence gathered by prosecutors is indirect evidence.
 The accusation, it is true, is based only on indirect evidence, but their combination is so well known. 2 The new draft Criminal Procedure Code provides guarantees for the accused to effectively exercise his right to defense.
  New legal opportunities were given to the defense (Melkonyan D., New legal opportunities of the defense և their counterbalances, State և law, No. 2.64), Yerevan, 2014, pp. 62-67).
3 Ghambaryan A., Karapetyan N., pp. 20-25.
It is the weight that leads to the conclusion about the guilt of the accused.
 In this case, the responsibility for refuting such evidence already rests with the accused1.
 The draft also contains some regulation in relation to the issue under discussion.
 Thus, according to Article 106, entitled "Legal presumption of facts": If the opposite is not proved during the criminal proceedings, then the following are considered proven: 1. popular fact 2. The veracity of the universally recognized methods of modern science, technology, art, craft or other fields3. the fact that the person is aware or should have been aware of the professional or official responsibilities defined by the normative acts4. the fact that the accused is known or should have been known as a circumstance of his exceptional awareness.
If the participant in the proceedings disputes the veracity of the facts defined in part 1 of this article, he / she has the obligation to prove the opposite.
The essence of the presumption.
  V. Baranov notes that the logical explanation of the presumption of innocence has been subjected to a methodological blow.
  The opinion has been expressed in the legal literature that "to consider the presumption of innocence as presumed in its true sense is quite debatable." it has the nature of a legal axiom.
V. Baba notes that the so-called presumption of innocence is not a presumption (in the traditional sense), but a principle that there is no consensus on the nature of this legal phenomenon2.
  The presumption is an assumption that the defining facts and cases are confirmed without being fully proven.
 The presumption is a presumption of links between events or phenomena that are considered legally valid until other links are found.
 There are different forms of the presumption of innocence.
 In the constitutions of some countries it is mentioned "considered innocent", in others - "not considered guilty".
 In some cases, the definition is concluded "until proven otherwise", in some cases "until the guilt is confirmed", "the guilt is not confirmed in the manner prescribed by law".
 The scope of subjects in the constitutional formulations of different countries is different3.
 The assumptions are probabilistic generalizations, the degree of probability is possible.
 Their probability is quite relative.
The assumption is based on incomplete induction, ie induction by simple enumeration.
  The essence of it is that on the basis of the generalization of a large number of cases, a general assessment is formed, a unique background, which is considered correct for all similar cases.
 However, the enumeration of the phenomena through which the conclusion is made is not considered exhaustive, final, because situations may arise, to which those assessments-conclusions do not apply 4.
 But above all, the classification of presuppositions is also possible.1. General legal presumptions - substantive principles (for example, legality of court decisions), 2. Presumptions, which are tricks of legal technique.
These assumptions have procedural significance, helping to resolve the matter substantially by reducing և facilitating the proof process by defining the duty of proof.
Presumptions lead to system stability.
1 Ghambaryan A., Karapetyan N., pp. 20-25.
2 Цыбулевская О., Презумпция невиновности.
  нравственный аспект, Юридическая текника, 2010, № 4, available at http.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/prezumptsiya-nevinovnosti-nravstvennyy-aspekt.
makes, Journal of the Volgograd State University, Series 5.
 Руриспруденция, 2012, № 2 (17), pp. 48-53 available at http:
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/aktualnye-problemy-i-voprosy-ponimaniya-i-tolkovaniya-printsipa-prezumptsii-nevinovnosti-v is available at http:
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/o-ponyatii-prezumptsiy-i-ih-meste-v-sisteme-sredstv-yuridicheskoy-tehniki. At the same time, it is possible to distinguish presumptions from similar phenomena at first sight.
  The presumptions differ from the hypotheses by the preconditions for the formation.
  They differ from the possible variants by the duration of their existence, the reasons for their occurrence, and the feature of being fixed in the legislative norms.
 The presumption of innocence is the rule according to which unresolved suspicions are interpreted in favor of the accused.
 Doubts about the guilt of the accused lead to the acquittal of the accused if all possible means of gathering additional evidence have been exhausted.
 This means that: (1) in the event of unresolved suspicions about the facts substantiating the accusation, those facts must be removed from the system of evidence; և thus, the unsolved suspicions are interpreted in favor of the accused; as long as they are not refuted, thus the unresolved suspicions are interpreted in favor of the accused1.
In the cases provided for in Article 106 of the draft, the principle of unresolved suspicion does not apply.
  In terms of the reliability of the facts defined in the article, there is a clear requirement that if the opposite is not proven during the criminal proceedings, then they are considered proven.
  In other words, in case of disputing the precondition of considering them proven, the obligation to prove the opposite excludes the existence of unresolved doubt.
  These facts will not be considered proven only if the opposite is proved. This imperative requires the existence of any other situation.
Unproven guilt equals proven innocence.
  When we look at Article 106 1 1 from the point of view of this principle, it is considered probable that a situation will arise where we will ultimately have a proven guilt led to a combination of circumstantial evidence և the defendant exercising his right to remain silent.
  That is, from a situation against which nothing has been proven, it has resulted in a proven guilt, and consequently, a presumption of innocence (a legally considered fact until the opposite is proven) has not worked.
  The principle of innocence worked, taking into account the constitutional principle of being considered innocent, which addresses the issue of a person's morality, because a person, his dignity, fundamental rights and freedoms are the highest values.
Considering the presumption as a result of incomplete induction, considering possible the occurrence of cases on which the presumptions are not applied, we consider it right to formulate the right to be considered innocent as a principle of innocence, which will be possible for any person to ensure its existence.
Besides, it is quite difficult to answer the question whether it is possible to limit the presumption.
 If so, how, to what extent?
 Will it be possible to exclude the cases when the restriction will actually lead to the presumption of innocence not working?
The question also arises as to whether the simultaneous existence of two presuppositions on the same question is possible when one presumption essentially proves a contradictory legal fact.
In the case of a legal presumption of facts, the principle of innocence will be expressed in the fact that the person will be given the opportunity to prove the opposite in case of disputing the facts considered credible, that the accuser will have the duty to properly explain the meaning of the facts
At the same time, the person must be able to defend himself effectively, the court must make a reasoned decision (in many states where the evidence is free to assess, courts can consider all the facts of the case, including the defendant's conduct or defense, when assessing the evidence obtained in the case.
  The court may allow reasonable assumptions to play a significant role in the evaluation of the evidence).
In the case of Grayson և Barnham v. The United Kingdom (19955/05 և 15085/06, 23.09.2007) the ECHR addressed the following important question: "Վրա It was on the Prosecutor's Office 1 See Issues of Access to Justice in the Republic of Armenia, pp. 89-106.
the burden of proving that the applicant had acquired the property in question during that period.
… If the court was required by law to presume that the property had been acquired through illicit drug trafficking, that presumption could be refuted if the applicant proved that the property had been acquired lawfully.
 Besides, it was left to the judge's discretion not to rely on the presumption, if he finds that relying on it can pose a serious danger of refusing to administer justice ... ”
 That is, the Court has an obligation to refrain from spontaneously relying on presumptions.
 The court must properly consider the evidence presented, thoroughly assess it և base its judgments on guilt1.
In conclusion, the presumption of innocence will apply in all cases within the framework of the principle of innocence (the burden of proof will be placed on the accuser), except in cases where other presumptions established by law will apply, not excluding the principle of innocence. the right not to be considered, the right to use the defense effectively, the right to receive a reasoned court decision).
Marietta Mnatsakanyan THE PRESCRIPTION OF INNOCENCE IN THE NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Keywords: presumption of innocence, presumption, principle, obligation to prove, draft Criminal Procedure Code.
