COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ARMENIA'S INNOVATIVE ENVIRONMENT THROUGH THE GLOBAL INNOVATION INDEX The developments of the world economy in the last two decades prove the key importance of innovation in the context of economic development.
  Innovation capacity building has played a significant role for developing countries with high growth rates1.
  Technological innovation և Innovative activities are considered to be one of the main drivers of long-term economic growth2.
  The successful process of product innovation promotes the internationalization of the organization and its ability to enter foreign markets3.
  Research shows that the export intensity of innovative organizations is higher than that of organizations not involved in such processes4.
  Both manifestations of innovative activity, product և process innovation, have a significant positive impact on both the export decision and the export intensity5.
In the modern world, innovation is often seen as a competitive advantage6 through which companies compete in the international market, which is why it is considered a key source of efficiency 7.
  Innovation is especially vital for high tech 4 Basile R., Export Behavior of Italian Manufacturing Firms over the Nineties.
 The Role of Innovation, Technology and Export behavior.
 A Resource-Based View Approach, International Business Review, for the development of logical industries, as the latter are primarily considered to be the areas with the latest technology, ջանք innovation efforts have a positive impact on their economic performance 8.9.
  The ability to produce and export high technology (BT) in the conditions of the modern world economy testifies to the innovative power of the country.
 BT export volumes are considered to be the main criterion for the commercialization of national innovative potential10.
As the innovative behavior of organizations is one of the main sources of their competitiveness, it is therefore possible to study և identify the factors that condition innovative activities։ contribute to the development of high-tech industries.
  For this reason, in the framework of this research, an attempt was made to analyze Armenia's competitive position in innovative activities, based on data from the Global Innovation Index, which will reveal whether further improvement of orphans can contribute to the development of BT in the country and export promotion.
The Global Innovation Index is a composite indicator that is evaluated by countries based on the results of their innovation-promoting environment and innovation activities.
  The index is calculated for more than 140 countries around the world, using more than 80 indicators measuring their innovative potential.
 It consists of two "input subindex" and "output subindex".
  In the framework of this research, we consider it expedient to rely only on the study of the entry sub-index, as it reflects the totality of the factors influencing the innovative activity.
  The database was compiled for all components included in the Global Innovation Index Index 2013 և 2014. comparable data for more than 140 countries around the world11.
Before analyzing the competitive advantages, it was decided to group the observed countries according to the indicators 8 verlu 8 Ho Y.-Ch., Tsai Ch.-T., Front end of innovation of high technology industries.
  The moderatingHigh-tech Companies.
  an Application to the Italian Biotech and Aerospace Industries, International11 Global Innovation Index 2013, 2014, see www.globalinnovationindex.org.
to increase Armenia's position in relation to groups of countries with such indicators.
For this purpose, two-step cluster analysis 12 was performed using SPSS software package, as a result of which two clusters of countries were separated, moreover, the quality of cluster distribution was considered high.
  The countries with the best indicators stand out in Cluster 1, which make up about 20% of the sample, and Cluster 2 includes the other countries, except Armenia.
Below we present the comparative analysis of the Global Innovation Index components according to the following 5 pillars: • Institutions, • Human Capital, Research, • Infrastructure, • Favorable market situation, • Favorable business environment.
The analysis was performed on the basis of the averages of the indicators calculated for the two clusters obtained in Armenia, according to each pillar, except for the components in which the omitted values ​​made it impossible to carry out a comparative analysis.
Thus, in the table in Appendix 1, all the pillars of the access sub-index are presented, with their components և corresponding codes.
Figure 1. Comparative analysis of political, legal and business environment 13 Cluster 1 ArmeniaCluster 212 The purpose of cluster analysis is to form clusters, the objects included in each of which are more similar to each other than those included in the other clusters.
13 The diagram is based on the research data conducted by the author.
It is clear from Figure 1 that in terms of factors expressing the political situation, Armenia is significantly behind the first-class countries.
  In this respect, the worst indicator was registered for the level of management efficiency (1.1.2), which shows that there are significant problems in the country in terms of the quality of policy development and implementation, as well as the government's commitment to the implementation of the planned policy.
  As for the legal field, the main shortcomings are visible in terms of the rule of law (1.2.2), as Armenia lags behind even the countries of the second cluster.
 This states that the steps taken to increase the export potential of BTs from Armenia should include measures to increase management efficiency, as well as the rule of law.
  To this end, it is necessary to develop a state personnel policy, improve the mechanisms for ensuring the transparency of the policy-making process, create opportunities to increase the participation of the business sector and civil society in the process, and ensure the consistency and continuity of steps to reduce corruption in the country.
  Armenia has an obvious advantage in terms of factors assessing the favorableness of the business environment. that is, the ease of starting a business (1.3.1), by which Armenia significantly exceeds the average of even the countries included in the first cluster.
  This circumstance, without a doubt, can be a serious impetus for attracting foreign investors to the Armenian IT sector.
As for the comparative analysis of the components of the second pillar, human capital և research potential, the study of the situation in Armenia here raises significant problems.
Figure 2. Comparative analysis of human capital և research potential 14 Cluster 1 ArmeniaCluster 2 Figure 2 shows that the most important problem in terms of IT development in the country is the small number of graduates in the field of science and engineering (2.2.2). the average of the countries included.
 This problem obviously has a negative impact on the promotion of high-tech production in the country, as there is a shortage of qualified personnel in the market, despite the fact that the share of those enrolled in the higher education system (2.2.1) exceeds that of second-tier countries.
 This means that when there is no shortage of supply in the labor market, there is a high demand for qualified personnel in high-tech industries.
  In terms of research potential, Armenia's problems are more acute, as the share of researchers in the population (2.3.1) is significantly lower than in the first cluster countries, but our country has a very high level of gross expenditure on research and development (2.3.2). low index և is even lower than the average of the second cluster countries.
 As the country's scientific potential and the level of expenditures on research and development directly affect the development of the IT sector, measures for further development of the sector in our country should include the provision of state support for relevant training programs, as well as significant private sector research and development. Ensuring participation through closer science-business cooperation.
14 The diagram is based on research data by the author.
Figure 3. Comparative Analysis of Infrastructures 15 Cluster 1 ArmeniaCluster 2 Referring to the analysis of the infrastructure system required for innovative activities in the country, it should be noted that in this area Armenia lags significantly behind the leading countries in the first cluster in terms of almost all indicators (Figure 3).
  Even in terms of information and telecommunication technologies (ICT) infrastructures, Armenia's indicators are inferior not only to the average indicators of the first, but also of the second cluster countries.
  Both in terms of access to ICT (3.1.1) and their use (3.1.2) առցանց the country is in a very unfavorable position in terms of government online services (3.1.3), which means that measures to further improve the innovation environment should include research. ուղղված Functions aimed at increasing the possibilities of using ICT in innovative processes, as well as their accessibility.
Taking into account the development trends of the ICT sector in Armenia in recent years, it is possible to design, implement appropriate standards of cooperation between leading ICT organizations and research organizations, which will enable the most effective introduction of ICT achievements in research and innovation processes.
From the point of view of the development and export of IT, the existence of a favorable market situation is extremely important, which will be an incentive for the intensification of innovative processes in the country to become a market value.
 Below is a comparative analysis of the supporting components that assess the market position.
15 The diagram is based on the research data of the author.
Figure 4. Comparative Analysis of the Market Situation 16 Cluster 1 ArmeniaCluster 2 The chart shows that there are a number of favorable factors in promoting innovative activities in the Armenian market situation.
 Among them, it should be noted that the ease of obtaining a loan in the country (4.1.1) is almost at the same level as the average of the countries included in the leading cluster.
  The same can be said about the indicator of ease of investor protection (4.2.1), which proves that there are preconditions for promoting business activity in Armenia; in addition to ease of starting a business, they can seriously contribute to foreign high-tech investments in Armenia. involvement.
  But the country has a very unfavorable index in terms of the volume of loans provided to the private sector (4.1.2), as well as the number of transactions related to venture capital (4.2.4).
 The advanced experience of IT development shows the positive impact of venture fund activities on the development of the sector.
  The Granatus Ventures Foundation has been operating in Armenia since 2013, and its activities are aimed at making investments in the technological field.
  Half of the fund's capital is financed by the Government of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of a loan program provided by the World Bank17.
We believe that the 16 Figure Charts for the continuous application of this model of collaboration are based on research data conducted by the author.
17 See www.granatusventures.com.
The economy can ensure the development of high-tech sectors in Armenia, and consequently the growth of export volumes.
Another factor hindering the development of the Armenian high-tech sector is the extremely low level of competition intensity (4.3.3) in the local market.
  It is no secret that in the conditions of a market economy, competition leads to the development of mechanisms for the more efficient use of production factors, and consequently to technological development.
 The unfavorable competitive environment has a negative impact on the development of high-tech production in the country.
  The State Commission for the Protection of Economic Competition of the Republic of Armenia has been operating in Armenia since 2000, which operates in accordance with the Law of the Republic of Armenia on the Protection of Economic Competition.
  The goals of the commission are to protect and promote free economic competition, to provide the necessary environment for fair competition, but numerous international reports show that our country still has significant problems in terms of protecting economic competition.
In this context, given the relatively low level of competition in the local market, it should be noted that further stimulation of competition can play a major role in expanding the export potential of high technology products, especially if entrepreneurship is used as a tool to improve the competitive environment.
The last pillar of the Global Innovation Index sub-index reflects the degree of favorableness of the business environment.
  Analyzing the business environment in Armenia, we notice that the indicators of our country in terms of almost all components are inferior to the average indicators of the two clusters under study.
  In this regard, as factors having a negative impact on the export of BTs, we would like to mention in particular the low share of organizations providing advanced training to their employees (5.1.2) in the economy.
 It is clear from Figure 5 that with this indicator Armenia is significantly behind both the countries of the first cluster with the best indicators and the average index of the countries included in the second cluster.
  Taking into account the above-mentioned, we think that the creation of a qualification improvement system should be considered among the opportunities for further development of the IT sector.
 In terms of encouraging the development of the sector, we consider the targeted development of the capacity of the specialists involved in the implementation of the target programs to be a significant factor.
Figure 5. Comparative analysis of the business environment 18 Cluster 1 ArmeniaCluster 2 Another factor hindering innovation in the business environment is the low level of university-business cooperation (5.2.1) in conducting research.
This problem is very urgent in many developing countries, including abroad.
  That is why we consider the further strengthening of this cooperation in terms of the development of high-tech sectors and the increase of their export potential, especially through the creation of the necessary infrastructure, "intermediate" organizations.
  This can be done by setting up business incubator technology transfer offices.
 Moreover, it is extremely important for the state to raise awareness about the effectiveness of university-business cooperation.
  A tool to promote such cooperation can also be the provision of research grants, targeting programs implemented in cooperation with universities and organizations.
  Discussing the other obstacles in the business environment, we consider it necessary to consider the very low level of foreign funding for research and development (5.2.3.) In our country.
  Steps taken to increase the share of foreign funding in research expenditures, in our opinion 18 Figure is based on the research data conducted by the author.
They should include measures to improve research infrastructure, as well as measures to increase the efficiency and flexibility of research institutes.
  In this regard, it is extremely important to improve the system of protection of intellectual property rights in our country, which will provide confidence among foreign organizations investing in research and development in Armenia.
Summarizing the study of the components of the Global Innovation Index pillars in the context of improving the export potential of BT, it should be noted that in most of them our country lags behind the countries in the leading position in terms of innovation in the development of BT, unfortunately included in the second class. not so high-level countries.
 However, this analysis allows us to find out the factors and directions, the further improvement of which can have a positive impact on the development of high-tech industries in Armenia and the growth of their exports.
Annex 1. The structure of the "innovation" sub-index of global innovation1. Institutions 1.1 Political situation 1.2 Legal field 1.3 Business environment 2. Human Capital ևResearch 2.1 Education 2.2 Higher Education 1.1.1 Political Stability բաց Absence of Violence / Terrorism 1.1.2 Effectiveness of Governance 1.1.3 Freedom of the Press 1.2.1 Effectiveness of Government Policies 1.2.2 Rule of Law Obstacles to Obstacle Dismissal .3.3 Ease of paying taxes 2.1.1 Expenditures on education 2.1.2 Government expenditures on one-year education 2.1.3 School education capacity 2.1.4 Assessment of reading, mathematics and knowledge 2.1.5 Student-teacher ratio in secondary school 2.2. 1 Level of inclusion in the higher education system 2.2.2 Number of graduates in the field of science and technology 2.3 Research and development (R&D) 3. Infrastructure 3.1 ICT 3.2 General infrastructure 3.3 Ecological sustainability 4. Market environment 4.1 Loans 4.2 Investments 4.3 Trade Competition 5. Business Environment 5.1 Education Officers 2.2.3 International Students (Percentage of Students) 2.3.1 Researchers 2.3.2 GPA Expenditure 2.3.3 Average Grade of the Three Leading Higher Education Universities with QS Classification Score: Q3 Service 3.This 3.Th 3THT 3.Th 3TH 1.4 Online e-participation 3.2.1 Volume of electricity generation 3.2.2 Logistic performance 3.2.3 Gross capital formation 3.3.
