DETSIMETRAKAN waves Millimetrical AND IMPACT C.GUILLIERMONDII НП-4 and yeasts ADENINAYIN GUANINAYINMIATSUTYUNNERI DEZAMINATSMAN VRAVerjin the microwave radiation is non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation variety of mobile communication is widely used in various industries, in medicine, snnditekhnologiayum.
 The use of mobile phones is growing exponentially, and the effects of high-frequency microwave radiation emitted by these devices on human health are increasing day by day, which creates an alarming mood in the society due to the threats to human health [1].
The development of medical devices, such as the use of millimeter-decimetre waveguides for clinical diagnosis և therapy for clinical diagnosis, has aroused great interest, greatly promoting microwave radiation and animal interaction research.
 Two types of microwave radiation effects are known: thermal և non-thermal [2].
 Thermal effects are related to the heat generated by the absorption of microwave energy by the aquatic environment or by organic compounds [3].
 Non-thermal effects are measurable changes in biological systems that can be associated with harmful effects on health.
 It has been shown that low-intensity microwaves can affect the activity of enzymes.
 However, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms of non-thermal effects.
 One hypothesis is that low-intensity microwave radiation can cause dipole oscillations in the active site of a protein, thereby altering its function.
One of the most common factors affecting the environment is radio frequency և microwave anthropogenic electromagnetic fields.
Their influence on biological processes, in particular on human health, is of great interest.
  Many theories have been proposed to explain the mechanisms of biological influence of this factor, but despite numerous studies and several specific programs of the World Health Organization, the issue is still not fully understood.
  Many researchers point out that the use of multicellular organisms as a laboratory model, in terms of objectively assessing the biological effects of electromagnetic fields, and elucidating the mechanisms of interaction between living matter and physical force in such studies leads to a number of problems. .
  More important information in this regard can be provided by studies of prolonged radiation exposure to unicellular eukaryotic organisms, particularly yeast cells.
 Yeasts are inferior eukaryotic organisms.
 Due to their commonalities with multicellular eukaryotic organisms, including human cells, they are widely used as model organisms for the study of high-grade eukaryotic organisms.
Nowadays, in connection with the widespread use of mobile phones (they use millimeter-decimeter channels), it is very important to study, understand and monitor their impact on human health.
 For mobile telephony, electromagnetic waves of the millimeter band are used, and for Wi-Fi, electromagnetic waves of the decimetric band are used.
 Despite numerous studies in this area, there is still no final, unified position on the harmful effects of long-range electromagnetic waves and their molecular mechanisms.
  Therefore, new research is needed to detect the effects of high-frequency waves on the cells of living organisms.
  Of great interest is the detection of changes in the body's metabolism due to radiation, including the study of the metabolism of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides in the structure of DNA, which is suitable for the implementation of lower eukaryotes, particularly yeast.
 The aim of our work was to study the changes of desmination of purine nucleotides, nucleosides և nitrogen bases in millimeters և decimeter և irradiated and post-irradiation incubated with Candida guilliermondii НP-4 yeast.
Object of research և methods.
 The object of study was C. guillermondii НП-4 yeast, obtained from the Moscow Institute of Protein Synthesis, stored at 2-4 ° C on agar-agar containing 2%.
Preparing the food environment.
  Yeast cells were grown in a liquid synthetic medium with the following composition: (NH4) 2HPO4 - 50 mg, NH4H2PO4 - 200 mg, K2SO4 - 20 mg, MgSO4x7H2O - 40 mg.
 The specified amount of salts was dissolved in 100 ml of tap water, then the pH was determined with the help of a pH meter և with the help of 1N H2SO4 it was brought to 5.5.
  The medium was disinfected for 20 minutes at 1 atmospheric pressure.
Obtaining C. guillermondii НП-4 yeast biomass.
  D-glucose was used as the only source of carbon for the growth of yeast.
0.1 M glucose և 3x10-6 g / l biotin was added to the Erlenmeyer flask containing 200 ml of medium.
  The yeast grown in the solid food medium was transferred to a liquid food medium, then the flasks were placed on a shaker (200-250 ppm), which provided the necessary aeration.
 The yeasts were grown in Լ 30 ° C lighting conditions of 4000 lux.
 After 24 hours of incubation, the yeast biomass was separated from the culture medium by centrifugation (4000 rpm, 10 minutes, centrifuge CLL-1).
  After washing the yeast cells with distilled water, the weight of the wet biomass was determined.
Yeast irradiation of yeast cells.
 A part of the wet biomass of yeast was transferred to Petri plastic bag with իմ millimeter waves (λ = 6 mm, 51.8 GHz, which corresponds to the range of influence of mobile phones) and was exposed to radiation for 45 minutes at YSU Faculty of Physics.
 In the same way, the radiation was performed in decimetric waves (λ = 3 dm, ,1 GHz, which corresponds to the range of influence of wireless internet).
Post-radiation remediation of yeast cells.
  Part of the yeast biomass irradiated with millimeter-decimeter waves was further incubated (30 ° C, 0.1 Mg glucose) to facilitate post-radiation recovery, in the same nutrient medium where the yeast pre-germinated.
Obtaining water-soluble protein extract.
  Non-irradiated, millimeter-եց decimeter-wave և post-irradiation yeast cells were pressurized with a pre-frozen press after freezing to և100 ° C.
 In order to obtain a water-soluble protein extract, the homogenate obtained after pressing was mixed in distilled water for 20 minutes on a magnetic mixer.
  The resulting homogenate was centrifuged at 15000 rpm (CLR-1) for 20 minutes.
  The desenation strength of adenine-guanine compounds was determined in the phenol hypochlorite dye reaction method [6].
Two test tubes containing the substrate (test-experimental) were placed in a water bath at 37 ° C for 2-3 minutes.
  Yeast homogenate was added to the experimental sample, and the tubes were incubated at 37 ° C for 60 minutes.
  A phenolic reagent was added to the test tubes to stop the reaction.
 The same amount of yeast homogenate was added to both the test sample and the juicer, then basic hypochlorite was added to the two test tubes for color formation. The test tubes were incubated at 37 ° C for 15 minutes, after which the color was reduced to a color length of λ = 640 cm. КФК 2МП).
 The coloring remains stable for 20 minutes.
 Detoxification activity was assessed according to a pre-obtained calibration curve, ie, 1 unit of activity corresponded to 1 μg of nitrogen per 1 ml of the test solution, which was recalculated for 1 g of yeast biomass.
The results of the research.
  The data obtained by us on the changes in the decay of adenine compounds under the influence of millimeter waves in the studied yeast cells are presented in Table 1.
 Evidence suggests that adenine-adenosine deacidation is not observed in non-irradiated yeast cells irradiated with millimeter-wave և post-radiation reparative yeast cells.
 As for nucleotides, trace activity is detected in the process of deamination of AED in unradiated yeast cells.
 Significantly higher activity is observed only in case of AMF deamination, and in case of ACF - moderate activity.
 An increase in the activity of enzymes that degrade adenine nucleotides is observed in the aqueous protein extract of yeast cells exposed to millimeter waves.
 In the process of disinfection of the AMF there is an increase of almost twice the intensity of desamination, and in the process of disinfection of the AEF the displacement is more significant, that is, in comparison with non-irradiated yeasts there is a sharp increase in the intensity of desamination - about 17 times.
 In the case of ACF, a decrease in the intensity of desamination is observed under the influence of radiation.
 Thus, the highest desamination rate for yeasts irradiated with millimeter waves is observed in the case of AEDs, which is probably due to changes in the phosphate metabolism of the cell in the extreme state.
In post-radiation incubated yeast cell extracts, only deamination of AEF is observed, the strength of which exceeds the typical value for non-irradiated cells, but significantly less than the observed deamination value for irradiated yeasts.
Substrate AdenineAdenosineAMFACFAEFFRax ՃRaysRetradiation
harvatsharvatsinkubatsiayi yentarkatskhmorasnkerkhmorasnkerkhmorasnkerAghyusak 1. Adeninayin compounds dezaminatsume C. guilliermondii НП-4 yeast cells charagaytahareluts yevhetcharagaytayin Millimetrical Wave after incubation (mg N2 / 1 g wet biomass, n = 3, p <0.05) results from the irradiated yeast bjijnerumadeninayin compounds dezaminatsman change channels on the Detsimetrakan in Table 2.
 The data show that adenine-adenosine deamination is not observed in decymetrically irradiated yeast cells exposed to decimetric waves, but in irradiated yeast cells - 1.5, and in the case of AEF - 6.48 times.
  The sharp increase in AED's deamination during radiation probably suggests that AEF catabolism plays a significant role in cell adaptation processes in response to radiation stress.
Compared to irradiated cells, radiation exposure in AMF cells decreased by 2.16 times compared to irradiated cells, a slight increase in detoxification rate in case of ACF, and a sharp increase of 3.3 times in case of AEF.
 Thus, Substrate Adenine Adenosine
The data obtained by AMFACFAEFs show that the AEF showed a higher rate of desamination in yeast cells subjected to post-radiation incubation.
Non-ray-ray-ray-ray
percussion incubated yeast table yeast Table 2. Determination of adenine nucleotides in decimetre-irradiated C. guilliermondii NP-4 yeast cells (variation in d) (c) N5 / 1 g wet cell, 0.05 g When irradiated with decimetric waves հետո after post-radiation incubation.
 Delamination data of guanine, guanosine ու guanine nucleotides in millimeters of radiation irradiated with millimeter waves (Table 3) show that in irradiated yeast cells, as in ինչպես irradiated yeast դ, guamose is not observed.
 The intensity of deamination of GFF decreases by 2.3, and from the point of view of deamination of GEF, the intensity of deamination is almost doubled.
  Thus, in millimeter-irradiated yeasts, only GCF և GEF is deaminated from guanine compounds, and the deamination of GEF is about 5 times greater than the deamination of GCF.
 Based on the data obtained, it can be assumed that GEF catabolism in irradiated yeast cells performs an important adaptive function to counteract stress.
Substrate Guanine Guanose
GMFR-ray-ray-post-ray
harvatsharvatsinkubatsiayi yentarkatskhmorasnkerkhmorasnkerkhmorasnker GKFGEFAghyusak 3. Guaninayin nucleotides, guanini and guanozini dezaminatsmanuzhgnutyune Millimetrical channels irradiated yeast cells of C. guilliermondii НП-4 extract (mg N2 / 1 g wet biomass, n = 5, p <0.05) after incubation guanindezaminaze Hetcharagaytayin and guanozindezaminazn activity are displayed.
 There is no activity from the point of view of GMF deamination.
 The descaling strength of GCF increased 4 times compared to the irradiated cells, moreover, it is about 1.7 times higher than the desaccination intensity of GCF in non-irradiated yeast cells.
 The delamination intensity of GEF is reduced by about 7 times compared to irradiated cells, and by about 3.5 times compared to non-irradiated cells.
Thus, the data obtained suggest that the higher degree of desamination is observed in yeast cells irradiated with millimeter waves in the case of GEF, and in the case of yeast cells exposed to post-radiation incubation in the case of GKF.
 Under the influence of decimetric radiation, as in post-radiation incubated yeasts, guanine, guanosine, and GMF-degrading enzymes did not show activity (Table 4).
  After decimetre irradiation, approximately the same deamination intensity was detected for GFF և GEF, with the deamination intensity of GCF increasing 2.3 times compared to non-irradiated cells and 2 times the deamination rate of GEF.
 After post-irradiation incubation, the GFF desamination rate increased by 2.3 times compared to the irradiated cells, and the GEF desamination rate increased by about 1.3 times.
  According to the obtained data, when the yeast cells are irradiated with waves in the decimetric range, the degree of deamination of GFF և GEF increases և reaches the maximum value in the cells subjected to post-radiation incubation, moreover, after post-radiation incubation is higher.
Post-radiation
Radiation ՃbeamSubstratum hit with yeastGuaninGuanozineGMF
Incubated yeast GKF
GEF:
Table 4. Deoxinization rate of guanine nucleotides, guanine և guanosine in the extract of C. guilliermondii НП-4 yeast cells exposed to decimetric waves (mg N2 / 1 g wet biomass, n = 5, p <0.05).
 Summarizing the above, it can be said that prolonged electromagnetic radiation affects the desamination intensity of adenine-guanine compounds.
  The change in desaminase activity in this extreme state has an adaptive effect նշանակ, possibly contributing to the desamination of adenine և guanine compounds in nucleotide resynthesis և exchange, which is a "way of salvation" for these compounds.
LITERATURE [1] World Health Organization (WHO), Electromagnetic Fields and Public Health.
 Mobile [5] Botstein D., Fink GR, Yeast.
 an Experimental Organism for 21st Century Biology, Susanna Gevorgyan, Gayane Petrosyan DETSIMETRAKAN waves Millimetrical AND IMPACT C.GUILLIERMONDII НП-4 Yeast ADENINAYIN WHO GUANINAYINMIATSUTYUNNERI DEZAMINATSMAN VRABanali words, yeasts, adeninayin nucleotides, guaninayinalikner.
