THE HEROES OF THE RURAL WORLD IN HAKOB MNDZUR'S "BLUE LIGHT", "ARMTAN", "CRANE, WHERE DO YOU WANT?" COLLECTIONS [1]
 Having lost everything, with a broken heart and dreams, he started a new life in Constantinople, but in Turkey in the 20s and 30s, the Armenian writer had no right to describe the Armenian village.
 Mndzuri writes about the village before 1915. "Before the deportation, I will tell you what I knew.
 I don't know who stayed after that, what happened. "[2]
Mndzuri has created many heroes in his story-images, who are vivid, accentuated characters, prominent literary characters in our literature, some human personalities, who are at the same time types, images that condense the typical features of different layers of the Armenian peasant.
 With their thinking, behaviors, life, work, great love for people and animals, they complete the image of an Armenian villager, which is localized in the context of nature and time. perfect, complete.
 The heroes of Mndzuri are people connected to their land and water, their centuries-old history and deposits, their every movement, action, word are the expressions of their native element.
  Each sentence uttered by the heroes bears the deep stamp of the life and everyday life of the people.
But, here, the surprising and strange thing is that after communicating with all that, the unexplained longing follows.
 That longing belongs to the author, who is next to his heroes.
And the most important thing is that even in the most negative hero, the author can show even the slightest good, the positive to say, insist, prove, confirm the human, that one can not be disappointed even with the worst, if there is good somewhere in him. , the human embryo, the particle.
 At the same time, it can not exist, it does not exist ից "Hence, Hakob Mndzur, healthy patriotism, the positive of his agriculture, the building block of his literature" [3].
Mndzuri mainly depicts people who find their livelihood in the native nature with difficulty, who do their job patiently, gently, adapting to fate.
 They seem to be part of nature, with the simple soul of their ancestors, their affection for land and animals.
The heroes of Mndzuri are villagers, mostly Armenians, but also non-Armenians.
 They are all people of the same land and water, brotherly at work, kind.
 The rural world he depicts is inhabited not only by Armenians, but also by Kurds, Ghzlbash, Assyrians, Greeks and foreigners, who live side by side, with natural connections to each other, but have the peculiarities of their way of life, customs, traditions ("Misak of Tivrik", "At Kuzel "," Tsorighori te zori "," Tsikaran "," Anotutyun "," Timit of Biritede "," Marlu of Taghluents "," The people of Jurucha "," Eskesem this man is not Armenian "," Haren "," Istanbul "," The grenade's mama's son's shop ”).
Mndzuri also tells about their customs, putting them side by side, unnoticed, shows the special kinship of the real owners of that world, the natives, towards the land.
 The native of that land is engaged in agriculture.
 The mental relations with the soil, nature, pets are the main features of its essence.
  Mndzuri shows how the foreigners living with those natives are "Armenian-speaking", so the world is Armenia, the rulers are different.
 A world where the Armenian would treat his rulers with the eyes of a native.
 And there is surprise in that look.
 To the newcomer who does not understand the language of the land… "[4].
There are "workers" and "rural rich" in Mndzuri's work, but there is no pronounced social contradiction.
 They are all farmers, one is poor, the other is rich, peasants with their worries, pains and hardships.
  Mndzuri does not try to create particularly negative characters for two reasons. First, the village depicted by Mndzuri was not really a place of socially emphasized contradictions. It was still a patriarchal village to some extent, then there is a subjective circumstance.
 Mndzuri talks about people who are mostly real people, who no longer exist.
Speaking of his close friends and acquaintances who tragically passed away, as a tribute of remembrance and respect, Mndzuri speaks in soft tones, with longing, kind and impartial love.
 The writer tells about his lost nature, the tragic loss of his loves.
The hero of Mndzuri is the man of God, to whom he brings into the world a poor and unnoticed, difficult-going peasant woman named Mariam, on whose moral foundation the Armenian family-homeland is strengthened and rises.
 A child brought up according to the strict rules of the Armenian patriarchal family cannot be called a mother, he is silent, deprived of the divine gift of talking to the elders of the family, caressing his child in their presence, and expressing his emotions and thoughts in general.
 In the emotional story "Our Mothers", Mndzuri describes the difficult daily life of Armenian brides (by the way, in Mndzurubar dialect, when we say bride, we should mean mother, and when we mean mother, we should mean grandmother, grandmother).
 The author modestly opposes the difficult and difficult life of the anonymous Armenian humble people, defending only in writing the lost right of his bride, that is, his mother, of all Armenian brides. "What they pulled, the saints did not pull, the Hripsimes, the Gayans, did not suffer any more to be holy." [5]
The brides kept their word and humility not only with the men, strangers, but also with their mothers-in-law, and all their questions were answered with voices, nods, or through children.
  If there is no mediator in the house to talk to the adults, in such a case, the spoken language is Munjer. "My grandfather, wife, does not talk to my mother.
  He also does not talk to my father or mother.
  The house will talk to me and my son only when we are urinating. ”
"If he breathes in between his lips," is his "yes."
- He says - it is his "no".
"Shish!" Is his "look, look."
"Is he complaining? Is it his 'Is it me? Did I do it?'" ("Woman and me") [6].
There are many pages describing the dumbness of brides in Mndzuri's stories ("Kozik", "Harsnutyun", "Harsik" և, etc.), և as it seems, "Munjeren" had a unique "vocabulary" for each bride.
Only married women could greet acquaintances and relatives. Without uttering a word, they connected the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of the right hand, gently placed it on the acquaintance's (friend's) hand, then parted the fingers, put their hand on the lip, forehead, and finally again. on the lip.
 The man was a distant or pleasant guest, this greeting was repeated twice, wanting to say that the woman was very happy to see him.
 The girl, even if the guest was a friend, did not approach, did not say goodbye, did not speak indifferently.
 Is there meaning and logic in all that?
 That is not the question, of course.
 Here, it is possible that the reason for these manners and customs is born of respect and reverence for the elders.
 "Does every man want a bride?"
 To work.
 Sweep the house, the barn, pack the garbage, fetch water, harvest the grass in the mountain, dig the field, dig a hole, and have a keeper.
 Your bride is for them.
 "Bringing a child is when it is," Mndzuri explains.
"Why do you need a girl girl?"
 Do you have to sit on the front of the house, look in the face?
 Aghvor!
 Shouldn't what you said be old?
 You should not marry a little girl.
 Let your son be six or seven years old.
 With great age and strength, go to the spring, fill the pitcher, throw the bundle once and walk. ”[5]
That is why Mndzuri speaks about unequal marriages and the social tragedies caused by them, emphasizing his mercy and sympathy for the victims.
 As when talking about other social evils, in this case, Mndzuri's target, of course, also hurt the root causes of those evils.
 In one place, the behavior of the rich, in another, the backwardness of society, ignorance, but mainly as a principle, the main axis of the writer's work is not so much the condemnation of the perpetrators of evil, but rather his protection, mercy and sympathy for the "humble" victims of evil. .
Inspired by its wonderful rural world, the story "A Fall in Love" is the love story of a young student who created his world with literature, who has many literary similarities in Armenian literature only with the difference of the plot elements, identity and theme, they can be conditionally titled "Armenian Humble". Axel Bakunts' "Humble Girl" as a perfect sale of material, around which are gathered new types of humble Armenian writing: Susan ("Honor"), Sona ("Mirhav"), the reaper's wife ("Alpine Violet").
 As the harvest was abundant in the village, so the emotions were swirling. The love affair was intense ադարձ mutual.
 The key to the maturity of Hurt's fields was thrown by Naro, whose first glance is already generating sex tremors. "She had become a delicate, long girl with a brown face and yellow hair.
 It was not typical for the women of our country to be so delicate, slender, tall, and the hair, melting into a lovely golden color, would fall down a special flower painting of a girl, go down to the ground and sit down and reach the ground and still grow on the ground. "[5]
 This admiration is transformed into love, on idolatrous evenings abroad they meet, caress each other, making their feelings visible to the strict environment, which stops the further course of love.
  Naro is quickly married to the son of a villager in a house. We are already familiar with this solution from the stories "Namus", "Mirhav", "Humble Girl".
 The story becomes a novel.
Naro meets the object of his sincere and true love, he says that they got married against his will, և tears "drop" on his eyelashes.
  The drama of unfinished love is not revealed.
  Ignoring the wishes of the girl, the unwilling transaction will distort the psychological atmosphere of the emerging family. After all, the boredom of life that follows the highest emotions experienced will kill the soul, in some cases, the body.
 Even if the body resists, the soul rebels.
 In this sense, the perfect embodiment of the uprising is the type of Hrant Matosyan Aghun, who was against the poor and reluctant Simon type.
 In the super-moral Armenian environment, the humble are alone, they are sacrificed in order to get rid of possible sin, the love-sin opposition turns into a unity with ethnic morality, where love, there with the justification of sin.
Referring to the topic of unequal marriages, we can remember the stories "At Kuzel", "Eyup agha", "My boyhood", "Haren", "Anna", and those dedicated to the tragedies caused by the complications of sexual life - "Elif", "Ham", etc. each of which excavates the devastation caused by these socially based deviations.
  In these stories, Hakob Mndzuri took not only Armenian heroes-heroines, but also other nationalities, thus emphasizing the general nature of social inequalities and complications, the victims of which were "Armenians, Turks", "Ghzilpash", Greeks and Assyrians.
  In the story "At Kuzel", the hero and the heroines are islanders.
 "At the end of a few seconds, a mother and a son were growing up.
 The following lines of the story show that the boy was infected with a fever.
 He was barely fifteen years old, thin, in poor health, and his mother, the beautiful and strong Melek, was thirty-five years old.
 It turns out that they are not a mother and a son, but a man and a woman.
 The boy is the husband of such a beautiful woman.
 "Ali Effendi knows his job, this Melek was marrying his eldest son.
  Anke also has four grandchildren.
  He died, and the little boy At took Kuzel.
He will let someone else go.
 Melek has many pastures both here and below Chaygharan.
  This onion's field also belongs to Melek.
  What would you do if you were?
  Would you take a woman in your arms? ”[5]
In order not to lose Melek's wealth, after the loss of his first son, Ali Efendi, who married his second son, sacrifices տը "At's Kyuzel".
 This lesson is not a lesson that Effendi, who is in a hurry not to lose his wealth in any way, puts him in a new risk.
 "Would you let Ali Effendi go to someone else? How smart is he?"
 He had no other children, his nephew adopted him. Melek gave him.
 Melek's fields remained to him again.
 Now he will wear a jacket, sit at the yard door, watch the gorge.
 Melek and his son will do the same for him. "[5]
Hakob Mndzuri's stories describe in detail the appearance of village men և women's appearance, clothes with their details, up to linen (in other stories "Golden Place at Elpakyan's wedding" [7], in particular, "What would we wear" [8])).
There were separate and strict manners and customs, memorized laws, even in the church, especially for women.
Of course, the fact that women are considered second class played a role in all that.
 There was contempt for those women շատ many medieval elements in the forced isolation of women.
 Still, of course, women did the housework, even outside.
 And those works, first of all, were an occasion to talk to each other after being convicted of being silent in the house. "In front of the fountains, the women are doing laundry on the stone slabs.
 [9]
One of the main characters was the men, who had to go abroad for a year or two after marriage to earn money.
  Often their firstborns were newborns or were born without a father.
 This exile recurred every four to five years throughout its life.
 One member of the family was returning and the other was leaving.
 And it turned out that during the married life the couple did not live in Elmias for five or ten years ("Nazar", "Istanbul", "Sila").
 This was the case in the whole province and in other villages near the Euphrates, such as Kemakh, Chmshkatsag, Akn, Arabkir, Tivrik, etc.
 The Turkish government collects a part of the taxes in Erdram, which the villager did not have.
 Although he had a rather large surplus of grain, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products, none of the villagers left him, so he was forced into exile.
The longing of foreigners for their homeland and relatives, according to Varuzhan, "nostalgia" was torturous.
 An episode in the story "Sila", where the author tells how the foreigners suffered from the longing for the homeland and relatives.
  Every time a new person from his native village came from Kamgavar, they would gather, and a flood of questions would begin.
 They used to gather when someone was returning to the "country" to say kind words of return, to send money to him or to his relatives, and by all means, kind words and kisses.
  "Good-bye, good-bye. Տար Take our good-byes to all who ask us, to the mountains of the homeland, to the valleys… - Good-bye to all of you… taros to you, so that you too may come…" [5].
The hero of the same story, Vahan, was not in Polisgn with the desire to get rich, but was forced, out of need.
  "He left, he came to Stampol… It was very difficult for his wife to be separated… But what was he supposed to do?
 There was no money in the country, not even a penny. ”[5]
Mndzuri says about one of his foreign heroes, Avetyan. "Let there be a dialogue, let the country come to its senses, let the natives call our brides."
The natives were the folk songs composed by the brides of the village, in which they told about the great and passionate love, longing and longing for their husbands.
  Avetyan sang those songs, his friends listened silently with sad looks, and the song seemed to alleviate the longing.
Those songs were the compositions of Armtan brides.
 They collected and invented. ”[5]
 Those songs were an expression of longing, longing, love, the storms of the inner world of "home-loving brides".
 Here is an example of a folk song that brings Mndzuri in the story "Sila". "Beat, set fire, aghas, I'm going to burn, I'm thirsty like water, aghas, I'm looking at your way.
                                I was sleepy, you were awake, aghas, I was in love with you, Heru was very cold, aghas, what have I been like this year?
                                I took off my blue, aghas, I wore it too, I miss you, aghas, what can I do?
                                I would not be Shille, aghas, your favorite friend, Shille would not bring me, aghas, the mare who brought me.
                                Come home, aghas, get out and come home, I do not want Armughand, aghas, come here! ”[5].
According to Mndzuri, the "aghas" ​​brides called "their 20-40-year-old daughters-in-law as an expression of longing, equal love and worship."
The women were engaged in foreign work, the men were in exile, the house was run by midwives.
 The children called the grandmothers mothers, and the mothers called the mothers brides.
 One of the typical manifestations of the image of a great mother is the story "Pomegranate mother".
  The key player of the Armenian tribal family, the materially responsible of the hearth, the creator of the psychological environment, "Pomegranate sat on the top of the goal with wide, wide cheeks, with a large staff" [9].
  In the story "Pomegranate Mother", the heroine of the same name is a storyteller, she communicates to her grandchildren and children of the neighbors to the national folklore treasury, enriching their imagination, shaping and refining their thoughts, words and language.
  The range of folk art is not poor, և children choose the desired fairy tale. "Tell the tale to the forty girls, Nour Mom մամ" [9].
 The fairy tale unfolds, filling the tonratangol with the admiration of the children.
LITERATURE [1] Gabrielyan V., Diaspora Armenian Literature, Yerevan, 2008, p. 317.
[2] Darbinyan G., ArmArmenia in the release of Mndzuri, Yerevan, 1994, p. 28.
[3] San G., Hakob Mndzuri, Yerevan, 1981, p. 63.
[4] Galfayan H., "Armenian-Armenian Geography և Hakob Mndzuri", "Ashkharh", Paris, 1977, pp. 1001-2.
[5] Mndzuri H., Works, Yerevan, 1986, pp. 397, 299, 87, 139, 141, 142, 336, 369, 397,376.
[6] Mndzuri H., Armtan, Istanbul, 1966, p. 258.
[7] Mndzuri H., Armtan, Istanbul, 1966, pp. 200-1.
[8] Mndzuri H., Krunk, so why are you coming, Istanbul, 1974, p. 216.
[9] Mndzuri H., Blue Light, Istanbul, 1958, pp. 15, 28, 30.
Grigoryan ALVINA AGRICULTURAL HEROES IN HAKOB MNZUR "COLUMN LIGHT", "ARMTAN", "CRANE, WHERE DO YOU GO?" COLLECTIONS Keywords: Apple, humility
