VALUE CHANGES IN THE THEORY OF POLITICAL MODERNIZATION In the ever-changing world, the newly independent states have faced many challenges, so due to globalization, the development of information and communication technologies, systemic changes occur in public life.
  As a result, modernization has led not to the interplay of traditional universal values ​​but to mechanical "rationalization."
In order to study the value changes of the theory of political modernization in a systematic way, we first need to consider the definition and nature of the term "political modernization".
 In general, the term "modernization" is used in a narrow sense.
 The transition from the socio-political processes of the traditional society to the modern, industrial society is described in a narrow sense.
  In a broader sense, modernization is perceived as a theory-practice of social development.
Manifesting in all spheres of public life, it forms open social structures, raises the social differentiation and specialization of individuals, as well as the social functions of groups, classes and classes.
  The most important feature of the modernization of the social sphere is the division of the private and public spheres, personal independence and functional interdependence.
 Economic modernization is characterized by the development of the industrial system, the development of new sophisticated technologies, scientific knowledge, the division of labor, the development of goods, services, capital in the market.
At present, special attention is paid to a phenomenon in public life, such as political modernization, the effectiveness of which as a system as a whole is conditioned by the process of humanization of both political institutions and capital.
  Political modernization, political change և political development's phenomena complement each other, but are relatively independent.
 This independence is conditioned by the historical memory of the modernizing society and the ability to overcome the crises of political development on its own.
  American political scientist G. Almond (1911-2002) conventionally divided the development of the political system into the primitive, the traditional and the modern 1.
 The latter characterized the transition of the socio-political processes of the traditional society to the modern, industrial society, being perceived as a theory-practice of social development.
  Thus, the general model of governing world political processes underlies the theory of political modernization, which implies a transition from a traditional society to an information society.
  The latter is possible only in the conditions of scientific and technical progress, social mobility, change of value systems, supposing the clarification of political institutions, actors, goals and value system2.
 It can be described as a universal, radical transformation of the society.
The network operation of the information society proves that modernization is a multidimensional phenomenon, conditioned by the level of public political consciousness, it can be based on both K. Marx and M. Weber, E. On Durkheim's concepts.
  According to K. Marx, capitalism is a precondition for the change of modernization of modern society. According to Weber, the spirit of capitalism աճ the nation growing from Protestantism in the pre-industrial age, according to. Durkheim's division of labor և industrialization.
Therefore, political modernization, as an integral part of political development, is based on the humanization of the development of capitalism.
 The latter is considered to be the main institute of modernity. Product production system, center, main result of modernization and core 3.
Thus, modernization as a branch of science developed in the late 1950s in the United States, which was first addressed by American political scientists. Almond, D ․ Paoel, L. Pay, S ․ Huntington, F .; Fukuyaman, F. Zakaria և others.
 The theory arose to serve Western policy toward developing countries.
 Further 1 See Typology of Modern Political Systems, http.
//www.politictime.ru/potis-422-1.html.
2 See Huntington's, Political order in the changing societies, -M., Progress-Tradition, 3 See Fedotova V. G., Kolpakov V. А, Федотова Н. N., Global Capitalism.
  Three Great Cultural Revolutions, 2008, pp. 76-79.
It turned into a global process, the transition of developing countries to modern Western democracies.
  At this stage, it strongly advised the modernizing countries to follow in detail the Western, especially the American, example, to the point of imitation of their material consumption standards.
Thus, in the first stage of the theory of political modernization, the following took place:
Presenting modernization as a special direction of development in general, the theorists of that time started talking about "technological determinism".
  They were convinced that the development of society was conditioned by the development of capitalism, economy, technology, the development of quality of life, the development of social dialogue.
  In this context, developing countries have had the opportunity to reach the level of "modernity" of advanced societies, if they naturally modernize their identity, consciously renounce marginal or color revolutions.
 As a result, the process of decolonization challenged to become independent, but to "be able to self-govern" and realize itself, otherwise the independent states would fall into crises of political development.
Thus, the main features of the first stage of modernization theory were "European centrism" and "American centrism".
 The perception of modernization was called "westernization".
 However, at this stage, due to the identity crisis, the modernization process failed for the "third world" countries.
  Models of African-Latin American modernization have shown that, in fact, the clash of traditional, social structures and mentalities leads to official corruption, bureaucratic arrogance, increasing population poverty, and consequently increasing social tensions in society.
In the 1970s and 1980s, theorists of political modernization found that while maintaining the primary criteria, the emphasis should be on the implementation of a unified national horse.
  Transition ում transformation processes were conditioned by socio-cultural factors (type of individual, national nature, degree of acceptance of universal norms, goal of political development).
  Therefore, modernization could be realized only in the conditions of change of value orientations of social strata, continuous development of the political culture of the society.
In 1970 I. Wallerstein, in his work The World Order, stated that the modern conception of the state can be traced back to the 1648 Westphalian Reconciliation (Westphalian world order).
 At that time, the traditional society was replaced by the industrial one, in the context of which the process of modernization rationalizes the terms "nation", "nation state" and "national identity".
 As a result of such processes, the former "borders" and "territories" were moved and violated.
  Traditional peoples and states were replaced by modern nations and nation-states.
This stage of modernization was also marked by global changes, which, in fact, fundamentally changed the perception of capitalism, the main factor of modernization.
  The above changes were: • globalization, which enabled the unification of the various forms of both Western and non-Western capitalism into a common economic system; The Impact of Civilization ումը The Formation of Capitalism in Different Countries5.
Beginning in the 1980s, theorists (A. Toure, S. Huntington, S. Eisenstadt) began to talk about the third stage of modernization, according to which modernization is not limited to purely economic approaches (human resources, capital accumulation, modern technologies), but existing also civilizational factors (geopolitical, social, cultural), which testifies to the socio-cultural nature of modernization.
 At this stage, Eurocentrism was already overcome, the impossibility of a mechanical transition to the model of Western development arose in other countries.
 This Armenian 4 See Wallerstein I., Analysis of the peace system and the situation in the modern world, SPb., 5 See Fedotova V. G., Kolpakov V. А., Федотова Н. N., Global Capitalism.
  The three great systems did not deny the universality of social and political development, but were combined with features, the synthesis of which was considered a successful process of modernization.
  Therefore, modernization is a process of self-development, conditioned not only by the ruling elite, but also by the behavior of members of society due to objective circumstances6.
The concept of modernization presupposed radical changes in culture and tradition.
  English sociologist E. Giddens was convinced that the concept of modernization offered individuals նոր a new identity of society հ renunciation of their own traditions.
  Due to the processes of forced globalization and the activation of world politics, the interpretations of the nation-state gradually became uncertain, and the perceptions of time and space changed.
 The area was deprived of its cultural, historical and geographical significance.
  In the conditions of globalization, the separation of the internal and external borders of the state և nation was losing its former meaning.
  Thus, the third stage of political modernization presupposed a process of modernization, where the society consciously sought to carry out reforms not by duplicating the experience of developed countries, but by harmonizing and harmonizing common political values ​​and structures for the given society.
 It could be described as the formation, development and dissemination of modern political institutions and political structures.
In sum, it is necessary to understand the current political institutions, which provide an adequate response to the changing conditions and challenges of the system during the political period.
  The concept of political modernization reflects the processes that contribute to the improvement of political relations, the settlement and prevention of conflicts caused by various political crises.
 In this context, we claim that the nation-state has not exhausted itself, but, on the contrary, within the framework of such a state, it is possible to make a strategic goal, to make a natural modernization.
Western political scientists of the 20th century came to the idea that the conditions for political reform in "traditional" societies presuppose the discovery of local peculiarities. 6 See Meleshkina E., Political Processes.
 basic aspects and abilities of analysis, -M., INFRA-M; և study, otherwise developing countries do not live in progress, but find themselves in development crises (identity, legitimacy, participation, distribution, penetration).
  In fact, in the first stage of modernization, the "third world countries", mechanically imitating the models of Western democratization, found themselves in development crises.
 Therefore, political development presupposes not only the modernization of Western democratic values, but also the adaptation, combination of socio-cultural and ethno-national values ​​in order to preserve and normalize identity, self-preservation, historical memory, legitimacy, participatory democracy.
  Here, the individual is perceived as a means and a goal for the development of the society.
 The ruling elite, then, as a player of modernization, must provide a wide range of choices for the individual in all spheres of public life.
According to the speed of the modernization process, modern theorists of political modernization distinguish two types of modernization.
The ruling elite, having a key role in the process of political development, is responsible for the natural modernization of society.
  Therefore, the countries that have adopted the "running modernization" model, using the help of countries that have "mastered" the modernization process, try to accelerate their own development through various methods (rapid democratization of political totalitarian regimes), as a result of which society not only does not develop but also leads to deadlock.
 To respond effectively to the challenges of modernization, to set the standards for political development, G. Almond JL. There are three processes of functional approach to political modernization: • Structural differentiation - increase in the number of components of the political system - specialization of their functions, formation of a separate system of power in traditional societies, "Running" or secondary political modernization - spreading to more "backward" countries and in the regions (Latin America, Russia, Asia, Africa, etc.), due to the ever-increasing influence of politically modernized neighboring countries, eventually led to the inconsistency of their modernization with Western political institutions.
  All this forced the "backward" countries to accelerate their own modernization processes.
• Adaptation of the system to changing conditions - increase the process of political system self-renewal, consolidate social resources for the prevention, mitigation, maintenance of public order, • Development of participatory democracy, creation of an atmosphere of equality7.
R ․ By considering political modernization as a factor of democratization, Dahl emphasizes the degree of people's involvement in political processes and the provision of an independent, open competitive environment for elites.
  Assuming human rights compliance, a pluralistic system of government, consensus, sets priorities, focusing on political stability.
 For the construction of a developed democratic society, it singles out seven conditions: the historical sequence of political reforms, the degree of concentration of political power, the level of socio-economic development, the essence of "equality-inequality" relations, the type of subcultural differences, external intervention, the nature of political ideological beliefs.
  Considering democracy as a guarantee of normal political modernization, he uses pluralist values, giving the ruling elite a polyarchic character.
Thus, the end result of political modernization is the formation of a stable political system, but representatives of different directions of theory give different assessments to these results.
  For example, the founders of the liberal concept (R. Dal, G. Almond, L. Pay) conditioned the success of political modernization with the participation of a large part of the society, the creation of free competitive conditions of political elites.
  However, when the population has low turnout in the conditions of high competition of the elite, the probability of creating an authoritarian regime increases.
  The latter can lead to a decline in the political activity of the people, a reduction in the level of competition of the elite, as a result of which there is a danger of a chaotic situation and the collapse of the political system8.
In the mentioned context, the processes of transformation of the ruling elite of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of the transition-consolidation concept are used.
  Therefore, the ruling elite of the Republic of Armenia as a political entity 7 See Political Modernization, http.
//all-politologija.ru/knigi/politologiya-uchebnoe-posobie-dlya8 See Lancov S. А., Ланко И. S., General Laws of Modernization and Specifics in Russia in East Asia, http: // www.
//www.politex.info/content/view/87/30/.
The urgency of the study of the dualization actor is conditioned by the imperatives of linear to multi-vector development.
Due to the linear reforms made by the "first generation" democrats, the Armenian society is immersed in political development crises.
  Established monopolies have led not only to the alienation of citizens, but also to a lack of trust in the ruling elite.
  The current situation is, in fact, a threat to the results of the changes carried out by the ruling elite.
The work done allows us to reach the following conclusions.1. The ruling elite in the process of modernization of the political system must: • Realize the need for "natural modernization of the values ​​of democracy in Armenian society for the sake of sovereignty, security of its own society, avoidance of political development crises", establishment of a social, legal state; • Preserve its own national values ետ Develop a culture of cooperation in the conditions of ensuring the natural modernization of the society in accordance with the international norms of values.
2. At present, the political elite, as an integral part of the government, has, in fact, found itself in a monopoly position in the political system, which contradicts not only the principles of the polyarchic elite, but also the principles of democratization, transition and consolidation.
 Therefore, the provision of the latter is possible only under the conditions of cooperation, mutual agreement, real discourse of economic, political, military, strategic-cultural-elite groups.
3. As a key player in political modernization, the transformation of society, the ruling elite, for the formation of a polyarchic society, presupposes the establishment of large-scale institutions, the provision of a realistic political agenda.
 To this end, the ruling elite must also cooperate with the elite opposition groups.
  Therefore, in order to ensure the acceptance and legitimacy of the ruling elite, the opposition elites must be heard և involved in the process of developing a political course.
4. In the conditions of the democratic transition of the Republic of Armenia, the establishment of a political-civic culture presupposes the existence of a ruling elite seeking legitimacy, for which the introduction of the values ​​of spirituality in the public consciousness and the ensuring of national-liberal values ​​are decisive.
Julieta Nikoghosyan VALUE CHANGES IN THE THEORY OF POLITICAL MODERNIZATION Keywords: political modernization, development, ruling elite, transitional society, democracy, polyarchySummary.
