THE NATIONAL-LIBERATION STRUGGLE OF THE BULGARIAN PEOPLE IN THE PAGES OF "MSHAK" (1870-YEARS) The interest of the Armenian press has long been focused on Archelian interrogation.
 The national-liberation struggle of the Bulgarian people, being a part of that issue, could not but draw attention, as the Armenians were fighting for liberation from the rule of the Ottoman Empire.
XIX century The "Mshak" newspaper published in Tbilissi (Georgia) has been consistently raised by the Armenian periodicals since the first year of its publication1.
  The first years of the newspaper's publication coincided with the Argean crisis, the Ottoman Empire and the liberation struggle of the oppressed nations, the Russian-Turkish war, and the convening of the Berlin Congress.
  It was during this period that the Armenian question came to a standstill, and the rapid liberation of the Slavic nations gained new momentum; many Slavic peoples were finally able to restore their independence.
  Grigor Artsruni's "Mshak" widely covered the events, each time drawing the attention of the Armenian reader to the struggle of other Bulgarian, Serbian and Balkan peoples, with a special call to fight and resolve the Armenian question by a similar example.
 Thus, the coverage of the national-liberation struggle of the Bulgarians became one of the components of "Mshak" -political articles.
Gr. Artsruni criticized the "National Constitution" and the "Ottoman Constitution" 2.
  He called on the Armenian-Armenians to stand together with the Slavic nations and create their true constitution with weapons.
  The joint struggle in "Mshak" was considered to be the most important issue before the Russian-Turkish war.
  Mshak considered that "the Asia Minor movement contributed to the rapid determination of the success of the Slavic movement" 3.
The national liberation struggle of the Balkan peoples becomes the main material of "Mshak"'s foreign theories.
 K. Bold reports from Constantinople continue to expose the settlement of the Ottoman Empire. The first issues of "Mshak" were published in 1872. from January 1, Gr. Edited by Artsruni.
2 National Constitution of 1857 Armenian-Armenian intellectuals N. Rusinyan, G. Otyan, S. Vechenyan, G. Palyan և by others and in 1863 ratified by the sultan.
 Being a legal document regulating the internal life of the Armenians, the Constitution did not have a serious impact on the improvement of the life of the Armenians.
  There was no belief in the Ottoman Constitution, because in 1839 և 1856 The proclamations of the reforms did not play such a significant role in improving the legal status of the subject nations, so Gr. Artsruni did not hope that the constitution would solve those problems.
3 See Cultivator, 1876, № 26, p.
treacherous behavior 1.
  "The sultan has changed, that is true, but the way of government has remained the same… In the rebel countries, for example, the same unspeakable barbarities are being committed as in the time of Abdul Aziz.
 Newly K. The central power of Constantinople has ordered the ruthless destruction of 150 villages in Bulgaria.
 These villages are now a pile of ruins, the old people who could not escape the mountains were massacred, 60,000 women were "caught in the hymns", ordered to be taken to Asia Minor, sold in the shops there, like slaves.
  About 20,000 healthy young Bulgarians are imprisoned in various prisons, including more than 2,000 people who have died of starvation and disease in prisons. .
  Gr. Artsruni was dissatisfied with the draft Ottoman constitution, which, according to him, did not give anything to the subject nations.
  It was necessary to join the Slavonic movement and give a joint counterattack to the Ottoman Empire. The main political position of Artsruni.
  "The whole of Europe looks indifferently at that desperate battle of the Slavic race.
We are talking about European powers, but not public opinion.
 Public opinion, of course, everywhere sympathizes with the just cause of the Slavs, the cause of the freedom of Christians.
  Even in a state that helps the Turks with money and weapons, perhaps with troops, public opinion is outraged by the barbarity perpetrated by the Turks.
  Yes, the English public opinion, not looking at the shameful course taken by the state in relation to the Eastern problem, is constantly protesting against the barbarities of the Turks. ”3
A special place in the articles of "Mshak" was given to the notifications concerning the relations between the Greek Patriarchate and the Bulgarian Church4.
  From the beginning of the liberation struggle, the Greek Church put pressure on the Bulgarian Church, և in the 1870s. This was no exception.
 In particular, we see how the Greek Church oppresses the Bulgarian population and the church in different regions.
  K. stands out among them. The letter of a number of missionaries from Constantinople, written to draw the attention of the Romans to the events taking place in the city of Rushchuk. "The Greek bishops of Bulgaria oppress the people, especially in Rushchuk և etc.
  The German newspaper 5 thinks that these printed letters are aimed at gaining sympathy for the Holy See of Rome. the chair ”6.
1Gorgyan L., Grigor Artsruni և his "The Cultivator", Yerevan, 1996, p. 144.
2 "Mshak", 1876, № 23, page 3.
3 "Cultivator", 1876, № 26, page 3.
4 After the Crimean War, the Bulgarians waged a vast struggle for ecclesiastical autonomy.
 They demanded to elect the head of the Bulgarian church independently, not to depend on the Greek patriarchate.
  This process worsened the relations between the Greek-Bulgarian churches and led the Bulgarian people to revolt.
 Fearing that the religious struggle would take on greater volumes, the High Door in 1870. On February 28, 1945, he issued a decree establishing an independent Bulgarian patriarchate.
  However, this "did not help to get rid of the persecution of the Greek Patriarchate, which sometimes led to clashes between the two religious communities."
5 “K Zenische Zeitung”.
6 "Mshak", 1872, № 51, page 5.
The daily also pays close attention to Turkey's internal problems, which are covered in almost every issue.
  When talking about the Ottoman Empire in the East, the reader focuses on the problems of Turkey. "The ongoing revolt in the provinces of ց Herzegovina, Bosnia and Bulgaria, the deplorable economic situation of the state, the complete absence of capable state people, the complete bankruptcy of the state treasury, the useless organization of the army, the inability of the Christian nations to tolerate it." "- Rebellion, war, material bankruptcy, plague, poverty, oppression, violence, bigotry, - this is the dark abyss in which Turkey is now, this is the pitiful image of that country."
 The newspaper notes that if in the past the subject nations were satisfied only with the expansion of their rights, now (it refers to the Herzegovina uprising that took place in 1875) the subject nations demand an interim government, which will be elected by the local peoples, inspired by the uprising. "No one thought that the result of this uprising would be the complete collapse of the Turkish state."
 Considering these events a complete fall of Turkey, the article also shows despair because the revolts of the Slavic nations do not become a stimulus for the uprising of the Armenian people.
"Mshak" particularly refers to the activities of the Turkish authorities, which are hindering the Bulgarian national liberation struggle, especially the fact that a number of Bulgarian newspapers were closed. "By the order of the Turkish government, the Bulgarian newspaper" Pravo "was banned."
 Then it is added. "Some time ago, two other Bulgarian newspapers were banned: 'Turkey' and 'Macedonia', so the Bulgarians now do not have any newspapers in Iranian."
 By recording these facts, the newspaper wants to show the dire situation of national newspapers in the Ottoman Empire, the existence of which was endangered in every way, they could be closed even if they raised even the smallest national problem.
By focusing on the national liberation struggle of the Balkan countries and the problems that have arisen as a result, "Mshak" pays special attention to the accumulation of Turkish troops and political upheavals.
  1875 An uprising broke out in Herzegovina, և Gr. Artsruni predicted that the uprising would spread to other parts of the Balkan Peninsula.
  And indeed, after Herzegovina, the revolt spread to Bosnia, Montenegro, and then to Bulgaria.
The newspaper presents yearly data on the rebel forces.
 Thus, when the proclamation of the Serbian prince Milan to start a war against Turkey is published, the number of the Bulgarian army is given. "The army of the Bulgarian rebels reaches 45 thousand" 4.
  Thus, all the peoples of the Balkans were preparing to fight against the Ottoman Empire.
1 "Mshak", 1876, № 18, page 3.
2 In the same place.
3 "Cultivator", 1874, № 5, page 3.
4 "Mshak", 1876, № 24, page 3.
Immediately after the April uprising, Gr. Artsruni made a statement of program significance. "Whoever values ​​the liberation of the Slavic tribes from violence, he must wholeheartedly want the same movement to appear among the Christians of Asia Minor, because it is the only way to destroy, once and for all, the old accounts of the nations subject to Turkey."
  The movement in Asia Minor would contribute to the rapid determination of the success of the Slavic movement.
  As it is known, Bulgaria rebelled… ".
On the eve of the Russian-Turkish war, such a call for the solidarity of the Armenian-Slavic peoples was made by Gr. Artsruni came from the reliable situation created by the Armenians.
  In addition to describing the terrible situation of the Armenians in the article "Isn't it the turn of Armenians now?" Artsruni was moved by the idea that it was the turn of the Armenians to revolt after the Bulgarians.
Numerous reports and programs published in "Mshak" told about the unspeakable barbarities committed by the Turkish invaders in Bulgaria.
  "Can the pen describe or tell the word of all the bloody holes for which Bulgaria served as a stage," wrote "Mshak" theorist Spandaryan in those days with anger.
 Like Artsruni, Spandaryan considered the events taking place in Bulgaria to be the result of the two-sided policy of England, the European states. "We owe it to politics that the Balkan Peninsula has become a slaughterhouse. England helps the Bashibozuks."
Nevertheless, in a letter received from Yerevan, "Mshak" expressed hope for the success of the national liberation struggle of the Balkan peoples, regretting the indifferent policy of other Christians living in the Ottoman Empire, particularly the plight of Armenians.
The newspaper begins to cover the Bulgarian liberation struggle with more articles in 1877-1878. during the Russian-Turkish war.
The triumphant advance of Russian troops in the Balkans and Western Armenia aroused unprecedented enthusiasm among the Armenian people.
  The attention of the whole press and society was focused on the war in Armenia and Bulgaria.
 Every victory of the Bulgarian-Russian troops հող Bulgarian world soldiers arouses admiration among the Armenians.
However, the liberation struggle of the Bulgarian people Gr. Artsruni is quite one-sided, in particular, he is negatively opposed to the policy of the major European powers, especially England and Austria; he unequivocally presents Russia's policy in the Balkans, especially in the Bulgarian territories.
  If we take into account the socio-political atmosphere prevailing in Tbilissi (Georgia) at that time, the mood of the writers of "Mshak" newspaper is completely understandable.
  From this point of view, 1877-1878 were important. On the eve of the Russian-Turkish war, Mshak's great efforts to strengthen the Russian orientation of the Armenian people.
  The role of the final solution of the Arjelyan tangled issue Gr. Artsruni reserves to Russia.
  Armenians should 1 "Mshak", 1876, № 35, page 3.
become one of the pillars that Gr. Artsruni, on whom Russia must carry out its historical mission, whose "title was to spread world civilization in the East. That resilient, hard-working, nation that sacrificed the idea of ​​Christianity to itself, the Armenians, could serve as a means to achieve Russia's goal in Asia Minor.
The Armenians could be the most loyal mediators for Russia, contributing to the goals այդ of that state և calling, spreading and introducing the light of the gospel Փ European education in Asia Minor, hence և the common human civilization ”1.
Another problem was what sources Mshak used.
 Both European and Turkish and Russian newspapers were numerous here.
The newspaper, of course, referred to the various publications of the Armenian press, as well as to the numerous correspondences and letters sent to the editorial office by K. From Constantinople, Smyrna, Yerevan, Sofia and other cities.
  Of course, the majority were Russian newspapers, of which it is worth mentioning the newspaper "Русские ведомости".
  "Mshak" regrets that "the most popular and powerful organ of the most sympathetic part of the Russian intelligentsia" has no readers in the Caucasus2.
 References from "Вестник Ewropы", "Северный вестник", "Русская мысль" newspapers were inseparable in the issues of "Mshak".
  Gr. Artsruni mentions that "Russkaymsl" newspaper adheres to the ideology of "Mshak", regrets that the Armenian reader is almost unaware of the newspaper, while "it is generally higher than the previous two, it is the most popular magazine" 3.
  Thus, "Mshak" is somewhat oriented towards the Russian liberal press, which represented the democratic issue of Russian public thought.
In conclusion, it should be noted that the reflection of the national-liberation struggle of the Bulgarians in "Mshak" newspaper was of great importance in the spread of liberation ideas among the Armenian people. The correspondence of Artsruni, Raffi, Spandaryan greatly contributed to the liberation ideas spreading and receiving new impetus.
  In all the articles on the Balkan Slavs, especially the liberation struggle of the Bulgarians, the newspaper comes to a logical conclusion that if the Armenian-Armenians want to break the yoke of foreigners, they must follow the example of the Bulgarians.
Hayk MkhoyanBULGAR PEOPLE'S NATIONAL LIBERATION STRUGGLE IN THE PAGES OF "MSHAK" (1870s) Keywords: Bulgarian national liberation struggle, "Mshak" newspaper, Ottoman Empire, Bulgarian nationalist
