TECHNOLOGICAL COMMENTS G. GHAPANJYAN'S "HISTORY OF THE ARMENIAN LANGUAGE. ANCIENT PERIOD ”WORKPlanes are one of the layers of the language's vocabulary that contain unique, rich information.
 Being linguistic facts, they are a unique mirror, which reflects the history, language, national description and mentality of the peoples.
  The toponymy is the result of historical, geographical, linguistic and political factors.
  The study of toponyms refers to both simultaneous and asynchronous stages of language development1.
As a discipline, toponymy bridges several sciences: linguistics, history, geography, psychology, ethnography.
 Toponymy is a young science discipline. It originates from the 18-19th centuries, although the place name has a history of more than 6 millennia.
The purpose of our report is to examine the toponyms pointed out by Grigor Ghapantsyan, comparing them with H. Barseghyan, T. Hakobyan, St. With the relevant testimonies of the five-volume "Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia" authored by Melik-Bakhshyan ("Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia", T.Kh. Hakobyan, H.Kh. Barseghyan, ST Melik-Bakhshyan, Yerevan, 1986, 1988 , 1991, 1998, 2001).
Grigor Ghapantsyan (1887-1956) is a brilliant member of the Faculty of Oriental Languages ​​of St. Petersburg University.
  In his monographs: "Linguistic disciplines և language" (1914), "General linguistics" (E., 1937-39), "History of Urartu" (1940), "On the relationship between Armenian and Laz-Megrelian languages" (Russian, E., 1952), "Armenia - the cradle of the Armenians" (Russian: 1947), "History of the Armenian language" (E., 1961), "Историко-лингвистическиеботы", 1-2 (E., 1956-1975), to the general urgent problems of comparative linguistics, the Armenian language, the Armenian history, the origins of the formation of the Armenian people, and the present-day kinship relations.
Ghapantsyan “History of the Armenian language. "Ancient Period" is the only work left unattended during the life of a great scientist, in which the Armenologist, having studied all the facts about the connection between ancient and dead languages, has combined rich historical, mythological, linguistic and ethnographic materials.
 Based on these similarities, he outlined the influences of the ancient Asia Minor languages ​​- Hittite, Urartian, Khurite, Lazo-Megrelian - on Armenian2.
 Ghapantsyan has thoroughly examined many toponyms, surnames and surnames, has given the commonalities of Armenian և the mentioned languages ​​at the level of vocabulary։ grammar.
1. Գ. Ghapantsyan mentions the name of Aylaberk village, present-day Ala-Pars, which was located in the Kotayk province of Great Armenia.
  2. He explains the word as "clans with another name", noting that "bring" means "clan, tribe", and "al" is the name of a clan, like Aghiovit, derived from Eli / Aylitohm.
3. We see the same "bring" root in the toponym Arberan (i), which was a province in Vaspurakan province.
 It is evidenced in the sources from the 5th century է was known by about 13 names, for example, Amko Yerkir, Gnunis, Tarberuni.
  The name is based on the Ar-Asia Minor root, which means "eagle", "gift", "friend", in this case "eagle", և speaks of the ancient traces of eagle totem worship.
4. Arhita, which was a city in Western Armenia, more specifically in Hayasa, of Unichetan origin. is based on irhi // erhi - the word "border", and -ita is a particle with which in Hittite 1 Hmmt. Dilbaryan N., Historical-geographical-linguistic factors in Armenian toponyms, Yerevan, 2001, pp. 6-11.
2 Hmmt. Ghapantsyan G., History of the Armenian language. Old period, Yerevan, 1961, pp. 62-68.
The practical syllable was formed, which is present in the toponyms Andzit (province in the Fourth Hayk), Amit, Kharzit, Sit.
 irhi // erhi root is present in Arkhashen, which is one of the peaks of Geghama և known by other names, such as Arkashen, Arkhashan, Tsaghkavet.
Asianik ber has its roots in Armavir, Shulaver, Talaver և Vaghaver toponyms, but ber has undergone a phonetic change with the typical Armenian b / v transition, which is pronounced Biyana-Van, Urart. abili- more, ebani- avan և in other examples.
5. Armavir is an ancient city in the Ayrarat world of Greater Armenia. Khorenatsi, Yeghishei, Ts. Parpetsi, Sebeos, H. Draskhanakerttsi, V. Archelts և others, evidenced by 14 names, some of which are Aramayir, Argishtikhinili, Armavia, and from the end of the 3rd century BC ից from the beginning of the 2nd century - "Abandoned capital".
 According to Khorenatsi, it was founded and named after Hayk's grandson Aramayis.
 It is probable that it means "the tribal city of Arma" and is the Armenian version of the Urartian Argishtikhinili.
6. Shulaver is a settlement in the province of Tbilissi. They were a river of the same name, a village.
The place name is attested mostly in Georgian sources.
7. Talaver is a village in Western Armenia, in the province of Van, also known as Takaver, Talver.
8. Villages with early names are known in Erzurum, Ayrarat, Syunik provinces, Shirak-Kotayk provinces of Greater Armenia, Kars region, Hadrut region of NKR.
 Ghapantsyan also refers to the different names of Armenia, by which our homeland was known to foreigners.
9. Speaking of Armina from those names, she subjectes it to word-formation analysis. As a result, we have arminaya - "Arminatsi" տեղ -ina, which consists of Hatte-ina, Lulu-ina (place of the Lulu tribe, enemy country), Bia-ina (Bia tribe land, Van), Naşibina (Mtsbin), Palestine ( Land of the Philistines), as in the names of Karin, Pagin, Aghin, Talin, Artin.
 According to Ghapantsyan, Armina coincides with the later Angeghtan, which was mentioned in the Urartian, Hittite-Assyrian inscriptions as Arme // Arime, later Armina.
 The capital was Nihira (Nihira // Nihria), which means "fortress, castle" in Khurite, later replaced by angl <agil = Sumerian egal, Akkadian word ekall-u - "palace".
 In Armenian it is expressed as Angel Dz.
10. The surname Aza originated from the surname Hay - Azz.
  The village of the same name is mentioned in Goghtn և Pokr Hayk, and the ancient country in the Ararat valley is known as Azain.
The surname Bala is the basis of a number of toponyms.
11. Balanrot or Roti Bala is a river in the Caspian Sea basin, also known as Balhab, Bolh-aru.
12. Baghk և Baghats Ashkhar (13) are provinces in Syunik.
14. We do not find the mention of Baghaberd in the works of ancient historians, and the folklore connects the place name with the name of the ancestor Bagh of Syunik. It is said that the province of Baghak Dzorq inherited from the Sisakyans, to establish the stone fortress of Baghak there, which was renamed Baghaberd.
  As evidenced by G. Ghapantsyan and N. Adonts is ethnic in the origin of the name.
 According to Adonts, the place name originated from the "Baghas-Jats" tribe.
15. The name of Karabala or Bala Karan is based on the surname Bala mentioned by Ghapantsyan, which means "bala tsegh", "tsela bala", according to Ghapantsyan, is in Artsakh, and is not evidenced in the "Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia" 2.
16. Xenophon, Buzand, Khorenatsi, Yeghishe, Sebeos, Hovh. The name of the province Basen (located in Ayrarat), which was mentioned many times in the works of Mamikonyan, Draskhanakert and Lastivertsi, originated from the surname of the Basyans or Pasyans.
 In addition to "Basen", it is known by 37 37 names, such as Bagsen, Bisane, Ordunyats Yerkir, Fasiank… 17. Bartav (Partav), a city based on the Megrelian bardi root, means "bush" (чаща, терновый куст), literally "bartut" - shrub.
 -Av (av) is a toponymic part, which is found in the toponyms Vordnav, Kchav, Dzirav, Georgian Thelavi ("Teghut").
 The mentioned city was located in the Utik province of Great Armenia, was founded by Aranshahik Vache II in 462. According to some chroniclers, the city was founded by the order of the Persian king Peroz.
18. Ghapantsyan connects the toponym Gamirk-Cappadocia with the surname gimirri (gimirri), supposes that the Armenian "hero" means "hero, commander".
 The mentioned place is also known as Gami 1 Hmmt. Jahukyan G., History of the Armenian language. Preliminary period, Yerevan, 1987, pp. 279-292.
2 See Ghapantsyan G., page 38.
ra, Ima, Katpatuk, Spitak Assyrik և under other names.
 Gamirk-Cappadocia was a region, a country-province in the east of Asia Minor, in the middle reaches of the Alice River.
 Evidenced since the time of the Hittite state in its territory.
  Apart from Ghapantsyan's etymology, there are two etymologies. (a) Cappadocia means "land of chosen horses"; (b) originated from the name of the river Capatag.
 The name Old Gamirk is connected with Q. Named after the Cimmerians who infiltrated the territory of the former Hittite state in the 8th century1.
19. The toponym Gardabani (Gardavan) consists of the roots ebani or abani, of which ebani means "country" in Georgian, abani - "place" in Megrelian, ubani - "district, district" in Kartvelian.
 Gardavan was obtained through the typical Armenian> b v e> a transitions.
 This place name has about 13 other names: Kurtmanik, Parisos, Krtmanik, etc., it was located in Gardmanadzor province of the Utik world of Great Armenia.
 Witnessed by St. Tarontsi Asoghik, H. In the works of Draskhanakert և in Georgian sources.
20. The toponym Gegharkunik (Welikuni) originates from the Urartian word wel - "regiment, regiment", which corresponds to the Russian word polk - "regiment". volk ​​means "people" in Armenian, and the root wel is translated as "village, peasant" with the transfer w> g.
  Both Ghapantsyan and N. The origin of the name Adonts is connected with the name of a beautiful tribe living in the Araks region, and according to Patmahor, the place name originated from the name of Hayk's heir Gegham.
 Some scholars have identified it with the Kiehun area mentioned in the Urartian inscriptions.
 According to the "Geography", the province was located in the Syunik province of Great Armenia, in the basin of Lake Sanaa.
21. The place name of the court is of Khurtian origin. The name Dada is associated with the Hittite orthographic name Patta and the Hittite hieroglyphic name Tatta.
  It literally means "Residence of the God of Judgment", and the God of Judgment replaced Teshup, the god of water thunder.
  Other names are mentioned: Altaytuan, Tadvan, Zorkonk, etc.
  We had a village, a settlement, a fortress, a port a village Բ Bznunik in the homonymous town of Mete Hayk Turuberanashkhar or in the province of Bitlis of the same name in the province of Bitlis և a village in Diarbekir.
22. One of the ancient cradles of the Armenian people is the Church, which literally means "field people".
 It originated from the Semitic word ehi-u "field" (it is the field of the Church).
 It was the sanctuary of the goddess Anahit, and after the conversion to Christianity, the property of the house of the Enlightener.
 Due to these historical changes, it was also known as Anaitika, Anahit province, Lusavorichigavar and 40 other names, for example, Eccles, Chelzene, Sene. It should be noted that the name has nothing to do with the term "church", and the other versions of the name Ekelesene or Achillesene have nothing to do with the Turkish word "kilisa" - "church".
 It is possible that the Church originated from Geghi or the place name of the Church.
23. The toponym Yeghivard literally means "upper water". In Hittite, ehi is the upper, and Isvard is the water.
  The root "Yeghi" has been preserved in other toponyms: Yeghipatrush - "upper town", Yeghivank - "upper monastery".
 A village called Yeghivard or Yeghvard is mentioned in the Aragatsotn province of the Ayrarat world of Greater Armenia, not far from the city of Kapan, and an ancient city in the present-day Kotayk region.
  The place name has been subjected to folk etymology.
  According to one of them, when they saw from the ark of Noah that the water had receded from the foot of Mount Ara, they exclaimed, "Behold, now the water has receded."
  According to another legend, the spear of Christ was preserved in the monastery adjacent to the village, due to which the village was renamed Geghard, then Yeghvard.
 One of the battles fought by Ara և Shamiram is connected with the latter.
 The Catholicos Movses II of Yeghvard (574-604) and the Catholicos of Mashtots I of Yeghvard (897-898) were born in Yeghvard.
 The last L. It is the prototype of the main character of Shant's drama "Old Gods".
24. One of the territories of the Urartian kingdom is the land of Eria or Eriain, which in Eurasian is called Eria-e ibani.
  Ghapantsyan connects it with the surname Eria, which is of Iranian origin.
 The archaeologist Nikolsky saw mediations in the names of the present-day Yeryan of the Eryan country, but that view was rejected by N. By Adonts.
 The region is mentioned in the cuneiform inscriptions of Argishti I.
25. The name of the village Թ village of Taghavard River in the Martuni region of the NKR is based on the above-mentioned rose / verd root, which originated from the Hittite wātar> Armenian vard, meaning "water" meaning "inner water".
  By the way, the same vard root is underlying the word "vardavar".
  According to folk etymology, the place was called Taghavard because of the fact that many rose bushes (districts) used to have it.
26. The toponym Lahirhila or Lahirkhila (an ancient city in Armenia) is a compound word consisting of the Lahir-widow և Hittite hila - "hugh" components.
  The name Ayran was pronounced Lahr-, 1 See Jahukyan G., p. 495.
which appears in a Cappadocian native word: La-ah-ra-ah-šu (Lahr-ahšu). "-Ahšu" means "prince, chief" and belongs to a number of such groups: Berw-ahšu, Azzan-ahšu, Hištahšut-Kin-ahšu.
 Lahr-hila literally means "Lakhr living room, anteroom".
27. G. Ghapantsyan mentions the name of Letarich village, which was located in the historical Little Armenia, in the province of Shapin Garahisar, Sebastia province.
 In the toponymic dictionary it is indicated in Latarich version.
  Ghapantsyan considers the place name to have originated from * Latararichtz, which literally means "place of grain" - "Hatsavan". It originated from the Hittite word aladdar (laddar), which is equivalent to the Armenian words "dessert / desserts", "fruit", "evil", "salt", "grain".
The work mentions several toponymic suffixes, one of which is evidence of the families of those families in Kotayk, Korchayk, Rshtunik, Mokq.
However, q is not always a place name. This is the case, for example, in the case of the toponyms Kark (= Kars), Doghq (= Doghs), Yereruk, Ekeghik, Kecharuk 1.
28. Kotayk was a province in the Ayrarat world of Greater Armenia, evidenced by about 20 other names (for example, Khata province, Kayta, Jrkhbulagh.).
 The place name has an ancient origin. It is connected with the tribe of the same name, it is identified with the name of the country of the Urartian cuneiform.
  Alishan considers it possible that the Kotakene province և Kotayk mentioned by Ptolemy is the same.
 On another occasion, the Armenologist considers the name to have originated from the village of Kutis in Mazaz province.
Some scholars consider the name to be derived from the name of a prince, others from the village of KotaykKetron (now Getamej) or the village of Kot (Kotakar) in the Gegharkunik province, as the province of the displaced or Kotaayetsik.
 Evidence of the place-name appears in the Geography, the first of the chronicles mentioned by Sebeos (7th century).
  The Arab historian mentions Baladzor as Kuyta dz, and M. Chamchyan calls it Khata or Khatayots province.
 Nowadays there is a village of the same name 5 km north-east of Abovyan.
29. Korchayk was one of the 15 worlds of Great Armenia.
 In "Geography", in the works of Khorenatsi and other historians, it is called Korchek.
 It is more often mentioned after the name of its most famous province, Korduk.
 We find the first evidence in Xenophon, remembered as a rich, developed and prosperous country.
30. Rshtunik was a province in the Vaspurakan province of Great Armenia.
  It is known by the names of Arkharunik, Manakert, Vostan, Tosp։.
 The origin of the name is connected with the country names of Urashtu (Urartu) և Rishuan, which are mentioned in the Assyrian Jurassic cuneiform sources.
31. Mokk was the smallest province of Greater Armenia, it had about 15 other names, such as Maekats, Moksene, Mushki, etc.
 In one case the name is explained by the ancient name musk, musk, in another case by the word magician (in the religious sense).
32. One of the oldest names in the Armenian world is Hayasan, mentioned in Hittite inscriptions found in the 20th century.
  It literally means "place of the Armenian nation (god)."
  Composed of the -sa (-sa) particle, which in turn is composed of -s (-s) (in Luwian language) և a (a) particles, shows the influence of the Hittite-Luwian, that is, West Asia Minor languages2.
 This part is composed of a number of toponyms, such as Khatusa, Khutlusa (Khutlasa) - "place of khurites", Zazzisa - "place of zazas", Ninasa - "Nina goddess", Tarkhundasa - "place of Tarkhunt god".
 Hayasa is often united with its northeastern neighbor Azza in the Chorokh basin; this tribal union is called Hayasa-Azzi.
 Some people simply identify Azz with Hayasa.
 The fact that Armenia, the people of Armenia and Armenia are indisputably connected with each other is indisputable, but those relations have not been fully covered yet.
33. The toponyms Mardad, Mardpetaran (34), Managh (Mananagh) (35), which form the "Muratsan" ministries of Amatun, arose from the Mannian's surnames of people, maders (= mares) և Mannats 3.
  The first two in the dictionary of toponyms, however, are not proven, and Mananagh, also known as Derjan Verin, Lakzo Dzor, Mananalis, was located in Bardzr Hayk.
  Khorenatsi was the first to mention, but Ghapantsyan allegedly accepted Sebeosin as the first to mention, proposing J. To bring the managh of Managh, brought by Parpetsi to Mardagh, as he has with Yeghishe.
  According to Ghapantsyan, the name originated from the Managh horse, in the Daranaghi style.
 They also check Mana (personal name) + salt 1 See Ghapantsyan G., pp. 55-56.
2 See Jahukyan G., pp. 322-332.
3 See Ghapantsyan G., page 46.
(= ali - suffix) with egg.
 Adonts mentions the province of Manragh somewhere, which, in all probability, is a mistake.
36. Npat is a mountain in the Armenian Highlands է known as Aghi, Tapasheit, Nifat, Noyapat, Npatakan և
 Evidenced in both Armenian and Greek, Latin and Ukrainian sources.
  It is connected with the name of the mountain god Nupatik.
  The mountain has retained its theological function in the form of the famous "Three Churches" (Uchkilisa) built on its slope, Old Bagavan, which literally means "God's place, place" (khurit.).
37. Shaghagom (Shaghagumg, Shaghagmq, Shatalagom, Shatgomk և etc.) was a province of Great Hayk in the High Hayk world.
 The first mention is Ghazar Parpetsi.
 According to Armenian historians, Mashtots taught the first group of his students in this very province, to open the first school from here.
  The place name consists of a Hittite root, "big" և means "big barn".
 This root has been preserved in the words chatter (talk), chatter (deceiver), chatter (foolish, crazy).
38. Shashverd is a river in the Araks basin.
 Originated from Shaghverd horse. It is based on the word "water", which is derived from the Hittite word wetar.
  The same root is present in Olaverd, Lastiverd, as in the basis of the above-mentioned toponyms Yeghivard աղ Taghavard.
39. The toponym Pattariga (Patarič), which had 14 other names (for example, Bgarich, Btarich, Pitterich, Pitarij…), is a village in the province of Yerznka, Erzurum Province, Western Armenia.
 In a 14th century manuscript it is attested by Ptarich egg.
 Equivalent to Urartian patari - "city" (here "small town" or "fortress").
  Corresponds to the village of Bitarich near Yerznka.
-arig // - rig (-ariga // - riga) are toponyms, there are Btarich, Gagtarich, Gaylarich, Zardarich, Khokarich, Arjo arich-arinj toponyms, they mean "place, place of residence".
  Let us compare it with the Megrelian orenji horse, whose consonant originated before j, j, as in the words Arinj, karmunj, darnunj (bitter plant).
  In Asia Minor, Hittite words such as Aladar-ariza, meaning "bread," are preserved along with the word "lion."
 "Aladdar" in Hittite means "grains of wheat" (pronounced dessert <alander <aladdar), which is an abbreviated version of ladar (see Letarich).
40. The place name Jajur (settlement, river, village, mountain in the Pambak mountain range) derives from the Khuri word Zaza.
  41. The same root has been preserved in the toponyms Zaz և Zazi doz (42) (plain in Ashtarak), which are not evidenced in the dictionary of toponyms.
 Ghapantsyan supposes that Jazz և Ջ Jajur are dialectal forms in which f has turned into j.
 These names are known from Nuzi ապ Cappadocia tablets as native local words: Zazia, Zaz, Zaza (god), Zazuni1.
  43. With the name of Zaza H. Manandyan connects the name of the country Zazisa mentioned in the Hittite inscriptions.
44. Sper was a province (village, village town) in Erzurum province of Western Armenia.
It was mentioned in Armenian, Greco-Roman, Assyrian, Byzantine, Georgian and Turkish sources.
 Ղ. Inchichyan identifies one of the four rivers of paradise with Chorokh, and Khavilaerkir with the land of the Khalibs, where, according to the Bible, there was gold.
 It is in that country that Sper is introduced, and Ghapantsyan connects his name with the surname of the Esperites.
45. Tamber is a province in the Persian-Armenian world of Greater Armenia, also referred to as Tambet, Tambers, Tamberk, Tanber.
 It literally means "give, clan".
46. ​​From the worlds of Greater Armenia, Turuberan (Tarono, Tarberuni, Taruberan), the name of the province, is rarely mentioned. Only Yeghishe, Khorenatsi, Shirakatsi.
The name was used in two ways: Turuberan և Taruberan.
 Moreover, A. Shirakatsi, feeling that the name is less used, unknown to many, notes that Turubera is the Taroni world ("Tarono's side").
 The word "taur (and)" means "clans" or "tribes", and tauz means "bull".
 Different means "with Taruberan".
47. Utbrun is a village in Syunik.
 It literally means "eight clans".
48. The name Pambak corresponds to the word p΄ap΄ala ('' обрыв, пропасть ''), in which -ala- is a suffix (like boši - "boy", bošala - "youth, courage", kazaxi - "peasant, Cossack" ", Kazaxala -" virtue ").
  P΄ap΄ corresponds to the Armenian word pamb (pamp), hence the names Papshen և Pambak.
 Khurite pab means "mountain, mountain", from which Paphi // Pab-hi - "mountain", Urartu. Baba - "mountain, mountain", Armenian pamp - "high place", Baba - "hill", Apapay - the words "difficult և rocky places".
 In Megrelian p΄ap΄ala means "mountain, cliff" - a feature of a mountain.
1 Ghapantsyan G., page 125.
49. The place-name Kashatagh (province in Syunik province, in the Araks river basin, peak in the Lesser Caucasus), also referred to as Kashatagh province, Kashtagh, Kshtaghq և in other names, originated from the Kajberuni / Kashberuni's horse, which in turn is kaša (kašga) .
50. The toponyms of Kashi meg և Kashunik (51) have the same origin, the first of which is a village in Vayots Dzor province.
  Stepanos Orbelyan (13th century) mentions that there was a province called Kashuniq in the Syunik world of Greater Armenia, a village in the Kashatagh region of the NKR.
52. Kghimar Fortress (fortress city) located in Kegh province of Aghdznik province is mentioned in Armenian-Byzantine sources.
  Յ. Marquardt identifies it with the name of Kullimer mentioned in the Assyrian Jurassic Protocols, while others identify it with the fortress city of Kutmar mentioned in Hittite sources.
  The Assyrian transliteration of the name is Kullumeri, first it was pronounced Kullimer // Kulimar, then Khelimar.
Kristine Bagratyan LOCAL COMMENTS G. GHAPANTSYAN'S "HISTORY OF THE ARMENIAN LANGUAGE. OLD PERIOD "OF WORK Keywords: Gr. Ghapantsyan, "History of the Armenian language. Ancient period ”work, place names, surnames, surnames, epithets, etymology.
