SONG TV PRODUCT AND ADULT VALUE SYSTEM (EXAMPLE OF RA TV COMPANIES) The recreational (restorative) function of providing entertainment has a special place among the functions of television.
  According to some sources, most viewers watch TV to relieve stress, relax, and have a good time.
 In addition to music, comedy shows, movies, and TV games, comedy shows and TV series can play a role in the programs that carry out this function of television.
  Being among the most watched programs, their viewers are teenagers, and the authors of humorous programs, in response to the criticism addressed to them, claim that their products are not intended for that age group.
 The purpose of this article is to show the impact that satirical programs and movies can have on a teenage audience.
Satire որը humor has other important social components in addition to its restorative function և they are capable of their various genres today in the age of subtle tactics for the most effective influence on opinions և positions.
 Theorists state: "Felieton, especially today, can have a serious public resonance, becoming a powerful means of influencing public opinion."
 However, it is one thing to have an unintentional effect, it is another thing to have a calculated և intended effect.
  The first is more typical of programs created exclusively for entertainment, to relax, the second - for programs that undertake social commitments.
Satirical programs are among the most important TV productions in terms of presenting and creating values, as they are more attractive, easy to digest in terms of eggs and content.
 The psychological circumstance of their perception - relieving tension, family, weakening of conscious reflection - make these characteristics more effective in terms of influencing.
 Television journalism manuals refer especially to satirical programs that are characterized by a consciously, deliberately aggravated social context, and therefore a calculated impact on the audience.
  Thus, "The main thing for the satirical genre is the formation of a sharper, more pronounced attitude towards the phenomena around us, when the emergence of humor and laughter is used as a weapon" 3.
  "And it is natural that the audience wants to see life transformed after all that.
  Sometimes the same author-satirist, presenting the situation, expresses his murderous attitude, that is, not to change the situation, but to destroy it through ridicule ”4.
 In other words, professionalism is combined with satire that has undertaken social commitments.
Therefore, the question arises: what is the image of Armenian television in terms of social commitments?
 The first impression is that there are no programs with such a problem on TV.
  The authors of the satirical programs do not seem to make a demand to influence the public opinion, moreover, they respond to the negative assessments, saying that their program is not intended for this or that audience.
  And it remains unclear for what audience the program is intended.
  In addition, the satirical 1 See Rozhko A., A TV show on the formation of the "map of peace" television, Journal of the Udmurt University, № 2, 2005, p. 81.
2 Yeritsyan S., Contemporary manifestations of television genres, Yerevan, Pedagogue, 2004, p. 53.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., Pp. 51-52.
The situations presented in the programs եղանակ the ways of presenting them do not arouse a negative attitude, but on the contrary, they can give birth to a pleasure նույն to identify with them.
What's possible here is a lack of humor born of serious creativity.
 ATV TV's "Arm Comedy" program, for example, instead of creative, pictorial humor, tries to make fun of people often through serious ethical mistakes, making passers-by funny, among whom it conducts polls, forcing them to comment on absurd, imaginary situations.
The "Low Comments" program of "Armenia" TV Company is characterized by the same low taste of comments, the motto of which, according to the author group, is the following: "We comment on everything. even everything that simply does not need to be commented on ”1.
 Such programs, for sure, can have very negative effects on the adolescent audience, making simplicity, fun and ordinary simplicity.
This issue has also attracted the attention of many media researchers.
 According to many sociologists, "Entertainment media product is a media message aimed at gaining visible pleasure, it has no hidden components" 2.
 Moreover, in order to provide the most effective connection with the audience, in order to reach a larger audience, as the researchers note, the authors of the program often resort to theatricality և to such an extent that it can be daring in terms of the values ​​of a particular society և traditions3.
The tendency to influence the reality became quite noticeable in the season of the Public Television, taking into account in the program policy և, in particular, N. In Duryan's satirical videos "One minute, let me say something".
  Regularly shown short videos can be described as publicist satire.
 It is worth noting the general introduction of the videos, "Wait a minute, let me say something", which with its brevity and haste informs the viewer that it will not take his time, as in the tone of intimacy, talkativeness, it provides an accurate everyday story, a way of listening.
 The duality of such an approach is interesting. On the one hand, it draws attention to socially rejected phenomena, on the other hand, in its style of telling and telling stories, it imitates the style of gossip, saying "to the neighbor's ear".
  Thus, the TV channels criticize the aspects of the Armenian society that are criticized, for example, in the pavilions of Yerevan yards, around coffee tables.
 And they are criticized in almost the same style.
  According to this, it can be said that such criticism may draw additional attention to the rejected phenomena, but in its entirety it reproduces the image of the same society.
These videos can also be seen as a social advertisement, where the guessed idea of ​​the need for change is advertised through criticism and denial.
  However, this idea is not so obvious, as it is not presented as a specific content advertising message.
  Although the videos suggest the need for change, the idea of ​​getting rid of the presented negative features, but, in my opinion, the fruitless criticism with the logic "The country is not a country" is advertised in the same or more obscure way.
As stereotyped researcher U. accurately puts it. Lippmann, "The most subtle և most common mechanisms of media influence are those made up of stereotypes.
 We are told about the world before we see it.
 We imagine things in the composition before we have the opportunity to see them directly.
  And if our education is not enough to understand that the information we receive is full of prejudices and prejudices, then they are the ones that guide the process of our perception.
 These prejudices cover the phenomenon, either as an acquaintance, or as strange and unusual, and as a result, with the aggravation of the feeling, the result turns out that what is more or less familiar to a person seems too soulful 1 "Comments", 20.10 .15, (available at http.
//www.armeniatv.am/en/programs/1348645861 link).
3 See Ilyin I., Postmodernism. Словарь терминов, Москва, 2001, (available at http: // www.
//yanko.lib.ru/books/philosoph/ilyinbook.htm link).
dear, and what is not so far away, is completely foreign ”1.
 It is obvious that all these ifs - "lack of social experience", "insufficient level of education" can characterize a teenager.
The main mechanism of satire on Armenian TV can be the topic of special reference.
 We can say that satirical situations are mostly created through rather gross insults.
 In other words, insult is the main way to make people laugh.
It is interesting to consider the aesthetics of such situations, in this case, the imagery.
 In my opinion, special attention should be paid to this issue, because there is a profound "noticeable change" here, which is certainly much more worrying than the negative aspects that are often pointed out in the criticism of such programs.
  This satire changes the nature of the image.
  The creative action, aimed at creating images, is carried out here with a change of values. The principle of being pictorial is preserved, but perceptions about the value of images change.
  The main way to show ingenuity is to address an insulting image to someone else with the most unexpected, unusual combinations.
  It is especially dangerous from the point of view that it creates the illusion of creating in the audience, that is, it satisfies the need to create without, however, worrying about the content.
  This false satisfaction of the need to create is one of the most dangerous aspects of such satire.
 The above can be paralleled with the culturologist V. about the teenagers gathered on the street, who seem to be doing nothing. With Jaloyan's thought. "The definiteness of the area, the purposelessness of the gatherings, but the expediency indicate the aesthetic nature of the event (emphasis added)" 2.
TV companies compete in the production of satirical programs and TV series.
 Each TV channel strives to have its own unique soap opera industry, which will have a larger audience than competing TV channels.
The leaders in this struggle in terms of quantity are "Armenia" and "Shant" TV companies, which in recent years have oversaturated the Armenian TV with entertainment products.
  A significant part of the satire industry is made up of satirical TV series, which we will refer to by separating them from non-satirical TV series.
The TV series "Khopan Theory" of "Shant" TV is one of the manifestations of typical tendencies in recent years.
  They try to ensure the ridiculousness here through ignorance.
 We can say that the two main mechanisms of Armenian entertaining TV series are insult and ignorance.
  If in the case of "Armenia" TV series ("Kargin" TV series 3, "Housewife") the main tool is insult, then in the case of "Shant" TV ("Khopan Theory") the main tool is ignorance.
  However, it is unfortunate that if the TV series "In the Army" of "Shant" TV had a deliberately emphasized value component4, then in the next "City", especially in the TV series "Khopan Theory" the picture is completely different. "I do not even accept everyone in my class, I have to accept every piece of advice," says the heroine of the TV series "Khopan Theory" named Marietta, who is presented as an ignorant and jealous woman.
  One of the young heroines of the TV series falls in love with the actor of the play, she thinks that her name is "Bis", based on the shouts heard in the hall at the end of the play.
 The village girl, Arpine, who came down to her aunt's house, has a clumsy movement. The villainous serial with a pronounced crude, naive behavior reproduces the sub-capital's naive capitalist's naivety, at the same time presenting it again mostly as ignorance.
  And it is noteworthy that these Armenian women left without husbands are opposed by a Russian woman, Yulia, whose civilization is emphasized by the words she utters at the end of each series, "Я no one cares" (I do not understand anything).
  There was this unconscious way of presenting and strengthening the widespread social's stereotypes, there were 2 Jaloyan V., Public space. The city in Armenian literature, Public sphere. "Interpretation" of the dispute (ed. Azatyan V.), Yerevan, 2007, p. 233.
3 For details, see Menemshyan A., Sargsyan Z., Stepanyan V., Transformations of the Armenian Adolescent Value System under the Influence of Electronic Media, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 23-27.
4 For details, see pages 12-19.
5 "Theory of Khopan", episode 17, 06.06.15.
This is one of the potential dangers that adolescents in particular face.
 The authors of the TV series try to present the simple behavior of the heroes, in other words, as ingenuity, prompting where to laugh.
 The laughter that comes after this or that episode often tries to make all the not-so-funny situations or words funny.
  As a result, these preferences of serial producers can be imitated by the audience, especially the adolescent audience, becoming behavioral stereotypes.
Special attention should be paid to one of the most watched satirical TV series lately, "Full House" of "Armenia" TV.
 Here, values ​​typical of traditional society, which are considered traditional, are remarkably combined.
Interesting is the presence of young girls and boys in one apartment, which is a sign of violation of the imagined space between a man and a woman.
 But unlike other experiments familiar to the Armenian viewer, such as the "Alfred Room" project, here the attitude towards tradition is more moderate, and the presented relations are more conservative.
  In my opinion, one of the guarantees of the success of the TV series is this balance, which, despite the unusualness of the situation, at the same time gives the impression of a reliable nature.
 Almost all Armenian soap operas are more or less typical of the alienation of the values ​​presented, when, for example, most of the heroes of the TV series are representatives of the criminal world or have other characters that are difficult to identify with the Armenian environment.
From this point of view, the characters of the hero girls of the TV series are interesting. Beautiful, modern, completely free in the male environment, girls who are presented as equal to men in conflicts, who, at the same time, have moral-traditional orientations.
 One of the heroes, Tatik, who is more modest, works as a waitress, dreams of becoming an actress, which, however, does not mean that she should behave more freely, as the social stereotype might have suggested.
  In this regard, attention is drawn to Hrachikerpar, the cousin of a heroine named Lika, who is presented as supervising her sister, ostensibly a "district authority" ready to defend her honor in street revenge.
  His image, as well as his function in this TV series, is mocked, in parallel with his typical amorous science.
 Of course, we would not be wrong to say that the image of a man who has taken control of women in general is treated in the same way.
However, one of the positive aspects of this TV series is that the humor here is not based on sharp street ridicule.
 Or the satire is not "sterile" here either, but it is much milder, tolerant even when scenes of physical cruelty are shown.
From the point of view of gender relations, thus, the TV series reflects the image of a changing society.
  The image of a modern Armenian girl is outlined, from traditional stereotypes and complexes, but at the same time with values ​​different from Western values.
 This circumstance is well seen in the relationship between the unmarried modern Armenian Tamara and Mushegh, who is called a "father" by girls because of her strong conservative views.
  The TV series, due to its high ratings, can influence the gender perceptions of teenagers.
Thus, Armenian humorous programs and soap operas are full of many factors that negatively affect the teenager.
  The influence of their content և means of expression is more noticeable on adolescents due to insufficient social experience։ knowledge.
 Aside from the obvious: jargon, cheap content, satire, and TV series also pose equally serious dangers, which, however, go unnoticed, making it difficult for adolescents to exercise caution.
Aida Anastasyan SONG TV PRODUCT AND ADOLESCENT VALUE SYSTEM (EXAMPLE OF RA TV COMPANIES) Keywords: teenager, function, media product, language message, audio message, media message
