THE CITY IN THE HISTORY OF HISTORICAL TRANSFORMATIONS. ISSUES OF HISTORICAL-SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH The study of historical processes is considered as a basis for current interpretation.
  People adapt over time և learn about possible phenomena1.
Historical sociology, occupying an intermediate link between the "history" of sociology, looks at the present past, focusing on the formation and transformation of modernity.
Despite the grammatical diversity of past and present, the past is not a completely separate unit.
  For most of history, we have dealt with societies and communities for which the past was a model for the present.
The city, bearing's focus on industrial and technological achievements, becomes a guideline for the development of the society.
  Charles Tilly, observing the connection between the "daily life" of broad structural changes, notes that "the quintessential history of modernity is nothing but the history of the city."
  The application of the historical-sociological methodology of the study of the city in this respect gives an opportunity to observe the current stage of the development of the society in the context of the historical development.
There are traditions of historical-sociological analysis4, each of which is the result of historical changes and interpretations.
 In the course of the study we encounter a variety of approaches that need to be completed և to show the methodological possibilities of urban-sociological analysis և the interrelationships of perspectives.
The field of historical-sociological study is not so much the focus on past events as the observation of their influence on the emergence of modernity.
  Historians use sociology to analyze, to emphasize a specific emphasis in large-scale processes, to draw patterns.
In this regard, the French historian F. Brodell's aim in "What is France?" Is to "find connections, tendencies, repetitions that make that story a retrospective sociology."
R. Aron, summing up M. Weber's approach to the purpose of history և sociology, to explain causal connections, interprets it in two directions: historical causality և sociological causality.
  Historical causality considers the conditions that gave rise to other events.
  Sociological causality is a regular correlation between two phenomena. The event does not have to be the cause of another event, it may to some extent contribute to the emergence of the latter.
The problem of causality lies in the study of all the facts that preceded the event.
 This means classifying events in sequence of development և addressing the latter sequentially: a) extracting the construct of the historical event; b) analyzing the elements of a historical event from complex to private; (c) assuming what would have happened if no specific incident had occurred or otherwise occurred.
  This methodological approach summarizes the stages without which the study will be limited to a mere description6.
  The idea of ​​a functioning subject is possible here. Everything is not determined from the beginning և the construction of the unreal mind is a means of understanding 1 See Mumford L., The City in History.
 Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects, New York, 1961, p. 526.
2 See H. Marutyan, The role of memory in the structure of national identity. Theoretical questions, Yerevan, 2006, page 6.
3 Tilly Ch., What Good is Urban History, Journal of Urban History, 22 (6), 1996.
4 See Delanty G., Isin E., Handbook of Historical Sociology, US, 2003, pp. 9-81.
5 Brodel F., What about France? Space and History, Moscow, 1994, p.17.
6 See Aaron R., Stages of Sociological Thought Development, Moscow, 1993, p. 501.
to see how the event can develop.
  The methodology allows the current facts to be interpreted differently, thus revealing patterns, giving an opportunity to predict possible developments.
  F. Brodel confirms the idea and refers to the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre in this regard, noting: "Reality cannot be dialectical if time is not dialectical, in other words, if we do not realize some manifestations of the future.
  Our present makes sense if it leads to tomorrow, if we go beyond its threshold ”1.
In the course of historical-sociological analysis, the city is studied as such, in contrast to the urban stories, in the case of which the history of the city is considered.
 But is it possible to discuss the history of the city without knowing about the city as such?
 Ch. In this regard, Tilly notes that urban historians overlook the challenge of linking the daily life of the city to macro-processes, while the study of cities as such provides an opportunity to consider everyday experience in the broader context of history.
  Cities are the first to reflect the changes in social life, խոսել When we talk about cities, we are talking about the history of the whole period.
L. Mamford's views Ch. For Tili, it is a way to show that urban historians view each city as a separate specimen, not as a process of affirming or disproving the relationship between such specimens.
  "Either they view cities in a differentiated way, focusing on interurban processes such as urbanization-migration, or they view the city as clearly demarcated to analyze self-contained urban processes."
  Մ. Weber և L. Mamford offered an adequate approach, focusing on the study of individual historical events, the elements that ensured the uniqueness of the city, deviating from the normal, evolutionary schemes of development of other cities.
In the broader historical context, the Annals's school representatives conducted the study.
  The methodological peculiarity of the school was to look at the events in a long time context (longue dure! E).
 F. Brodel, presenting examples of a number of French cities4, shows the possibilities of extracting comparisons, patterns, and repetitions through a long study of the history of the city.
F. Brodel pointed out that in order to discover everyday life, one must study what a person uses: life, food, clothes, objects, villages, cities. Only through it is it possible to feel its daily activities, as well as the historical and cultural context in which people live.
  That is why the historian referred to cities as a place where everyday life takes place.
Brodel developed a theory describing the multistage structure of historical reality.
  He thought that history should study synchronously, then the new diachronic processes.
 His version of synchronous analysis included the study of three layers of structure: structural, conjectural, and event.
The structure corresponds to long-term social, economic and cultural realities.
  Connective reality is characterized by short waves that are continuous.
 And the event history corresponds to different time periods, with a probable cut from the general history5.
The application of Brodel's methodology in the historical-sociological study of the city provides an opportunity to reflect on the social structure, context and individual events.
  Of these three, he paid the most attention to the structural, the conjectural, not to the eventual.
 "The structure is a construction. Besides, at the same time it is a reality connected with a long time interval.
 Structures give a certain framework to human life, from which man և his activity does not go beyond ”6.
Although F. Brodel describes the different time periods inherent in history, yet history is one և մակարդ these levels are a means of regulating history 1 Brodel F., 1994, p. 13.
2 See Delanty G., Isin E., Handbook of Historical Sociology, US, 2003, p. 313.
3 See ibid., P. 314.
4 See Brodel F., 1994.
5 See Brodel F., Material Civilization, Economics and Capitalism, XV-XVIII c. T.1.
 Structures of daily life.
 possibility and impossible, Moscow, 1986, pp. 509-592.
to create a "complete history 1".
  The whole story covers different aspects of the historical reality. Since each of the aspects is moving at a certain pace, it is necessary to consider these three layers.
  The design of Brodel's methodology in the study of the city allows to analyze the broad structural changes of the city as such in a certain historical period, considering the context հաշվի taking into account the events.
Thus, when analyzing the city historically and sociologically, it is necessary to distinguish whether the history of the city or the developments of the city as such are observed, at the same time fixing that the cities are the first to reflect the changes of social life.
  The choice of methodological approach is crucial here, as it depends on the peculiarity of the use of history in the analysis: the emphasis on a particular structural event, the extraction of causality, patterns of temporal-spatial perceptions, etc., as these possibilities are expressed by F. Brodeli և M. In the methodological approaches described by Weber above.
And despite the fact that, according to Z. According to Bauman, globalization processes lead to a change in the perception of cities, a situation in which cities are now considered a place where strangers meet, stay close to each other, interact with each other for a long time and remain strangers. և The changes were born in the cities, which later changed the whole society.
  As predicted by L. According to Mamford, "throughout history we have moved from a city that was a single world to a world that is a city."
Ofelia Grigoryan CITY IN THE HISTORY OF HISTORICAL TRANSFORMATIONS: ISSUES OF HISTORICAL AND SOCIAL STUDY Keywords: historical-sociological methodology, city, historical transformations, F. Brodel, M .; Weber.
