PROBLEMS OF ARMENIAN AND RUSSIAN VERB MEMBER SUPPLEMENTS The problem of additions is one of the important components of Armenian-Russian grammars.
  Both Armenian and Russian are descended from the same language family (Indo-European), but with some similarities, they reveal significant differences.
In this article we have tried to combine the problem of verb member additions in Armenian in Russian, we have examined their peculiarities, having Hovhannes Tumanyan's poems as a source of study in Armenian 1, and in Russian A. Ս. The works of Pushkin 2.
 We tried to make a typological examination of the means of expression of the problem of the verb member, separating the semantic aspects, we made statistics based on the language of the poems.
There are different linguistic approaches to the addition of the verb member in Armenian grammar.
 When classifying, their number in the works of different linguists varies from seven (S. Gyulbudaghyan 3) to more than thirty (V. Arakelyan 4), which is conditioned by whether or not to look at the various nuances of the problem separately.
 Some linguists distinguish between direct and indirect problems (for example, V. Arakelyan, S. Abrahamyan), and others - gender-natural problems (for example, R. Ishkhanyan, M. Asatryan, S. Gyulbudaghyan), in particular, A. Papoyan և Kh. In Badikyan's "Syntax of the Modern Armenian Language", these problems are finally classified5.
There are direct and indirect problems in Russian. the latter, expressing particular meanings, are not divided into separate types6.
According to the word-part belonging of the requested word, in Russian the problems attached to the parts of the verb և name are separated, according to the method of expression - problems և pronounced և not pronounced (not explained) 7.
  The most common of the problems in Armenian is the straight line (446), which is expressed in a straightforward or triangular form, formed by ego, pronoun, adjective, part of speech, indefinite verb, for example, Love, mourning, You do not love me, Anush, let them tell me straight, D He wanted to omelet his mother-in-law.
  In the study of problems, the currency of verbs is used, which, according to the nature of the connected units, acts as subordination, subordination, request և paraphrase8.
  The verbs in the given sentences are long verbs in terms of subjectivity առ strong demand.
In Russian, this direct problem has many applications, such as: Прими приноменье, Юношу зови, хот хт.
  In the latter, the verb hotot, according to the subject և strong demand, is a long-term verb (in addition to the subject, it also requires an infinitive, put in the indefinite form, prodat), and the verb pratatь is a verb according to the strong և obligatory demand, moreover, one of the problems is directly inflected. is (menya), the other is a problem of the ending set by trakan (unpleasant).
  If in Armenian the direct or transitive form of a direct problem is conditioned by the person's person, then in Russian it is conditioned by the grammar of the noun 1 See Hovhannes Tumanyan, Complete Collection of Poems, Volume 3, Yerevan, 1989.
2 See Pushkin AS, Selected Compositions, Volume 1, Moscow, 1980.
3 See S. Gyulbudaghyan, Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1988, pp. 174-185.
4 See Arakelyan V., Armenian Syntax, Volume 1, Yerevan, 1958, pp. 283-331.
5 See Papoyan A., Badikyan Kh., Syntax of the Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2003, p. 139.
6 See Grammar of the Russian Language, Volume 2, Syntax, The First Part, Moscow, 1960, p. 558-570.
7 See Lekant PA, Contemporary Russian Language, Syntax, Moscow, 2010, p. 154-156.
8 See Jahukyan G., Fundamentals of Modern Armenian Theory, Yerevan, 1974, p. 467.
in order.
  The differences in Pushkin's works are clearly visible: he is lazy, he leaves the night's roof, the earth is broken, the hall is built, your beauty is appreciated.
 Unlike in Armenian, in Russian the direct problem indicates an inanimate object, in case of the presence of subjunctive macabres it can be expressed by a sexual syllable. unfortunately // emu unfortunately today.
 In the first example, it is expressed in the accusative syllable, as it points to a breathing object.
 In the sentence, today in the sentence, the preferred member expressed himself with a sorrowful macabre, which was connected with the problems set by the tragic-sexual syllable with a strong և mandatory management.
In Russian, the direct problem is posed by a gender, even if the sentence is expressed by a transitive verb or a footnote, in which there is a denial: Не по Не, ночных часов, Не отвергай моих молений.
  In the given sentences, the verbs, according to the strong demand, are a currency. With strong governance, they only demand a direct problem.
Both in Armenian and in Russian there is the meaning of a double direct problem. In this case, the verb, according to the subject և strong management, is a tri-currency. "You learned our song".
In Russian, particularly in Pushkin's works, the direct problem is usually questioned if 1. The direct problem is a sentence towards the subordinate: He does not see the faces of the characters, 2. the direct problem completes the opposite verb + the indefinite structure: I do not have a hotel, but here it is a long-term: with strong management, the pronoun is connected with an indefinite verb).
One of the indirect problems in Armenian is Hovh. In Tumanyan's poems we have singled out the problems of termination, separation, means, influence, attitude, unity, limitation and comparison.
  However, unlike in Armenian, indirect problems in Russian are not divided into separate types, that is, they express different meanings that correspond to the types of problems in Armenian.
  Hovh. Tumanyan և A. Ս. Pushkin's poems have provided a great deal of linguistic material in this regard.1. In Armenian, the problem of rhyme was expressed in a Trakan syllable, with, for, with connections on, Twin shepherd Karo, Do you need salt for a sheep? I will fight with a thousand pains.
The meaning of the rhyme problem in Russian is expressed by the Trakan syllable, к, in the prepositions: Склонясь на копие, К нем приближалась, Дай руку мне.
  Daba, according to the subordination և strong demand, is a tri-currency.
In a faceless sentence, the indirect problem with the main member in the tragic syllable shows a person (a rare object) in some state or with some feeling: Мне не спатся, нет огня. The verb is not spelled here, the net-particle with the function of a footnote is a currency.
2. In Armenian, the issue of separation was expressed only in an exceptional case, such as "I will die, I will escape from this day, Man will not escape from my hand, I will get rid of this pain, I will take the name out of my heart."
The meaning of the problem of separation in Russian is expressed by the sexual syllable, from, from, with prepositions, which, unfortunately, is due to the fact that in Russian there is no exclusive syllable: Я you ran away не разставалс Е, Ее спасут от посрамленья.
  The verbs in the enumerated sentences have been linked to the problems of separation wisdom with strong management.
3. In Armenian, the issue of attitude was expressed in tragic, exclusive syllables և with connection structures. The problems of relation with the tragic syllable appear in adjective phrases: ruthless to the curse of that Darwish And God is aware of this situation, They speak of the ancient heroes of Lori, My word about history is fulfilled, He began to think about evils, etc.
The meaning of the problem of relation in Russian is expressed by the prepositional syllable: Speak of the waves, of beauty, of delights, I dream of Russian or victory, леалел ли он днях, О чем уныние моё, Мыслить.
4. The problem affecting the Armenian language has been expressed in equally և exclusive, և practical terms: Persecuted by his father, persecuted by luck, they fly to you with a fiery flock, they are wrapped in Meg.
 Verbs are associated with strong governance problems.
In Russian, unfortunately, due to the fact that there is no exclusive syllable, the meaning of the problem is expressed only in the practical syllable: Я pursuer of fate
  As in Armenian, in Russian the verbs are connected to the additions in the sense of the problem in a strong way.
5. In Armenian, the problem of unity was formed in connection with the practical part: The sheep takes the sheep to the pasture with the dogs, I will go with the girls, Who am I with? One day we got up with five or six people.
 Verbs are associated with unity problems with poor management.
In Russian, the meaning of this problem is expressed by the preposition: С ним тайный жинцечском жилище сидит, Дней не трать со мною, Он со мною бродит, Беги со мной և etc.
6. In Armenian, the problem of the means was formed by a practical syllable, by means of communication. And with a grudging effort, writing and communication, healing, they broke the child's heart.
In Russian, the meaning of this problem is expressed by the practical syllable: Cover the tent, the glorious shore of the Danube shines its death, The song of the bell and the pleasant other announced the news.
7. The problem of limitation in Armenian is expressed by an exceptional syllable, in connection with: In everything I have remained poor, We have chosen a few old people among us.
In Russian, the meaning of this problem is expressed by the practical syllable և prepositions: Свиду блл нервным, Но кто с тобою, Грузинка, равен красотою.
8. The problem of comparison was expressed in Armenian with an exceptional syllable, rather than (or) a connection: Your work is more beautiful than your Avar, He was brave and more beautiful than you, Is he redder than us?
In Russian (particularly in Pushkin's works) the meaning of this problem is expressed in the presence of a footnote expressed in the compound degree of the adjective, moreover, with a sexual connotation, such as Your captive eyes яснее дня, чернее ночи.
 In this sentence, the adjectives яснее և чернее have been linked with strong և binding management to the corresponding δνя д ночи problem additions.
In Russian, the above-mentioned meanings of problems are also manifested by other preconceived notions: For them, the last four days, months, summer passes, The watch is gentle, there is no power, no authority over his soul, In Russia, do you come again?
 In Armenian, prepositions are replaced by the above-mentioned connections.
Unlike in Armenian, in Russian և direct, խնդիրները indirect problems can be posed with a gender syllable.
  In Russian (particularly in Pushkin's works) indirect problems are posed by a gender, if.1. show disconnection, removal: Я you fled, Fear the people above or the skin2. show the object of touch, touch, have the meaning of rhyme: Мы берегов reachesчь3. show the object of expectation, search, desire: Я ждал беспечно лучших дней.
In contrast to Armenian, in Russian the indirect problem posed by a practical syllable can indicate the object to which the action extends, in other words, being an indirect problem, it expresses the meaning of the direct problem: Что շարժт гордою душою therefore, verbs are connected to them by strong և binding management.
 The meaning of the direct problem in Russian is also expressed in the indirect problems composed of prepositions: Я в лес хочу. Here, however, strong management has been linked to the indirect problem.
Thus, in the structure of indirect problems in Russian, the choice of a conjugation is conditioned by the meaning, its word-formation features, the composition of the sentence members.
In Russian, problems are distinguished from the verb (приглагольные) և problems attached to the parts of the noun (приименные), depending on the word-part belonging to the requested verb 1.
 Problems with the verb complement the verb in different forms, verb form, verb form և In Pushkin's works it is common: adjectives (adjectives) քիչ Rarely found in Pushkin 's works: Веленью милому покорный, я привстал, Очём уныние моё, Аулов разоритель, Рабов избавитель.
 In such problems there is a decisive sign 1 See Lekant PA, Contemporary Russian Language, Syntax, Moscow, 2010, p. 154-156 elements, therefore, the boundaries of noun additions աց such problems are fluid.
 And in Armenian these structures are decisive relations. The filling of the noun can not have a problematic function (ct.
According to the method of expression, in Russian there are problems of morphological and non-morphological problems.
  The above-mentioned issues were clarified.
 The second type of problems are expressed in indefinite, which does not exist.
  Such problems have very little application in Russian, as the definite article, unlike the Armenian dervish of the same name, does not have a grammatical order.
In Russian, two groups of indefinite object significance are distinguished.1. Phrases in which the key word expresses the influence, the direction of the person who is to perform the action, called indefinite, in other words, the opposite verb and the indefinite verb are not the actions of the same subject:
 In these, the verbs prosim և represented, according to the subject և strong management, are long-term verbs, 2. word combinations, in which the meaning of the goal is expressed: Как идут пленницымладые капаться в жаркие ساعت.
The grammatical feature of indefinite pronoun in Armenian allows him to be widely used in problematic positions: He wanted to slaughter him with his eyes open, I want to sing, I will die when you come.
Statistics also show that just as problem-solving in Armenian outweighs problem-solving in addition to problems, so in Russian problem-solving in Russian significantly outperforms prepositions.
Karine Diloyan PROBLEMS OF ARMENIAN AND RUSSIAN VERB MEMBER COMPLETIONS Keywords: Armenian, Russian, combinations, problem addition, direct problem, indirect problem, currency, syllable, verb, statistics.
