CURRENT PROBLEMS OF SHARE CONSOLIDATION IN ARMENIA This paper deals with the consolidation of shares carried out by joint stock companies, the current problems in the Republic of Armenia հիմն its effective solution.
 In a free market economy, the organizational and legal nature of a joint-stock company is a more complex but effective way to conduct large-scale business activities.
  And since the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia guarantees the freedom of economic activity, we can mention that both the joint-stock companies and other legal entities with other organizational and legal rights are reserved by the Basic Law to freely use their opportunities, own capacities and property to carry out economic activities not prohibited by law. for.
  The freedom of business of a joint-stock company includes the freedom to issue shares, to place shares, to increase or decrease the authorized capital, to increase or decrease the nominal value of shares.
 The analysis of the current legislation shows that the change in the nominal value of shares can be done both by changing the authorized capital and without changing the amount of the authorized capital.
 A striking example of the latter is the consolidation of shares, which converts two or more shares into the same type of shares with a higher nominal value, without changing the authorized capital of the joint-stock company.
 In other words, the essence of consolidation is to increase the nominal value of shares by reducing their number.
 Consolidation of shares in the professional literature, together with the acquisition of allotted shares, the establishment of a "parallel company" with the establishment of a fiduciary relationship with other shareholders, is one of the mechanisms for the formation of controlling stakes.
 The Constitutional Court expressed its position by Resolution 903 2, according to which the consolidation of shares is an economically justified process, which is one of the manifestations of the economic freedom of a joint stock company.
  In fact, the consolidation of shares is the peculiarity of joint-stock companies. It is a corporate action, as according to Articles 56-67 of the Law on Joint Stock Companies, such authority is reserved exclusively for the general meeting of the company.
Reserving a joint stock company with such a right is not an end in itself.
 First of all, it is aimed at increasing the efficiency of the company, because sometimes the company wants to form a small package of shares, which it will be able to sell to those interested in the development of the company, ready to achieve that goal, ie through consolidation the company wants to raise some money. to increase profits, to implement business plans.
  The solution to the above-mentioned problems by consolidating shares is more effective.
  As rightly mentioned by V. In Avetisyan's "Shareholder Law" textbook, it is necessary to prepare for the organization of the general meeting of shareholders in a rather delicate way, to clearly substantiate the motives that caused the need for the consolidation of shares.
  Second, the consolidation of shares 1 See Могилевский С.
2 Decision 903 of the RA Constitutional Court on the basis of the application of citizens Ruben Avagyan, Hrachik Hakobjanyan, Hrachya Avetisyan, Arayik Avetisyan on the case of determining the issue of compliance of Articles 56, 57 and 58 of the RA Law on Joint Stock Companies with the RA Constitution, July 13, 2010 .:
It should be done by the company in such a way as to ensure the highest level of legitimate interests of minority shareholders, to be implemented for the common good, based solely on corporate interests and not on the interests of individual shareholders or shareholders, ie consolidation should not be a means of expelling shareholders.
  Third, the consolidation of shares simplifies the maintenance of the register as much as possible, simplifies the registration of securities issued by the joint stock company1.
 The current legislation does not specify the grounds on which the company can carry out consolidation, ie in each case the company's meeting is obliged to substantiate the need to consolidate the shares (although such a obligation is not imposed on them by law).
Article 3 of the Civil Code stipulates that citizens աբանական legal entities assume rights voluntarily շահ for their own benefit.
  By acquiring a share, the shareholder acquires certain rights, the most important of which are the rights to participate in the management of the company, to receive a dividend or dividend from the company's profit, or to receive property after the liquidation of the company.
  Having a share, the shareholder seeks to exercise the above-mentioned rights, և since the share is a type of property կարող it can belong to any person (which stipulates that citizens ցանկացած any property can be owned by legal entities), in the field of current legal regulations. The fundamental role is assumed by the constitutionally enshrined principle of property inviolability.
  This principle is directly enshrined in Article 31 of the Constitution, according to which everyone has the right to possess, use, manage and bequeath their property at their own discretion.
  No one may be deprived of his property except in a court of law.
 This provision enshrined in the Constitution has also found its place in the RA city. It is stated that the civil legislation is based on the principle of inviolability of property relations regulated by the Code.
The issue under discussion - the consolidation of shares and their own immunity - is related to both legislative shortcomings and case law.
 In particular, during the consolidation of shares, it is possible that fractional shares will arise, which is an objective-inevitable process of consolidation in the field of business.
  And as the Constitutional Court finds, the existence of such shares is not expedient, both for the sake of ensuring the stability of the securities market and for the effective management of the joint stock company, therefore, the law provides for the obligation to repurchase such shares by the joint stock company.
  It should be noted that the nature of joint-stock companies is such that within the framework of the company's activities, the different interests of the shareholders collide, which is most clearly expressed in the relations between large and small shareholders.
 The main interest of large shareholders is to achieve certain results by making the necessary management decisions. They are the strategic investors of the company, who have the opportunity to predetermine the decisions of the company, unlike small shareholders who do not have such rights. Their main interest is to get some profit from the funds they invest in their share.
  The regulation of economic activity by a state governed by the rule of law presupposes an effective balance between the large "small shareholders" of the joint-stock company, and this is the purpose of requiring the legislature to provide a protection mechanism that provides legal safeguards against large shareholders in the consolidation process.
However, after the analysis of the current legal system, it follows that such a mechanism does not exist in the Republic of Armenia, in this case, the interests of small shareholders are significantly endangered.
  In particular, as mentioned, consolidation of shares results in sub-volume shares (fractional shares, which arise as a result of this or that corporate activity carried out by the company, such as reorganization, consolidation, reduction of authorized capital, etc.) should be considered fractional, but which can be avoided. is not, because the formation of fractional shares is an object 1 See Grandfather D. 9, September 2003, page 6.
2 See Avetisyan V., Current Issues of Corporate Legal Relations in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2013, p. 179.
is a necessary process in the field of business activity. they must be repurchased by the joint stock company.
 Moreover, the RA legislation has chosen the institution of obligatory repurchase as a way to exclude the existence of fractional shares, ie the shares of the shareholders are redeemed; in each case the joint-stock company undertakes to repurchase the fractional shares without taking into account the market price set by law.
 In this regard, the 1982 report of the European Commission of Human Rights is interesting. Bramelid և Salmstrրn v. Sweden in the case of October 12, 2006.
  In this case, the applicants had challenged the fact that they had been deprived of their shares against their will, not in the public interest, for fair compensation.
 The Commission has concluded that the law should not create such an unequal situation that a person arbitrarily unjustly loses his property in favor of another person1.
 Of course, in each case, as rightly mentioned by V. In Avetisyan's "Shareholder Law" textbook, during the consolidation of shares, the following feature should be revealed: the nominal value of the consolidated share should not be higher than the total value of the smallest package of shares owned by one shareholder.
 Only in this case, the shareholder holding the smallest package of shares is guaranteed to receive at least two shares during the consolidation of shares, otherwise the shareholder will be deprived of the right to own shares altogether2.
 Therefore, if there are shareholders in the company with a small package of shares, the consolidation of shares is not effective, as it is, in fact, not to increase the efficiency of the company, to attract additional funds, but to expel small shareholders.
 The consolidation of shares in the Republic of Armenia is largely implemented for that very purpose.
 In the current legal framework, it should be noted that, so to speak, the interests of small shareholders are ignored, as consolidation leads to an increase in the nominal value of shares, while reducing the number of shares, so it is possible that small shareholders do not have at least one new share.
 As a result, the resulting fractional shares are in any case subject to repurchase by the company.
 It turns out that the person is deprived of his property right over the shares.
  In connection with the issue, the RA Constitutional Court finds that the constitutional content of "deprivation of property" պար in case of compulsory repurchase of fractional shares, the payment of the share market value to the owner in accordance with the law is not obligatory, ie
  However, if we interpret both the Constitution and the current legislation, then we are dealing with the following issue.
 Article 31 of the Constitution stipulates the inviolability of property, in particular, stating that no one can be deprived of property, except in cases provided by law by law.
 It follows from the literal interpretation of the above-mentioned norm that deprivation of property is carried out in the presence of grounds provided by law, that is, exclusively in court.
  However, if we compare the mentioned norm with the RA Law on Joint Stock Companies, we see that here we are really dealing with the notion of deprivation of property, because if as a result of consolidation arise fragmentary shares, then without considering the will of the owners of those fractional shares, the company he buys them.
 The problem is that the law does not establish an effective mechanism for the protection of the rights of small shareholders և legal interests, deprives the latter of the opportunity to manage, use and own their own fractional shares at their own discretion, thus allowing a gross violation of the Constitution.
 This is the reason why consolidation in Armenia is a way to get rid of small "undesirable" shareholders4. In the current legal framework, the law allows such an opportunity only by defining that fractional share 1 See European Commission of the Commission on Human Rights, 1982. The decision in the case of "Biamelid և Salmston v. Sweden" of October 12, 2006.
2 See Avetisyan V., page 93.
3 See ibid., P. 95.
4 See ibid., P. 94.
redemption of love market price.
 At the same time, if we study Civil. For example, we will see that it does not define the grounds for compulsory termination of property rights.
Thus, we can conclude that our legislation, as a means of excluding fractional shares, has enshrined the institution of mandatory repurchase.
 In this regard, it should be noted that the existing regulations are not in the interests of small shareholders. There is no effective mechanism to protect their interests.
  The analysis of the law on joint stock companies allows us to say that the legislator has chosen the policy of giving priority to the protection of the rights of large shareholders, which deprives small shareholders of the right to protect the savings invested by them1.
The legislation of the Russian Federation has its own peculiarities in the field of consolidation of relations related to consolidation.
 In particular, until 2001. In Russia, the institution of compulsory repurchase was applied, which "was not in line with the spirit of free market relations," contradicted the Russian Constitution and the Civil Code (it did not mention the revocation of ownership of shares on such grounds).
 2001 After the amendments, the institute of fractional shares was introduced by the Federal Law of the Russian Federation "On Joint Stock Companies" 2.
 Article 25 3 3 of the Law stipulates that, along with a number of other grounds, fractional shares arise in the case of consolidation of shares, and only when it is impossible to acquire an integer number of shares.
 In fact, the Russian doctrine renounced the right of compulsory repurchase, thus stating that regardless of the results of consolidation, the shareholder continues to be the owner of his share; he decides the ways of managing his share.
  The federal law of the Russian Federation regulates in detail the relations related to the formation of fractional shares, considering them as an object of civil legal relations.
  The law stipulates that a fractional share is equivalent to an ordinary full share, which implies that a fractional share can be freely the subject of a contract of sale, any civil contract, as a full share.
  A fractional share gives the owner-shareholder the right to receive a dividend in the appropriate amount of that share, to receive the relevant part of his property after the liquidation of the company.
 The vote of the owner of a fractional share is expressed in fractional numbers.
  By law, a fractional share gives the shareholder, its owner, the amount of rights that correspond to the size of that share in the general section, which is provided by shares in that category.
 At the same time, the law defines the situations when the shareholder acquires two or more fractional shares of the same type.
 In such cases, they are added together and become either a whole or a fractional share.
 It is also mentioned that all the allocated fractional shares are added together, իրար if in this case a fractional number is obtained, then the number of the fractional shares placed in the charter of the company is expressed as a fractional number.
  It would not be wrong to say that the Russian legal system has moved in a more efficient way, trying to bring the legislation in line with the Constitution as much as possible, to end abuses by large shareholders and to concentrate capital in their hands, to establish effective protection measures for small shareholders.
  That is why the application of the Russian experience in Armenia will be completely justified, which will become one of the solutions to this fundamental problem.
 The United Kingdom, the United States and Switzerland have their own approaches to this issue.
 MB legislation prohibits actions that could lead to the formation of fractional shares.
  In the United States, the amount of compensation given to the owner of a fractional share is determined by the value of one share resulting from econsolidation, and in Switzerland it is provided on the condition that the authorized capital does not change.
Thus, in this work an attempt was made to present the current issues of consolidation of shares in the Republic of Armenia; we came to the conclusion that the current legal regulation does not ensure the main purpose of consolidation, in its turn does not ensure the interests of small shareholders.
1 See Avetisyan V., page 170.
Attempts are sometimes made to equate the interests of large shareholders with the interests of the company, thereby justifying the granting of rights to large shareholders that could lead to the expulsion of small shareholder shareholders against their will1.
  As a key way to increase the efficiency of the company, this corporate action is carried out at the general meeting of shareholders, aimed at the effective implementation of the tasks set by the company.
  Taking into account the fact that the principle "it is allowed to do what is not prohibited by law" applies equally to legal entities, joint stock companies sell shares in a consolidation in accordance with the law.
 However, the problem here is especially for what purpose this corporate action is carried out.
 The analysis of the current legislation suggests that the consolidation of shares can be carried out for public purposes, but it is also used to oust shareholders, to concentrate capital in the hands of large shareholders, becoming a legally enforceable tool, which is not legally compatible. to the idea, because in this case a fair balance is not ensured between the participants of economic activity. "
 And in this case, it is possible abuse of rights, which, according to Civil. day. Article 12 - the actions of citizens - legal entities, which are carried out solely with the intention of causing harm to others.
  At the same time, there is no provision that would establish an effective protection mechanism against the arbitrariness of large shareholders.
  And that is the reason why we propose to make relevant changes in the legislation. In this respect, it would be reasonable to apply the Russian experience, which regulates this issue in accordance with the spirit of the Constitution, in accordance with the nature of free market relations.
Martun Stepanyan CURRENT PROBLEMS OF SHARE CONSOLIDATION IN ARMENIA Keywords: joint stock company, shares, consolidation of shares,
Large and small shareholders, fractional shares
.
