VIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS A MEDIA PLATFORM The information field is undergoing major changes globally.
  Moreover, today in the world there is a conceptual change of network media relations, which affects the general information field.
 People's interest in social networks is growing incomparably faster.
  We think that the reason is the free exchange of information and easy communication between people on this platform.
  With the book "Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere", the theorist of the 20th century Jürgen Habermas started the discourse of the public sphere.
 Habermas singles out modern media as a public sector environment.
 In doing so, he seems to be changing the tradition of social theory of society, as opposed to his Frankfurt School mass culture critics, Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, who believed that mass-mediated culture was an ideological power, not a public sphere.
  Note that the idea of ​​numerous communities raised the question of how they relate to one another.
 "Sociologist Graham Man և Historian Geoff Elley created a separate idea, according to which these alternative spheres are" platforms "where different voices or interests prepare their voice to represent the general public sphere."
Given the social context of the 20th century, the relations that are unfolding in society, it can be said that without the media, it is difficult to imagine the public sphere of their mediation.
Restrictions on the free flow of information on the Internet have become one of the most serious problems in the world today.
  China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, and more recently Russia and Russia are vivid examples of this, where the first steps are being taken to restrict the flow of information on the Internet and block dozens of websites, creating a legal basis for such "regulations".
 Meanwhile, international human rights organizations on the freedom of information flow on the Internet call on states to refrain from legal regulations as much as possible, as long as there is no extreme need.
  In the case of Armenia, there are several legal acts related to the Internet, which mainly refer to public-individual notifications via the Internet, data transmission and tariffs and conditions for providing Internet access services, permits, etc.
  Some of them are indirect regulations that come from civil-legal relations: insult, slander, copyright, etc.
  The Internet is a self-regulating domain where input is distributed and exists on its own, becoming more manageable in time and space.
 That is why the Internet, more than any other domain, can cause irreversible and irreversible damage to personal and family life, personal dignity, honor and business reputation, and ultimately national security.
The news, first appearing on the Internet, spreads with lightning speed, 7 days a week, 24 hours a day, at any time, in any size, as a matter of urgency, without additional costs.
In the age of social media, anyone becomes a media carrier, and status, image, and video are already information.
 Social networks can be a tool in the hands of a journalist to provide information that is desirable, additional or background.
 But for a number of Armenian networking sites, social media and its content can be dominant as a source of information.
 Meanwhile, social networks are also personal areas where any individual can express himself freely.
 These changes have had a significant impact on the work of journalists.
"Today, the media audience is changing just as public places of discussion are changing or disappearing from urban areas and the social environment.
 The public sphere is moving from the real to the virtual environment ”2.
2 Hakobyan L ․, Mass Communication կարծիք Public Opinion, Yerevan, 2013, p. 75.
 We can state that today it is a question of how to manage the means of communication for the sake of the public sphere.
  In other words, how do we use new means to create alternative mediated public spheres?
 This changed situation raises new questions.
 How can the media serve the public sector when it simultaneously serves the state or the private interest?
One of the pioneers of "Communication և Public Sphere" theory, communication theorist Peter Delgreen3 suggests considering four dimensions that will make clear the mediated public sphere today: semi-governmental public media, Media institution.
 As soon as the broadcast appeared, the state undertook the responsibility of creating media institutions that would contribute to the public sphere.
  Founded in European countries, they were created by the state with its own means.
 It was likely that under that name it could be more of a propaganda tool than a public service.
  In the United States, commercial media is governed by state law.
 The difficulties associated with their settlement began when media corporations came to global economic centralization.
 They became self-financing structures, which brought about a significant change in the relationship between the state and these corporations.
Media representation.
 In these conditions, there is a problem of reorganization of media representation.
  As a practical source of information for citizens, the regulation of the media focuses on the majority of public opinion.
The more and more diverse the opinions, the freer the entry of any typology to the press, the freer it is.
Social structure.
  This has to do with the internal structure of the public sphere, its relationship with other social institutions, which together form a common social structure.
This refers to some of the above ideas, such as the ideas of public spheres և their relations, alternative հարաբերությունների dominant's relations of dominant (dominant) media.
  Sana is related to a new phenomenon - media globalization.
Face-to-face interactions or meetings.
  The issue of media representation, making the citizen passive, is exacerbated here, because the media audience is dispersed just as public places of discussion change or disappear from urban areas and the social environment.
It should be noted that the Armenian online community has gone through many stages of development, during which not only the impact on social and political processes, but also the vocabulary has changed qualitatively.
 The first public platforms that followed purely entertainment chats were forums.
  This is where the first virtual Armenian-Azerbaijani contacts began to take shape.
In 2005, the Armenian blogosphere began to take shape, which was mainly located in Livejournal4.
  Already in March 2008, blogs were almost the only source of information, and the audience of active blogs far exceeded the audience of the online press.
 However, the invasion of social networks led to the decline of the blogosphere.
Note that the social impact of Facebook started in 2010. The struggle against the demolition of the summer hall of "Moscow" cinema, the reopening of foreign language schools and other similar movements started the activation of social networks.
Another problem in the virtual domain is the behavior of journalists.
  The issue of the limits of journalists' free expression became an active topic of discussion when two journalists were fired in 2013 because of their Facebook post.
 In both cases, the editor of the newspaper and the management of the TV company explained their move by the fact that "a journalist can not spend part of the day preparing journalistic materials, and the other part making posts on social networks, which does not fit into the" policy "of the media" 5.
 Let us state that in both cases there was no written or verbal agreement between the employer և journalist վերաբերյալ on the behavior of the latter on social media.
 Therefore, facing such decisions was a surprise for the journalists.
  As social media integrates, large media organizations are developing social media guidelines for their editorial offices.
As an example, we can mention the "Washington Post", according to which journalists should realize that any content related to them on social networks is equivalent to what appears on the website of the authority of those journalists.
 Moreover, according to the newspaper's social media guidelines, journalists should "protect their professional integrity" when using Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and other social networks for both professional and personal purposes. .
"Remember that their social media accounts affect the credibility and credibility of the Washington Post's editorial staff."
 But according to Reuters' social media policy, journalists should have two separate accounts on social media. "If you use social networks for professional and personal purposes, then have two separate accounts.
 In the online world, personal and professional are becoming more and more intertwined, but you have to maintain your professional face, in other words, you have to apply certain criteria when using social media professionally, which will be different when using your personal account. ”7
Thus, on the one hand, it is undeniable that social media, particularly social networks, are an active platform for the circulation of public information in Armenia today, and on the other hand, given the technical capabilities and features of this platform, .
Literature 1. "The best in the network", Journalists for the Future NGO, Yerevan, "Asoghik" publishing house, 2013.
2. Hakobyan L ․, Mass Communication կարծիք Public Opinion, Yerevan, 2013.
3. Richard Butsch, "Media and puplic spheres", 2009.
4. “Critical Theory, Public Sphere and Culture. Jurgen Habermas and his Critics ”, 2001.
VIRTUAL SOCIAL NETWORKS AS A MEDIA PLATFORNna Khachatryan Keywords: network media connections, public sector discourse, virtual information environment Summary.
