In order to manage the Risk of environmental risks in order to rationally use energy resources, their spatial planning, investments in the energy sector and the environment, the introduction of a green economic concept of water resources in the Republic of Armenia և other issues are especially urgent. One of the three priority areas is the development of green energy15.
Armenia և The European Union is combining its efforts to mitigate the negative effects of climate change.
  The European Union is at the forefront of climate change adaptation processes with its financial support.
 2014-2020 20% of the EU budget will be allocated within the European Union - for implementation abroad - for policy development.
 With the financial support of the European Union, the Climate Arcelq program is implemented to support climate change policies in the ENP countries (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine) 16.
Publications of the 15 EU official website on the creation, green energy efficiency and energy saving http.
//ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris/index_en.htm16http.
//eunewsletter.am/en/%D6%83%D5%A1%D6%80%D5%AB%D5%A6%D5%B5%D5%
In Armenia, energy management has become one of the most important tools for solving ecological problems, which allows for more in-depth study of energy-intensive, socio-economic
  The introduction of an energy-efficient system is one of the most effective solutions to the problems of the current technogenic geoenvironment, where the application of innovative management has a special place.
The growing attention to energy management issues is due to the fact that in the 20th century the consumption of energy resources has increased almost 10 times, and not only energy consumption in general, but also the volume of electricity consumption per capita (specific consumption) - 4.5-5 times in developed countries և 24-25 times 17.
 At the same time, according to forecasts, the trend of growth in consumer consumption will continue due to the extension of life expectancy, which in turn is accompanied by man-made negative effects.
Implementation of energy management standards in the implementation of the economy in the Republic of Armenia իրական The real beneficiaries of the implementation of էներգConsumer energy literacy systems are the state (represented by the NSSA, Government, Ministry of Nature Protection, Energy Ministries (in terms of standards development) and the society Individuals.
 The scheme of compliance with the introduction of energy management standards in the Republic of Armenia, measures aimed at raising energy literacy of consumers, and the sequence of conformity of their results can be presented as follows: Figure 1.
  Scheme of measures for the implementation of energy management standards 17 http.
//ac.gov.ru/files/publication/a/1546.pdf генергетический бюллетень Terms, Economy և Energy Management Standards
In the definition of vision
with:
Suggested solutions:
Integration of other programs Application of Innovative approaches
Application of complex solutions
Energy management, Energy management acts as a component of the standards of the economy, internal and external international competitiveness of its sectors.
Compulsory investment factors in the Republic of Armenia are: the need for energy security restrictions and their effective use due to the increase in energy resources, taking into account the current challenges of energy security, upgrading the production base of the economy, intensifying cooperation, striving for sustainable green development in all countries. These factors cause the openness of energy within the borders of all environmental members of various energy cooperation programs, the resistance to migration challenges in the field of ecological consequences,Socio-economic factors (derived from the impact on tariffs in the economy), energy factors և environmental factors (vector for green economy development).
Interest in mandatory implementation of energy management standards for all countries.
The concept of the introduction of management standards, the innovative development of the sector, the concept of increasing the energy literacy of consumers is first of all conditioned by the inclusion of class social beneficiaries and the provision of opportunities.
 To this end, it is necessary to create a platform for the introduction of energy management systems among consumers in the real sector.
  The complexity of the energy management system; the multi-layered conditionality of the comprehensive approach to the implemented measures; the provision of the principle of sequence, including the elaboration of legislative, normative and other factors.
առThe priority directions of the concept of introduction of management standards, innovative development of the sphere բարձրConsumption of energy literacy of consumers should be: 1. Development of energy risk risks in the development of the economy և Reduction of losses, development of innovative management և Development of modeling mechanism - input factors close to consumers - result for connection, creation of organizational and management mechanisms in market conditions: organizational, energy sector, long-term, environmental, environmental, systematic Development of a system of energy indicators for raising the efficiency of the research-oriented energy management system - literacy raising.
The mission of energy consumers և the directly visible results are: 1. Increasing energy independence and security (reducing dependence on imports) ավ Attracting investments in the sector, political benefits, creating new jobs through the introduction of energy audit, 2. Enhancing the country's economy, ensuring diversification of the supply and application of innovative energy resources solutions, positive balance of benefits and benefits through cost-benefit analysis, 3. Improving the state of the environment, reducing emissions, 4. Improving the efficiency of energy management decisions in the economy մոտ among consumers, introducing systems in the energy management sector, 5. Expanding the boundaries of energy markets.
IMMJIAN MARIAM ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION PROBLEMS IN ARMENIA Keywords - energy, green economy, energy management, energy security, energy security, corporate responsibility competitiveness statistics
