FLOWER NAMES AND FLOWER NAMES DAVID SALADZORTS '"PRAISE OF FLOWERS" SONG The date of birth and death of the late medieval Armenian poet Davit Saladzor is unknown.
 J. Alishan thinks that the people of Saladzor lived in the 16th-17th centuries.
 We get information about the biography և birthplace from the poem "Praise of Flowers" authored by him, in which the poet says: My country will be called Arzrum, Saladzor is my home.
On different occasions the author introduces himself as a priest, scribe, monk, deacon, he has been absent from the homeland for a long time.
  He authored hymns ("Song of the Mother of God", "Father the Creator", etc.), love poems ("Game to the lost khanum", "Song on the goose") and other poems.
Our work is dedicated to the cozy song "Praise of flowers" by Saladzor resident. It is entirely the praise of nature, a celebration of natural awakening.
  The hymn begins with the following lines: "Blessed are you, Heavenly Father, unsearchable deity," 2, after which he describes his "exhausted" state, and asks God to "awaken" him with the awakening of spring, to heal him, to heal him, to give him vitality.
 But above all, he wants God to give him wisdom so that he can recognize evil and good in the world.
 In fact, the song is the praise of the awakening of nature.
 Euda is expressed by the description of different types of flowers, one of them is colorful and beautiful.
 First the snowdrop and the chickpea wake up, and then the barb and the hawk, և these four give an elm-like voice to the rest of the flowers, the world is decorated and filled with flowers, դեռ the plants that have not yet awakened take part in that wonderful awakening.
The poem, described as "Paradise", lists 80 flowers, each of which in turn excites the whole world.
  In his hymn, the people of Saladzor create beautiful pictures and word games with the help of flower names, such as Jill and Tsluan and Tsarurik draw Surma on their eyes. They have very colorful colors, like a peach tsarurun.
The mother-in-law is painted like a cow, the rust is like surmayun, Acher's must be Armenian, to mingle with the akhlkhntsorun, Now the blossom has become strong, I do not know who it is with whom,
In the song, the personified flowers greet each other, give nectar to the bees, decorate the mountains and valleys with color, fill the world with flowers.
 These flowers do not bloom in vain. The roots of one are useful, the other - the newspapers, and some "participate" in the preparation of the dead.
  At the end of his hymn, the people of Saladzor, summing up the praise of the flowers, turn to him. Jo, deacon of Saladzor, bring down the flowers, The blossom that you praise, for example, the stars from the sky, As much as you sin with your judgment, you look like a blossoming tree. - to plant, flower, dry yirik.
I am David, I judged a lot to take care of the flowers, I praise the few flowers, there was a lot left for the masters.
1 Sahakyan H., Late medieval Armenian poetry, vol. II, Yerevan, 1987, pp. 350-357.
2 Ibid., P.
Thus, in the song "Govasank tsankants", the author used more than 80 flower names, some of which are known and are cooperative in Armenian (antaram, balsam, brabion, goharvard, chamomile, loshtak, poppy, orchid, milkweed, poppy, scattered , lavender, lily, chrysanthemum, plane tree, basil, coriander, sesame, etc.).
 Some of them were used in a non-common word-formation or phonetic version (ginarbin, oxenaghik, chicory, khntsor, clap, matutik, mother, pvvak, etc.).
 There are a large number of flower names in the poem, which can be found in various works, but today are less practical, they represent beautiful word units.
 We stop at the examination of such flower names.
 We compared our excerpts from J. Alishan "Haybusak", K. Gabikyan's "Armenian flora" և St. With the data of Malkhasyants "Armenian Explanatory Dictionary".
  In a number of cases, the flower names had several unique manuscript and script versions, which are presented in brackets next to the keyword.
1. Akhlakhntsor - is a red snowdrop, very common.
  The first part of the word is unknown, the second part - khnstor> apple, belongs to the class of clover meadows.
2. Eye - Made in Armenian. Of the components k + և + tuk, the racial classification is unknown.
3. Aspuza - This beautiful flower was first mentioned by Agatangeghos, calling the flower "Aspuza".
  The origin of the word is unknown, it belongs to the class of Gnarbukazgins.
4. Ascending (ascending, ascending, ascending, ascending, ascending, ascending, ascending, ascending).
  It is considered a Georgian loan.
  Ղ. Alishan mentions that it is very common in Tayk, Ardvin, Khotrjur, Tortum, Karin1.
 This flower has a yellow-white color.
 Especially the yellow flower is very fragrant.
 It belongs to the class of Mormazgins.
5. Bangs - has Persian. origin.
 Grows in Persia.
 The plant has narcotic properties դեպքում in case of many doses can be deadly.
 There are 3-4 breeds, it belongs to the class of Mormazgins.
6. Barp - Alishan proves that this flower should be flat or complex instead of writing barp2.
 There is no other information about this plant.
7. Bakrosh - Bambush, Bebghosh.
 It is a spring flower.
 There is no other information.
8. Gamutash - Blueberry is a grass.
 There is no other information.
9. Lamb (lamb, lamb, lamb).
  The plant is completely crimson red.
  Grows on wet mountains, near moss grasses.
  The roots are very thin, that is why they often fall off.
  The owners of this flower are fleshy like a lamb's tail, and the flowers are bright apricot.
 Grows in July-August է flowers for three months.
  It consists of lamb (lamb) + dmak components.
 It belongs to the class of high-ranking nations.
10. Goharvard - The name of the shiny stone "Gohar" is connected with the flower name "Vard".
 This flower name was still used by Narekatsi in "Tagh Vardavar", in which the gem is not a makdir, but a kind of rose.
  The word pres. borrowed Gohar (rose) + rose, the kinship of flowers is unknown.
11. Guzel (kyuzel).
 The word has Turkish. origin, and the kinship of the flowers is unknown.
12. Guliasapah - originates from Persia. From the word rose, the second component is unknown.
 It belongs to the nocturnal class.
13. Hedgehog - It seems to be the yellow Hedgehog, but this is the first time we mention this flower.
 It consists of ox + flower components, and the kinship is unknown.
14. Basket (zempil çicheyi (Turkish), simpugh, basket flower, smbul, titre).
 Grows in forest areas, meadows, on walls and roofs.
  It has a thin, long stem, large flowers, the ends of the petals are rounded, it is red-yellow, the inflorescence is weak, but fragrant.
  Belongs to the class of star flowers (complex flowers).
15. Cake (cake, cake).
 This delicate flower grows in both "cultivated" and "uncultivated" places.
 It has trumpet-like flowers.
 The flower material is used in medicine.
 The dialect is unknown, it belongs to the class of secrets.
1 Alishan J., "Haybusak or Armenian botanical dictionary", Venice, 1895, page 85.
2 Ibid., P.
16. Lalazar - It is a harmful plant, the fruits are square eggs.
 It is so harmful that if they put the fruits in water and drink them, then they will stink like wine.
 Grows in the mountains of Taron ադր Badrosh (Takeldu).
 The origin of the word is unknown, it belongs to the class of lilies.
17. Khalinch (khach).
 The origin of the word is unknown, it belongs to the class of oysters.
18. Orchid (scaly grass).
 The stem is thin, and the owners are long and narrow.
 Grows in the valley, is one of the most favorite foods of animals.
 Used in medicine.
 Arabic dialect. pea (peach) belongs to the class of orchids.
19. Tsaptsal - An Armenian originated. From the words clap + fold, the kinship of the flowers is unknown.
20. Tsaptsil (tsiltsap).
 He came from Armenia. applause և Georgian. From the words sprout, the tribal connection is unknown.
21. Tsapkotruk (Hy. Means Land, Aman, Ptuk, that is why they called it Ptukkotruk, Kchjakotrik, Harkur flower, Tsarurik, etc.).
  There are two types: Lala (Poppy), և Shaghayigh (Shagayig) is the same Arjvard or Khachapayt.
 It means the tops of the ears of the eagle.
  It originated from (Armenian) clap + (Georgian) from broken + uk components, the tribal connection is unknown.
22. Cuckoo (Cuckoo reed).
  Used in herbal medicine.
  The original origin of the word is unknown, but it is obvious that the word is composed of Armenian components: kakau + reed, a complex word.
 The kinship of the flowers is unknown.
23. Cinnamon (Cinnamon, Cinnamon, Cassia, Cinnamon).
 The plant is mentioned from an early period.
  The "peel", the juice they get from the flower, is useful.
The word has a root. It belongs to the laurel class.
24. Button (Button, Button).
  It is a flower that grows in the fields.
  Widespread abroad.
Պրսկ. borrowed belongs to the class of star flowers (complex flowers).
25. Cranberry (Incense, Poppy, Kankuk).
 It originated from (c.) Crane + ook horse.
26. Kokrosh (Currant).
 It is a kind of mule.
 It has a green-red type.
 In Russian, red is called smorodina, and green is called krizhonik.
  It is grape-like և variety.
  Barnuni Latin. It belongs to the class of Karbekazgins.
27. Hazrevard (Penwa).
  It is one of the beautiful flowers of Armenia (rozmarinus).
  Originated: (arb.) Hazri> hazre (rose) + rose.
 Ref. is in the class of asteraceae (complex inflorescences).
28. Horot (Morot, Horut, mrut), Khoraut (morut).
 Alishan testifies that this flower is widespread among Armenians, but does not provide any information to anyone who is asked1.
 It belongs to the group of field flowers, is related to Aspuzan.
  Borrowed from Iranian mythology, meaning Manushak, belongs to the class of Gnarbukazgins.
29. Horom (Gabikyan testifies that there are several species, such as Taghtik, Horom Spannakh, Horom Aghvosyak, Horom Annukh, Horom Khunk 2).
  All these types are used in medicine.
 It is a simple word, it has hyk. originates, belongs to the class of celery (umbrellas).
30. Garanfil (Shahokram).
  It is a beautiful, diverse flower, some of which are wild.
The apricot variety is "Dianthus Armenia", and the white variety with cracked petals is "D. Carthusianorum ".
 The word is Turkish. borrowed is a relative of flowers. The connection is unknown.
31. Matifa.
 Turkish borrowed "Velvet", there is no other information.
32. Skin (Lashgin, Tasty, Tasty).
 The word has phlv. origin, there is no other information.
33. Moss (Gortnburd, Lori, Khoz, Khozkhot, Grimur, Kari Shang, Karapartar, Kanachkhot, Kamarkaptsin և Inviolable root).
 This parasite grows everywhere.
 Փխռ. It is from the Russian word "moray", belongs to the class of Parmelagians.
34. Meghrik (a small type of pear).
  In the dialect of Khotrjur they say Meghrik or Meghruk.
It originated from (Armenian) honey + ik components, belongs to the class of Gagtrikazgins.
35. Mosh (Mosha, Moshepayt, Moshavagh, Gaz is a wild, forest tree species).
 Used in medicine.
 They are very well known in Her (Khoy) province.
 A simple word is hyk. origin, belongs to the class of roses (rose flowers).
1 Ibid., P.
2 Ibid., P. 132.
36. Murt (Mrteni, Mrti, Antaram).
  The masters grow opposite each other, the flowers are white, fragrant, and the fruit is white.
  The word has phlv. origin, other information.
37. Mor (Forot, Mosh).
  This flower grows in Gegharkunik.
  The branches are torn, it is root-like.
  It is red.
  The word has hyk. originates, belongs to the Mormazgin class.
38. Nafn (Nafnaf, Faf).
 Պրսկ. origin, the kinship of the flowers is unknown.
39. Nunufar (Nonophor, Nilufar, Water Lily).
 They grow on the surface of the water, the owners are scattered on the surface of the water, the foreheads are many.
  It can be blue, white, red, yellow.
The flower is named after the Nile River in Egypt.
 Blooms in June-August.
 The word has Arabic. origin, fig. is in the class of bridesmaids (water lilies).
40. Chamomile (tentacle).
  The wreath is tent-shaped, it is bright red "white together with green".
  Turkish borrowed belongs to the class of patutagazins.
41. Chiktam (Chikitam, Chitam, Chikitam, Chivteon, Chkitam, Turmeric).
  It is a small onion-thin plant, it has long filamentous owners, it is red-white.
 There are autumn and spring chickens.
 The spring root will be eaten, it grows in Zeytun, Brgnik, and the autumn root grows in pairs.
 The origin of the word is Turkish.
 Ref. to the irikazgins.
42. Ptvak (screw).
 Հյ. It is a word: put + uak, the kinship is unknown.
43. Putp (Putput, blue lily, Olive flower, Sasn. Br. Khakakut, wild vegetable, which is also called "Yaghvans put".
 It has reddish flowers.
 Հյկ. It is a word, belonging to the class of Bazotians.
44. Paper (Paper).
 It is vine-like կ consists of 5 leaves, it is a whitish flower.
 The word is universal. Borrowed, it belongs to the class of Molossians, Pipers, Tughts.
FLOWERS WITH VARIETIES We present some flower names found in the valley, which have handwritten versions. ungrateful , shakhrun, khachkhachmatutik - lynx, baby, marukh, marakh, metnikmor - mori, mormeni, mormik, morminosketsaghig - chemistry, sun mother, golden mother, funny grassEhan - zartar, zartrik, basil, Turkish. from fesilq.
In conclusion, it should be said that many of the flower names have become obsolete, for example, Guzel, Tsapkotruk, Chiktam, etc.
 A small number of the above-mentioned flower names have been preserved, such as Antaram, Snowdrop, Poppy, Shushan, Rose, etc.
  Through statistics, we discovered that J. There are 62 flower names in Alishan "Haybusak", Hr. In Acharyan's "Radical Dictionary of Armenian" - 77, R. In Ghazaryan's "Armenian-Latin Dictionary" - 53, and K. In Gabikyan's "Armenian flora" - 41.
  We get some information about the above-mentioned flower names, but we came across 10 flower names that are not registered in the above-mentioned dictionaries: Burazan, Zafran, Lezuak, Khazal, Khaj, Khastutia, Gatifa, Sutvard, Zink, fenah.
Diana HakobyanFLOWER NAMES AND FLOWER NAMES DAVID SALADZORTSI "GLORY OF FLOWERS" SONG Keywords: flower, plant, song, classification, statistics, word composition, nature.
