EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION IN CIVIL PROCEEDINGS The jurisdiction of civil cases subject to courts of general jurisdiction is determined by the rules of territorial jurisdiction.
Territorial jurisdiction is aimed at the even distribution of cases between the courts of the same circle, taking into account the economic-personal interests of the parties, ensuring access to justice for the parties, economic և expeditious proceedings [1].
The goals of defining certain types of territorial jurisdiction differ from each other. In one case, the definition of the rules of jurisdiction is based on the interests of the court, in the other case, the private interests of the parties, in another case, the interests of the court and the parties.
The RA Civil Procedure Code1, establishing a general territorial jurisdiction, according to which the claim is initiated in the court of the defendant's place of residence (Article 82 of the RA CCP), at the same time defines other types of territorial jurisdiction, including allowing interested parties to change the territorial jurisdiction Of exceptional jurisdiction.
Exclusive jurisdiction is a special type of territorial jurisdiction, the rules of which define the scope of certain cases, the examination of which is carried out by courts clearly defined by law, excluding the possibility of agreement of the parties on the examination of such cases in another court.
There are different opinions in the legal literature on the purposes of defining the rules of exclusive jurisdiction չափ the criteria for determining this type of jurisdiction.
Thus, there is a widespread view that lawsuits brought under the rules of exclusive jurisdiction can more quickly and correctly examine the courts where the disputed property is located, as the examination of these cases, as a rule, involves detailed on-site inspections, buildings To be examined, to interrogate the victims 1 Adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
 See ARPA 1998.09.09 / 20 (53).
Hereinafter referred to as the RA Civil Procedure Code or the RA CCO.
with [2].
 Given the fact that the subject matter of disputes under the exclusive jurisdiction is mainly related to real estate located in the territory of the court, therefore the trial by the other court may significantly prolong the trial, necessitate the execution of court orders, negatively affect the immediacy of the trial. ].
Without underestimating the urgency of all the above-mentioned views, however, we believe that the interests of the court are paramount in the definition of exceptional jurisdiction.
 In other words, the main purpose of establishing exclusive jurisdiction is to establish a higher level of accessibility for the court, that is, the court examines the case in the place where the subject of the dispute is.
 This facilitates the work of the court during the collection and examination of evidence, and according to the legislator, it should lead to a faster and more correct solution of the case.
 Moreover, basing the interests of the court on the basis of exceptional jurisdiction, it is ultimately aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the protection of the subjective rights of the participants in the trial.
  Thus, in civil litigation, the main public-legal function of the court is to ensure the timely շ due diligence և resolution of the case, which is aimed at protecting the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of the persons concerned.
 Despite the fact that the basis for initiating a civil case is the claim submitted by the plaintiff, in the civil case the judicial protection is given not only to the plaintiff, but also to the other persons participating in the case.
Clarification of the criteria for defining this type of jurisdiction is crucial for the separation of the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
 We believe that the criterion for defining the rule of exclusive jurisdiction should be, first of all, the object of the claim, that is, the subject to which the claim constituting the content of the subject of the claim is directed.
 Second, the claim related to that object, the substantive claim that the plaintiff presents against the defendant.
Based on the above, we believe that real estate should be considered as an object, and as a claim related to that object, the claim on the right of ownership over real estate այլ other property rights.
Although Article 85 of the RA CCC is entirely devoted to exclusive jurisdiction, however, the article lacks regulations on a number of issues related to this type of jurisdiction.
 Thus, the RA CCO does not regulate the question of which court has a lawsuit, within the framework of which several lawsuits have been joined, which have different jurisdiction.
 The issue raised is particularly problematic in the case of the correlation between the norms of alternative jurisdiction and the rules of exclusive jurisdiction, ie in cases when one of the claims in the lawsuit is an alternative to the courts defined by the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
 This applies equally to situations where the principal derivative claims have different jurisdiction from the claims included in the claim.
The mentioned issue was regulated by the draft law of the Republic of Armenia “On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia” developed by the working group of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia [4] (hereinafter referred to as the Draft), entitled “Exclusive Territorial Jurisdiction”. It is stipulated in the part that at the same time the claim with exclusive claims with other territorial jurisdiction is initiated in the court of first instance defined by this article.
In our opinion, the issue of giving preference to one of the rules of alternative or exclusive jurisdiction should be considered by clarifying the correlation of the above-mentioned norms.
 As a result, it will be possible to decide which one should be given preference as a result of the competition of the norms.
We think that the issue of giving preference to one of the mentioned norms should be solved first of all, taking into account the legal nature of those rules, for the purpose of defining the rules defined by those norms.
Thus, alternative territorial jurisdiction is characterized by the fact that the plaintiff reserves the right to file a claim in another court (courts) in parallel with the general rule, in parallel with the court of the defendant's place of residence.
 In such cases, the legislature creates special privileged conditions for the plaintiffs' cases, which affect the most essential interests of the participants in the civil turnover, which, due to special circumstances, need excellent protection.
 In other words, alternative jurisdiction is a privilege granted to plaintiffs in certain cases.
In the case of exceptional jurisdiction, the choice of the court competent to hear the case is made by law և does not depend on the discretion, convenience or desire of the parties.
Based on the above, we can conclude that the rules of alternative territorial jurisdiction are encouraging in nature, improving the situation of the plaintiffs in certain cases.
 Meanwhile, in the case of exceptional jurisdiction, we are dealing not with an encouraging, but with a restrictive norm.
Therefore, in case of competition of the norms of exceptional alternative jurisdiction, the issue of giving preference to one of them should be solved by the following question: Which norm of the RA legislation do you prefer, the encouraging or restrictive norm?
According to Article 2 78 of the RA Law on Legal Acts. «1. (…).
Retroactive force may not be granted restricting the rights or freedoms of legal or natural persons, stricter the procedure for their implementation or imposing liability or aggravating liability or (…).
  2. A legal act that eliminates or mitigates the liability established for an offense or otherwise improves the situation of legal or natural persons who have committed an offense shall apply to the relations arising from its entry into force, ie it shall have retroactive effect unless otherwise provided by law or that legal act.
From the analysis of the above-mentioned norms, it becomes clear that the legislator gives preference to the improving norm.
 Moreover, it should be borne in mind that the prohibition of retroactive effect of the law extends not only to the laws defining responsibility, but also to the laws that worsen the legal status of a person in general.
 This implies that the prohibition enshrined in the mentioned constitutional provision refers not only to substantive law, but also to the norms of monetary law.
Based on the cited, we believe that the alternative jurisdictions contain norms of an improving nature, in other words, encouraging ones, and the exclusive jurisdiction, on the contrary, has a restrictive nature.
Therefore, the choice between alternative "exclusive jurisdiction rules" should be made with a preference for alternative jurisdiction rules.
Based on the above, we consider that it is necessary to define by the RA CCP, in the case when the submitted claims (including the main Derivative) have different jurisdiction, ie they are at the same time jurisdiction over the courts defined by the rules of "exclusive", alternative territorial jurisdiction. then the claim is initiated in a court established by the rules of alternative jurisdiction.
The RA CCP envisages the following cases with exceptional jurisdiction: “1. Recognizing the right of ownership over lands, buildings, constructions, land plots, buildings, constructions are illegal's 2 Adopted on 03.04.2002, entered into force on 31.05.2002.
 See ARPA N 49 (224), HO-320.
"Claims for reclaiming possession, elimination of violations related to the rights of the owner or other legal possessor not related to deprivation of possession shall be initiated in the court of the land, building, construction site."
The Court of Appeal, following the analysis of the above-mentioned norm, states that the legislator considers the object of this rule of exclusive jurisdiction not only any real estate, but only plots of land, buildings, structures.
 This is evidenced by the fact that instead of the general concept of "real estate" in the article, the legislator uses the concept of "land, buildings, constructions", which in practice often causes problems with real estate lawsuits.
Thus, for example, in the civil case No. EADD / 0768/02/11 dated 24.08.2011. The decision stating that the claim for recognition of the right of ownership over the apartment could not be identified with the requirement for recognition of the right of ownership over land, buildings and structures, և this claim should be examined by the rule of general territorial jurisdiction.
 The RA Court of Cassation within the framework of the mentioned case on 18.01.2012 According to the decision made by the RA Civil Code, the apartment is defined as a planned area of ​​residence (building).
  That is, the rule of exclusive jurisdiction defined by the RA Civil Procedure Code applies to the claim for recognition of the ownership of the apartment as a building.
  Therefore, we believe that the object of this rule of exclusive jurisdiction should be considered real estate in general.
Therefore, it is necessary to replace the phrase "land, buildings - buildings" used in the cited norm with the notion of "real estate", which will exclude unnecessary restrictions on the application of this rule and its very narrow interpretation in practice.
The so-called rule of exclusive jurisdiction has another limitation.
In particular, this rule of exclusive jurisdiction applies only to the recognition of ownership of land, buildings, structures, reclaiming lands, buildings, structures from unlawful possession of another (vindication claim), elimination of violations of rights not related to deprivation of possession of an owner or other lawful possessor. with claims on claims.
This means that the legislator has conditioned the application of the rule of exclusive jurisdiction not only on the lands, buildings, constructions that are the object of the dispute, but also on the claim against that property.
  That is, even in cases when the object of the claim is a plot of land, a building or a building, but the submitted claim does not include any of the mentioned claims, the claim must be initiated according to the rules of general territorial jurisdiction.
However, there are many cases in the jurisprudence where instead of applying the rules of general territorial jurisdiction with a number of claims related to real estate, the lawsuits are erroneously submitted by the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
 For example, in the civil case No. EMD / 2814/02/14, the RA Civil Court of Appeal on 24.10.2014 According to the decision, the claim to divide the property under share ownership and to separate it from the share can not be identified with any of the vindication, negation - property recognition claims, therefore, it is subject to initiation and examination under Article 82 of the RA Civil Procedure Code. as a general rule, in which case the rule of exclusive jurisdiction to initiate a claim does not apply in this case.
In the civil case No. EED / 3788/02/16, the Court of General Jurisdiction of the Nubarashen Administrative District of Erebuni, Yerevan, on 10.11.2016. By the decision "On returning the lawsuit" he noted that the rules of exclusive jurisdiction defined by Article 85 of the RA Civil Procedure Code apply to the claims to separate the debtor's part from the joint property, to distribute confiscation in the amount of damage caused by the crime.
In another case, the Court of General Jurisdiction of Avan-Nor Nork Administrative District of the city of Yerevan noted that Article 85 of the RA Civil Procedure Code (exclusive jurisdiction) deals with the recognition of the right of ownership over real estate, and not on restoration.
 The court found that exclusive jurisdiction was not applicable to this claim [5], while in another case the RA Civil Court of Appeal ruled that the claim for termination of property rights should be examined under the rules of exclusive jurisdiction [6].
Thus, if exclusive jurisdiction is established to settle disputes over real estate more quickly and effectively, it should be noted that the category "disputes relating to real estate" includes not only the three lawsuits referred to, but also disputes over other property rights, e.g. Termination of the right of ownership over the real estate, servitudes defined for the real estate, the right of indefinite use of the real estate, acquisition of the right of use of the land plot, etc.
There are two main approaches to resolving this issue.
  Thus, in a number of states, the rule of exclusive jurisdiction is defined by all types of claims against real estate, without specifying the nature of the claim.
 For example, pursuant to Article 114 1 1 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine, lawsuits arising in connection with immovable property are brought before the court of the real estate or its principal place of residence.
In other parts of the world, the definition of exclusive jurisdiction is based on the nature of the real estate claim.
 For example, under Article 44 of the French Code of Civil Procedure, claims for immovable property are subject only to the jurisdiction of that immovable property.
Part 1 of Article 99 of the Estonian CCP lists the claims that are the subject of property disputes over real estate.
 The jurisdiction of these lawsuits is determined by the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
Thus, among them are the lawsuits, the subject of which are: the recognition of the right of ownership over the real estate or other related claims, the determination of the boundaries of the real estate or the division, etc. 3.
Pursuant to Article 4 20, Clause 3 of the Minsk Convention of January 22, 1993 "On Legal Assistance in Civil, Criminal-Family" Ratifications ratified between the Republic of Armenia and the Russian Federation, claims on property rights and other property rights are exclusively adjudicable. to the location of the property.
As mentioned above, the purpose of this exclusive jurisdiction rule is to provide a quicker, more accurate, time-saving solution for the parties and the court in the case of the disputed real estate, as the examination of these cases usually involves detailed on-site inspections. examination, interrogation of և other actions.
  And the need to perform the mentioned actions arises not only during the examination of the cases with the requirements included in Part 1 of Article 85 of the RA CCP, but also during the examination of the cases with other claims against the real estate.
 Therefore, we believe that 3 For more details, see the Civil Procedure Code of Estonia4 entered into force for the Republic of Armenia on June 22, 1993, and for the Russian Federation on December 10, 1994.
This rule of exclusive jurisdiction shall apply to claims relating to property rights in respect of property, the examination of which necessitates the performance of such actions.
  These may include claims for termination of ownership by real estate, servitudes against real estate, etc.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the determination of jurisdiction in real estate disputes can often cause difficulties.
 For example, if there is a claim for recognition of ownership of a plot of land located in the legal territory of two or more courts, then the question arises as to which court the plaintiff should apply to.
 This applies equally to cases where two or more of the claims in the lawsuit are subject to different courts determined by the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
  This issue is not regulated by the RA CCP.
 The legislation of a number of countries has adopted the approach that in that case the location of the main part of the property should be guided, ie the lawsuit in these cases is initiated to the court of the location of the main part of the property.
 Such an approach is available in the case of the RA CCO in the case of claims against inherited property.
  If we accept that in the mentioned cases we should be guided by the location of the main part of the real estate, then a number of questions arise.
 First, the notion of "main part of the property" is not given by the RA legislation.
 Therefore, the question arises as to what should become the criterion for determining the "main part of the real estate": the value of the given part of the property, its role in business activity or other criteria.
  If we accept that the criterion for determining the main part of real estate is its market value, then it will be necessary to regulate the question of how to determine the value of the property, in particular, who should determine the value of the property, whether it is necessary to involve a real estate appraiser. on whom the obligation to determine the main part of the property should be placed, և according to which the court should examine the case.
 In addition, if the main part of the property is determined by the market value of the property, then the next question arises that the market value of the property should be determined at the moment.
  Moreover, it is not excluded that the main size of real estate located in different places can be determined because they are almost equal.
  Taking into account the above, we think that in the mentioned cases the alternative-exclusive jurisdiction should act, that is, the plaintiff himself can make a choice between the courts in the territory of which the disputed real estate is located.
 Moreover, the choice of a competent court is limited to those courts that operate in the location of real estate, therefore, applying to one of those courts excludes the right to apply to another court.
 Therefore, in case the plaintiff applies to one of the courts defined by the rules of exclusive jurisdiction having jurisdiction to hear the case, that court is obliged to accept the application for proceedings.
 The only exception to this rule, in our opinion, should be established for cases when one of the competent courts coincides with the court of the defendant's place of residence.
 In that case, the claim will be initiated in the place of residence (location) of the defendant, where one or several of the real estates are located.
2. The lawsuits of the heir creditors are initiated in the court of the location of the inherited property or its main part (Article 85, Part 2) of the RA CCP.
It should be noted that this rule of exclusive jurisdiction under the Draft has been almost completely edited.
  Part 3 of Article 21 stipulates that the claims of the creditor of the heir are initiated in the registration (location) or residence of the heir or testator, and in the absence of the mentioned persons, in the court of first instance of the place of opening the inheritance.
That the legal regulation defined by the Draft is logical in the sense that the claims of the heir creditors are mainly directed not against the hereditary property, but against the heirs (as they are expected to receive their claims), but in our opinion, this rule can no longer be considered a rule of exclusive jurisdiction.
 In the first part of the draft norm under discussion, the initiation of a claim is connected with the registration or place of residence of the testator, which is in itself a rule of general territorial jurisdiction.
 In the second part, the court of the place of initiation of the lawsuit is considered the court of first instance of the place of opening the inheritance, both of which may not coincide with the location of the inherited property.
  Moreover, it is not excluded that there are several heirs և their place of registration (location) or place of residence is in different places.
 In that case, the question arises as to which place the court should examine the submitted claim.
 Therefore, we find that the mentioned rule cannot be considered a rule of exclusive jurisdiction, as it does not meet the criteria for defining the rule of exclusive jurisdiction.
3. The lawsuits on the release of the property are initiated in the court of the location of the property (Article 85, part 3) of the RA Criminal Code.
As it can be noticed, in the cited article the legislator uses the word "property", that is, in this case it is about both movable and immovable property.
 Moreover, with the mentioned exception, the basis is the property և not the place of its registration.
 However, if the article refers to movable property, it would be more correct to stipulate that the claim can be initiated not only in the court of the location of the property, but also in the court of the place of residence (residence) of the person in possession of the property.
It should be noted that this Rule of Exclusive Jurisdiction under the Draft has been amended to a certain extent, according to which Article 21, Part 2, claims for removal from immovable property are filed in the court of first instance where the real estate is located.
 We think that this settlement should be considered justified, because in the case of movable property, applying the rule of exclusive jurisdiction, the parties themselves can choose the court of jurisdiction by changing the location of the property.
Summarizing the above, we propose to rewrite Article 85 of the RA Civil Procedure Code as follows: «1. Claims on property rights և property rights are exclusively within the jurisdiction of the courts where the property is located.
In cases where the claims relate to several properties located in different courts, the claim must be brought in the court of the location of one of those properties, at the choice of the plaintiff, unless one of the courts in that place is the court of the defendant's place of residence. is.
  In that case, the claim is initiated in the court of the place of residence (location) of the defendant, where the real estate is located.
2. Claims for the release of real estate from seizure shall be filed in the court of first instance where the real estate is located.
3. At the same time, a claim with claims of exceptional alternative jurisdiction shall be filed with a court defined by the rules of alternative jurisdiction. ”
LITERATURE [4] Draft Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, URL.
  http:
//www.moj.am/storage/files/legal_acts/legal_acts_7886870405861_K-1041.pdf(Accessed.
 08.11.2017).
[5] In civil case No. EAND / 4477/02/16 of the Court of General Jurisdiction of Avan-NorNork Administrative District of Yerevan, November 7, 2016. Decision on returning the lawsuit.
[6] In the civil case No. EAND / 1635/02/10 of the RA Civil Court of Appeal of December 16, 2010. decision.
[7] Civil Procedure Code of Ukraine dated 18.03.2004 № 1618-IV.
Mikaelyan Ani EXCLUSIVE JUDGE IN CIVIL TRIAL Keywords: exclusive jurisdiction, alternative jurisdiction, related disputes.
