Isolated from lithophytic lichen ACINETOBACTER SP. A1 ENDOPHYTIC BACTERIAL STAGE CHARACTERISTICS Lichens are coexisting stable organisms composed of fungal (mycobiont) և photoautotrophic algae (photobiont) components [1].
Recent scientific studies have shown that in addition to the mycobionate-photobiont component, lichen thallus contains a variety of endophytic bacteria.
 Endophytic bacteria are of great ecological importance in the biodiversity, especially in terms of providing nitrogen self-sufficiency in coexistence [2, 3].
  It has been shown that the production of biologically active substances in lichens is conditioned by these endophytic bacteria.
  Therefore, the isolation and study of these bacteria can be promising for the synthesis of valuable biologically active compounds in biotechnological processes [3].
 Carcinogens have been used for centuries in traditional medicine as a disinfectant, warming and analgesic for wounds.
 Lichens are now widely used in biotechnology in the preparation of antibacterial, antioxidant and anti-tumor preparations [4, 2, 5].
The flora of Armenia is rich in lichens typical of the region.
 The aim of this work was to isolate and identify endophytic bacteria from the most common lithophytic lichen in the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
Material և method.
 The samples of lithophytic lichen collected from Tavush region became the subject of study.
For the isolation of endophytic bacteria, the following nutrient medium (g / l) was used: glucose 20, KNO3 1, K2HPO4 0.5, MgSO4 x 7H2O 0.5, NaCl 0.5 CaCO3 1, FeSO4 x 7H2O trace, agar-agar 20. pH - 7.0-7.2.
 In order to sterilize pre-surface contaminants, the lichen thallum was rinsed several times with sterile distilled water and treated on a plate at 1000 C for 1 hour [6].
 Then, the treated lichen sediment was homogenized under sterile conditions, suspended with sterilized distilled water, and in order to obtain separate colonies, the suspension was spread 103-106 times with a spatula on the surface of a solid medium filled with petri dishes (incubation at a temperature of 300C per day).
Bacterial colonies were characterized by their external characteristics: egg, size, surface, color, edge structure.
  Among the morphological features of the cells, the egg, the arrangement, the ability to produce spores were mentioned.
 To determine the temperature range of the culture, they were incubated at 30'44 և 37 0C, respectively.
 As a carbon source, ethanolysis of Na citrate, lactate, aspartate, L-phenylalanine, β-alanine, L-arginine, as well as gelatinase և hemolytic activities, will be determined according to commonly accepted methods [7, 8].
ևPhylogenetic analysis was performed by sequencing of 16S RNA gene sequences.
  DNA cleavage was performed using acetyltermethylammonium bromide according to the accepted method of bacterial genomic DNA cleavage [9].
  Genomic DNA (PCR) was used as a template for polymerase chain reaction (universal GAAAGGAGGTGATCCAGCC-3 ') primers to amplify the 16S RNA gene.
 The amplicons were cleaned using the GenEluteTMPCR Clean-up Kit (Sigma, USA) and sequenced with the ABI PRISM capillary sequencer.
  The sequencing results were processed և decoded using BioEdit (7.0.5.3) և Chromas Lite (2.1).
 The sequences obtained for the identification of the strains were analyzed online "BLAST", "NCBI" (http.
//blast.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) domain.
  Ephylogenetic tree was constructed with the help of "MEGA 6.06" program, comparing with "Neighbor Joining" method with the sequences available online at GENBANK.
Results և discussion.
 A bacterial culture was isolated from lithophytic lichen, which was named A1.
  The culture forms concentric, flat profile, flat surface, dull, milky, irregular colonies.
 Cells are rod-shaped, asporogenic, forming chains.
The 16S RNA gene was successfully amplified by PCR from genomic DNA isolated from A1 culture and then sequenced.
  The results of "BLAST" analysis are presented in Table 1.
  As can be seen from the table, culture A1 has the closest correlation with Acinetobacter lwoffii (KX495293) at 97% similarity in 16S RNA gene analysis.
Table 1 ․ Results of "BLAST" analysis of isolated cultureInsulated
Culture 16 S RNA igen length (n.z.) Similarity Degree closest match in GenBank
According to the identification results, a phylogenetic tree was constructed using the similar sequences available online BL in the BLAST and NCBI domains as reference sequences (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Phylogenetic position of A1 culture in a tree.
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa was used as a remote phylogenetic indicator.
 The scale (0.01) corresponds to 1 nucleotide difference for every 100 nucleotides.
Taking into account the results of "BLAST" analysis, the identified features were compared with the typical species of Acinetobacter lwoffii.
 The results are summarized in Table 2.
strain fentypical Table 2 ․ Comparison of phenotypic characteristics of the isolated bacterium CharacteristicsGrowth: 300C CharacteristicsGelatin hydrolysisHemolysis of citrate Lactate Aspartate L-phenylalanine β-alanine L-arginineEthanolThe optimum growth temperature of the isolated culture is 300 ° C, in contrast to the temperature of 300 ° C.
 Moreover, unlike the typical strain, A1 culture assimilates citrate, L-phenylalanine, β-alanine, L-arginine, hydrolyzes gelatin, but assimilates lactate և ethanol.
Lichen biofilm Based on the results of phylogenetic analysis of culture phenotypic symptoms կարելի, it can be concluded that the isolated culture belonging to the genus Acinetobacter և is probably a new species.
That is why we named it Acinetobacter sp. strain A1.
Isolated ecological significance is due in particular to the assimilation of atmospheric nitrogen in ecosystems in the complete absence of sources of oxidized or reduced nitrogen compounds.
  The Acinetobacter genus is characterized by diazotrophy, so our isolated bacterium in the lithophytic lichen probably performs a nitrogen fixation function.
Bacteriology Agents. In.
 Lichen Secondary Metabolites. Eds. Rankovic B. et al., Springer, pp. 81-104.Anticancer Activity In.
 Lichen Secondary Metabolites. Eds. Rankovic B. et al., Springer, [4] Crawford SD, (2015) Lichens Used in Traditional Medicine. In.
 Lichen SecondaryMetabolites. In.
 Lichen Secondary Metabolites. Eds. Rankovic B. et al., Springer, pp. 1-27.Isolated from Lichens.
 Evaluation of Their Diversity and Detection of Biosynthetic Gene [9] Брюханов А. L., Rybak K. V., Netrusov A. I., Molecular micro-biology.
Учебник для вузов., М.
 Publisher: Московского университета, 2012, 480 pp. Hasmik Hunanyan, Razmik Sargsyan Isolated from lithophytic lichen ACINETOBACTER SP. A1 ENDOPHYTIC BACTERIAL STAIN CHARACTERISTICS Keywords: lithophytic lichens, endophytes, Acinetobacter, 16S RNAs.
