CHARACTERISTICS OF LEADER FORMATION IN POST-SOVIET ARMENIA (1988-1995) The process of political socialization leads to a unique stratification of individuals.
 Some of them become active citizens, others strive for a passive existence.
 The state is based on assets, due to them the political system exists, the political society is built.
  Its leaders, the leaders, become the most active.
Attempts have been made to reveal the role and place of the leader in the socio-political process in antiquity.
 In the works of ancient authors we find descriptions of heroes who, in their opinion, are the creators of history1.
  The separate aspects of the mentioned topic have been studied by different authors.
  The description of the leader-ruler was first given by N. Machiavelli.
 In his opinion, the leader should use all possible means to unite the society and maintain order, including cunning, force, deception2.
The classic division of the typology of a ruling or aspiring political leader was made by Max Weber.
  The division is based on the logic of the legitimacy of the exercised power.
  Weber distinguished three types of leaders: traditional, charismatic, rational-bureaucratic.
  The construction of each of them is based on a separate factor. In the case of traditional leadership it is the tradition, in the case of the charismatic it is the exceptional human qualities, in the case of the rational-bureaucratic it is the current law and its effectiveness.
The power and significance of a political leader becomes more urgent when the state is in a period of transition, from one political regime to another.
 Every political system has its own mechanisms for forming and maintaining the highest bodies of power, which mainly form the psychological image of a leader.
  In the conditions of totalitarianism, "first-person worship" is accepted3.
 But in democratic countries, the supposed national leader must enjoy the trust of "the broad masses of the population," especially the members of the party he leads.
 Leaders with democratic values ​​often have more connections with the public during the transition period.
 They see themselves as potential winners and rulers in the future democratic regime4.
1980s At the end of the 19th century, along with the Armenian National Movement in Armenia, a new political elite emerged, which began to rule on the basis of new institutions of liberal values, and democracy became a factor in the formation of a new elite.
 At the time when the people's movement started, all his wishes and demands were obvious.
  Dissatisfied with the government of the region, the people themselves elected their leaders, the people who initiated, organized and coordinated the people's movement.
1990 On May 20, 1945, for the first time in the history of Soviet Armenia, democratic elections were held with the participation of numerous political parties and organizations.
  Since the traditional Armenian political parties: 1 Poghosyan V. ։ Others, Political Science, Encyclopedic Dictionary, Yerevan, 2004, p. 160.
2 See N. Machiavelli, The Prince, available at http: // www.
//www.constitution.org/mac/prince.pdf, available on 31.01.2014.
3 Margaryan M., Political Leadership, Yerevan, 2001, p. 54.
4 Lintz Kh., Stepan A., The Problems of Transition to Democracy կայ The Establishment of Democracy, Southern Europe, South America և Post-Communist Europe, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 104-106.
Dashnaktsutyun, Ramkavars և The Hunchaks were not yet formed in Armenia, the votes were divided in the elections among the "representatives of the Communist Party of Armenia".
1990 On August 4, the newly elected parliament of the republic Leon Ter-Petrosyan was elected chairman of the Supreme Council of the Armenian National Movement.
  The latter was the first chairman of the Supreme Council of Armenia who was not a member of the Communist Party.
1991 The first presidential elections were held in Armenia on October 16, 2010. Six candidates ran in the elections: Paruyr Hayrikyan, leader of the National Self-Determination Union, Ashot Navasardyan, founder of the Republican Party of Armenia, Zori Balayan, writer, academician Rafael Ghazaryan, actor Sos Sargsyan, nominated by the ARF Dashnaktsutyun. և Levon Ter-Petrosyan, member of the Armenian National Movement.
  Ter-Petrosyan became president in one round, receiving 83% of the votes of 1,518,090 voters.
  Paruyr Hayrikyan received 7% of his vote of confidence, Sos Sargsyan - 4.3%, Zori Balayan - 0.45%, Rafael Ghazaryan - 0.39%, Ashot Navasardyan - 0.16% 1.
  The presidential elections allow us to conclude that the process of establishing the institution of a leader in this period had entered the stage of legality.
  The leaders of this region, Ter-Petrosyan and his team, enjoyed the unconditional trust of the people, the people believed, and supported them.
Without exception, in times of trouble, the leader և his supporters perceive the power field և perceive their emotional criteria - political consciousness - in accordance with the culture.
 The leader's self discusses not only the connection he has with his supporters, but first of all his identity.
 The leader communicates with his identity "horizontally" with different types of party and state leaders, and "vertically" communicates with his supporters, the people and the opposition.
  Only in dual communication can the leader develop his identity through the mechanism of protection of the interests of the two fields.
 Therefore, only a leader with an identity can break his relations in the field of power, assuming the relations of his people, his supporters, his team, his opposition.
  The ability to maintain a relationship at each of these levels enables the leader to bring to power a field with their own goals, interests, place, role, studying the capabilities of each of them, managing նրանցtheir, power field2.
Since the 1980s ․ Since the end of the 19th century, a vacuum-closed period has emerged in the Armenian reality, where it was difficult to separate the "horizontal" and "vertical" relations of the political leader.
 There was a Communist Party և People's Movement, where everyone - the people, its leaders, at least initially, had almost the same goals and desire to solve problems, then the relations between the leader - the people, the leader - his supporters, the leader - the opposition - almost the same were at that level.
 1996 was a turning point for a political leader. The presidential election, where the divisions were already obvious, և as a result of this breakthrough գործընթացը, the process of legitimizing the country's leader seems to have failed.
  There was an opposition, a society that had already formed interest groups, that demanded a solution from the political leader.
 Problems were waiting for an immediate response, which the first person of the country was not able to solve immediately.
 Before independence, Soviet Armenia had the largest number of scientists and specialists among the USSR countries.
 Almost 30% of the high-tech computers of the equipment used for the defense industry and space systems of the Soviet Union were developed and produced in Armenia.
3 At that time, the following situation prevailed in the country: • The catastrophic earthquake caused great damage to the country's economy.
• The Artsakh war was going on.
• The country was under economic blockade by Turkey and Azerbaijan.
• There was an acute energy crisis due to the closure of the nuclear power plant.
• The water of Lake Sanaa was used for energy.
  The massive deforestation of this had put the country in front of an environmental catastrophe.
view, available: RA President 1 Manukyan A., http.
//www.7or.am/en/news/view/46011/, available on 01.02.2014.
2 Margaryan M., pp. 57-59.
3 Ellena M., Tablet made in Armenia - the next big thing ?, Financial Times, available at http.
//blogs.ft.com/beyondbrics/2014/01/20/tablet-made-in-armenia-the-next-big-thing/?catid=677&SID=google#axzz2rJkKq3gs, available on 31.01.2014.
Elections: Return In such conditions, it was necessary to make a transition from the former administrative system to free market relations.
  The industry of the republic, cut off from the former union economic system, was paralyzed.
  Most of the factories were deprived of raw materials and product markets and were dismantled.
 1992 Compared to the previous year, the gross industrial product made only 52% 1.
  Thousands of workers lost their jobs and mass emigration began.
 The leadership of the republic was not able to overcome many difficulties. Moreover, a number of mistakes and abuses were made.
1990 On August 23, the Supreme Council of the Republic adopted the "Declaration of Independence of Armenia".
  We consider it necessary to mention that a special article of the Declaration mentioned the supremacy of the laws of the republic over the laws of the USSR.
It is interesting that L. Ter-Petrosyan was against in the declaration of 1915. Most of the deputies demanded the Armenian Genocide to be included in the clause on the Armenian territories, but as a result of the voting, it was nevertheless introduced.
 Ter-Petrosyan's decision was also reflected in his future domestic and foreign policy, which can be vividly demonstrated by the removal of Raffi Hovannisian from the post of RA Foreign Minister against the background of his Armenian Genocide and the Armenian issue in Turkey, which also has its role. - In the decline of the rating of Petrosyan political leader 2.
  The Armenian people, who gained new independence, could not forgive this step of the de facto president for not actually taking ownership of the genocide process.
Among the motives for the formation of a leader in the post-Soviet situation in Armenia, one can single out the leader's beliefs, aspirations, sense of duty, selfless struggle for freedom, independence, welfare of the people, intra-group ties, friendship, vital relations. , private property.
  The presence of ideologues guaranteed the leader a relationship with equals.
 The rupture of such unity could lead to the violation of the identity of the leader in government structures, which could give birth to dictatorial or authoritarian leaders.
It was during the rupture of this unity that the first constitutional referendum took place.
  The adopted constitution enshrined a number of rights of the country's president, as a result of which we can consider the state a presidential republic.
  By country, the country was considered SEMI-PRESIDENTIAL, but the political reality was different, especially in 1995-1997. the end, when the legislative, executive and judicial systems were completely in the hands of the president3.
 Many Soviet leaders did not feel united with their class "supporters."
  Slavery և Unconditional accreditation deprived the "proletarian god" of the opportunity to see the political field, the game, the reality universally4.
 1990 The Communist Party loses in a pluralistic, free and competitive election.
  The defeated Communist Party could have kept control of many resources and loyal supporters who would help them run in the next elections, but they did not have a comparable institutional base in the state apparatus, ambition for the resources of the new state, and an ongoing state mission.
Defeated in free and fair elections, they again held many important positions in the apparatus, especially in state-owned enterprises, and were able to secure a privileged position in the emerging capitalist economy.
 In Armenia, unlike other communist states, the former communists did not try to overthrow or challenge the new regime, but tried to benefit from it.
  This led to confusion between the public and the private, thus opening the door to corruption.
1 Danielyan E., Melkonyan I, From ancient times to the present day, Yerevan, 2008, p. 350.
2 Arshakyan III, Turkey's policy in the South Caucasus 1991-2001 ․, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 63-64.
http:
//www.politex.info/content/view/219/30/, available on 31.01.2014.
4 Margaryan M., page 75.
See Markarov A., Semi-presidentialism available in 1990-95. In the conditions of radical changes of the political system, a new political elite was formed around the strong leader.
 However, even in the conditions of radical transformation, the newly formed team was still the birth of the political team left over from the last years of the Soviet Union.
 1990-95 The formed elite, in spite of many political upheavals, left its mark not only on the state-building regional politics, but also on the current political events.
  In this connection, NA deputy Tjan Poghosyan mentions that there are people who from the 90s until today continue to remain in the political team, people who are the basis of today's political team1.
 For example, the current President of the Republic of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan has been active in politics since the beginning of the Karabakh movement.
  Before taking office as the President of the Republic of Armenia in 1991-96, he was the NKR Minister, then the Minister of Defense of the Republic of Armenia, and then the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia.
  T. In Poghosyan's opinion, there is an ingenetic connection between these two political elites, not only in the sense that there were people who came to power and maintain their power, but also in the opposite sense. They were people who left power in the 90s, today they are in the opposition of the political field.
The people who are educating the young generation today are no exception; they have found a lot in the field of education. For example, Bagrat Asatryan, who is considered one of the best lecturers in the field of economics, while he held the position of the Chairman of the Central Bank in the early 90s.
Thus, in the 1980s. From the second half of the 20th century, the revolutionary atmosphere created as a result of deep social conflicts throughout the USSR became fertile ground for the development of new political processes, the emergence of a new political leader.
 At the same time, this process took place within the framework of the "Third Wave of Democracy" described by Samuel Huntington.
 In other words, the new type of leader had to correspond to the model of democracy, to be legally legitimate, and the process of establishing the institution in accordance with democratic standards, which would allow this institution to function effectively.
1980s During the recent political instability in Armenia, leaders became those who were initially inclined, either by upbringing or by nature, as a "God-given gift" of charisma.
 They were considered special mission prophets, demigods, prominent historical figures, and so on.
 The relationship between the leader and the masses, being emotional-mysterious, presupposes blind faith, complete self-forgetfulness, unconditional obedience.
The leaders of the period under study responded to the demands of the society in a timely manner, were able to manage and make flexible changes in the political field.
  They skillfully and quickly solved problems that had arisen at the right time, in this way standing out from the society, pushing themselves forward on the path of the people's movement, and a little later on the path of state leadership.
 The relations between the leader and the masses, being emotional-mysterious, presupposed blind faith, complete self-forgetfulness, unconditional obedience.
The leaders of this region relied on the principles of unity of society and tolerance.
  The power of the leader was to have a philosophy of group unity in power relations.
  The leader endowed with patience, kindness and generosity had the opportunity to prevent "administrative" and "social aggression".
Summing up, we can mention that .1. The leaders of the democratic movement in the period under study can be classified in the third group of the typology of Weber political leaders - charismatic leadership.
  This form of leadership is typical of any transitional society.
One of the most prominent features of a leader in post-Soviet Armenia is charisma.
2. It is noteworthy that the relations between the leader and the masses were emotional-mysterious, the society accepted its leader with blind faith, complete self-forgetfulness, unconditional obedience.
1 Interview with Tjan Poghosyan, 24.01.2014.
3. The leaders of this region relied on the principles of unity of society կառավարման tolerance.
  The power of the leader was in having a philosophy of group unity in the power relations.
4. At the end of the 20th century, informal leaders had a great reputation and influence in the Armenian political field.
 The study of the given period shows that not having the opportunity to control the state policy, the informal leader can significantly influence the development of political processes.
Rima Khalatyan CHARACTERISTICS OF LEADER FORMATION IN POST-SOVIET ARMENIA (1988-1995) Keywords: political leader, elite, transformation of political regime, charisma, influence on political processes.
