THEORETICAL QUESTIONS OF POLITICAL LEADERSHIP AND DRAWINGS: When talking about modern political processes, we involuntarily encounter the problem of the functions of a political leader, with positive or negative consequences.
Political leadership is considered the highest type of leadership.
 Its special nature is different in the case of all political leaders.
 To get a fair idea of ​​the phenomenon of the leader, let us mention a few characteristics that political leaders are usually endowed with.
 These are: having power over a certain number of people, skillful execution of political activity, clear plans, developed ability to make decisions, to implement them.
  We think that the analysis of political leadership as a political science phenomenon becomes possible only after the definition of the object.
  For a better coverage of the issue to be studied, let us refer to the concept of "leader" and the explanation of other equivalent words.
The word "leader" comes from the English word "to lead".
There is no such thing as a "leader" in a number of European languages.
 The French word "chef" describes a more hierarchical, certain team structure, including the very concept of "leader".
 Recently, the French concept of "decideur" (literally, decision-maker) has become quite popular, which is already related to the decision-making process.
 Charles de Gaulle, the word "guide" brought to the political arena, which literally translates from French as "leader", is not accepted by everyone, հաճախ more often used instead of the word "guide".
 Of some interest is the German word "führer" (Führer), which has become emotionally negative due to well-known historical events.
 We can not consider it equivalent to the English version.
Thus, in a number of Western dictionaries one can find the following formulation of the concept of "leader". "A member of a group who has the right to make decisions in important situations, who plays a huge role in the process of joint activities and relations in the group."
 In any difficult political situation, the role of a flexible leader is quite possible, as he is responsible not only for the given situation, but also for the people who follow him [1].
The main purpose of this study is to find out how interconnected leadership և the situation, whether dependent on each other, using comparative և situational methods to understand the main reasons and unexplained situations in political practice that prevent the leader from orienting correctly և to form a positive image of the leader.
When studying political leadership, it becomes clear how much the social sciences should work to avoid presenting political leaders with qualities that could damage their reputation.
  The choice of such collective, mutually exclusive, agreed, and sometimes chaotic decision-making processes is the basis of sociological research for public policy.
The institution of leadership can be considered a certain social system, which (the structure of the social system), according to Parsons [3], can be analyzed using four types of independent variables: roles, collectives, norms և values.
 The role of the above variables in political leadership presupposes the interaction between the subjects of politics, the influence on the political behavior of the people, that is, the restriction of the political behavior of the people.
In view of all this, Parsons distinguishes three possible types of modernization of political leadership: 1. The first type of leaders are strict, cruel, non-discriminatory in means of means, frivolous and unpromising.
 In this case, leadership is presented as a self-sufficient value that is considered above all և self-sufficient values.
2. In the case of the second leader, opposing the common public interests, the citizen directs his efforts to the solution of personal problems.
The main reason is that the leader acts as an anti-value.
 In this case, political leadership is the best way to normalize relations.
3. The last type of leader is perceived by the society as the best way to change due to democratic values.
 That is why the leader is considered a public value հ a wonderful way of development [4].
Ignoring moral norms can lead to the destruction of political leadership.
  As an institution of government, political leadership, with its multidimensional values ​​and various manifestations, presupposes both the calculation of moral norms and the concurrence of traditional Jardian values.
  Therefore, considering the value multiplicity of the phenomenon of political leadership, we consider it necessary to emphasize the four characteristics of a political leader: 1. In the case of the first characteristic, the political leader acts as an established individual, whose electorate authorizes the development and modernization of the public-group value system.
2. The second characteristic is distinguished by the fact that due to his personal authority, the leader has a significant role in group, individual, collective, as well as in other changes in social and political processes, because, in fact, A. moves. According to the famous Meneget phrase, on the principle of "first among equals".
3. In the case of the third characteristic, the leader is able to carry out his influence և main activity only due to the authority earned within the group.
4. In the latter case, due to the circumstances, the leader appears in the role of a leader at the "top of the pyramid", having the opportunity to make independent decisions, to give various orders to subordinates.
In my opinion, the last two characteristics of political leadership are more effective in the Republic of Armenia.
  As a vivid example of the second characteristic of a political leader, it is appropriate to mention the role and activity of the great Armenian politician Aram Manukyan during the First Republic, due to whose bright personality and strong will of the leader, the Armenian army was able to celebrate victory in the May heroic battles.
Leadership has one mandatory condition. have influence in various non-governmental organizations, local self-government bodies, formal and informal organizations.
Ժ. Blondel, taking into account the constitutional legal basis for the establishment of leadership, emphasized that leadership is a power that is exercised vertically, "from top to bottom".
  He paid special attention to the peculiarities of its psychological impact, noting that leadership is a permanent psychological impact of a person on a society, organization, group.
 Thus, one can assume that political leadership is a power exercised by several individuals at the same time with the aim of motivating the members of the nation to take various actions.
Famous Western political technologist J. Segelan noted that the election was largely held in a neutral zone, where the tonnage rival, who was able to draw more people into his camp, won.
From this point of view, the political leader, in order to be accepted by the general public, is obliged to conduct a heterogeneous study of the social strata, trying to justify their expectations.
This must be done purposefully in order to make it clear to the political leader how much he is in demand in the given society.
The elected candidates are responsible not only for the current political situation, but also for the political future.
 The latter increases the sense of responsibility.
One of the main objectives of the study is the study of leadership in the situation approach.
  That is why the political leadership should be considered from the point of view of interaction and balance with the situation.
The situational approach is widespread in the field of leadership research.
  Each historical situation puts forward a leader who corresponds especially to that situation and period.
 The situational approach does not completely ignore the characteristic theory.
 His supporters note that some features of the leader are changing due to the historical situation.
 For example, in a market economy, a person tries to develop characteristics that correspond to the conditions of the situation, striving to sell more knowledge, experience, innovations, capabilities, etc. [9].
 In my opinion, the leader is the one who performs his role better in a specific situation.
 A situation can be created by the power of the leader as much as the leader can be created by the situation.
In another context, we can state that the study of the situation in which the leader operates can reveal many of his characteristics, moreover, in many situations, revealing the need for a leader of different classes and styles.
A number of Western theorists believe that the situational approach reduces the leader's activity by making it an instrument of the situation.
  And indeed, the situation can not only affect the leader, but also make him his tool.
  However, I think it is not possible to reveal the phenomenon of leadership only by the situation. The leader can not only not become a prisoner of the situation, but also influence and control its development.
 It is clear from the above that the leader-situation relationship is not deterministic և strictly linear.
  These are interactive relationships because the leader's direct actions depend on the situation, which, however, can change under the influence of the leader.
Leadership, however, is an end in itself if it is not effective; it is not in the public interest.
 The rupture of the word և case is undesirable in the leadership mechanism, it reduces the guarantees of effective management.
  Knowledge of consistent, true, social theory imposes on the image of the leader creative creative activity.
 In order to define effective leadership, we must first clarify the characteristics of an effective leader.
  Going a little beyond the traditional attributes (attractiveness, charm, public elegance, self-confidence, etc.), note the following criteria that have received little attention so far: • The leader must be able to build quality relationships.
This trait is one of the keys to a leader's success.
  In many cases, the leader is guided by the principle "I am the leader, you are the subject", which mostly leads to hierarchical relations, where on the one hand there are levers of power, power, domination, and on the other hand - intelligent people who suffer from "inferiority complex".
 As a result, we get inefficient, self-serving, conflicting relationships.
 The counterbalance to all this must be the principle of "listening to each other, respecting each other", "only in that case can mutual trust" be reached.
• The leader must have the appropriate level of moral awareness to accept his own ignorance.
This feature is one of the strengths of the modern leader.
  It can contribute to the leader's transparency and honesty, as a result of which he can not avoid taking into account the most correct և listening to the appropriate proposals։.
• The leader must be able to combine traditional values ​​with innovative ideas, be ready for change.
Being exclusively traditionalist, not developing and not modernizing its own policy, work style և approaches, the leader can never succeed, and maintaining the old և developing innovative ideas will have a huge opportunity to win today and be the first tomorrow.
 Of course, flexibility is especially important here.
• The leader should be a source of energy։ inspiration.
Currently the rules of the game have changed.
  The secret of a leader's success is to be inspired and to inspire his followers.
 This is possible only when the leader is full of positive energy.
  It is this energy that can create a sense of responsibility in the followers, push them to work more efficiently.
LITERATURE [3] The Social System.
 Parsons, Talcott, 1951, pp. 10-18, 57, 354-355. [4] Margaryan M., Modernization of the political market as a component of public security of the Republic of Armenia, "Public Administration" scientific journal, 2012, 1-2, pp. 170-178.
[6] Blondel J., Thiebault Jean-Louis, et al, Political Leadership, Parties and Citizens.
 The [8] Political Science.
  Educational manual (editor: HG Manucharyan), YSU, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2006, 586 pages.
Poghosyan THEORETICAL QUESTIONS OF TERRITORIAL LEADERSHIP AND THEIR CHARACTERISTIC LINES Keywords: leader, political leader, authority, social environment, feature, situational approach, determinism, inferiority complex.
