PROCEDURE AND PROBLEMS OF EXPROPRIATION OF THE HUMANITY OF THE SOCIETY AND THE STATE NEEDS.
 The aim of the study is to identify the little-known or not at all revealed aspects of the given legal regulation, to address the issues of case law based on it, as well as the existing problems in the legal field and the possible ways to solve them.
The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, based on Part 5 of Article 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, that is, the alienation of property in order to ensure the overriding interests of the public is carried out in exceptional cases defined by law. "The alienation of property for the needs of the society and the state can be done only in exceptional cases of overriding public interests, in the manner prescribed by law, with adequate initial compensation."
  The requirement to take the real estate is subject to satisfaction if the adjudicated body proves that the use of the land for the purpose for which it is taken is impossible without terminating the right to the given real estate.
 The Constitutional Court in 2009 Paragraph 7 of the decision of the SDO-815 of July 14, 2006 stated that the need of the society և the state և exclusive overriding public interest, although acting in one unity, nevertheless the existence of exceptional overriding public interest is the condition in which the alienation of property becomes possible for the needs of society1.
 According to the same decision, the court is obliged to answer the following questions: first, is there a need of the society or the state for the alienation of the given property or, second, is that need conditioned only by an exceptional overriding public interest or not?
 And already in the 12th point of the decision SDO-630, the Constitutional Court has registered that the constitutional provision "exclusive, overriding public interest" is not an abstraction devoid of specific legal content.
 The existence of this provision proves that public interests can be presented in comparison as overriding public interests և not overriding public interests.
 The cases when there is a overriding public interest are exceptional, and the public interests, which in this case are endowed with the quality of priority over other public interests, can be considered to be of a paramount nature2.
  Now let us try to address some key issues related to the determination of the overriding public interest, the procedure for adequate initial compensation, which are regulated by the RA Law on Alienation of Property for the Needs of the Society (hereinafter Law) 3.
  In particular, Article 4 1 1 of the law enshrines in the set of principles of determining the overriding public interest that the alienation of property in the overriding public interest should not cause unreasonable damage to the owner.
 Parts 1-2 of Article 11 of the same law provide for ․1. Equivalent compensation is paid to the owner for the alienated property.
 Fifteen percent more than the market value of the property to be alienated is considered equivalent.
2. The market value of the alienated property is the most probable selling price of the property formed as a result of legal actions, consciously, in accordance with the terms of legal transactions, in the open, competitive market.
  If there is no corresponding open և competitive market for the alienated property, the market value of the property is determined by a method of calculation which would be fair to the court.
Now we consider it necessary to refer to the two most problematic issues of the quoted articles, which have already reached the practical 1 See SDO-815 decision, adopted in 2009. on July 14.
2 See SDO-630 decision adopted in 2006. on April 18.
3 See RA Law on Alienation of Property for the Needs of the Society և State, adopted on 27.11.2006.
cause problems.
  First, the legislator considers the principle of overriding public interest that the alienation of property in the overriding public interest should not cause unreasonable harm to the owner.
 Indeed, it is a very important principle, for the implementation of which there are simply no effective mechanisms or standards.
  Let's try to open the brackets.
  When the government recognizes the fact of alienation of real estate owned by the entity as an exceptional overriding public interest, it is simply satisfied by providing the initial adequate compensation provided by law to the owner of the alienated property, regardless of the following circumstances. which can be used in the sense of adequate purpose.
  Considering that the real estates to be alienated for the overriding public interest are mainly residential areas, will not their loss lead to interconnected problems in the living, economic, educational and other spheres, which cannot be solved by providing adequate preliminary compensation?
  And, of course, does not the existence of these issues mean the cause of unjustified damages to the owner of the alienated property, that is, a gross violation of the principle of determining the overriding public interest?
 Here are some examples to illustrate the nature of the problem.
  By the decision of the government, by virtue of the recognition of the Public Superiority, the residential areas of the persons living in one of the suburbs of the community are alienated with X + 15% compensation.
  The citizens, of course, have to look for an apartment in another place, where the value of the apartments is significantly higher than the value of those in the suburbs.
  Of course, it can be considered reasonable that the given compensation will be enough for the citizen not to find a place to stay outside, but will there be at least the minimum conditions that the latter was able to provide when using the alienated property for its intended purpose?
  This is one, let's consider the next.
  When moving a citizen from his / her permanent residence, there is a problem with arriving at the workplace on time, at the same costs.
  Do the above-mentioned problems cause unjustified damage to the owner of the alienated property?
It turns out that we come to the conclusion that there really are no effective mechanisms in which case the owner of the property alienated by the recognition of the overriding public interest will not be caused unjustified damages.
  In practice, we already have problems with the above-mentioned issues, in particular, the Government of the Republic of Armenia 108-NJ 347-N, respectively, on 25.01.07. և 01.03.07 As a result, the European Court of Human Rights of the Republic of Armenia made several decisions (in particular, the decision of the ECHR "Hovhannisyan v Shiroyan v. Armenia" of July 20, 2010, "Minasyan and Semerjyan v. Armenia" of 2009). decision of June 23).
  Let us refer to the decisions made against Armenia very briefly, first in the first case ("Hovhannisyan and Shiroyan v. Armenia") we will present the amount of damages suffered. In particular, instead of the equivalent of USD 3,500, they suffered a loss of AMD 36,660 equivalent to EUR 5, and already in the second case ("Minasyan and Semerjyan v. Armenia") the ECHR ordered the applicants to pay a total of AMD 300,000 equivalent to AMD 300,000 in material damages. Compensation for non-pecuniary damage 6.
 The following options are offered to resolve the mentioned issues.
In each specific case, the property to be alienated must take into account all the features and damages that will be available after making the relevant decision on alienation of property, not only based on the amount of compensation provided for in the Law on Alienation of Property for Public Needs. The amount of damages caused as a result may be less than the amount of adequate initial compensation provided by law.
  Problems related to the determination of the amount of damage to be attributed to the features must have an appropriate legal basis, which will be interpreted in the sense of parts 1, 2, 2 և 4 of Article 8 of this law.
The following can be considered as an alternative solution to the problem.
 On the basis of the preliminary study of the property subject to alienation, the acquirer must first offer the owner 4 See Government Decisions No. 108-N և 347-N.
5 See "Hovhannisyan and Shiroyan v. Armenia", ECHR decision of 20.07.10, Complaint No. 5065/06.
6 See "Minasyan and Semerjyan v. Armenia", ECtHR 23.06.09. Decision: Complaint No. 27651/05.
Another property equivalent to the property to be alienated, which can be used for the same purpose, of course, taking into account the possibility of compensating the owner for damages as a result of the exchange.
 The peculiarity of this version of the problem is that the person does not lose his property right in any case.
  The next issue, which has again caused a great deal of controversy in practice, concerns the guarantees of compensation for the alienation of property, its proper execution and control.
 According to the law, in case the acquirer has to pay for the alienated property, in case of not concluding the contract within the mentioned terms, the acquirer is obliged to transfer the mentioned amount to the court or notary deposit account within 1 month in order to enforce the conclusion.
  That is, in this case there is a guarantee of compensation by the state.
 However, when the acquirer, under the contract, undertakes to transfer the property in return for compensation, in this case no means of control are established by the state.
 As evidence, let us present the following case ․ According to the above-mentioned decisions of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, in particular, according to the contract signed by the residents of the residential building at 6 Firdus Street, the construction company Glendale Hills, after 3 years of construction, newly built apartments were to be provided with ownership.
 During that time the company was declared bankrupt due to financial problems and stopped construction, as a result of which dozens of families were left homeless.
 In order to solve the problem, it is suggested that in all cases when the acquirer is obliged to transfer the property to the owner in exchange for the alienation of the property, the state must act as a guarantor in accordance with Article 375 of the RA Civil Code. In this case, the owner of the alienated property) is obliged to bear responsibility by the debtor (in this case, the acquirer) for the full fulfillment of his obligations.
  The logic of this solution is that, ultimately, the alienation of a person's property on the basis of a state decision is considered an exclusive, overriding public interest.
 If we try to make a comparison with the legal regulations on these issues in other countries, we will get the following picture.
 In the United States, before making a decision on the compulsory alienation of property, the state representative must be involved throughout the process, with only the acquirer agreeing to calculate the owner's damages and the compensation procedure, overseeing the entire process7.
  In Italy, the law obliges the acquirer to pay 1.5-3 times more than its market value for the property under the control of the state, due to which the parties will avoid the issue of resolving the issue in court8.
  In this case, in fact, the Italian legislation allows the calculation of the amount of compensation to be made on the basis of a preliminary study, which will not be less than 50% of the market value of the alienated property օ at the same time can not exceed three times the equivalent value. taking into account the specifics of each specific case and the amount of damage.
Summarizing the comparative analysis with the effective mechanisms of legal regulation of international practice, we conclude that the proposed approaches to the subject of our discussion are entirely based on the essence of international legal documents, principles of civil legislation of the Republic of Armenia, protection of property rights of individuals.
Davit Baklachyan PROPERTY AND PROBLEMS OF PROPERTY EXPOSURE FOR SOCIETY AND STATE NEEDS Keywords: Public overriding interest, alienation of property, European Court of Human Rights, Government decision, compensation
