CRIMINAL ISSUES RELATED TO THE BEGINNING OF LIFE One of the most important questions of modern domestic and international law is the question of the legal status of the human embryo.
 By embryo is meant the body from conception to birth.
  However, according to a unified assessment, the embryo is not given a legal status by scientists, jurists or the norms of international domestic law.
 It is noteworthy that the stage of development of the embryo from which it must be protected by law and endowed with the right to life is not clearly predetermined.
There are two main approaches in the scientific literature on the legal status of the embryo.
  According to the first approach, the embryo is defined as a subject of law, a full participant in a legal relationship, equal to a human being, and according to the second, the embryo is an object of law, a part of the mother's body equated to other human organs and tissues, property.
The positions in the scientific literature differ on the question of when human life should be under legislative protection.
 Several theories are distinguished in connection with the issue, each of which has its own peculiarities.
  Thus, absolute theory is based on the absolute value of the human embryo at all stages of its development.
 Liberals believe that the embryo has little or no value.
 According to the theory of moderation, the origin of the right to life of the embryo is connected with a certain level of development or the achievement of viability2.
1 See Fedoseeva NN, Frolova EA, Problem of determining the legal status of embryos between international and Russian // Medical Law, 2008, № 1.
2 See Purge A. R., The right position of Embrionov in modern Russia // Molodoschucheny, 2012, № 2, p. 202-204.
Disagreeing with the positions put forward within the last two theories, let us try to present in more detail the arguments underlying the absolute theory.
 Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Bernard Nathansson, former director of the Reproductive Medicine Clinic, who performed 75,000 abortions during his practice, conducted a series of experiments to determine if his actions were safe.
  As a result, he declared that the fact that the embryo is a separate human being with unique personal characteristics is not in doubt.
  To substantiate the findings, he undertook an ultrasound video of the removal of the three-month-old embryo.
  This recording, called "Silent Scream", proves that the fruit feels the danger threatening it from the instrumental. he begins to move faster, restless, his heart beats faster, he opens his mouth wide, as if shouting silently3.
Jacques Sudo proved the absolute value of the embryo by bringing the following arguments: From the moment of fertilization, the human embryo has a new, unique biological essence, with its life-development program, masters the internal dynamics aimed at constant development, up to the formation of an adult.
  It exists as an independent body, that is, it is an formed biological being, it is the self-governing one for the implementation of its genetic program.
 The gametes from which it is formed prove its belonging to the human species, which is clearly determined by the characteristics of its genetic structure4.
American doctor Ernst Hunt noted. "The fertilized egg is not just a cell mass without its own characteristics.
 At this stage it does not look like a flower cocoon or a baby's.
 "Daliov absolutely describes the life of a human being, the same life that a newborn child, a teenager and an adult have."
Examining the arguments underlying the absolute theory, as well as being guided by the position of the Armenian Apostolic Church, that is, to consider the moment of fertilization of the egg as the beginning of life, we find that the debt of any state, including the Republic of Armenia 3 See Simonyan G., The beginning of human life. Criminal Legal Regulation, YSU Faculty of Law Postgraduate Students-Applicants 2013 Proceedings, p. 193.
4 See Перевозчикова Е. V., Pankratova E. A., Constitutional Law on Life and Legal Status of the Embryo of Man, "Medical Law", 2006, N 2.
The law is to ensure the development of the fetus և its absolute protection from the moment of fertilization of the egg.
In the Armenian legal literature, as a rule, the opinion is expressed that the initial moment of life should be considered the beginning of the process of physiological childbirth.
 Childbirth, as a certain physiological process, consists of several successive stages.
 The first of these is accompanied by labor pains, which are caused by contractions of the uterine muscles.
  The second stage begins with the expulsion of the fetus from the uterus ով with the final birth, when the baby begins to breathe և to release the first cry.
According to the prevailing approach in the Armenian legal literature, by saying the initial moment of life in criminal law, one should understand the beginning of labor pains.
 Proponents of this theory, considering the beginning of life as the beginning of the birth process, consider the human embryo as a subject of a legal relationship with the right to life, but consider it as a part of the mother's body, equal to the human body5.
 This is the reason why the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia restricts the protection of the rights of the embryo, stating only that the murder of an obviously pregnant woman, even if the purpose of the murder was to kill the embryo, will be aggravated murder, and the perpetrator will not be prosecuted. .
  By the same logic, it is qualified as causing harm to a person's health, which was combined with abortion. The act is qualified as causing serious damage to a person's health, and the person who committed the crime of killing the embryo will be held accountable.
 We consider that such an approach is not so justified as it does not protect the constitutionally guaranteed right to life.
Examining the experience of foreign countries, we see that in many of the offspring the right to life is guaranteed from the moment of fertilization of the egg, and from that moment the embryo is under the protection of the state.
  In particular, according to Article 4 of the Constitution of Ireland, "The State recognizes the right to life of the unborn child և (…) in its laws guarantees respect for that right; 'protects as far as possible by its laws' upholds that right."
 There is also such a formulation in the Czech Republic 5 See RA University Textbook on Criminal Law, Special Part, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 38-39.
Article 6 of the Constitution of the Republic.
  According to the principle accepted in Germany, human life begins with the moment of fertilization.
 In France in 2000 In connection with the amendment of the health legislation in January, the legislator stated that human life must be protected from the first signs of its emergence.
 Seventeen US states recognize that killing a fetus should be considered an illegal deprivation of human life6.
We, considering the opinions of the proponents of the absolute theory justified, as well as studying the experience of foreign countries, think that it would be right to consider the moment of fertilization of the egg as the beginning of life, to make appropriate changes in the legislation, in particular the murder of an obvious pregnant woman. to cause harm, which was accompanied by abortion, to qualify as causing serious damage to a person's health - murder, if the perpetrator knew that he was causing harm to a pregnant woman.
Considering the beginning of life the moment of fertilization of the egg, we should consider referring to the criminal regulation of illegal abortion.
The RA Criminal Code envisages responsibility for illegal abortion.
  Abortion is considered illegal if the woman's pregnancy is artificially terminated in violation of the rules set by the health authorities.
 The legal regulation of abortion in no way affects the protection of the life of the fetus, as evidenced by the fact that abortion is allowed until 12 weeks of gestation. All women who simply want to terminate the pregnancy և have no contraindications.
  In case of pregnancy for more than 12 weeks, its abortion is allowed to be performed in case of appropriate medical and social instructions, up to 22 weeks 7.
These dates are set taking into account the negative impact of abortion on a woman's health, depending on the maturity of the fetus.
  Criminal law, do not protect 6 See Simonyan G., The beginning of human life. Criminal Legal Regulation, YSU Faculty of Law Postgraduate Students-Applicants 2013 Proceedings of the session, pp. 196-197.
7 See RA Criminal Law University Textbook, special part, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 38-39.
The right to life of the fetus, which does not envisage a norm on the liability of the conscientious objector, classifying among the subjects of the crime only the third part having the relevant higher medical education, and the third part not having the relevant higher medical education.
In connection with the mentioned issue, we consider it necessary to refer to the norms of international law, the experience of foreign countries.
In European countries, there are four types of approaches to the legal regulation of abortion.
  In more liberal countries, abortion is allowed at the request of the individual, without legal restrictions.
  In fairly free countries, abortion is allowed under a number of medical and social guidelines.
 In countries with a strict approach, abortion is allowed in some cases when there is a threat to a woman's physical or mental health, when the fetus is defective, when the fetus is a result of rape, and so on.
 In countries with very strict legislation, abortion is banned altogether or allowed in exceptional cases where it poses a direct threat to a woman's life.
  In 98% of countries worldwide, abortion is permitted to save a woman's life8.
Considering the moment of fertilization of the egg as the beginning of life, we analyze the criminal legislation of all countries, where abortion is allowed in exceptional cases.
 Morocco, San Marino, Turkey, Germany, etc. are among such countries.
  In all these countries, termination of legal pregnancy is allowed only with medical indications.
The Criminal Code of Morocco, within the framework of certain articles, provides for the limits of criminal liability for unlawful adultery in general, and defines in a separate article the responsibility for "self-immolation" to justify the act.
  The woman who had an illegal abortion, tried to have an abortion, agreed to use means aimed at having an abortion, is punished with imprisonment for a term of 6 months to 2 years.
 The San Marino-Turkish criminal codes separate the criminal responsibility of the woman who performed the abortion.
  The Criminal Code of the Republic of San Marino is free for 6 months to 3 years 8 See Medical resource herpes.ru dedicated to a wide range of questions related to medicine and healthy people - http.
//herpes.ru/abort/law/zakonsovzak.htm provides for imprisonment for a pregnant woman who has attempted an abortion, և for all those who assisted her in that inquiry.
 In Turkey, a woman who consents to abortion is subject to criminal liability.
 Moreover, the legislation of the mentioned states separately describes the circumstances excluding the crime of the act.
  Thus, according to Marco's criminal law, the need to protect maternal health is one of them.
  A special procedure is established for that, the implementation of the given proceedings by a special subject with the consent of the woman.
 If the doctor thinks that the mother's life is in danger, such permission is not required.
 However, in that case the chief health officer of the state or province must be notified.
  According to Article 472 of the Turkish Penal Code, performing an illegal abortion reduces the punishment for saving one's or a relative's honor or dignity by one-third or two-thirds9.
 According to Article 6 1 1 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, “Everyone has the inalienable right to life.
 That right is protected by law.
  No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life. "
  Part 5 of the same article states that the death penalty is not carried out on pregnant women.
The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child contains a number of provisions on the protection of the unborn child.
  In particular, the preamble refers to the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly on November 20, 1959, according to which a child, given his or her physical or mental immaturity, needs special protection և care, including proper legal protection before birth։.
  And according to Article 6 of the Convention, every child has the inalienable right to life, և States Parties shall ensure to the fullest extent possible the survival and healthy development of the child.
By studying the norms of international law, which do not directly fix the right to life of an unborn child, this 9 See Dudyan K. W.
 In particular, we believe that it is necessary to add a pregnant woman who has had a self-abortion to the crime of having an illegal abortion.
We consider that it is not right to consider abortion legal, depending on the age of the fetus, to regulate the scope of issues by the decision of the government, therefore, we suggest envisaging liability for abortion in general by the RA Criminal Code, clearly listing the circumstances excluding the crime. the need.
Zhanna Hakobyan CRIMINAL ISSUES RELATED TO THE BEGINNING OF LIFE Keywords: embryo, legal status of the embryo, beginning of life, fertilized organism of the egg.
