AZERBAIJANI'S ANTI-ARMENIAN INFOCIAL POLICY AND THE PROBLEM OF KHOJALU ON THE INTERNET The 21st century is open, the society has become a consumer of information, quickly absorbs any information, and in the modern world information has become one of the main weapons to win.
 Now it is possible not only to fully master it, but also to use it in various dimensions.
  A problem that can turn insignificant information at first sight into a frightening reality.
  In the article, in the context of the Khojaly problem, we will refer to Azerbaijan's anti-Armenian info-policy system.
  We will make a comparison with the anti-propaganda carried out by the Armenian side, we will present the problems of both sides, the propaganda methods, the omissions and the advantages.
  Currently, the conflict is in the "frozen" stage, but the shootout continues not only in the area of ​​contact with the enemy, but also on the virtual field, turning into a serious propaganda conflict.
 A phenomenon that is getting new developments day by day, bringing new challenges for the national security of the Republic of Armenia and the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.
The urgency of the Khojaly issue is that Azerbaijan continues to carry out large-scale propaganda at the state level about the events in Khojaly1, presenting them to the world as a genocide committed by Armenians.
 Thousands of multilingual print books, websites, articles, foundations are trying to inculcate anti-Armenian thinking not only in the consciousness of the Azerbaijanis, but also in the public consciousness of the world, particularly the countries of the Minsk Commission.
  Azerbaijan's foreign policy priority has been to assert its dominance in Nagorno-Karabakh, one of the components of which is large-scale propaganda over the distorted events in Khojaly.
 For two decades, the Azerbaijani propaganda has been trying to convince the world community that the Armenians committed the genocide of the Azerbaijanis in Khojaly.
  Moreover, every February 28, Azerbaijan and Turkey mark the day of the "Azerbaijani Genocide", while the attack in Khojaly started on February 25 at 23:00.
00 վել ended on February 26 at 4 in the morning 2.
  "One of the goals is to equate the massacres of Armenians in Ottoman Turkey at the beginning of the last century, and later with the massacre, violence and deportation of Azerbaijani thugs against the Armenian population in Sumgait, Baku, Kirovabad and other Azerbaijani settlements."
 In other words, it becomes clear that we are dealing with an aggressive and intensive propaganda against Armenia. At the beginning of the 19th century, the first issue on the agenda for the NKR was the pressure on the military bases located in the villages of the republic, which had become Azerbaijani during the last years of the Soviet Union.
 The surrounding Armenian villages and towns were bombed during the day.
  The settlement of Khojaly was one of such bases.
  For months from Khojaly, "Grad" and "Alazan" type missile stations were shelling the capital Stepanakert and the surrounding settlements day and night.
  1992 Khojalu had a significant military significance.
  Khojalu, right in the middle of the Shushi-Aghdam road, was a convenient military base to capture Askeran on the one hand and Stepanakert on the other.
 At the same time, the Baku authorities made sure that Khojaly had a large stockpile of offensive weapons.
 The OMON troops were stationed in Khojaly, but by their very nature they were illegal groups.
 At that time, criminals were quickly released from Azerbaijani prisons, formed detachments, distributed weapons, put on uniforms and were sent to Karabakh.
 Baku has developed the following strategy. Simultaneous attacks from Aghdam and Khojalu were to be organized in the direction of Askeran, and after the capture of Askeran, the siege of Stepanakert was to begin under incessant shelling from Shushi and Jan-Hasan.
  The only way to neutralize this threat was to capture Khojaly.
  Azerbaijan was concentrating weapons, ammunition, and at the same time serious human resources in Khojaly.
2 Manasyan A., Ghondyan A., Nagorno-Karabakh, how it happened, Yerevan, 2010, p. 37.
with many falsifications and distortions.
  Azerbaijan spreads falsifications in all possible ways, they mention special funds, information sources, which allegedly provide relevant information about the events in Khojaly as a source.
  The growing image of information technologies in the Armenian reality in recent years has led to the fact that scientific-scientific-printed studies on the subject matter, videos have been linked to the Internet, which was a serious contradiction to the Azerbaijani falsification.
  However, there is still a lot to do, the Armenian side must use all possible means, resources in order to be able to oppose the falsification with true and substantiated facts.
  According to experts, the only way to neutralize the falsification, to present the real facts to the international community, is in the accuracy of the facts, and in that sense we can say with confidence that we have already won.
  And if Baku assesses the events in Khojaly as genocide, then based on the results of so many years of research, facts and data, we can definitely say that it was a "genocide."
Between the Armenian-Azerbaijani sides in 1994 Since the signing of the ceasefire, information policy, remaining within the logic of conflict communication, has entered a new post-war period.
1988 Since the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, both the Azerbaijani and Armenian sides have been carrying out various propaganda and anti-propaganda.
  The Azeri-Turkish propaganda actively uses the Internet resources to advance their interests, to discredit Armenia and the Armenians.
 Neighboring countries spend significant human and financial resources on their propaganda.
 A problem that was a difficult competition to overcome a few years ago2.
 A preliminary study of the results of the "propaganda wars" waged by both countries over the past years leads to the conclusion that the Azerbaijani side has a more or less elaborate approach in this area, yet fails to fully formulate its points of view, despite the intensity of propaganda work and state sponsorship. .
 It is obvious that the information challenges և problems against our society are not limited to the Azerbaijani factor.
 It should be stressed that both in the NKR armed conflict and in the current information war, Azerbaijan has maintained its status as an aggressor.
 Although the development of information technologies has enabled Azerbaijan to expand the ways of disseminating information, to renew the information "arsenal", to increase the audience of influence, nevertheless their expectations are still not justified.
The active search for strategic methods of information operations in Azerbaijan began especially in 1998-2002.
 In particular, the number of Azerbaijani and Turkish Meskhetian victims during the events in Khojaly doubled, and the number 613 was put into circulation3.
  Then in 1998 In March, H. Ali signed a decree on the "Genocide of the Azerbaijanis."
  During that time, the Armenian side was skeptical of the steps taken by the Azerbaijanis, underestimated the enemy until the situation reached its peak, until the real danger was felt.
  Besides, the texts sowing anti-Armenianism have a clear place in Azerbaijani school textbooks. The Ali Foundation organizes regular essay or fine art competitions entitled "Khojalu through the Eyes of Children", and the winning children receive incentive prizes and awards.
Given the fact that according to statistics, the majority of search engine users stop searching after the results of the first page of the survey 4, we monitored a number of search engines (google.com, google.am, google.az, google.ru, bing.com, mail.ru, yandex.com, yahoo.com, youtube.com) within the front page.
It turns out that the Armenian side is seriously behind the Azerbaijani side - the case of Khojaly 1 Ulubabyan B., The history of Artsakh from the beginning to the present day, Yerevan, 1994, pp. 350-352.
2 Martirosyan S., Some issues of information security of the Republic of Armenia, 21st CENTURY, 2 (16), 2007, http.
//www.noravank.am/upload/pdf/248_am.pdf.
3 In the unofficial preaching work, the death toll rises to thousands.
4 Hovhannisyan M., History և culture, Journal of Armenology A., Yerevan, 2011, p. 7.
in terms of providing their own opinion on the issue, as there are more materials presented by the opposing party as a result of the survey.
 Searching for the Russian word Ходжалы in Google.com1 և google.am search engine, we get the following image. that is, 12 results, 9 of which are of anti-Armenian content, 3 of which are Armenian.
 We get almost the same result in google.ru2, yahoo.com3, yandex.ru4, mail.ru5, bing.com6, google.az7, youtube.com8 systems.
As a result of monitoring, the results of the first page 10-12 offer the same sites in almost all search engines.
 In the first or second place in all search engines, the page of the "Wikipedia" open encyclopedia (which can be edited by any visitor, in connection with which the content of that page changes over time), was the Russian version of the events in Khojaly, which has anti-Armenian content.
The websites xocali.net and sumgait.info are already in different places, which were created by Armenians to cover the Karabakh conflict, to make the truth available to the majority of Internet users, to avoid misleading.
In addition to pro-Azerbaijani websites in Russian, the adversary is making great efforts to expand English literature.
 Azerbaijani NGOs, Azeris living abroad, and other Turkish-speaking migrants, together with Turkish community associations, form a coordinated information network on the info-policy pursued against the Armenians of Armenia through popular diplomacy.
  This network not only provides the desired information flows, but also organizes "civil actions", thus trying to influence the formation of international opinion.
 In this area, Azerbaijan uses և´ diplomatic channels, իր its community resources and targeted NGOs in the country.
  One of the activities carried out in the international political sphere is to involve foreign diplomats in pro-Azerbaijani positions in various ways, as well as to support the advancement of those prominent in anti-Armenian activities in the political arenas of different countries.
As a result of the study of foreign language resources, we can clearly state a fact that Turkey is not considered a neutral party, but we can not ignore the fact that Turkey diligently helps its brothers and receives appropriate support, both for the denial of the Armenian Genocide and In order to attribute any events related to Karabakh, particularly in Khojaly, to the Armenians9.
In contrast to the results obtained in Russian about the events in Khojaly, in the case of English, the advantage of the opposing side is obvious.
 If in the case of Russian we came across 2 websites out of 10 in the Armenian direction, in the case of the search in English there are almost no websites or materials provided by the Armenian side.
Again in the same search engines, but this time when searching for the English words Xocali, Xojaly we get the following results. Google.com-Google.am10, Google.ru11, Google.az12, Yahoo.com13, Yandex.ru14, Bing.com15, Mail.ru16.
 Here, at best, we can meet one or two results with Armenian content.
  Again, the advantage is for pro-Azerbaijani websites.
1 Google.am, https.
//www.google.am/search?hl=ru&q=ходжалы&ei=nfZjV_OGB8Wr6AT67KSoCw.2 Google.ru, https.
//goo.gl/Cq7wHh.3 Yahoo.com, http:
//yhoo.it/1Y2bfIu.4 Yandex.ru, https.
//yandex.ru/yandsearch?lr=10262&text=ходжалы&redircnt=1466169243.1.5 Mail.ru, http:
//go.mail.ru/search?mailru=1&q=ходжалы.6 Bing.com, http:
//www.bing.com/search?q=ходжалы&go=&qs=n&form=QBLH&pq=ходжалы&sc=0-0&sp=-1&sk=.7 Google.az, https.
//www.google.az/search?hl=ru&q=ходжалы&ei=hfhjV4XlM4S1sQHaiqyICQ.8 Youtube.com, http.
//bit.ly/28ObD0r.9 Melkonyan A., The Turkish-Azerbaijani methodological basis of history falsification, Yerevan, 2011, p. 84.
10 Google.am, https.
//www.google.am/search?hl=ru&q=Khojaly&ei=X_ljV43CEeLJ6AShpYfwDA.11 Google.ru, https.
//goo.gl/Gv4YpU. 12 Google.az, https.
//goo.gl/lz7KGD.13 Yahoo.com, http:
//yhoo.it/1PAsEiO.14 Yandex.ru, http:
//bit.ly/1UVtpHo.15 Bing.com, http:
//bit.ly/1QdQW7L.16 Mail.ru, http:
//urla.ru/10000dod One of the most important components of the Azerbaijani propaganda is the falsification of the history of the Armenian people, the destruction of historical, material and cultural values, the falsification of their prehistory, the promotion of artificially unscientific views, the involvement of foreign mercenaries.
 Examples have been registered when the identity of Armenian historical monuments is falsified using simple computer graphic programs, and in that way they are already placed in state-sponsored books1.
Through political statements, publications that have flooded the world wide web, tons of falsified literature, events organized by the Azerbaijani Diaspora, and other means, Azerbaijan has already managed to introduce one-sided information on the Karabakh issue on many stages.
  An essential feature of the new tactics used by our adversary in the information war is the blatant fascism of its content, which is reflected in the propaganda tricks used by the first person of the state.
  Many wonder why the President of Azerbaijan I. Ali constantly repeats his usual delusions of declaring Karabakh "historical Azerbaijani land" and the present-day Republic of Armenia a state formed in the "historical territories of Azerbaijan."
  After all, neither I. Ali nor those who listen to him are idiots.
  Everyone who knows the history of the region knows that in 1918 ․ To speak about the "historical territories" of a state that was not on the world maps before is at least a forgery.
 But come and see that I. Ali continues to sing the same song with even greater persistence and perseverance.
 All this is an attempt to copy the propaganda technology of disorienting public opinion, well known since the time of Goebbels, the propagandist of Nazi Germany.
 Because the international community, various organizations, foreigners unaware of history are currently in a situation where every day they are given only the Azeri interpretation.
 Therefore, no matter how historically substantiated the claims of the Azerbaijani leader, such stupid persistence is beginning to be seen as the attitude of a country fighting for its rights, disenfranchised.
Of course, the Armenian propaganda does not have enough opportunities to respond to every fabrication emitted by Azerbaijan, but the rating of our state must be considered the most important point in this whole propaganda struggle.
  We can not spend so much money in the field of information, but we can respond to the opponent with his "weapons", that is, through the comments against every falsification posted on the Internet.
 Any comparison, even the most superficial, can reveal the whole truth, because our opponent acts without discrimination of the means of falsification.
 The problem of the Armenian propaganda campaign over the Khojaly events is that we present the reality and reality mostly only in our mother tongue, while we have nothing to prove ourselves, we must move the propaganda attack to the outside field, we must make the resources available to the external reader so that they There will be no opinion based only on misinformation.
  Having enough resources to campaign internationally is a possible circumstance, but there is a possible problem here as well. Just having a lot of money is not the way to dominate yet, especially by spreading lies.
  It is very important to do effective work, we have always tried to put quality first, and only then to ensure the problem of quantity.
 Sometimes this step of ours brings its irreversible consequences.
 As experience shows, in the case of our neighbors, the opposite logic works, it gives its result in a certain way.
 The Armenian side, having solid historical and legal evidence, does not work systematically on anti-propaganda.
  The problem is that the international community does not strive to reach the truth, it takes the ready-made information, which is mainly provided by the Azerbaijani side, forgetting about the historical truth.
  In this way, a whole generation was brought up in Azerbaijan with the false theory that they are the oldest, smartest and culturally rich people in the Caucasus.
  And today in connection with information anti-propaganda in Armenia 1 Atanesyan A., on the issue of modern Azerbaijani falsifications of Armenian history. History շակCulture. Principles of the Republican Conference against Fraud and Harassment, Yerevan, 2011, p. 9.
question arises. Is Armenia's foreign policy making enough efforts to stop Azerbaijan's aggressive propaganda?
 Diplomats say that something is being done, but not everything is being voiced.
  In all probability, it is really so, if we take into account that the Azeri propaganda has only the opposite result as expected.
  All this is understood by Azerbaijani-Turkish intellectuals, for whom their own interests are not primary for spreading lies, who try to oppose the ax-wielding style of their leadership with universal values.
One of the most important circumstances is that following the Armenian propaganda, we can say with confidence that the Armenian side has always acted from a universal position, thus putting the Azerbaijani propaganda in an "out of the game" position.
  And all this has forced the Baku authorities to lose their sense of proportion more and more, to prove that there is no value.
 Any money with which one can buy history և reputation.
Thus, if we try to analyze the events in general, the results obtained "the anger of the Azerbaijani side", we can mention a strong fact that the Azeri sources persistently exaggerate the events in Khojaly, spread anti-Armenian hysteria, aiming to present the falsified cases as absolute truth, discredit the Armenian people.
  After so many facts, the events in Khojaly, which became the cause of death of civilians, are exclusively the result of political intrigues and struggles for power in Azerbaijan.
 The real reasons are more convincingly presented both in the eyewitness accounts of the Azerbaijani participants in the events, as well as in the testimonies of those who were aware of their sub-poster in Baku.
Therefore, the Azeri propaganda has no choice but to make money all over the world about "Armenian atrocities", broadcasting horrific scenes, a field full of desecrated corpses, so that the fact of "self-genocide" committed by its own people would be blamed on Armenians.
Even today, the official propaganda of Azerbaijan continues to manipulate the topic of Khojaly in various inappropriate international forums and meetings.
  And that is to be expected and understandable.
 It is clear because Azerbaijan has to resort to offensive tactics to protect itself from its sins.
  Today, the current government of Azerbaijan is obliged to invent, to present the desired instead of the real, that it is very painful to believe in the same fabrication ... That is to say, to abandon justice once and for all, to adopt the path of moral decline ... war, Nagorno Karabakh issue, Khojaly issue, misinformation, Khojaly, Sumgait, Baku, Kirovabad, internet search engines.
