MAJAKIA ARCHBISHOP ORMANYAN'S REFORM VIEWS The study of the history of the Armenian Church in the beginning of the 20th century in modern religious-political conditions is of great importance from the point of view of the new revaluation of the church.
 The study of this period of the history of the Armenian Apostolic Church is also of great interest, as during this period a multifaceted movement emerged within the church, which was called the "Reformation Movement" in the religious and ecclesiastical literature.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, a movement known as the Enlightenment emerged in Europe.
 The aim of this movement was to instill in society the importance of knowledge and education, considering the role of religion to be tertiary.
 Another ideological manifestation of this movement was the "Reformation Movement", which presupposed a socio-political, religious-cultural movement, which was aimed at the policy pursued by the Roman Catholic Church. As a result of this movement, the protest was formed.
The ideological birth of the above-mentioned two movements can be considered the reform movement that emerged in the Gulf of the Armenian Church in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The Enlightenment considered knowledge, perfect laws and the spread of education as a necessary condition for the development of society.
  In order to spread their ideas, they published numerous books on philosophy, art, pedagogy, and ethics.
 The main representatives of the Enlightenment are John Locke, John Colin, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Goethe, Alexander Radisch, and the first prominent representatives of the Enlightenment movement in the Armenian reality can be considered Shahamir Shahamiryan, as well as Hovsep Emin, Movses Baghramyan Chaylos.
The Reformation was a socio-political, religious and cultural movement that emerged in a number of European countries in the 16th and 17th centuries and was directed against the policies and vicious practices of the Roman Catholic Church.
As a result of the Reformation, Protestantism was formed in Europe, which was initiated and pioneered by the former Catholic monk Martin Luther (1483-1546), although Protestant ideas originated in Europe many years ago, thanks to John Wycliffe and Ian Huss.
The movement was founded in Germany and later spread rapidly to Switzerland, England, France, the Netherlands, and later to the Nordic countries.
The reform movement in the Armenian Church began at the end of the 19th century. It was a new movement of the Armenian Enlightenment thought, which was an attempt to reform the Armenian Church.
  Reformation ideas penetrated the walls of the church at the end of the century.
From the last quarter of the 19th century, but especially at the beginning of the 20th century, this multifaceted movement that appeared within the Armenian Church was called the "Reformation Movement" in the ecclesiastical literature.
A number of Armenian clergymen (not only) educated in European universities came up with various reform programs and proposals.
 Most of them remained only as a program, but gave rise to a powerful movement of repair and renewal of thinking.
  The main supporters of the reforms were the clergy themselves, who were mainly graduates of the seminary of Armash in Etchmiadzin and Armash.
  In addition, the clergy lived and worked in a church environment, were well aware of internal shortcomings, and some even came up with a systematic program.
 It is very possible that the demand of the reformers was not religious changes, but religious and ritual issues.
 Apparently, they believed that as a result of these reforms, the people's connection with the church would become closer, and the church, in its turn, would be able to adequately respond to the people's concerns.
Some of them acted as official representatives of the church, such as diocesan leaders, as members of reform committees.
 Many, not always being in the church governing system, acted as individuals, expressing their views in their own works, articles, and sermons.
The questions about the reform of the Armenian Church were most intensely expressed in the 80-90s of the 19th century.
 The aim of the relatively later directions was to see a reformed, strengthened church structure.
To achieve this goal, especially in the choice of means and methods, the views of the reformers were markedly different, as a result of which the latter were divided into different currents.
The main directions of the Reformation (apart from the above) were the "interior decoration" of the church itself, such as the education of priests, the abolition of celibacy, the reform of the rite of passage, and the reduction of the liturgy, most importantly, the change of language. , offered liturgy, worship ժամ rituals performed worldwide) questions.
  Apart from the basic requirements of the renovation, there were problems related to clothing, appearance and other ritual attributes.
The press of the time called the two conflicting parties "conservatives", "liberals", "Armenians", "Slavs" [3], as well as "insiders" and "outsiders".
 "We believe that the words' conservative 'և' liberal 'in the press of the time մեջ have been interpreted in a semantic biased way in the analytical literature, otherwise it would not have been possible to accuse people educated by European standards of' liberal '' destructive approaches to building the new by erasing the old."
 That is why they called their ideological approaches not change, but improvement. "[4]
At this stage in the history of the Armenian Church, a number of views related to the Reformation were aimed at comprehensively improving the spiritual, theological, canonical and ritual as well as the educational spheres of the Armenian Church, adapting the church life in time and giving a dynamic character to the spiritual structure.
  Proponents of reforming the Armenian Church understood that this issue required a process.
 Some blamed the clergy for the situation in Etchmiadzin, who viewed the Mother See as a purely pious institution.
 There were many reformers who blamed the secularists for the current situation.
  They believed that the secularists did not want to support the church but to seize its power.
 Therefore, it is natural that these movements gained opponents in the intellectual and social strata.
  The opposition forces were also divided due to their disagreements.
  However, the biggest obstacle to reforming the church life was the conservative clergy who completely rejected the reforms.
  These approaches to classification were an adequate reflection of the course of events.
Conservative oppositionists used gradual solutions, believing that radical reforms were premature and inexpedient, given the "strength of the people's custom."
  There are opinions that this situation was favorable for the caring class, as the low educational level of the people would make it easier for the caring people to manage the church and the society more easily.
  An analysis of the views of the Conservatives shows that many times, without an impartial examination of the issue, they accused the "educated liberals" of carrying the ideas of Darwinism and Marxism, and even of considering them religious. [6]
  And the conservatives representing the opposition categorically refused to carry out reforms, believing that the "torch of freedom" would damage the eyes of Armenians with its very bright light. [3]
Maghakia Ormanyan's reformist views. Analysts of the time considered Maghakia Ormanyan, who, as mentioned in the previous chapter, was born in a Catholic family and returned to the Armenian Church in adulthood, investing all her scientific and intellectual potential in the development of the Armenian Church, as the instigator of the reform movement.
 In his book "Thoughts and Words" he not only addresses his concerns as a clergyman related to the Armenian Church, but also the idiots, touching upon the issue of celibacy, marriage, divorce, the issue of the priesthood, and in particular the reform of the Armenian Church.
  Finally, the pages where he explains his perceptions of faith and love, freedom, foresight, administrative style, debt and duty are of special importance for getting to know Ormanyan.
 He was repeatedly criticized by the press of the time for his views.
 For example, Tok.N. Taghavarian in his work "The Armenian Catholicosate and the Election of the current Catholicos" with 17-point accusers declares Ormanyan an unskilled man in national affairs, a traitor to the nation, a liar, the cause of all the misfortunes of the Armenians of Armenia. [7]
 He also directed his pen against Ormanyan: Grigorian A. In the book "The Source of Corruption or Ormanian Patriarchate", where he severely criticized Ormanyan, considering him a "spy palace", a bribe-taker, aspiring to the Catholicosate, and even compares him to Judas. [8]
 Ormanyan was criticized by Archimandrite Benik, who fought actively against the clergy throughout his life.
  In his numerous articles and books, he "does not shy away" from criticizing Ormanyan, and from the point of view of self-reform, he found that only the Armenian Church could save the "ecclesiastical revolution." [9]
  Among the many critical publications addressed to him, the works of Maghakia Ormanyan can be studied in terms of psycho-theological as well as socio-political activities.
  Talking about Ormanyan's role in the reform movement, it should be noted that during his one-year seminary career, as we have already mentioned, the theologians (although Karapet Ter-Mkrtchyan remained faithful to his full service until the end) [10] later played a major role. in motion.
 Besides, he had a great influence on Babken Küleseryan, Torgom Gushakyan and others, who studied at Armash Convent during his inspection and teaching years.
 It is a proof that during his lectures Ormanyan raised the idea of ​​having a renovated church among the students, sowing the seeds which, as we saw, had their bright expression.
Let us touch upon another problem for our study, that is, what was the starting point of the famous scientist-theologian Ormanyan in the issue of the reform of the Armenian Apostolic Church?
 When talking about this, we should refer to one of the works of the famous theologian, where the author analyzes in detail the history of the Armenian Church, the doctrine, the administration, the reform, the ritual, the status, etc.
 "I think that no book in the summaries of Bishop Ormanyan's book will give such a bright idea about the Armenian Church." [11]
 He authored the "Armenian Church" in order to make the creed and doctrine of the Armenian Church, the rituals and traditions foreign to him, to dispel the misunderstandings and myths accumulated over the centuries, to clarify the image of the Armenian Church, its place in the family of other churches.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, it was included in the list of Vatican Organized Literature.
Ormanyan advocates celibacy, is against the views of eliminating it in general.
 In his opinion, choosing celibacy as a minor is more preferable than as an adult.
  "Single ecclesiastics, whatever their origin and development, have passed the legal requirements and there is a need for those who follow that process in religious friendship." [13]
  According to Ormanyan, the issue of reforming the Armenian Church began to be discussed in practice in 1905. from the Russian Revolution և 1908 After the Young Turk coup.
  "When there was talk of renovation and improvement everywhere, and when the problem of church improvement expanded in our future, and rumors and editions, programs and proposals began to appear everywhere, everyone wanted to create a new church situation according to their theories." [13] .
An interesting fact about the clergy ևs ․ According to Ormanyan, married clergymen should also receive diocesan high positions without encountering a canonical obstacle in that matter.
When making reforms for Ormanyan, first of all, the early church structure should be restored, and not the church should be adapted to the time and its demands ․ "Now, if I want improvement, I have to get old, return to the initial, starting points, I have to take the excesses of the recent times," Ormanyan claims in one of his lectures.
 However, to accept this view completely, to put it mildly, would be wrong, because, nevertheless, it should be noted that the church is a dynamically developing organism; it must to some extent keep pace with the times.
   Speaking about "official" or "officials", Ormanyan mentioned that "the church should be separated from the clergy.
  The accusation against the clergyman did not apply to the church.
 The Church should not be blamed for them at all ”[15, 16].
 In this regard, he points to the ritual issues of the old Church rules.
  The problem is that, according to the author, over the centuries, the rite of the Armenian Apostolic Church իկան canonically-Greek-Latin-influenced, has lost its truthfulness (these influences have become mainly acute in Bagratuni, Arab domination, as well as Catholicism in Cilicia.
 This was mainly due to the fact that the church, being the center of national affairs, due to political circumstances had to get rid of the impending dangers at the cost of a number of concessions.
For the sake of justice, we consider it necessary to mention that the Armenian Church has not made any serious concessions over the centuries regarding religious issues, especially in a number of other issues of a ritual and religious nature.
 "Regarding the length of the rites and the strictness of the rules, we have to admit that the Armenian Church is sometimes forced to make many mistakes due to political reasons," Ormanyan writes. [17]
These redundancies did not exist from the beginning of the church, անի according to the theologian, every reformer must take steps to return to the old, traditional church ․ "When the spirit of the century is advanced and they demand that the Church adapt to it, saying that they hate the essence of the Church, in that case it will not be a Divine institution." [16]
  And in "Thought and speech" he writes heartily "ար Darus's soul wants light! Binding points are few, those who are tired of thinking are few, those who restrain their hands are less, those who burden them are less, and this is how the Armenian Church is. ”[13]
 Ormanyan was so big that he was not criticizing, but improving the traditional from the position of achieving the stability of the church.
 Ormanyan considered the strength of the people's habit, which would oppose the new conditions proposed by the reformers, a serious obstacle in this regard.
According to all this, in order to carry out the reforms proposed by Ormanyan, he considers that as a first step, the Armenian church should be cleansed of ritual additions and return to the 5th century church system.
  Realizing that it is not a one-day affair, it is quite reasonable to say that the improvements should be made with caution, because only with the step-by-step implementation of the reforms it will be possible to achieve the goal.
 He suggested starting with the ritual and the simplification of the rules.
Speaking about the role of the secularists in the Armenian Church, he mentions in detail the situation before the Polynesia and after that their role in the election of the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem, as well as the secular dermis in other Christian churches.
  Summing up, he concludes that the role of the laity in the Armenian church government is harmful.
 Regarding the names to be given to the Armenian Church, Ormanyan thinks that one should stay away from foreign, foreign titles and descriptions once and for all.
  He does not accept either the Enlightenment Kmrigorian or the "Etchmiadzin" adjectives, considering it inappropriate, because the Armenian Church does not start with the Enlightener, but from the very first century, the apostolic period.
  He is more in favor of the "orthodox" suffix, as it will give an advantage in accordance with the title of the Orthodox Churches, that is, it will have a clear name among them, for example, the Russian Orthodox Church - Pravoslav, the Greek Orthodox Church - Orthodox, etc.
 If the Armenian Apostolic Church was called the Armenian Orthodox Church, the close relations with the other Eastern churches would be shown, emphasizing the status of a church specific to the nation.
 Touching upon the issue of the name of the church, we should mention that this time the position of Patriarch Ormanyan is not acceptable in any sense, as the Armenian Apostolic Church, with its "apostolic" status, also has its special place among the Eastern churches.
There were people among the Armenian Church who partially imitated the Ormanian reformist views.
 One of them is worth mentioning, Bishop Gnel Galamkeryan.
 Discussing the issue of reform from a purely ecclesiastical point of view, Bishop Gyut noted that the Armenian Church must first settle its internal issues.
 The problem was that the issue of the improvement of the Armenian Church by Bishop Gyut should not be dictated by external demands, but should reflect the modern social demands, as the society is always in dynamic development.
 Together with his great predecessor, he believed that the reform of the church should be limited to purely external reform, that is, ritual, canonical and administrative issues.
 As for the issue of internal canonical improvement, Bishop Gnel clearly points out that we should not talk about it.
  From these positions he presented the demand for the external renovation of the church in the form of the following actions: a) the renovated church should return to the old state, b) the renovation of the church should be more related to the reform of the clergy, c) the modern ritual, canonical and administrative composition of the church .
He was, unfortunately, a member of the conservative current, but, nevertheless, he thought that one should not criticize the fathers who adapted the religion to the time, trying to satisfy the needs of the time.
 Thus, inspired by Ormanian ideas and filled with lectures, Bishop Gnel concludes that "the question of reform contains the need to reflect on the old condition, to improve the clergy, and to make less careful instructions in accordance with the understandings of my time. Therefore, in our theory, the three views mentioned above are united, and the totality of the reform will be achieved. "[14]
It is interesting that one of the challenges of the church was the low level of education of the priests, as a result of which there were many diseases, for example in Etchmiadzin, in different centers.
 They were especially connected with "Old Pain" or "Problem from the Priest", which has not lost its relevance even today.
 But why did it become relevant in the 19th century? Why did such a problem not exist in the 18th century, for example?
 This, of course, was conditioned by the change of the society.
  The church had to compete not only with other churches, but also with art and science.
 In addition, the manifestations of the soul, such as art and science, become more powerful, becoming ostensibly rivals of the church.
Returning to the partial analysis and re-evaluation of the views on Ormanyan's reform, it should be noted that the Church, as a dynamic structure in general, must always keep pace with the times, as our church fathers did, solving the problems of the time. without making serious theological changes at the moment, as the issues related to the church are solvable, but require step-by-step approaches.
LITERATURE [1] Enlightenment, Armenian Encyclopedia, 2010, URL.
 http:
//www.encyclopedia.am5 (link made: 19-08-2017).
[2] Reform, URL.
 http:
//kronadaran.am/dictionary/reformacia/ (link made: 16-09-2017).
[3] Father Gyut, Bishop Garabed as a caretaker, Etchmiadzin, 1917, pp. 11, 10.
[4] Hovhannisyan H., The Problem of Reform of the Armenian Apostolic Church in 1901-1906, Yerevan, 2008, p. 128.
[5] Der-Minasyants E., The Problem of Renovation of the Armenian Church, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910, pp. 7-9.
[6] Hovhannisyan H., Archbishop Maghakia. Ormanyan և The Problem of the Reform Movement of the Armenian Church in the Early 20th Century, Armenian Theologian, Collection of Scientific Articles, A, Yerevan, 2007, p. 155.
[7] Toc. Taghavarian N., The Armenian Catholicosate and the current Catholicosate, Cairo, URL.
 http:
//greenstone.flib.sci.am/gsdl/collect/hajgirqn/book/hayoc_kathoxik_index.html.
[8] Grigoryan A., The Hearth of Corruption or the Ormanian Patriarchate, Boston, pp. 52-4.
[9] Archimandrite Benik, Heartfelt Word, Yerevan, p. 28; Justice of Etchmiadzin, part A, Tbilissi (Georgia).
  My answer (to the moral pathogens of Etchmiadzin), Yerevan.
[10] Ter-Minasyants E., Karapet Ter-Mkrtchyan, life and activity, Moscow, p. 79, Father Gut, Bishop Karapet as a clergyman, Etchmiadzin, pp. 30-3.
[11] Weldon J., Manchester, URL.
  http:
//booksfromarmenia.com/blog/hy/OrmanianChurch-of-Armenia-English (link made: 16.04.2018).
[12] Encyclopedia of Religion, URL.
 http:
//booksfromarmenia.com, "Christian Armenia" encyclopedia, Hovhannes Ayvazyan, Yerevan, 2002, page 1069.
[13] Ormanyan M., Thoughts, Jerusalem, 1929, pp. 48-9, 305, 309.
[14] Leaders of Armenian Ecclesiology, Keziurian Z., LectureAmen. Archbishops Ormanian and Durian and Fr. Buy from the Galamkerian in the classroom, K. Constantinople, pp. 34, 30, 120.
[15] A. Avtandilyan, The identification of the Church of the Nation has a negative impact on the culture և national identity, URL.
  https:
//vahagnakanch.wordpress.com (link made: 20-06-2017).
[16] Siruni H., Ormanyan և his time, "Echmiadzin", 1962, D, Echmiadzin, pp. 32, 31.
Mariam Harutyunyan ARCHBISHOP ARCHBISHOP ORMANYAN'S REFORM VIEWS Keywords: Enlightenment, Reformation, "New" church, two-layered society.
