CURRENT LEGAL PROBLEMS OF THE RA TOURISM SPHERE Tourism today is developing at a rather stable pace in the Republic of Armenia.
  In developed countries, the tourism sector is considered to be the primary sector of the economy, providing most of the country's income.
 The urgency of the topic is conditioned by the fact that for several years now, the sphere of tourism in Armenia has been declared one of the primary spheres of the economy, ensuring the majority of the country's incomes.
  However, there are a number of legal issues that need to be addressed and solutions.
The aim of the work is to study the documents on the legal regulations of the RA tourism, the state policy programs, the current legal issues, the settlement of which will contribute to the development of the sphere.
The improvement of the legislation stems from the need to improve the existing legal framework, which has arisen in the conditions of dynamic development typical of the tourism sector, new challenges, the need to strengthen and increase the competitiveness of the Armenian tourism product in the world tourism market, including the diversification of the development, human resources development, activation of international cooperation, etc.
  Therefore, a unified strategy for tourism development should be developed, based on the RA Law on "Tourism Activities".
The experience of different countries shows that the efficiency of the development of the tourism sector directly depends on the support of the state.
 The state policy in this sphere first of all requires the formation of the necessary normative field.
  Given that tourism is declared a priority in the country, the legal field in which this field operates is more widely used.
 The legislative field regulating the sphere of tourism in the Republic of Armenia is formed by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, the Law of the Republic of Armenia on Tourism, the Concept of Tourism Development, legal acts [2].
  In recent years, the Government of the Republic of Armenia has adopted a number of legislative documents regulating tourism-related spheres, approved the "Concept of Development of Resort Homes in the Territory of the Republic of Armenia", "State Program for the Development of Resorts in the Territory of the Republic of Armenia".
Due to the stable policy pursued by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in the sphere of tourism, the dominance of the sphere is considered one of the main directions of the economic development of the Republic of Armenia.
 The analysis of the current situation in the tourism sector of the Republic of Armenia shows that the government of the country in the conceptual approaches to the state development of the economy attaches great importance to pursuing state-oriented policy in this field, which is presented in the 2017-2022 budget of the Government of the Republic of Armenia. in the program.
The program fully covers the tourism industry in the field of small and medium enterprises.
 As the government intends for 2017-2022. To increase the annual number of tourists to at least 3 million as a result of the steps taken and measures taken.
The RA Law on Tourism, which was adopted on December 17, 2003, plays a key role in the regulation of the tourism sector of the Republic of Armenia.
  The general provisions of the state policy in the field of sub-tourism are presented here: goals, interests, rights, responsibilities of tourists խնդիրներըSafety issues.
The main goals, priorities and measures of the state policy in the sphere of tourism are defined in the above-mentioned law, in particular, ensuring citizens' rights during tourism, creating a tourism system that meets the needs of traveling citizens, creates new jobs, increases the income of the state and its citizens. Preservation of the environment ունեցող resources of tourist attraction, historical and cultural heritage։ rational use of nature [1].
The Republic of Armenia is also a important tool for tourism management. The Tourism Development Concept approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia on February 13 [3].
  The purpose of the concept is to describe և assess Armenia's tourism resources, tourism development trends in Armenia ները perspectives, define the main goals of state policy in the field of tourism, assess the challenges and determine the state policy issues, directions and principles for the implementation of the goals.
Being a small country, it has huge resources and necessities for organizing and developing tourism activities.
  The diverse landscape of the country, the beautiful nature, the diverse, rich flora and fauna, as well as the historical monuments dismantled in nature are of great importance in the organization of the tourism activity of the Republic of Armenia.
  By using them fully and accurately, Armenia can become one of the most active and developed countries in the world in this field.
  According to Article 10 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the state ensures the protection of the environment, reproduction, and reasonable use of natural resources [5].
   The legislation ensuring the protection of the environment in the Republic of Armenia is developing in the direction of the use of natural resources and the improvement of the nature protection spheres.
  Laws on nature, nature protection, environment և use, by-laws are closely related to the organization of tourism activities, but when we study them we see that: supplement the other, as shown in the references: • Most laws lack regulation or legal restrictions in the field of tourism.
These points refer to all the above-mentioned legal documents that are directly related to the sphere of tourism.
 In order to choose the right management mechanism for sectoral development, it is necessary to review not only the laws related to tourism activities, but also other related legal documents.
The RA Law on Tourism (adopted on 17.12.2003) presents the general provisions of the state policy in the field of tourism: goals, interests, rights, responsibilities of tourists, security issues.
 A number of gaps and problems in the law were reviewed in 2017 by the relevant specialists of the Tourism Committee.
  As a result of the review, it was developed to amend the RA Law on Tourism, to amend the RA Law on Customs Regulation, to amend the RA Code on Administrative Offenses, to amend the RA Law on Licensing. The drafts of the RA laws.
 The draft laws included omissions in the existing laws, amendments were made, individual points և provisions were partially or completely revised [4].
  One of the possible additions is the table of Article 43 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On LICENSING" (adopted on May 30, 2001), that is, to supplement it with 17.1 parts: 1. activities of a guide, 2. activities of an escort, 3. activities of a tour operator, 4 Licensing the activities of a travel agent, 5. hotel services.
  This change will allow only the activities of leading և companies providing high quality services in the field, the activities of leading specialists, skilled և experienced tour guides, tour operators և tour agents.
  Compared to the current law, the new draft law: • The basic concepts of the law, the concept of "tour package", the package tour contract, the route, the tour are presented in detail.
• Clearly separated են are presented tourism entities (their licensing արտ standardization procedures) և facilities.
• Qualification procedures for hotel chains, food establishments, buses.
• The project also includes the administrative register of the tourism sector and the register of tourism resources.
• State control is established over the observance of the requirements of the legislation regulating the sphere of tourism.
Along with the improvement of the RA's tourism legislation, a policy should be applied that will facilitate the transition from mass tourism to sustainable tourism in the country.
 In this case, when compiling a tourism sector development plan, the government will take into account the territorial potential of the Republic of Armenia, the existence of appropriate և high-quality infrastructure, the մասնագետ human resources serving the specialists.
 Taking into account the absence of the above-mentioned, we can say that the country is not ready to receive 3 million tourists.
 Thus, the system of legal regulation can not lag behind the changes in public life, փոփոխ Changes in a dynamically developing sector such as tourism must also be reflected in legal acts.
  Active-effective cooperation of all stakeholders necessary for the implementation of an effective sectoral tourism policy - public administration and local self-government bodies, private sector - population - effective.
Due to the need to develop the sector through the legal regulation of tourism, as a result of the work study, we present the following recommendations: 1. The international legal system in the field of tourism should be studied, developed and localized in the Republic of Armenia.
2. To regulate the separate directions of tourism, to concentrate them on the regions of the Republic of Armenia, including rural communities.
3. It is necessary to separate the price policy of domestic inbound tourism and to fix it by law.
4. Improve Armenia's access to the world market by increasing transport access մատչելի access and exit access; 5. Develop a code of և tourist և visitor ethics, taking into account the World Tourism Ethics Regulation.
6. Only licensed and trained licensed professionals should be involved in the field.
7. Define by law և clearly indicate who is responsible for sectoral management, equal distribution of resources, implementation of programs, separating the functions of the public-private sector.
8. The procedure for creating new destinations, tourist destinations իչները criteria should be fixed by law.
9. Abuses of nature use as a result of tourism activities should be included in the law by imposing fines and penalties.
10. Review և approve the new draft law of the Republic of Armenia on tourism.
LITERATURE [1] "RA Law on Tourism", Yerevan, December 17, 2003.
[2] Margaryan A., "Legal regulations for the organization of tourism services", Yerevan, 2017, pp. 77-84.
[3] "RA Tourism Development Concept", Yerevan, 2008.
[4] Draft Laws on Tourism, Amendments to the RA Tax Code, Amendments to the RA Law on Customs Regulation, Amendments to the RA Code on Administrative Offenses, Amendments to the RA Law on Licensing , Yerevan, 2017.
[5] Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, December 6, 2015.
[6] Program of the Government of the Republic of Armenia 2017-2022, Yerevan, 2017, p. 52.
Hakobyan Ani CURRENT LEGAL ISSUES OF RA TOURISM SPHERE Keywords: tourism, law, by-law, concept, legal regulation, state policy, sustainable tourism.
