CREATIVE SELF-EXPRESSION AS AN FACTOR ON HIGHER SCHOOL PROGRESS According to the new educational system already introduced, there have been changes in curricula in RA schools.
 According to the new educational system, general secondary education in Armenia will be implemented for 12 years.
  The transition to 12-year education started in the 2006-2007 academic year (elementary school - 4 years (14th grades), secondary school - 5 years (5th-9th grades), high school - 3 years (10th-12th grades)) .
The main goal of the elementary school is to develop the learner's mental, emotional and physical abilities, language thinking, literacy, logic, and basic working skills.
  The elementary school provides the necessary conditions for learning, lays the foundation for continuing education in the secondary school.
The main purpose of the middle school is to provide the knowledge of man, nature, society, the ability to apply them in life, the skills, the moral and caring values ​​that a student needs to continue his / her education in a high school or vocational institution, as well as to work in a suitable age.
  Teaching in middle school is aimed at developing a healthy lifestyle, students' scientific understanding of the world and nature, providing the minimum amount of knowledge necessary for independent work, education and independent social activities.
The main purpose of the high school is to provide professional education, knowledge, abilities and skills necessary for independent living1.
 The age group of high school students includes children aged 15-18 (late adolescence և early adolescence).
Both adolescence and adolescence are considered parts of the study of age psychology.
  Different psychologists and pedagogues have given different divisions at this age.
  A. Ryan considers teenagers 11-15 years old, teenagers 16-19 years old2.
  E. Erickson singled out the crisis of adolescence and early adolescence among the 8 age crises he defined.
 He calls this crisis "Identification or mixing of roles" (Identity - loss of identity 1 See the official website of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia: http.
//www.edu.am.
crisis).
  In other words, the adolescent takes on different social roles, determines the requirements, opportunities և rights that are typical of each new image.
  In these roles, there are also negative objects that can cause conflict situations1.
 Crises, according to E. According to Erickson, these are turning points that force a person to make a "choice" between progress, regression or developmental delay.
Reaching higher grades (high school), adolescents pay more attention to how teachers treat them.
 They clearly distinguish the professional and personal qualities and qualities of teachers, overcome the negative stereotypes of teachers' perception, the negativity towards individual teachers3.
In almost all age psychology textbooks, descriptions of adolescence and adolescent crisis are presented in great detail.
  While adolescence seems to have no boundaries, there is no clear distinction between whether adolescence changes are in adolescence or in adulthood.
I. Kulagina made the division of high school age in the following ways: 16-17 years - early adolescence, 17 to 21-23 years - adolescence.
  V. Mukhina considered adolescence to be the period after adolescence, after which comes adulthood (from 15-16 to 21-25 years old).
Adolescence is considered to be a period of choosing a way of life, hard work in the direction of the profession chosen at that age, studying at university, in a family, for boys - military service.
The high school student is already on the verge of passing to an independent life.
  Among the tasks set are to start working, to find one's own place in life, and so on.
 According to I. Connie's requirements for high school students փոխ the conditions for developing an individual are changing.
 He must be ready to work, family life, married life, bear a number of civic responsibilities, etc.4.
V. According to Slobodchikov, adolescence is the final stage of the stage of personalization.
  One of the main neoplasms is self-reflection - the realization of one's own personality, the emergence of life plans, readiness for self-orientation, penetration into different spheres of life, etc. 5.
  The type of primary activity typical of age is considered to be the teaching profession.
  There is a selective attitude towards educational subjects, aspiration to choose a profession.
 The main neoplasms are independence, determination, criticism - self-criticism, impudence - rudeness.
Adolescence is a crucial stage in shaping the worldview.
The teenager is interested in the events of reality, based on his own interest and attitude towards the given event.
  Worldview includes the social orientation of the individual, himself / herself as 1 See http.
//bankrabot.com/work/work_6255.html?similar=1.
2 Khudoyan S., Crisis ages of personal development, Yerevan, 2004, p. 24.
5 Slobodchikov V., Isaev E., Basic Psychological Anthropologies. Психология человека.
  Introduction to a part of the social society (social group, nationality, etc.), the choice of the future social position ությունները the opportunities to achieve it.
 Adolescents are characterized by relaxation, self-analysis, high emotional level, abrupt mood swings, anxiety, etc.
 Self-awareness արը The image of "I" is more stable 1.
Adolescence արտաքին During adolescence, external physical changes are accompanied by acute anxiety.
One of the most important psychological features of adolescence is self-esteem, that is, the opposite of the real Ideal "I".
  The formation of worldview is influenced by the social space where the young person lives.
 The family is considered the place where they feel more relaxed and confident.
 One of the main topics of discussion with parents is the choice of profession.
 They can talk about life plans with teachers, adults whose opinions are valid for them.
 Communication with peers is crucial for personal development.
 The company of teenagers is unique 2.
The intellectual development of a person reaches its peak after 12-15 years old.
 This is proven as a result of many years of purposeful experiments.
 In adolescence, the intellect develops faster.
  Since the boundaries of adolescence and adolescence are not clear, it is wrong to view the development of intellect for certain ages.
  The development of cognitive processes in high school age reaches the level that they are ready to do such mental work as adults do.
Students' cognitive processes acquire qualities that make them more fully flexible.
 Theoretical thinking develops in high school age.
  Young people are already thinking logically, whether they are able to engage in theoretical discussions or self-analysis.
  Individual style of mental activity is formed among teenagers.
 The thinking style of high school students is essentially conditioned by the type of their nervous system.
  High school students with an inert nervous system learn more than the burden of educational requirements, because they do not keep up with the speed of teaching.
In high school, children learn many scientific concepts that they study and apply when solving many problems.
I. Conn mentions that at this age girls learn better. easier to solve concrete than abstract problems3.
Many people overestimate their knowledge ությունները the peculiarities of mental abilities.
 For many, the teaching seems uninteresting, they attend classes or are often absent.
  The attention of high school students is more focused on something specific.
One of the most important "components" of age is a fundamental change in self-consciousness.
  According to I. According to Annan, consciousness, passing to many objects of relations, becomes an object of self-consciousness, contributing to 2 Kulagina I., Koltsky V., Age psychology.
  Full life cycle of human development, school. to the development of the person և stability.
 The "I" concept is being formed1.
Educational interests are not of primary importance for high school students.
  The development of cognitive processes of intellect proceeds in 2 directions: quantitative-qualitative.
A person's creative ability is not related to the quality of his intellect.
Experimental research shows that the purposeful nature of creativity.
 Intellectual creativity is a part of the general activity of the subject.
American psychologists M. Parloff և L. The judge conducted research comparing several groups of creative people according to their adult age and personal characteristics.
  It turned out that the most creative people, regardless of age or interests, differ in their sense of personality development, aspiration to make a profit, emotionality, desire to work independently, self-confidence, balance and perseverance.
 In this case, the age difference is not qualitatively possible.
  Problems of "disciplinary influence" arose in both groups.
  The results of the research suggest that creativity allows us to get rid of narrow ideas, obstacles, excesses of self-control, the ability to regulate oneself, and so on.
It is necessary to pay attention to the fact that creative success is not connected with the progress of learning.
  Many famous people had low progress during their school years (Darwin, Hegel, Wagner, Verdi, Schiller, etc.).
 This is due to the fact that the school curriculum is strictly on the agenda.
 Children's creativity is fully and vividly displayed outside the classroom.
 The teacher's task is to discover and develop the student's "creative sphere" 2.
The syllabus taught in high schools in the educational system of the Republic of Armenia is very complicated, ող the subjects that promote the development of creativity are absent from the educational programs.
  In high schools, there are no lessons in the curriculum at all, during which, in addition to professional lessons, the student will be able to be creative and show a creative approach when preparing for lessons.
  Students create less than they should (due to age characteristics և Requirements), which means that the creative energy accumulated in them is not completely wasted.
  However, there is such an interesting observation that students of that age gladly participate in any extracurricular creative work, such as organizing an event, designing work, preparing scripts, and participating in CFI school competitions.
  The process of creating "connects" ևIt brings people, groups and groups closer.
  In the case of group work, people have a common unifying goal.
Due to the moral contact ման moral connections with different people in the work, the person feels his identity.
  "Creative deepening" has a therapeutic effect on a person3.
 A work 2 In the same place, pp. 329-330.
After noticing the positive aspects of self-expression, the need arises to create creative self-expression therapy (CPR).
This therapy was used for the first time in psychotherapy by Mark Eugene Burno.
  The goal is for everyone to consciously and purposefully discover their identity, personality, place in people, etc. during creative self-expression therapy.
By creating, a person begins to develop ստ enrich his creative personality in order to participate in the process of eternal search for the meaning of life1.
 Մ. Burno used this therapy in the treatment of adult psychopaths - schizophrenic visitors.
Applying some of these methods to high school students, we can say that even a short work done several times gives obvious positive results.
 When using creative self-expression techniques at school, the teacher or psychologist should first show how easy it is to draw and explain that the meaning of painting is to see the inner "world" well, and in that world, us.
  The themes of painting can be different ("The flower I like", "Scenes of ignorance", "What I do not like", etc.).
The teacher or psychologist gives an opportunity to make sure that everyone can create, that is, something interesting and unique.
  This strengthens the faith, the confidence in one's own abilities and possibilities.
Students are more inclined to music and poetry when using creative self-expression methods in schools.
 That is why M. Burno often combined them during treatment, for example, he chose music that was in tune with the poems chosen by the visitor.
 In this way he tried to strengthen the healing with a double positive effect at once.
  In general, M. The CTO offered by Burno is quite applicable in many fields, in particular, in psychology and pedagogy.
  It can be considered a modern approach to working with students.
 Using M. From Burno's advice, we found that after applying the methods, students focus more on themselves, their interests, personal qualities, even the small opportunities that are revealed as a result of applying the method.
 Teachers և parents also testified that students have become calmer, more purposeful, clearly set goals, և already consider the goals of achieving goals in a more comprehensive way, are more focused on lessons, կա there is a certain responsibility իս in preparing the assigned lessons.
By suppressing the desire to create, it is impossible to avoid the negative consequences it has on a person.
  That is why it is very possible to allow children to express themselves freely in schools by adding new lessons that will contribute to that.
  In addition, it is necessary to develop և apply a number of methods that promote creativity with the help of skilled professionals.
The process of creating both individually and in groups is "healing" in itself, so it is necessary to stimulate and develop every human creativity in every way.
Emma Mathosyan CREATIVE SELF-EXPRESSION AS AN FACTOR ON HIGHER SCHOOL PROGRESS Keywords: creative self-expression, creative high school, advanced, creative therapy
