Ն. ADONGE'S PHYTOLOGICAL AND BARACOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Adonts was an intellectual with multifaceted interests in the broadest sense of the word Armenologist.
 The basic knowledge acquired in the field of the study of the Armenian language at the Georgian Seminary of Etchmiadzin N. Adonts went deeper while attending the Sanskrit-Persian-Armenian specialized courses of the Department of Literature and Oriental Languages ​​of the Faculty of History of St. Petersburg University.
  Ն. Adonts was fluent in many languages: Greek (Old և New), Latin, Sanskrit, Persian, Turkish, Georgian, German, French, English, Italian and Russian.
  He was fluent in Old Armenian հայերեն Middle Armenian1.
The purpose of this study is N. It is the evaluation of Adonts's phonological-grammatical observations.
 His grammatical and linguistic works are presented in the third volume of the six-volume "Yerker".
 Among those studies is the "Literary Notes Linguistic-Orthographic" research (1904, St. Petersburg) - "Gift of J. Aghayan ”with the caption, where we read the scientist's pictorial attitude to the relationship between the old and new stages of the language. "A lot has passed from the old language to his, many have froze and died.
 To say that nothing can or should not be resurrected from the dead is heat.
 Our highest aspiration should be to remove the shining gems from the ruins, գործ to use the old linguistic treasure for the construction of a new language… To progress does not always mean to forget the old. True progress is like a refugee who keeps looking back while running. ”2
 Modern literary language, according to N. It is true that Adonts has matured on the basis of Old Armenian, but unfortunately he has chosen the wrong path of progress, because it is not enough to borrow from Old Armenian, we must work to make the borrowed words universal.
Let us refer to N. at all times. Adonts is concerned about the language problems.
  Thus, he speaks of the u placed before the vowel, which is pronounced v և.
 The scholar, longing for an explanation, considers the limited use of v in Armenian a strange phenomenon.
 In the middle of the word և at the end, as he rightly notes, v is written after o, because if u is written, o will turn into u.
 On the other hand, the history of the original Armenian sounds shows that in Armenian at the beginning of the word - υ could not be a sound, "the Aryan-European -υ sound at the beginning of the word in the Armenian language was changed to -γ. v-inum = գ-ինի, v-edami = I know… »3.
 Moreover, according to N. Adontsi, 30 words with the initial letter v, undoubtedly, passed from Middle Persian to Armenian.
  Among those words are: bad, sale (= bazaar), syllable, boar, tiger.
 This N. Adonts considers well-founded his assertion, according to which "they did not write anything in the syllable" Before Mesrob ", or they wrote wounded -u, ողը the reader should guess where -u and where-with.
  And the writing of this-u has been preserved in the practical conjugation of this, that, that pronouns, so-and-so, so-and-so.
 Ն. Adonts is sure that our ancestors used to read this-v-ik, thato-v-ik, because it is a practical conjunction u = v 4.
Ն. The adjective v is usually subjected to a remarkable etymology by Adonts.
  According to him, the origin of v still needs a clear explanation, nevertheless the scientist puts forward quite convincing arguments for its origin.
  Thus created, cut into other forms -
ած is the end of the past tense of the intransitive.
  The rest: * creator-, * cut-, * herd-, N. Adonts is thought to be the archaic horse of the past tense of the past tense.
 The researcher emphasizes that in Old Armenian, the -u particle, as a derivative, is the infinitive of the infinitive derba wise: mature, sharp, influential, reaching, biting, influencing.
 But that at some point they would mean ordinary 1 Adonts N., Yerker, G, Yerjan, 2008, p.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P. 315.
4 Hmmt. ibid., p. 316.
According to him, they also had a coat, probably from the words "coat".
 "Coat" means to be thrown on, to be thrown, not to be thrown.
 "Atsu, which in the ancient language means a people, a nation, is probably adjective = to bring is derived from the verb, և is the same as an adjective, atsk, that is, brought, generation" 1.
Ն. According to Adonts' version, the -u of the passive may have originated from the ancestor -i. * Created + ats = created = created2.
A. Aytyanyan thinks that we find that and the vowel in the old-fashioned's other words.
N. has very strong observations. About Adonts.
 He writes: "In pre-Southern European -en, -in is exceptional in the Tragic և verbs և -ek, -ik (= и-зь).
 After the loss of the consonant, the two's become identical, similar to it.
  Before the vowel, he had to show his old horse to the king.
 But it seems that the fall of n took place much earlier, only after the fall did the way of expressing the exceptional syllables i appear.
  The trace of Vaghakoruys n has remained in a few words: n-ayel (= mirror), n-stel, n-etsuk (yenul)… »4.
In the exceptional case, he explains the fact of appearing in the corresponding versions before the consonant և before the vowel այս as follows: From the beginning, before the consonant and the vowel, it was put in the thing, in the king.
 However, according to the law of hiatus, according to which a vowel is placed between two vowels to avoid yawning, the king was to be pronounced yarqa.
 Later i is reduced to ՝ disappears: յարքայէ = յարքայէ 5.
N. has some reservations. Adonts in the matter of the ending -y.
 Highly appreciating the role of symmetry in the change and development of language, he notes, however, that it explains strange linguistic phenomena.
  One of such phenomena, according to him, is the often meaningless addition of y at the end of that principle.
 Thus, a number of words borrowed from Assyrian, ending in aov, have been transliterated in our language as follows: kahna = priest, avila = abbot, she-shalta = chain.
 Ն. Adonts concludes. "In such – words -y has never been pronounced, but has been written only with the connotation of other Armenian words, such as, servant, gift 6" 6.
Ն. One of Adonts' linguistic studies is the article entitled "How to Write the Words' Amen 'and' Neutral '" (1930, Paris), also in Volume C.
 This article by N. Adonts wrote about the spelling corrections of the above-mentioned words in his article "Princess Mamikonyan" by the editorial board of "Hayrenik" magazine.
 At the very beginning, he emphasizes that in the Haigazian dictionary, which by the way he describes as a "respectable old man", those words have all the neutral spellings.
 Ն. Adonts, however, believes that we, being a new generation, should not repeat the previous ones, առաջ proposes the hypothesis that neutral (or neutral) should be verified not as "there is no one", he added , argues that the word should be interpreted as not + ox + someone, that is, "there is no one".
 According to him, the ox is equivalent to one.
 Ն. This view of Adonts was refuted by one of the fathers of Venice, Father Ghazikyan, A. Quoting from Bagratuni's "Developed" և Odznetsi's "Against the Yerutakanats" to prove that the essential verb, similar to the Greek, is accepted by the plaintiff, for example, Yeghev's was nothing… N. Adonts is sure that the latter is the result of a misreading, it was written in the beginning, "It happened that it was nothing".
  Due to the fact that the particles of A և l are attached, the impression of f was created, therefore, there remained from the present to the present.
  Ն. Adonts rejects the attempts of Father Ghazikyan to bring the neutral (neutral) to the colorful, gilded, gilded words, because, for example, to gild in gilding is a verb that originated in the same way as zodem from yodem, to concede. To get down from.
The next spelling problem concerns every (every) word.
  According to Father Ghazikyan, this word is the same as a man in a bundle.
 Ն. Adonts accepts the letter e.
 According to him, everything's is the result of the simplification of the suffix, and am is "a purely Armenian egg of taste, which is a Persian loanword, probably better than other Armenian eggs of the same root."
 Therefore, according to him, the oldest egg should be the whole, as everyone.
  A. Bagratuni, according to N. Adonts considers every (every) word to have originated from either me or the whole, but he is against both versions.
1 Adonts N., page 319.
2 Hmmt. ibid., p. 319.
3 Hmmt. Acharyan H., Complete grammar of the Armenian language, h. IV, B, Yerevan, 1961, page 326.
4 Ibid., P.
5 Hmmt. Adonts N., Page 324.
6 Ibid., P. 325.
7 Ibid., P. 362.
Men, according to him, is nothing but the result of the conjugation of only, only> men> amen> amen / everything, therefore, it is newer than every old word, և can not, in fact, be its parent.
 In addition, N. Adonts rejects the approach of considering everything as the narrow egg of the universe, according to the fact that in oblique cases, in complexity, it is necessary to change i to amin, aminayn.
 Meanwhile, Father Ghazikyan, together with Bagratuni, considers a a negative suffix.
 In our opinion, a is not a negative suffix here, because negative a, being of Latin origin, cannot be placed on the Armenian root.
After the original comments on these orthographic questions, N. Adonts goes to the responsible work of etymology.
  Under the title "Etymologies of a few Armenian words" (1937, Brussels) he connects the Armenian word heifer with * rendhyo, as the big one with * medyo, on the other hand he questions the German word das Rind - bull: Belonging to this series.
 We think that the latter has more right to be included in that series both from the phonetic and semantic points of view, than the heifer, because in the latter case there is only a phonological correspondence, while the semantic one is missing. the heifer, according to St. According to Malkhasyan, she is a three-year-old female cow, while, like N. Adonts testifies that * rendhyo means "fertile, fruitful" 1.
The Armenian word wolf ("lkam, sander"), N. According to Adonts, it corresponds to the Sanskrit words valga- (bridle), Latin valgus (crooked sword) = Indo-European * wlg.
  As h-e * luqwos / * w! Gwos, λύκος, lupus in Armenian gives wolf 2.
Ն. Adonts draws remarkable parallels with the etymology of the word collar.
He mentions that the etymology of the Greek words αύχήν, -ένοs - neck, neck, throat, և αύχή - pride is not known, but it is a fact that they are related to the Armenian words աւձի-ք, genus: ավձեաց.
This snake, according to him, probably meant neck, throat հ in ancient times և phonetically corresponds to the Greek αύχήν <aug1h-.
 ύΦ-ανχενέω - to raise one's head, to be arrogant, as naΦ ύΦανχένοε - boastful words prove that αύχή - arrogance is connected with a word around the neck 3.
Armenian adag-gang, skull-yun words, according to N. Adonts, no doubt related to the Greek word ήχή, όχα (* Fαχα) - the word noise, sound.
  According to him, Ardzagang means return sound, on the other hand, skull, skull (noise, sound) is the same word as vang (sound, syllable), but the last one, according to N. Adonts, is an Iranian loanword և corresponds to the Pahlavi vāng - shout, voice 4.
Ն. An irreplaceable place in Adonts' linguistic research is his examination of early borrowings, which he made in his book "History of Armenia", which is also included in volume C of his works.
 Here we will select the loans examined by him on a selective basis.
  According to N. Adontsi, Q.A. In the middle of the third millennium, Sargon invaded Asia Minor.
  Before leaving, he orders them to take some plants they know with them.
 According to N. Those plants of Adonts are: hashuru, tittu, šimiššala, šallura, karanu, buttu, sirdu.
  Ն. Adonts writes. "F. Hommel identified hashuru with the Aramaic huzra, the Assyrian hazzùra with "apple", հայերեն hazzùra recognized the Armenian apple (F. Hommel, Aufsätze und Abhandlungen, 1892, p. 167) ”5.
 But N. Adonts tends to consider hazzùra և apple as separate loans.
  According to him, hazzùra was preserved in its original form in the Caucasian languages.
  The name apple exists in many languages ​​of Dagestan in so many different ways that they have become almost unrecognizable.
 Some of these languages ​​are credit, curach, lek, N. According to Adonts, they use hinče-hinze, xinč-xinj.
 According to him, the last egg is similar to the Armenian apple, which proves that the Armenian language does not depend on the Assyrian hazzùra.
He writes: "The apple comes before xunjor or xinjor, the secondary n before the suffix, we think, is not alien to the Armenian phonology, my personal pronoun with a Trakan syllable represents a similar case instead of the unique (hmmt us, you).
 Also և "core", which is pronounced "korindz" in the dialectal form, M (u) zur = M (u) ndzur "6.
Ն. According to Adonts, A. Mayen showed the kinship of the Greek or Latin ficus և Armenian umbels.
 The Armenologist thinks that the Armenian tin, which is the stone of the grape, is Arabic 1 Hmmt. Adonts N., page 405.
2 Hmmt. ibid., p. 406.
3 Hmmt. ibid., p. 408.
4 Hmmt. ibid., p. 408.
5 Ibid., Pp. 387-388.
6 Ibid., P.
ren tiz, figs, belong to this series.
 All these words have in common with tittu the first component, but differ in the second.
 Ն. Adonts emphasizes that it is only the word mulberry, which clearly represents tutu. The latter is the word mulberry, which means mulberry throughout the Middle East.
He does, however, point out that in the Greek translation, συχομορέα is translated as ևβαντάζεν.
 According to the scientist, this composition shows that some inappropriate similarities have been found between the two fruits, fig թի mulberry և, it is due to these understandings that they have such names in Armenian.
 On the other hand, he rightly emphasizes that the grape seeds resemble the fig stones1.
  As a conclusion, N. Adonts writes that all these words have a common origin with the pre-Tutti tutti են are composed of the particle ti-tu with the help of the suffixes -to, -ko, -gho, -no2.
 That is, he outlines the Hittite sub-layer in Armenian.
Next is the word šalluru "plum".
 According to N. Adonts šalluru is a tree, but it is not known what it is.
He is the first to try to find a verbal parallel, seeing in that name the Armenian plum, in the provincial dialect, plum.
Then, according to N. Adonts անունըušu name can not be unrelated to the Arabic or Persian sùs կ `` և և և ս և և և և և։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 He mentions the part of M. Khorenatsi's story where the historian testifies about Ara's son Anushavan, nicknamed Sosanver.
 And it is characteristic that a village is located at the foot of Armavir Citadel Hill, according to N. Adonts, which was famous for its white plane trees3.
Hallùru word Ն. Adontsi is immediately reminded of the Greek őλυρα և the Armenian pea.
  According to him, the Bible χύαμου χαί φαχόυ was translated into Armenian as pea, therefore pea means χύαμος - bakla.
  It is noteworthy that őλυρα is easily translated into Armenian.
 Ն. Adonts concludes from this that there is a semantic version between őλυρα և ոլոլն. One means beech, the other - bakla.
 This proves that neither Armenian borrowed the term from Greek, nor vice versa.
  According to him, the old egg of the pea is a pea.
  Ն. Adonts mentions that as in apple խ plum, the last syllable of hallùru has become -or, and hallùru, according to him, is not Semitic, but rather an Asian loanword, that is, Hittite.
About the word Puglu N. Adonts writes that he hesitates to compare it with Armenian radish և Georgian boloki.
 The resemblance is tempting, but he considers the common origin of radish to be related to the Greek volvvos, onion, Lithuanian bumbuly's, red radish.
Summing up N. Let us emphasize the above-mentioned observations of Adonts. A) N. Adonts speaks about the fact that u is preserved in the practical syllable of this or that pronoun.
 It seems that in this Armenian, the substitution of the's,'s,'s,'s-'s's substitution (և in general, the basis for inclination in oblique rows) is conditioned by the fact that the y's can no longer be considered as a practical rhyme organizer.
 The general trailer was coined for the practical trailer, which on the other hand became one of the reasons for the disappearance of Grabar mixed trailers.
B) On the origin of the passive suffix N. While accepting Adonts's views, we should note that the meaning of influential, parallel to influential, having the meaning of biting, biting, adjacent to biting, is a bit puzzling in our observation, as the adjective value in them is more obvious than the verb. , և therefore it is not convincing to see any traces of conventionality in them.
 As for the second argument, according to which u is derived from yu, we will again make some reservations, since u can be derived from yu only in the case of consonant words, since yu is nothing but The conjugation of the verb for conjugation words.
 And u is the expression of the difference between the ending of the verb and in the case of conjugation words, when in one case they did not add anything to o, in the other case they added u.
 This is the result of the addition of that y, that is, the index of the functional, which, by the way, is mentioned above. Adonts, emphasizing that the letter u is preserved in the practice of this or that pronoun.
 Thus, we can conclude that the suffix and (v) suffix can be derived from the practical syllable.
  In this respect, it is also unacceptable to see long traces of passivity in the above-mentioned adjectives. Adonts' aspiration. in them came the ending of the verb rather than the conventional suffix.
C) The position of the scientist towards the preposition is quite impressive, especially his explanation of the appearance of y before the vowel, which becomes more convincing as in the 5th century, 1 Hmt. Adonts N., page 390.
2 Hmmt. ibid., p. 391.
3 Ibid., P.
In the same way, in the medieval bibliography, with the use of a double preposition, let us commit to (Urh., 322), to destroy on earth (422).
  This fact either proves the active use of hiatus or is a means of expressing the intensity of the meaning of the double preposition.
  Hiatus-activity is indicated, however, in the case of the addition of the singular III face of the Grabarian past perfect tense of the past tense - erk, the presence of their eggs - eyark, instead of the expected variants.
  Therefore, it remains to be assumed that the use of the double preposition was only a means of expressing meaning.
D) The extension of the word y to a large number of words, including borrowed words. Adonts finds it strange, but does not the borrowed language subject the borrowed rules to the linguistic rules?
 The addition of Y at the end of the word after a և o was one of our linguistic patterns.
 It would be different if he rejected that regularity within the framework of our language, not going beyond the level of loans.
  He certainly knew this regularity. Adonts, because in his own words, "y's voice was heard, it was heard in oblique syllables, in complexity. servant, but servant, servant ”1.
E) In the etymological experiments of each (every) word, which are really very interesting and convincing, N. In one case, Adonts connects the origin of everything with the Persian suffix և Armenian ian, which simplifies the occurrence of "ham + yan> hamen" every sequence, and in the other case, he considers the taste "already" to have originated only from .
 In this case, the question of a remains.
Ն. Adonts views am as the Armenian egg of Persian taste, but does not mention whether that taste is root or suffix?
 Besides, let us remember that in Armenian there are words borrowed from Persian with the final sound of h, which do not throw that h to provide Armenian dz, for example, the word world, so the fall of h at the beginning of the word is doubtful.
 H can fall if he is wearing clothes.
 On the other hand, we must emphasize that they are not the change of sound of yan, in our opinion, but of it.
 All that remains here is the question of taste, which seems to be a suffix borrowed from a Greek school, in common, consensual, in other words.
  However, we exclude this point of view at the same time with the fact that the interchangeable prefix does not appear in any other word.
E) N. Adonts's talent shines in both etymological examinations of native and borrowed words.
  By delving into the study of different languages, he can easily avoid various linguistic parallels.
  The confirmation of what has been said is not only his etymologies in our work, but also his remarkable comments on Armenian place names in various works, which deserve separate study.
 H) N. Adonts, no matter how interested he was in the study of different languages, still did not tolerate the penetration of foreign elements into our language, as evidenced by his words. "Many linguistic riches have given way to foreign elements, they have crystallized in written memoirs.
  They are not dead, but killed. and the slain are worthy of remembrance everywhere… »2.
Vanuhi BaghmanyanN. ADONTS PHYTOLOGICAL AND BARACOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS Keywords: N. Adonts, spelling, etymology, borrowing.
