ARRESTS AS A MEASURE OF PREVENTION ACCORDING TO THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA AND THE DRAFT OF THE NEW CODE The human rights of a citizen ությամբ other than those stipulated by other laws may be limited to criminal proceedings.
  Thus, for example, a person's rights are significantly restricted by the application of judicial coercive measures provided by law.
  Judicial coercion means the measures envisaged by law aimed at the compulsory prevention and warning of illegal actions of the subjects of criminal proceedings, which are used in the criminal sphere by the "authorized officials of the state bodies for that, if there are appropriate grounds and in accordance with the procedure" with all procedural guarantees. the realization and the discovery of the truth in the case 1.
 Any measure of coercion obliges the subject of criminal procedure to fulfill the requirements of the law և to act in accordance with the procedure established by the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
Precautionary measures form a separate group within the system of judicial coercive measures.
  The peculiarity of these is that they restrict the personal freedom of the suspect և accused ով for a long time, therefore, they require detailed legislative and controversial regulation.
  Chapter 18 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code is entirely devoted to precautionary measures, which reveals the concept and types of precautionary measures.
 In particular, according to Article 134, Part 1 of the Criminal Procedure Code, "precautionary measures are coercive measures used to prevent the suspect or the accused from behaving improperly during the criminal proceedings and to ensure the execution of the sentence."
 In other words, the precautionary measures are aimed at preventing the suspect գործունեության the accused's criminal activity, as well as ensuring their proper participation in the criminal trial.
Detention in the system of pre-trial detention has been և remains the strictest.
 Pursuant to Article 137, Part 1 of the current Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, detention is a person in the places provided for by law, under the conditions։ conditions.
 And Article 135 defines the grounds for detention. Detention և its alternative measure of restraint may be applied to the accused only for a crime for which the maximum term of imprisonment is more than one year, or there are sufficient grounds to believe that the accused may 1) hide from the prosecuting body, or 2) to exert illegal influence on the persons participating in the criminal proceedings, to conceal or falsify the materials relevant to the case, to fail to appear at the summons of the criminal proceedings without good reason or in any other way, 3) to commit an act not permitted by criminal law;
Being the most severe measure of restraint, detention restricts the constitutional rights and freedoms of a person to a maximum, including rights such as the right to liberty and security, so it must be exclusive.
1 See Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, general part, textbook for universities, Yerevan, 2006, YSU Publishing House, page 342.
Thus, human freedom as a supreme value is guaranteed by both domestic legislation and international treaties.
 Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
 A person may be deprived of liberty in cases prescribed by law in the։ order.
 No one shall be held guilty of any penal offense on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offense, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed.
Precedent judgments of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights և Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the European Convention) և of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR) make it clear that national courts must take into account all circumstances necessary to determine whether there is a public interest , an appropriate and sufficient reason, which, taking into account the presumption of innocence, justifies the retreat from respect for the right to liberty.
 The necessary grounds for depriving a person of liberty must be substantiated by specific factual materials and data.
  In particular, the ECHR has determined: "The fear that the accused will hinder the activity of the accused is legitimate.
 The court should affirm this as a legitimate concern, especially in the case of the accused, and not an indefinite abstract one (in the case of Clutte v. Belgium), "The possibility of interfering in the process of discovering the truth in the case (obstructing the obstruction in the pre-trial proceedings) should not be ruled out." "There must be concrete factual circumstances proving that a detainee can use them" (Trzaska v. Poland), "There must be a reasonable risk that, if released, the defendant will take steps that would impede justice" (Wemhoff v. Germany) "The risk of committing a crime again must be real in the case of the accused" (Ringeisen v. Austria).
The RA Court of Cassation, in its turn, stated in the precedent decision VB-132/07 made on 30.08.2007. "... the grounds for the use of detention are predictive, approximate in nature, as they presuppose future events.
 At the same time, these predicted actions need to be substantiated by certain materials obtained in the criminal case, which ultimately determines the justification of the use of detention. ”
Investigations into the possible actions of the accused should be based on reasonable suspicions or assumptions arising from the materials of the case.
  This means that in all cases some factual data must be used as a basis for the application of detention.
In the same precedent decision, the Court of Cassation noted: "Detention is the most severe of the precautionary measures used during the investigation of a criminal case.
  It should be chosen only when other precautionary measures cannot ensure the proper conduct of the person during the criminal proceedings.
  The RA criminal procedure legislation has established a series of guarantees ensuring the legality and justification of the use of detention, among which, first of all, the grounds for detention are distinguished and distinguished.
"These are the circumstances provided by law, which are confirmed by a certain set of evidence, allow for reasonable assumptions that a person, without being detained, may engage in misconduct, obstruct the conduct of criminal proceedings."
An analysis of the decisions of the ECHR և the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia on detention, the provisions of national law և the European Convention shows that the right to liberty և personal immunity, along with other fundamental human rights, is an inalienable և highest value.
  Therefore, one should be more careful in deciding the legality of the restriction of the mentioned right; one should exclude from the principles of inadmissibility of respect for human rights, deprivation of the fundamental right through restriction of human rights1.
Back in the beginning of the last century, N. Polyansky noted. "The question of what kind of precautionary measures can be applied, under what conditions they are permissible, on what their choice depends, is one of the most important issues in criminal proceedings.
  It is easy to imagine how much a citizen's personal freedom is endangered when there is no such thing in the legislation. 1 See Madoyan A., Application of detention as a precautionary measure in the Republic of Armenia, compliance with the precedent decisions of the Court of Cassation, the Journal of the Youth Council of the Chamber of Advocates. No. 3, December 2014.
the answer to the question »1.
 This approach is also relevant today.
 Therefore, the creation of the necessary conditions to ensure the legality and justification of their application in the law is the most important and primary requirement for the protection of a person's rights and legitimate interests.
The current judicial reforms in the Republic of Armenia are called to ensure the whole legal system, in particular, the democratization of criminal justice, the effective protection of individual rights.
 It is indisputable that one of the features of the rule of law is the restriction of state coercion only in cases when it is really necessary to protect the interests of the society and other persons.
At the heart of the regulation of coercive measures is the need to establish clear legislative mechanisms to guarantee the right to liberty of persons under the new draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Draft).
  Due to the fact that the application of coercive measures is in line with international human rights standards, the institution of pre-trial detention, in particular detention, has been fundamentally changed.
Thus, for the first time, the Draft stipulates that detention is a measure of extreme restraint in criminal proceedings ensuring the proper conduct of the accused է can only be applied if the proper conduct of the person cannot be guaranteed by other means of coercion.
 In other words, in each case, the prosecuting authorities must make the question of the expediency of applying a measure of restraint unrelated to the deprivation of liberty or restricting his freedom as little as possible before using detention as a measure of restraint.
 Only in cases when the given precautionary measures are not able to ensure the normal course of the proceedings, the proper conduct of a particular participant in the trial, the issue of using detention as a precautionary measure against the latter will arise.
  Such an approach stems from the case law of the ECHR.
  The latter found a violation of Article 5 of the European Convention only because the authorities had applied detention to the applicant without ever making it a relatively lenient measure of restraint, enabling him to be present.
The draft clarifies the grounds and conditions of detention.
  Article 5 1 1 (c) of the European Convention sets out an exhaustive list of grounds for deprivation of liberty, according to which the lawful detention or arrest of a person is lawful in order to bring him or her to the competent legal authority if there is a reasonable suspicion of an offense. is considered to prevent him from committing a crime or escaping after committing it.
  Based on this, Part 1 of Article 16 of the RA Constitution stipulates: "Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
 "A person can be deprived of liberty in cases prescribed by law."
 Paragraphs 3 to 4 of the same article stipulate that detention within the framework of criminal proceedings is allowed: 1) in order to ensure the performance of certain duties defined by law, 2) there is a reasonable suspicion that a crime has been committed, or 3) when it is necessary by the person to prevent the commission of a crime or its escape after its commission.
Referring to the analysis of Article 16 of the RA Constitution in the legal literature, it is particularly mentioned: "The strongest guarantee of the right to personal liberty and inviolability of a person is considered by the Constitution to be the law, according to which the procedure of deprivation of liberty must be carried out" procedure.
 However, historical experience has shown that the law can be a violation of the law, that is, cases of deprivation of liberty can be unfoundedly expanded by law.
  In order to prevent the adoption and application of such an illegal law, the Constitution enumerates in a closed circle the cases on the basis of which the law may provide for deprivation of liberty.
 Exhaustive framework of grounds և clear legal formulations exclude their spatial interpretation ”2.
1 See Polish N., Role Processes. Court of Appeal, its structure and activity, Moscow, 1911, p. 136.
2 See Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, vol. Editor: G. Harutyunyan A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, Page 190.
According to the case law of the European Court of Human Rights, prior deprivation of liberty before a conviction will be justified only in cases where there is a possibility that the accused will evade trial, obstruct justice 2, commit a new crime 3, or remain in custody 4.
H. According to Ghukasyan, the current RA Criminal Procedure Code, however, did not show the necessary consistency in envisaging the grounds for detention5.
 At least two of the grounds for precautionary measures provided for in Article 135 (1) of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, including the use of detention (obstructing the pre-trial or court proceedings to exert illegal influence on persons participating in the criminal proceedings, concealing or falsifying materials relevant to the case, criminal by obstructing the execution of a court judgment without good cause or by other means դուրս obstructing the execution of a court judgment) are outside the scope of the grounds enshrined in the European Convention, which exhaustively enumerate the grounds for deprivation of liberty ակա are not subject to spatial interpretation, ie unconstitutional; therefore, arrests cannot be made on those grounds.
 In fact, the grounds for applying detention under the current Code do not derive from Article 16 of the RA Constitution հոդված Article 5 of the European Convention.
In contrast to the current Code, the exhaustive list of grounds for detention set out in the new draft Criminal Procedure Code fully complies with the conditions set out in Article 5 of the Convention.
  In particular, under Article 116 2 2 of the Draft, a measure of restraint may be applied if it is necessary: ​​1) to prevent the accused from fleeing, 2) to prevent the accused from committing a crime, 3) to be imposed on him by law or by a court decision. to ensure the performance of duties.
It should be noted that the current Criminal Procedure Code contains one omission in terms of the grounds for the application of precautionary measures.
  It is not clear why these grounds apply to all precautionary measures.
 Both the European Convention and the Constitution lay down the grounds for guaranteeing the right to liberty and security of person, but other means of restraint do not restrict the right to liberty of the person, so the same grounds would be substantially restricted if applied to other restraining orders.
  It turns out that the application of other precautionary measures is directly dependent on the detention, that is, if those grounds exist, then, naturally, the issue of detention is discussed, and then the issue of the application of one of the other precautionary measures.
It should be noted that not all precautionary measures can be applied on the grounds specified in Article 135 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code.
 For example, it is hard to imagine that a signature not to leave could be used to prevent an act not permitted by criminal law or to hide from a body conducting criminal proceedings, or, for example, bail could be used to prevent crimes.
 We believe that each measure of restraint should be applied independently, regardless of the application of any other measure, of course, except for detention, the application of which, according to the Draft, is permitted only when other means of restraint cannot be achieved.
This issue seems to have been settled in the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code, which, according to Article 116, Part 3, does not require justification of the circumstances mentioned in Part 2 of the same Article: 1) in case of application of separate alternative precautionary measures provided by the Code; ) in case of initial detention or alternative pre-trial detention of a person accused of a serious or particularly serious crime.
It is clear from the above that according to the regulation defined by the Draft, the gravity of the crime is sufficient to detain the person initially.
  Note that this approach is not unequivocally accepted in theory.
 Some theorists are similar 1 See “Stögmüller v. Austria ”, 10 November 1969, § 15, Series A no. 9.
2 See “Wemhoff v. Germany ”, 27 June 1968, § 14, Series A no. 7.
3 See “Matznetter v. Austria ”, 10 November 1969, § 9, Series A no. 10.
4 See “Letellier v. France ”, 26 June 1991, 151, Series A no. 207.
5 See Ghukasyan H., International Domestic Guarantees for the Right to Freedom (Comparative Analysis), Proceedings of the Conference Dedicated to the 75th Anniversary of YSU Faculty of Law, Yerevan, 2008, pp. 246-247.
settlement, but others say it is unacceptable.
  Disagreeing with the approach that the gravity of the crime is sufficient to apply the crime, various facts are brought into the theory to refute it.
You. According to Melnikov, if the use of detention is conditioned only by the gravity of the crime, it loses its prive role and acquires a punitive nature. a person is detained not for the purpose of preventing his / her improper behavior, obstruction of the administration of justice, but for the fact that he / she is accused of committing a grave or especially grave crime1.
 You. Stetsowski considers that the choice of detention as a measure of restraint solely on the grounds of the danger of a crime is contrary to the requirement of Article 5 of the European Convention, which permits detention or arrest only in the following two cases: 1) to report him to the competent authority if there is a reasonable suspicion 2) when it is reasonably necessary to prevent him from committing a crime or to escape after committing it 2.
However, the idea of ​​considering the gravity of the crime as a basis for arrest has its supporters.
H. Analyzing the content of Article 5 1 1 (c) of the European Convention, Ghukasyan notes that the state's international obligations do not in any way prevent the gravity of the crime committed from being an independent basis for the application of detention.
  According to the author, there is no denying the fact that the publicly dangerous act accused of the accused and the circumstances of its commission may testify to the great social danger of the person.
  If a person is accused (of course, with a combination of sufficient evidence) of creating a criminal organization (group) of citizens (in general, committing a number of serious crimes against public security, terrorism, banditry, etc.), the fact of abduction itself gives grounds to suppose that the accused remained at liberty, may continue his criminal activity, hide from the competent bodies conducting the investigation of the case or use all possible means to oppose the investigation of the case.
  The provisions of the European Convention (in particular Article 5 1 1 (c)) shall not be applied or interpreted in such a way as to create undue difficulties for the State to use effective measures in the fight against organized crime.
 At the same time, in the case of the above-mentioned serious crimes, the criteria for detention should not be automatically extended to other publicly dangerous acts.
 Only in the case of detention on the grounds of the gravity of the act must all guarantees be ensured unconditionally to ensure the legality and justification of this measure of restraint (the person's connection to the crime must be obvious, the legality of the detention դատ justification և etc.) must be ensured3).
I. Analyzing the grounds for the detention, Petrukhin finds that the gravity of the crime itself and the seriousness of the punishment threatening him may motivate him to hide or prevent him from revealing the truth.
  In other words, according to the author, the gravity of the crime includes the risk of the possibility of the defendant behaving inappropriately.
It should be noted that international law already directly states that only that ground is sufficient for pre-trial detention, and it is only one of the conditions for continuous detention.
  Thus, the 1980 resolution of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe Paragraph 4 of R (80) 11 of the Pre-Trial Detention Order of 27 June 2006 provides that in exceptional cases pre-trial detention may be justified if the offense is particularly serious.
This approach has also been reflected in the case law of the European Court.
  In particular, the ECtHR states in its decision in the case of "Panchenko v. Russia" that the ECtHR allows the suspicion that the applicant has committed a serious crime can serve as a basis for pre-trial detention.
  However, the ECHR at the same time finds that the accusation 1 See Melyanikov V., Impeachment of a right citizen in the case of arbitrary production. Moscow, 2006, p. 223.
2 See Stecovski Ю., The right to freedom and personal inviolability, norms and sensitivity. Moscow, 2000, p. 167.
3 See Ghukasyan H., Grounds for use of detention and procedural procedure according to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, collection of scientific works dedicated to the 70th anniversary of YSU Faculty of Law, Yerevan, 2003, pp. 214-217.
4 See Petrukhin I., Inviolability of persons and warning in the lead process. Moscow, 1989, p. 107.
The severity of the sentence alone cannot justify long-term detention.
 It follows from this position of the court that only the gravity of the crime is considered sufficient for pre-trial detention at the initial stage of the investigation, but it may not be sufficient for further or long-term detention.
It should be noted that the gravity of the crime and the threat of punishment as a ground for detention are provided for in the criminal procedure codes of many foreign countries, in particular, France, Germany, Austria, Belarus, Ukraine.
Thus, in the case of pre-trial detention only on the basis of the gravity of the crime is lawful, it does not contradict international standards.
We consider it necessary to mention that the current RA Criminal Procedure Code does not differentiate between the application of detention and the grounds for its extension.
 The grounds listed in Part 1 of Article 135 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code are equally applied both in case of detention for the first time and in case of its extension.
In other words, the RA Criminal Procedure Code does not contain a norm regulating the extension of the detention term1.
 Meanwhile, the draft separates the grounds for the initial detention, the extension of the already used detention term.
  In particular, according to Article 118 4 4 of the Draft, "When extending the term of detention before a court, it is necessary to substantiate due diligence exercised by the prosecuting authority to determine the circumstances relevant to the proceedings, as well as the need to continue criminal prosecution against the accused." ».
  Such a settlement is in line with the practice of the ECHR.
  The latter, in numerous judgments, including several against the Republic of Armenia, clearly distinguishes the grounds for the use of initial detention and the extension of the term of detention2.
Thus, the comparative analysis of the current draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia և the new Code shows that, unlike the current Criminal Procedure Code, the Draft has established a system of effective guarantees to limit cases of arbitrary application of precautionary measures.
 The legislative regulations on coercive measures have been brought in line with the RA Constitution, the European Convention on Human Rights and the legal practice based on it.
Hovhannes Hovhannisyan ARRESTS AS A MEASURE OF PREVENTION ACCORDING TO THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA AND THE DRAFT NEW CODE Keywords: detention, pre-trial detention, measures of judicial coercion.
