SAME AND DIFFERENCES IN THE INFORMATION-PSYCHOLOGICAL SPHERES OF THE ETHNO-POLITICAL CONFLICTS IN THE SOUTH CAUCASUS.
  Let us separate from them the constant "re-release" of threats to the stability and security of the South Caucasus.
  The similarity of the conflicts is conditioned by the geographical position of the states that are parties to the conflict, as well as by remaining the focus of geopolitical events.
 One of the primary similarities is that all the above-mentioned states are living in the so-called "imperialist transit" 1, which is conditioned by the imperial past.
The current stage of the ethno-political conflicts in the South Caucasus contributed to the emergence of an information-psychological war alongside the previously known legal-political war in the region.
 Psychological warfare is a set of tricks to exert political influence on the enemy.
 The ultimate goal of such actions is to subjugate the adversary to his dependence or subordination from his own position.
  Psychological pressure during conflicts is usually exerted through information-psychological influence on mass consciousness.
As for information wars, they are an important part of modern foreign policy and pose a joint threat with military aggression in local wars.
  The only difference is that information wars are not regulated by international law2.
 In the 21st century, information warfare, as a priority means of gaining political and economic power, has become the main lever of modern world politics3.
 The information war, according to G. According to Papyan, it is a phenomenon that became more popular during the years of the Second World War due to the efforts of the Minister of Information of Nazi Germany Goebbels
The information content of conflicts is unstable and can turn into more dangerous situations.
  Thus, information warfare in the modern era of conflicts sometimes turns into information-psychological warfare.
It is first of all a struggle for political governance, in which case the struggle is accompanied by information-psychological actions5.
Usually, information warfare is the prelude or continuation of a military conflict, which not only always accompanies the real war, but is also part of diplomatic negotiations.
  Their main weapon is information leaks, often voluntary - misinformation.
  All this is closely connected with propaganda, which is an influence on the consciousness, feelings and logic of a certain group of people for military, economic and political purposes.
  That is, any information, the dissemination of which pursues a specific goal, becomes propaganda.
МИД РФ, 2009, available at http.
//andreymanoylo.vov.ru/psihoer.html. 4 See Papyan G., Information Wars, http.
//www.armtown.com/news/am/arv/20090409/58707/. According to H. Simon's theory, 1950s. The flow of information from the beginning is so great that people can not just perceive and do the right research.
 Human intelligence և logic can not be sober in the conditions of information flow, which sooner or later pushes a person to any position1.
Information wars are a set of means of information interaction and counteraction, which are carried out for the realization of power and interests.
Sometimes information wars predetermine the outcome of military conflicts, changing the pre-war or post-war situation.
  It is known that information wars are effective in cases when they are endowed with a clear theoretical basis and rapid response to events.
  They ignore the borders, they are constant, because victory in such wars is never final.
  According to Yu. According to Zavyalov, it is necessary to wage a constant information war against the enemy, so that military success is not temporary 2.
Speaking about information wars, it was appropriate to quote U. Churchill's words that he will surely win any war, because he will be the first to speak about it.
 And indeed, in 1946. After the division of Eastern Europe, initiated by Churchill, the latter announced in Fulton that the Red Army had divided into two parts3.
During the conflicts in the South Caucasus, there is almost no experience of waging an information-psychological war, the "five-day war" can be considered the first in that respect.
Although the direct actors in the information war were Georgia and Russia, it was still controlled by the United States.
  It was obvious to everyone that Georgia had attacked South Ossetia and Russia had made good arguments for a military counterattack, but the latter presented its actions to the West as aggression against the Georgians.
  On the contrary, the Russian side announced to the world that the presence of its forces prevented the danger that hung over the Ossetians.
  CNN and Sky News worked in favor of the Georgian side, which started broadcasting the hostilities only after the entry of Russian forces into South Ossetia.
During the South Ossetian War, the United States waged a three-pronged information war from the State Department, from Georgia և Gori4.
  Indeed, Russia's recognition of the independence of South Ossetia, Abkhazia, was a unique response to the Western intelligence war, which, even if it was aimed at consolidating military victory through diplomacy, was only calculated to deepen the international community's hostility.
Much of the literature currently published in Azerbaijan is aimed at anti-Armenian propaganda.
 They are published by private academia with funding from the Ministry of National Security5.
  We think that by pursuing such a dangerous domestic policy, the Azerbaijani authorities are hindering their own work, as the Azerbaijani who has achieved nationalism will accept any option of a future settlement with the same hostility, while a compromise will be reached one way or another.
  And the Azerbaijani media, according to S. According to Martirosyan, "he not only feeds on such sources, but also presents his own society as a fact" 6.
The Armenian side has a passive position in information wars.
  It is conditioned by the mild foreign policy of complementary Yerevan.
However, we believe that the country, which is the target of the information war, willy-nilly, must respond appropriately to the misinformation.
 We agree with H. Demoyan's proposal that it is necessary to form a propaganda antagonism in Armenia, Moscow, October 2, 2008, p. 23-24, available at http: // www.
//31.44.80.183/files/pf55/048335.pdf.2 Ibid., Pp. 91-92.
3 Ibid., Pp. 35-36.
4 Ibid., Pp. 42-43.
кало ", Baku, 2004 (this book received an incentive prize of the Ministry of National Security of Azerbaijan - $ 2000).
http:
//noravank.am/rus/articles/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=2591. войны hember Армении 16.10.2006, a rozing group is available, which will perform rapid response functions.
  According to Demoyan, such a group can include historians, political scientists, lawyers, ethnopsychologists, ethnographers and journalists.
  The group will monitor the Azerbaijani press, prepare reports for submission to international bodies, as well as anti-propaganda proposals1.
Undoubtedly, the use of information tricks during the war has positive features that should be used to resolve the problem, not to complicate it.
 One of the advantages is that it is impossible to win in the information space with large physical masses, as in the case of ordinary war.
On the other hand, the information space cannot be blocked and limited by problem-solving approaches.
 However, the main disadvantage of information-psychological warfare is that it is accessible to everyone, applicable by everyone, which contributes to the complication of existing conflicts and the emergence of new ones.
 In addition, information wars complicate the negotiating ground, forcing negotiation from positions, not from the point of view of interests, which is limited to one's own "self" 2.
We believe that information wars have always created favorable conditions for ethno-political conflicts in the South Caucasus, forcing the parties to make premature judgments in the negotiation stages, to seek the answer to the only unchanging question, as to tend to the view that "solving their problems" is their sole business.
  At the same time, it is obvious that with the incomplete use of information wars, the parties to the conflict have gradually chosen the most honest negotiation trick - the threat.
It is no secret that threatening is easier than making a constructive offer3.
 On the other hand, it is difficult for the parties to the conflict to give up their habits and emotions - to try to direct the actions in the stages of both negotiation and information war in the direction of the problem and not in the direction of the people.
Indeed, the process of resolving the conflicts of the 21st century is complicated by the presence of an information-psychological war, which occupies an intermediate place between the military "negotiation stages" of the conflict.
  It is a dangerous intermediate stage, which is always to the detriment of the conflict, as one cultural-civilizational environment opposes the other, not taking into account the peculiarities of the latter, mixing with political issues.
In conclusion, we should mention that the information-psychological war is inadmissible especially during ethno-political conflicts, as one of the few opportunities for already tense relations can be cultural-psychological rapprochement.
Therefore, despite the fact that the proposal has been voiced many times, the issues of establishing relevant structures aimed at waging an information war and / or counterattack remain open.
  The existence of such structures will also contribute to the processes of control and settlement of the ethno-political conflict.
Astghik Azizyan INFORMATION-PSYCHOLOGICAL SPHERES OF EXPLANATION OF ETHNO-POLITICAL CONFLICTS IN THE SOUTH CAUCASUS
