Back in the 1970s, experts predicted that the future of science depended on its applicability.
According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OESD), in the current context of deepening globalization փոխ cooperation between science and technology, the innovative policies of countries largely lead to the promotion of competitive advantages in the global value chain through the development of innovative segments.
  As the country's intellectual potential այլ other assets based on knowledge are more vulnerable և mobile, economies in this case compete in attracting as much of these assets as possible, which is achieved through the creation of national research "ecosystems" 2.
Taking into account the global development trends of the sphere, 2014-2025. In the concept of strategic development, as a main goal, it was fixed to make the Republic of Armenia a country with a knowledge-based economy, a competitive country in the European scientific-technical area at the level of basic and applied scientific researches and developments3.
In the long-term development vision, the adoption of such a goal is unequivocally positive, but our research has shown that neither the long-term development strategy nor any medium-term or annual development concept mentions the achievements of science in favor of economic development, science-economy intensive link What a clear mechanism, which today can become the guarantee of economic development and competitiveness of the Republic of Armenia.
1 Hannay NB, Science and Industry.
  The Private Sector. Using Science, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.3 See Republic of Armenia 2014-2025. Strategic Perspective Development Program, Annex to the Government of the Republic of Armenia 2014 Decision N 442 N of March 27, Yerevan, 2014, p. 149.
Moreover, the results of our research on the financing of science show that the interest of the private sector in the financing of scientific results in the Armenian economy shows a marked downward trend (in 2013, funding for scientific research at the expense of the private sector accounted for 28.3% of total funding; Instead, the state funding is insufficient for the development of the sector (the share of state funding for science in the total budget expenditures in 2004-2013 averaged 0.6%) 1.
 According to the RA NSS, in 2010-2014. The number of 2 scientific organizations in Armenia has increased from 81 to 66, and the number of their employees has been reduced from 6558 to 56273.
  In fact, 931 people have joined the ranks of the unemployed or changed their sphere of activity.
2010-2014 Internal Expenditures on Research շ Developments The dynamics showed the following tendencies (see Figure 1). General expenditures on research and development (million drams) Budget expenditures on research and development (million drams) 1. Internal Expenditures on Research Developments 2010 2010-2014.41 See Gyozalyan V., Problems of RA Science Sector Financing in the Context of Knowledge-Based Economy Construction, Contemporary Issues in Economics, 3rd International Conference, Proceedings, Yerevan.
 YSU YVU, pages 15-20.
2 According to the methodology of the NSSRA, scientific research institutes, research institutes, construction design and research organizations, experimental factories that do not release products, higher education institutions, scientific research, design and technological subdivisions, industrial organizations research Other organizations with processing units.
3 See RA Statistical Yearbook 2015, pp. 146-147.
4 The chart was compiled according to the "Statistical Yearbook of Armenia 2015".
The data of the chart show that although the total expenditures on scientific research and development have increased during the period under review, mostly due to the nominal increase in government funding for the sector.
  In particular, in 2014 The share of budget funds in total domestic expenditures on research and development was 75.9%, when the same indicator in 2010. was 66.3%.
Therefore, the potential of quality human capital of the Republic of Armenia, having a significant potential for competitiveness, at the same time due to limited financial resources can not be fully realized for the development of the economy.
  In these conditions, the introduction of an effective mechanism for the dissemination of scientific results in the RA economy becomes a primary imperative.
The complexity of the mentioned process, first of all, is the lack of clear tools for cooperation with the economic sector.
Today, the most effective way to apply scientific results is through mutually beneficial economic cooperation on all sides of the process, where both scientists and producers and investors are equally interested in the success of innovative ideas1.
The parties have the opportunity to receive a number of mutual benefits from the effective commercialization process, in particular: • New scientific assets are provided for the representatives of commercial organizations, and scientific organizations և Universities become more flexible according to market demands, • Cooperation increases funding, • Projects decrease risks, • effectively solves the personnel problem through the involvement of young people in joint projects, • creates a wider field for consulting services, which are beneficial for both commercial and scientific organizations as a source of additional financial resources 2.
The commercialization of the scientific result can be presented as a collaboration in the three markets (see Figure 2).
KNOWLEDGE MARKET 1. Realization of scientific and technical result MARKET OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 2. Realization of Intellectual Property Rights UsePRODUCTION MARKET3. Transformation of scientific result into serial productLine. 2. Schematic of commercialization of the scientific result The first stage includes the basic-applied researches, elaborations and projects, which are circulating in the knowledge market.
  The main subjects here are research organizations and universities.
One of the main goals of the research activity as a creative process is the creation of intellectual property, in particular, industrial objects, which includes all kinds of inventions, industrial designs և trademarks1.
The sphere of intellectual property of the Republic of Armenia is regulated by a number of laws2, which provide sufficient for the full realization of the right of possession of the legislative field.
It is a different matter that the possession of intellectual property rights in our economy does not turn into a tool that will allow us to encourage investments and develop the related industry3.
Based on the above, we believe that the problem is not the imperfections of the legal framework, but the discrepancy between the requirements of the main subjects of the process, that is, the organizations "suppliers" of the scientific result and the private sector organizations that are potential buyers.
In other words, the solution to the problem should be sought in the disproportion of demand and supply based on scientific results, which, in our opinion, are conditioned by a number of factors in the Armenian economy, including: 1 Khantarjyan S., Innovation management գնահատում evaluation of intellectual property objects, textbook , Yerevan, 2004, page 5.
2 Field www.armpatent.org.
3 Ghantarjyan S., page 9.
Relevant regulatory framework • information asymmetry. Potential consumers of scientific output are often unaware of research, inventions, quality staff, and economic opportunities expected from their market use; • high risk of scientific projects being implemented; Lack of appropriate means for bringing, • Inadequate goals and motivation of research organizations and investors.
Considering supply and demand as the main driving forces in the process of commercialization of scientific results, from the point of view of supply, first of all, it is necessary to assess the qualitative composition of scientific potential, and from the point of view of demand, investment attractiveness and risk-return ratio1.
One of the most important elements of promoting innovative activities, of course, is the existence of a system of training and retraining in this field.
  Training centers or so-called coaching centers can be established both in the form of infrastructures attached to universities, as well as in a separate specialized network, contributing to the scientific result matching the market requirements.
On the other hand, the innovative orientation of big business as a key participant in the commercialization process is very important to provide professional and specialized staff.
For example, in the UK, insufficient staff training at the leadership levels of industry organizations has been singled out as a major obstacle to innovation development, business-to-university partnerships2.
The issue of involving the private sector in financing the process of commercialization of scientific output in the Armenian economy should be considered, targeting mainly the sphere of large business, as at the current stage of development of the domestic economy the SME sector often solves the problem of mere survival.
According to many analysts, one of the main economic problems of governments today is science և private 1 Commercialization of Academic Research Results, Innovation Policy in Focus, Editors.
  D.Nordfors, J. Sandren, C. Wessner, VINNOVA Forum 2003.
1, pp. 69-70. The creation of an effective communication field between the two is the clarification of the paradigm and volume1.
In this respect, the study of successful international experience is possible.
  We think that the so-called "open innovations" policy deserves attention, for example, which is an active form of cooperation between companies, research organizations and universities in the conditions of global competition.
  It involves the creation of relevant databases by scientific organizations, which will enable organizations to get acquainted with existing innovative proposals2.
We also consider the existence of an established institute of mediators.
  These include companies specializing in licensing and consulting, innovation marketing.
  In addition to meeting the requirements of the parties, the latter performs one of the most important functions in helping to avoid unequal distribution of intellectual property proceeds, which are often seen when scientific organizations try to negotiate independently with the client companies3.
In this respect, the field in the RA economy is completely open, we think that the emergence of intermediary organizations in the sphere can be a serious stimulus for raising the level of investment activity.
The implementation of projects on the principle of co-financing can also be considered an effective mechanism.
  This model has been successful, particularly in the United States, within the framework of TheUniversity-Industry Collaboration Program (UICP4).
  50% of the total costs of the project are financed from the state funds, including the salaries of scientists, and other costs related to the acquisition of the necessary machinery are borne by a private company.
In our opinion, the above-mentioned mechanisms can be a guide for increasing the level of sectoral management of the commercialization of scientific results in the RA economy, contributing to 1 Tether B., Tajar A., ​​Beyond industry-university links.
  Sourcing knowledge for innovation from2 For details, see Cervantes A., Massner D., Commercialization of Scientific Research in the Accounting Sector by Model of "Discovered Innovation".
  new trends, Forsyth, 3 Dezhina IG, Saltykov BG, s. 37.
4 Source: http.
//www.itf.gov.hk/eng/UICP.asp. The solution of a number of key issues, such as the rejuvenation of staff in the field of science, the creation of new jobs, the modernization of infrastructure and logistics in the field of science at the expense of private sector funding for scientific projects, the reduction of scientific potential emigration, etc.
This circumstance can also be explained by the OTT competition.
Vardush Gyozalyan ON THE PROBLEM OF COMMERCIALIZATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESULTS IN THE ECONOMY OF RA Keywords: scientific result, commercialization, innovative process, science financing.
