ACTIVITIES OF THE ROMANIAN-ARMENIAN UNION (1919-2015) Armenians settled in present-day Romania in the 10th century and later played a major role in the political, economic, and cultural life of its historical authorities, Moldova, Wallachia, Transylvania.
 The mass migration of Armenians to Romania began in the 11th century after the fall of the Bagratid kingdom.
  The migration of the Armenian population to Eastern Europe was followed by a number of disasters (war, earthquake, famine), which were regularly faced by the Armenians in their historical homeland (Mongol-Tatar invasions in the 13th-14th centuries, Ani earthquake և famine in 1319).
  Prominent Romanian historian Nicolae Jorga states: "1330 There were quite a lot of Armenians in Moldova.
  The Moldovan government was established through trade, and it was the merchants who collaborated to establish the Moldovan government.
 Thus, Armenians are the so-called fathers of Moldova. ”1
The main references to the Armenian communities in a number of Romanian cities date back to the 15th century.
  For centuries, the Armenian communities have been one of the most influential national minorities in the historical Romanian authorities, but, as in almost all other Christian countries, they have faced a serious threat of assimilation.
 Prior to the Armenian Genocide, only a handful of cities had Armenian communities more or less preserved their national identity.
  It is noteworthy that at that time there was no structure uniting all the Armenian communities in Romania, which could play a unifying role to some extent - to partially prevent assimilation with the locals and other Romanian nationalities.
The situation changed dramatically after the Genocide, when tens of thousands of Armenian immigrants fled the Ottoman Empire to Romania, which was one of the first countries to open its doors to Armenian immigrants.
  A single body uniting Romanian-Armenians was established for the first time in 1919 under the auspices of the Romanian Ministry of Internal Affairs. The organization was renamed the Union of Armenians of Romania (UAR) on January 25, 1924.
 Grigore Tranku-Yash (1919-1924) became the first president of the UAR, followed by Armenak Manisalyan (1924-1927), Derenik Danielyan (1928-1934), Aris Fesjyan (1935-1937).
Leon Zohrap, Leon Shahazizyan և Artashes Gasarjyan were the last presidents of the UAR until 1948, when the organization was suspended by the communist regime2.
The creation of the UAR was a necessity after such an influx of migrants, taking into account the fact that the overwhelming majority of them had documentary and social problems, and the Armenians scattered throughout Romania needed to be united.
  The UAR was composed of representatives of the bodies of national societies, chairmen of district councils, later two representatives of the diocesan council, charitable cultural organizations, and so on.
  The purpose of the UAR was to establish contacts between the "government" of the Armenian population, to facilitate the residence of foreign Armenians or people with Nansen passports in Romania, to support the protection of orphans, to help Armenian churches, schools, the poor, the underprivileged, and cultural institutions.
  The UAR rendered patriotic service to the Romanian-Armenian community, supported tens of thousands of compatriots with Nansen passports, and, thanks to a large moral credit from the Romanian government, was able to obtain work permits for migrants3.
 It is noteworthy that during those nearly three decades, the UAR leadership was able to solve its problems. 1 Yorga N., Historical Writings on Armenians (Romanian), Bucharest, 1999, p. 249.
2 Galpagian H., The Romanian-Armenian Colony, Jerusalem, 1979, pp. 166-167.
3 Galpagian H., pp. 166-167.
most of them, and the activity of the organization in 1924-1942. It was covered by the Ararat magazine created by Vardan Mestujyan.
1927 was one of the important achievements of the Romanian-Armenian community. The opening of the Armenian Central Library, the main mission of which was to preserve the valuable old books տարբեր various art-related materials, which were scattered all over the country1.
 1944 In March, the library was transformed into a house of Armenian culture, named after the donors, Hovsep and Victoria Dudyan.
Its opening was attended by the then mayor of Bucharest Ioan Rishkanu (1942-1944) 2.
After the establishment of the communist regime in Romania, the Armenian national life gradually faded.
  Nevertheless, some cultural events continued to take place, but the lack of a national organization prevented them from being carried out in a unified manner.
 Add to all this the mass emigration of the Armenian population from Romania to Western Europe, the USA, Canada and other countries, and some of them returned to Armenia through a repatriation program.
 The assimilation of the Armenian population with the Romanians այլ with other Romanian nationalities reached greater proportions, in which the closure of national schools and the lack of education in the Armenian language played a major role.
 If in Bucharest, Constanta, which became populated by Armenians after the Armenian Genocide, the use of the Armenian language was more or less preserved, in other cities, where Armenians had a rich history, even participating in the construction of some of them, the situation seemed more fatal.
 It is difficult to say what would have happened to the Armenian communities in different cities of Romania if it were not for 1989. the December revolution.
 Probably, in a few generations, Armenianness would completely disappear in those cities, although we should not forget that, unlike before the 21st century, especially in the last one or two decades, the means of communication developed, the role of the Internet was strengthened in the lives of young people. For Romanian-Armenian youth to get more and more acquainted with their motherland և to return to their roots.
  1989 The December Revolution և the development of the means of communication had a serious և positive effect on the national minorities of Romania.
At the end of the 20th century, revolutions in a number of Eastern European countries changed the political situation in a number of countries.
  Liberated from the communist regime, the domestic political life of Romania entered a new phase, democratic institutions were gradually formed, and the main foreign policy direction of the country became integration into European structures.
 The national minorities benefited the most from all this, who got the right to create or re-create their national organizations.
1990 Many members of the Romanian-Armenian community gather to decide on the new UAR նոր leadership։'s priorities, but the common denominator fails, as many begin to accuse each other of collaborating with the communist authorities and being their secret agent.
  In the end, it is almost unanimously decided to put aside mutual accusations and personal ambitions և to hand over the management of the UAR to the younger generation3.
 This was a rather serious և successful step, as a result of which the Romanian-Armenian community got a fresh breath.
 1990 On March 11, 2012, 31-year-old Varuzhan Voskanyan was elected President of the UAR (currently in office), Varuzhan Pambukchyan and Nshan Bogdan Kush became Vice-Presidents, and Setin Maganyan became Secretary 4.
The second congress took place in 1992. Representatives of the Armenian communities of Hungary, Bulgaria and Moldova took part in the event.
  As a result of the Congress, a joint statement was adopted on deeper cooperation between the Republic of Armenia and the Armenian Diaspora5.
The next UAR Congresses took place in 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011, during which the organization's activities on the Romanian-Armenian community were adopted. 1 Siruni H., House of Armenian Culture (in Romanian), Bucharest, 1944, p. 3.
2 Ibid., Autobiographical notes, Yerevan, 2006, p. 243.
3 Author's interview with UAR President Varuzhan Voskanyan, 20154 Stepan-Kazazyan M., Chronology of the Armenian Community 1989-2009 (Romanian), Romanian Institute for the Study of National Minorities, http.
//ispmn.gov.ro/node/cronologia-minoritii-armene-1989--2009.
5 Conference of Armenian Communities in Bucharest, Republic of Armenia, No. 113 (458), June 11, 1992, page 1.
decisions.
  According to the results of the last congress, V. Along with Pambukchyan, the vice-presidents were elected representatives of the Armenian communities of several historical regions of Romania. Sirun Terzyan from Muntenia, which is a part of historical Wallachia, Zareh Nazaryan from Moldova, Khachik Karapet from Dobroja, Ioan Estegar from Transylvania.
  2015 It is envisaged that the new charter of the UAR will enter into force, according to which a conference of the UAR General Council will be held every year, which will also elect the UAR President every four years.
1989 One of the greatest achievements of Romania's national minorities since the revolution was the right to have one member of parliament in a fairly simplified manner.
  1990 The parliamentary elections were an exception in that the Interim National Unity Council (Romania's governing body in February-May 1990) had previously passed a decree allowing twelve national minorities to have one seat in parliament, regardless of the election results.
  That was the main reason that in 1990 Only 399 votes were cast in the UAR elections1.
  As a result, UAR President V. Voskanyan became a member of the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament (the Romanian legislature consists of the Senate - the Chamber of Deputies).
Article 59.2 of the newly adopted Constitution referred to the participation of national minority organizations in parliamentary elections.
  As it was mentioned, a rather simplified procedure was established for those organizations to have one deputy.
  That article of the Constitution (the new Constitution, Article 62.2), as well as the Electoral Code, stipulates that a representative of a national minority could enter parliament, who would receive at least 5% of the votes cast for the election of one deputy.
  And from the two organizations representing one national minority, the one who received the most votes could be elected a deputy.
  Of course, the 5% threshold (ie the passing number) is so small in the structure that in 2004 It is increased to 10%, but it does not play a role either, as no case has been registered yet that the candidate of 19 officially recognized national minorities in Romania will not be elected.
 18 of them form the group of national minorities of the Chamber of Deputies, the leader of which in 1992. Since 1996 he has been the representative of the UAR (V. Pambukchyan replaced V. Voskanyan in the Chamber of Deputies in 1996, he is still the deputy of the UAR, the head of that faction, and V. Voskanyan continued his political activity with other forces, he was elected a senator , and in 2012-2013 - Minister of Economy).
  Hungarians are not included in this group, as they make up about 6.5% of the Romanian population և are represented in the parliament with their own party (Table 1 shows the data on the vote for the UAR in the parliamentary elections, the electoral threshold for national minority organizations 2).
It is interesting that according to the official data of the census, the number of Armenians in Romania in 1992 It was made in 1957, in 1780 - 1780, and in 2011 - 13613.
 Naturally, it is noticeable that the number of votes received by the UAR has exceeded the threshold several times in all elections.
YearNumber of votesTable 1.Election threshold 1 Stepan-Kazazyan M.
2 In the same place.
3 Website of the Romanian Institute of National Statistics (Romanian), 1992, 2002 և 2011 Census data by nationality, http.
//www.insse.ro/cms/.
The same can be said, of course, when comparing the number of votes with the number of Armenians, which is explained both by the sympathy of Romanians for Armenians and the UAR candidate, and by the fact that the number of people with Armenian roots is much higher than the official census 1.
One of the significant achievements of the national minority organizations represented in the Romanian Parliament was the annual support provided by the state budget, which regularly causes dissatisfaction among some Romanian politicians, as the amount of money to be given to the Romanian national minorities is several times higher. The amount given to national minorities by the state budget in Romanian lei (1 euro = 4․4 lei) և UAR's share.
 Excluding the salaries of the UAR staff, the money is mainly spent on organizing many cultural events both in the Bucharest branch, where the UAR headquarters is located, and in the other 13 branches (Constanta, Tulca, Pitesti, Cluj, Gerla, Dumbruven, Suchanava, Suchanava, Suchanava, Baku, Galats, Fokshan).
UAR celebrates almost all the holidays of the Republic of Armenia, organizes various events, participates in church holidays.
 Every year, at the beginning of August, a three-day open-air festival called "Armenian Street" is organized in Bucharest. About 15,000 Romanians and foreigners took part.
  Every year camps are organized for teenagers and young people in different cities.
  Participation in the programs organized by the RA Ministry of Diaspora (especially "Ari Tun" և "Summer School") is quite encouraged, and the travel expenses of the participants are paid by the UAR.
 In order to better acquaint Romanian-Armenians with different Armenian issues and culture, politicians and cultural figures are regularly invited from Armenia, who take part in various events and give different lectures.
 Every year on April 24 in the center of Bucharest, the UAR organizes a commemoration ceremony for the victims of the Genocide, as well as a number of programs to make the voice of the Armenian community in Romania more audible, especially since that country has not yet officially recognized the Armenian Genocide.
  UAR և The Embassy of the Republic of Armenia in Romania has compiled a large list of events dedicated to the centenary of the Genocide, which includes various political and cultural events planned not only in Bucharest, but also in different cities.
UAR's activities բոլոր All issues related to the Romanian-Armenian community are covered by the Romanian-language Ararat magazine, which is republished after the revolution, as well as the bilingual (Armenian-Romanian) New Life magazine (the editor-in-chief of both magazines is Mihai Stepan-Kazazyan).
UAR representatives participate in pan-Armenian events both in Armenia and around the world.
 One of the priorities of the organization is to maintain strong ties with other Armenian communities, and in the future to create a unified network, at least at the regional level.
  There are prerequisites for that, it is just necessary to meet more often, to negotiate with the representatives of other communities around that issue.
  The implementation of this project will enable the Armenian communities to work more unitedly in all issues related to the Diaspora, as well as to bring the Diaspora-Armenia relations to a higher level.
Taking into account the historical experience and the current geopolitical situation, it can be concluded that the Armenian communities can reduce the challenges they face only due to unity.
  In Romania, the UAR has been able to achieve serious success during these 25 years, but, nevertheless, there is still a lot to do.
 Armenian 1 Arzumanyan A., The Romanian-Armenian community in 1989 After the Revolution, Banber Yerjan University, No. 3 (144), 2014, p. 59.
One of the main guarantees for the preservation of communities is the language and literature, the use and prevalence of which are a big problem for the Armenian communities in almost all Christian countries.
 In any case, by translating and disseminating the works of Armenian writers in the language of the given country, teaching the Armenian language with the right approach, one can have serious success և to connect the youth of the Diaspora more and more with the motherland.
Arsen Arzumanyan ACTIVITIES OF THE ROMANIAN-ARMENIAN UNION (1919-2015) Keywords: Romanian-Armenian Union, Diaspora, Romania, Ararat magazine, Varuzhan Voskanyan.
