DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS Consciousness is the highest form of reflection of objective reality նպատակ purposeful regulation of human attitude towards the environment.
  It is a system of sensory (sensory), intellectual, volitional-emotional processes formed during the development of mankind, which is aimed at the recognition and transformation of the world around us according to one's needs.
 It enables a person to know not only the world around him, but also himself, to become a subject of activity, a person.
 Through consciousness, the individual distinguishes the "I" from the "not I", from the world around him, giving him the opportunity to study his own person and direct his spiritual activity to himself "[1].
The corresponding type of consciousness is constructive in all regions of the caring life, emphasizing the relative boundaries of each of those regions.
  Religious consciousness is observed not only in the philosophy of religion, but also in sociology, psychology, phenomenology, in the history of religion.
  The creation of religion as a caring self-sphere was preceded by the process of "formation" of mythological beliefs.
  Historically, the first means of worldview is mythological consciousness.
Mythology creates an interconnectedness of myths, a myth is a careful reproduction of reality in the form of a message or a story, the events of which և the heroes are objectively recognized as existing.
  Mythology was created spontaneously, in the conditions of a community system, as a result of a collective creation, perceiving the world through emotional characters.
  In the myth, the intellectual, emotional-volitional attitude to the world is presented together.
  In mythology there is no consciousness of "human difference from external nature", individual consciousness is not separated from group consciousness, the image and object, subjective and objective do not differ, what is done in consciousness is accepted instead of what is actually done.
The indivisible collectivism of primitive society is based on nature, the features of nature և connections are formed by the similarity of actors, roles հարաբեր relations of tribal societies և, on the contrary, human-tribal relations appear in the form of naturomorphs.
 Fetishism, totemism, magic and animism were important for the formation of mythology.
 In the beginning, mythology, in fact, was assimilated into those ideas, appeared in them.
  Later, during the development of the society, a higher level of mythological abstraction gradually appeared, national myths of human-like gods of different peoples were formed.
Along with the increase of material inequality and the emergence of classes, the difference between the main and secondary gods deepened, their diocese was emphasized.
  The gods և demigods, embodying any element of nature, at the same time acquired social-moral significance, symbolizing the destruction of evil, good, beauty, heroism, social order.
When the mythological stage of the development of consciousness is over, myth ceases to be the only means of explaining reality.
 Galicron, philosophy, law, art, morality, politics and science appear instead of the original (diffuse, syncretic, mythological).
  Some mythological plots start the folk epic-fairy tale, while others serve as material.
But so the myth does not disappear.
 The mechanisms of mythological consciousness are reproduced in later stages of history, especially on a daily basis.
  Later, in the conditions of the dynastic system, previously faceless souls are named, they are attached to the functions of certain types of activities և management.
  Polydemonism is formed, within which a hierarchy of souls is gradually formed, the ruling soul stands out, the sponsor of initiatives, acquiring the features of a tribal god.
He became the head of the inter-tribal pantheon, where the gods of other tribes entered with the right of subordinates.
  Diversity is born - a religious idea about the existence of several or many gods.
The emergence of pluralism is connected with the development of logical abilities, that is, with generalizations, analyzes, classification of phenomena.
  Reaching the level of uniform ideas, consciousness has the opportunity to create images of spirits, corresponding gods.
  When the ability to create common ideas of species and clans emerged, images of gods were formed that functioned in a number of areas of nature and society.
 But the image of the god, whose field of activity extended to several spheres of reality, presupposed the recognition of the existence of other gods, with the help of which other regions of reality were explained.
 In parallel with the differentiation of the size of the division of labor, society, democracies, multi-god structures have developed.
Supremotism is formed - the worship of many gods under one leadership, genotheism - the acceptance of the existence of many gods, but the worship of one.
 For some peoples, supremotism են genothemism turns into monotheism, the notion of the existence of the only god.
  The images of the gods, who ruled several sectors of nature's society, were ascending, and finally the image of God, who controls all natural and social phenomena, was formed.
 During the development of the intellectual, the limitation of the gods resulted in the notion of the only god, which in turn was the result of the emergence and development of monotheistic religions.
 These are Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Sikhism.
The peculiarity of religious consciousness is interconnectedness, interconnectedness։ subordination.
  Characterized by faith, sensuality, imaginary characters, the combination of adequate reality content with inadequate, symbolism, allegory, strong emotional saturation, activity through the language of religion.
Belief in the supernatural is considered a sign of religious consciousness.
Believers believe that it does not obey the laws of the material world, which go beyond the category of causal dependencies.
 Consciousness in the early stages of development was not yet able to form ideas, therefore, to distinguish between the natural and the supernatural.
 The division of the natural and the supernatural has been studied in Judeo-Christian traditions, but in Christianity this dichotomy is not accepted by all intellectuals.
 Social studies show that it is often not given to the everyday consciousness of many believers.
  Sometimes faith is identified with religion, but not all beliefs are equal to religion, because the latter lives by a special phenomenon in human psychology.
 It is the basis of material interests, processes, demands, events, ideas and motives.
Faith is a valuable attitude towards one's own subject, it is a fusion of emotional moments, but, of course, emotions play a very big role in money.
 Faith unites the conscious and the unconscious, the elements of the rational և irrational, the elements of "peak" և "deep" psychology.
  It is closely connected with logic.
  Various means of substantiating a belief may be used, but it is not fully substantiated; it has not been tested in practice.
 In many cases, the subject of faith considers that it does not require any proof or proof at all, because if the believer finds himself in a situation of probability, then the human action is accompanied by risk.
  Nevertheless, it emerges as a potential factor in the involvement of individuals, groups, and masses, motivating their determination.
  Doctrines on the content of religious beliefs are formed within the framework of religious structures.
In different religions these teachings acquire certain peculiarities.
Religious belief combines emotional-volitional elements, but, as a rule, emotions prevail.
 With the help of religious faith, the unrealized transitions into the empirical existence of human beings are achieved: from the infinite to the infinite, from power to weakness, from life to life after death, from freedom to imprisonment, and so on.
 "In the beginning you live in a period when you believe in everything without any basis, then for a short time not in everything, then you do not believe in anything, and then you gain true, perfect faith.
 And, accordingly, you find reasons why you believe. "[2]
The content of religion determines the symbolic side of religious consciousness.
  Material objects, action, colloquial text, some images of consciousness are endowed with the properties of a symbol.
Objects և actions that are outside the consciousness acquire these properties only in combination with consciousness.
Objects, actions, words, texts get religious meanings և meanings.
  The bearers of these meanings և meanings are equivalent, substitutes for the symbolized, who form the corresponding consciousness of the environment of religious-symbolic cooperation, being included in the ritual.
  Every religious system has an interweaving of symbols, which is not the case outside that system.
 Religious symbols are many, but more common are those that represent the respective religion ․ The cross is the symbol of Christianity, the chakra is the symbol of Buddhism, the crescent is the symbol of Islam, and so on.
Religious consciousness is characterized by allegory.
  An allegory is an allegory, a conditional form of expression, a conventional expression of abstract concepts in pictorial images that mean something different from the literal meaning.
 On a daily basis, allegory is revealed spontaneously, and special actions of allegorical revelations will be developed in religious concepts.
 For example, in Christian theology, allegorical arrangement is specific to exegesis (Greek: explanation), which interprets the relevant Gospel texts.
 Along with the literal meaning, the texts are interpreted in other words.
Religious consciousness exists, functions վում is reproduced through the language of the screen.
  The language of religion is a symbolic structure, the elements of which have a religious meaning և meaning.
 It also includes layers of natural-artificial languages.
 The layers of natural languages ​​- tribal, folk, national - are primary to the artificial language of religion (symbols, actions, dances, gestures, religious fine arts, sculpture Zine).
 The language of religion, being a means of communication, expresses the content of religious consciousness.
 Natural language, depending on the means of materialization, appears in religion in the form of sound or writing.
  Words, phrases և sentences appear in phonetic or written units.
 The combination of words with religious meanings and meanings creates a religious vocabulary.
 These words, like և component names and sentences, can be divided into two groups ․1. when they name objects, persons, actions, events with attributed attributes: icon, cross, stone, cardinal, jihad, etc.
2. Named transcendent beings, spheres of life, attributed attributes և connections: Holy Spirit, Hell, Paradise, Atonement, Almighty, Most Mature, Revelation, Buddha in the body of Dhartma, Karma, Renaissance, etc.
A certain syntagmatic (constructed with each other) specific to the linguistic expressions of religious consciousness, which is, in essence, an interconnection of semantic units.
 Due to language, religious consciousness becomes practical for both individual and group and social masses.
 Religious ideas and standards are passed down from generation to generation through language.
 After the appearance of the developed script, religious texts were created: Vedas, Upanishads, Old Testament, New Testament, Qur'an.
 Worship languages ​​are formed: Sanskrit, Arabic, as well as liturgical languages: Catholic, Church Slavonic.
  Historically, the language of theological beliefs was formed, curses, hymns, prayers, and worship rituals were developed.
Psychologists believe that human adaptation to the external environment is initially done through mechanical actions, which gradually become more conscious and purposeful.
  Introspection of actions is carried out (insight), that is, in the process of actions to be performed, intellectual discussions, checks, they are transformed into mental operations, making possible the implementation of purposeful, meaningful activities.
 It is at this time that the embryos of religious consciousness are expressed.
  Consciousness is often identified with emotion, thought և thinking, which is expressed through econic ideas.
 In this case, the psyche is viewed as a subjective image of objective reality.
T. Sherrington was one of the first to put forward the idea of ​​the whole structure of the nervous system և the idea of ​​activity as a mechanism of individualization ․ "The central nervous system, although it can be divided into separate mechanisms, is a harmonious whole" [3].
  According to him, in order to study them, it is necessary to examine the receptor (perception) organs, in which the organism starts the reactions.
 The brain is part of the nervous system, a system of spatial perception organs.
 These receptors promote the development of the brain.
In addition, T. Sherrington hypothesized that the chain of control of behavior is activated by spatial receptors in general.
 Therefore, psychological development must also be considered in the context of the connection with physiological development.
 Religious consciousness is also formed in parallel with psychological and physiological development.
Փ. Johnson notes that "faith is as necessary to human beings as food"; "all people need to believe; it is useless to think that any of us can be happy by being skeptical."
  This idea is complemented by Y. Bornukov. "Faith presupposes confidence in what can theoretically give rise to doubts, and since the criterion of faith is readiness for action, it can be said that faith is a willingness to act for any purpose, the successful completion of which is not guaranteed in advance.
 Faith is instilled in a person when he is interested in the subject of faith, which creates in him an active function of emotional և evaluation.
 If any idea, hypothesis, image does not arouse active interest in him, the phenomenon of trust is absent.
 By this nature faith is different from knowledge.
 Knowledge is objective, it is accessible to the mind.
 And they believe in that which is close not only to the mind but also to the heart, which gives rise to active personal activity. ”[5]
  Studies of the state of mind are especially useful in assessing religious consciousness.
The process of upbringing cannot be properly organized without scientific studies.
  The task of the religious component of spiritual upbringing is to instill in a person a high level of faith, which will contribute to the imitation and manifestation of behavior in accordance with moral values ​​in interpersonal and social relations.
V. Zenkowski thinks that "knowing God" is not a "work of the soul" at all.
 According to him, it is the primary information և its inseparable achievement, which is connected with the phenomenology of faith ության the nature of the soul [6].
  And F. Schiller observed that "we see the real և primary reality not outwardly, but live having it within us, in the self-consciousness, but since we have a limited realization of the self, we understand that it is rooted in the absolutely impenetrable." և in the most inclusive "[7].
LITERATURE Abrahamyan Karine DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS Keywords: consciousness, mythology, diversity, faith, symbolism, allegory, religious "language".
