MIGRATION PROCESSES AS PRECONDITIONS FOR FORMATION AND MANIFESTATION OF TRANS-NATIONAL IDENTITY Migration is currently one of the most important issues of global importance.
 Formed as a result of many deep, strict social, political, economic processes, it, in its turn, has a primary significance and influence for all spheres of public life.
 The picture is more than obvious for modern Armenia, where migration, mainly emigration, is an inseparable component of the Armenian reality, from everyday life to international relations.
  The importance of the problem is evidenced by the numerous multi-level migration studies conducted in Armenia since the 1990s, aimed at the analysis of this or that side of the problem.
Migration, being very dynamic, especially constantly changing at present, is constantly experiencing unprecedented manifestations and consequences.
  It is obvious that what is said requires a new understanding of the migration problems conditioned by it, a modern, comprehensive and flexible methodology.
 This particularly refers to the transnationalism and transnational migration that is widespread in the current public discourse on the issue.
  Although there is still no definitive definition of the concept, most leading experts in the field emphasize the differences in the levels of daily life, social relations, and social life of migrants, in this case, transnational migrants, short-term or permanent residents abroad. .
 Due to modern globalization processes, developed means of communication and telecommunications, transnational social spaces are formed, which, at the same time, participating in different geographical, cultural, political, economic spaces, act as complete, transnational social essences.
 Thus, a migrant exists at the same time both abroad and in the homeland, is strongly connected with the homeland, participates directly in the life of the homeland, but also has a foreign, often socially active life.
  In the mentioned conditions, new, one might say, challenges of formation and assimilation of transnational identity arise, which give an opportunity to speak about a transnational migrant.
In the classical approaches of sociology, the society is inextricably linked with the place և territory, կապ that connection is realized through culture1.
 Thus, in order for a migrant to become part of a host society, it must be assimilated, assimilated or adapted to the culture of the host country.
 However, in the 1990s. at the beginning of N. Glick-Schiller, L. Bach, describing the nature of modern migration processes as transnational, questioned this provision2.
  Transnationalism is a social process where migrants create social fields that cross geographical, cultural and political boundaries.
 Migrants begin to develop և protect diverse family, economic, social, religious-political relations that cross state borders3.
 These types of transnational migrants seem to live in several places, are involved in more than one community, create new relationships, dependencies.
1 See Glick- Schiller N., Basch L., Blanc-Szaton C., Toward a Definition of Transnationalism.
 Introdactory Remarks and ReasearchQuestions, 1998, pp. 8-13.
2 See ibid., P.
3 See Basch L., Glick Schiller N., Szaton B., Nations Unbound.
 Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and deterritorialized Nation-states. New York.
 Cordon and Breach, 1994, p. 56.
Modern society, like U. Beck notes that it is a risk society1.
 Here, global instability is interdependent.
 The global system is not only threatened by global problems. Local problems have a great impact.
  Every local stability is globalized. As a result, an unstable world system is formed.
  Instability brings risk, which in turn leads to mistrust.
  There is a lot of mistrust in multi-ethnic, multi-ethnic societies due to different ethnic and national factors.
  The world system is also unstable, as it includes interconnected closed subsystems2.
  In these conditions, the migration processes become more complicated, the migrant finds himself in that instability.
  Escape from his own local instability, he finds himself in a bigger and deeper world instability.
  This instability is endless.
 Initially, the strengthening of ties in the homeland is considered a priority for migrants.
  The migrant personally tries to adapt the situation, to embody new values, to become a part of the new society without being cut off from the homeland.
  For transnational migrants, this process is expedient, because at an early stage in the new society, having adaptation, trustworthy individuals, social institutions, they continue to maintain stronger ties with the community established in the sending country.
  The transnational migrant finds himself in the "third field"; he wants to maintain his status in the homeland, where at the same time he is considered "his own", "a foreigner", where he can return at any time3.
  Transnational migration is expedient to the extent that the migrant completely excludes his connections with neither receiving nor sending societies. he strives to get the "maximum benefit" from both societies at any moment.
Initially, migrants do not consider themselves part of the receiving society, they are still part of the sending society in their consciousness4.
 Despite the lack of prospects for migrants to establish themselves in the host society, however, circumstances force them to be fully involved in the activities of the host society.
 Initially, the temporary perspectives are replaced by permanent ones, conditioned by new relations, creation of new transnational networks, expediency of the migration process.
 As a result, having the problem of adaptation as a priority, not accepting the values ​​of the new society, the patterns of behavior, nevertheless, the migrant adapts to the new society.
The participation of transnational migrants brings new changes in the life of the sending society. New qualities of life are emerging that are obviously new in nature, changing people's lifestyles.
 Remittances and investments of transnational migrants in the homeland contribute to the accumulation and use of a new type of financial capital.
Modern transnational migrants can not be described as "uprooted." Nowadays, migration is cyclical in nature, accompanied by simultaneous involvement of migrants in sending and receiving societies5.
  The task of integrating into a new society is not as necessary as in previous (unilateral) migrations, as they have "access" to their friendly 6 family network6.
In the conditions of transnationality, identity ceases to be firmly categorized, as it is presented by the primordialist approach to the study of identity.
Within different methodological approaches, identity is presented as a construct that is formed in the social environment, based on the interactions of people and their environment7.
  In particular, this is observed in the studies of symbolic interactionists (J. H. Mead, C. H. Cooley, H. Blumer).
  Identity is a construct constructed on the basis of the opinion of significant others (J. H. Mead). In these conditions, for transnational migrants, "significant others" are transformed, which 1 See Bek U., The Risk Society, on the Road to Another Modern, Moscow, 2000, pp. 34-35.
2 See Mkrtichyan A., Chaos as a system-forming mechanism of social self-organization, Yerevan, 2008, pp. 51-71.
3 See Vertovec S., Transnationalism, 2009, pp. 45-47.
4 See Massey D., Continuities in Transnational Migration.
 An Analysis of Nineteen Mexican Communities, American Journal of Sociology, (Vol. 99), 1994.
5 See Basch L., Glick Schiller N., Szaton B., 1994, pp. 36-39.
6 See Bradatan C., Popan A., Melton R., Transnationality as a Fluid Social Identity, Social Identities, 16 (2), 2010, pp. 169-178.
7 See Mead GH, The Genesis of Self and Social Control, International Journal of Ethics, Volume 35, Issue 3, 2002, p. 251.
As a result, expectations of migrants are transformed.
  "Significant" forms new standards of thinking and activity, which are clear in individuals with identical bases, who are identified with a particular society, group 1.
  From this point of view, it is necessary to separate with which "significant other" transnational migrants are identified, that the roles become primary for them in those conditions.
from abroad Establishing certain interactions in the host society և at home, migrants influence each other, exchange values, assertions, as a result of which their identities change2.
  Maintaining ties with the homeland is an important part of transnational migrants' self-identification3.
  Stable interactions of transnational migrants affect the expression of their identity.
  P. Lևit introduces the term "social transfers", which interprets the assertions, ideas, ideas that migrants exchange as a result of their many national interactions.
  As a result of such transfers, a common transnational identity is constructed4.
  In the context of migration processes, identity is characterized as a relative, process-situational construct5.
  The migrant is involved in the flow of global stability from territorial stability, that is, the former attachment to the territory is postponed, and now the migrant is cut off from the territory due to certain vital goals in the new society (for example, work).
  The latter to some extent restrict the expression of various aspects of the migrant's life and identity.
  The territorial identity of the migrant is changing.
  In these conditions, a new system of values ​​and thinking is formed in the migrant, which is connected with the context in which he appeared.
  L. Borrowing the term habitus from Guarnizon Bourdieu, he interprets the idea of ​​transnational habitus to interpret this phenomenon6.
  Habitus is a system of dispositions, certain structures, produced in an objective social environment, which organize և direct the practices of agents ումները ideas.
 Based on past experience, the habitus allows the agent to orient himself in the social space, to respond appropriately to this or that event.
Habitus reproduces universally accepted patterns of behavior7.
 Transnational habitat is characterized by the spread of practices և social positions across borders, resulting in the formation of conscious և unconscious dispositions that allow one to function differently in different situations8.
  It can be assumed that in the conditions of nationalism, the migrant's identity, depending on the conditions, becomes flexible, that is, he acquires a set of dispositions that will allow him to adapt to the context provided by the new society.
Mariam KhalatyanMIGRATION PROCESSES AS A PRECONDITION FOR THE FORMATION AND EXPRESSION OF TRANS-NATIONAL IDENTITY Keywords: migration processes, identity, transnational identity, transformation.
