VOSKAN YEREVANTS '"ALPHABET AND CHRISTIAN" WORK 2014 The 400th anniversary of the birth of Voskan Yerantsi, a great grateful to the Armenian publishing house and writing culture in general, has passed.
 And our publication is dedicated to that memorable anniversary.
Voskan Vardapet is an Armenian printer-publisher, cultural figure, linguist, archbishop of the Armenian Church1.
 He was born in New Julfa.
 His parents were from Yerevan and settled in New Julfa during the deportation of Shah Abbas.
  He studied with a local smoker priest, then in St. Julfa of New Julfa. In Amenaprkich monastery (in Khachatur Kesaratsi school).
  In 1629 he came to Etchmiadzin, then to Yerevan, after some studies (with Melikset Vzhanetsi) he returned to Nor-Jugha.
  1634 At the invitation of Catholicos Philip of Aghbak, he returned to Etchmiadzin, became close with the Dominican monk, scholar Paulo Piromali, took Latin, philosophy, geometry, and astrology lessons, taught him Armenian, and translated from Latin.
  Later he was appointed abbot of St. Ushi. In Sargis monastery.
  He received an invitation from his merchant brother Avetis Ghlichents in Amsterdam to take over the management of the Armenian printing house-publishing house founded in that city in 1660 by Matteos Tsaretsi.
1662 On September 27, 1945, on the instructions of Catholicos Hakob Jughayetsi, he left for Europe to publish the Bible in Armenian.
  1664 In the fall he took over the Holy Etchmiadzin Church in Amsterdam. The management of the printing house after Sargis և 1666 March 11, 1668 with his students Karapet Andrianatsi և Ohan Yerntsi. He finished the first edition of the complete Armenian Bible.
  In Amsterdam, Voskan Yertsantsi published 14 other books, including "A Book from the Alphabet, a New Boy for Children." (1666), his "Book of Grammar (" (Old Armenian grammar), New Testament (1668), "Book of the Worlds" attributed to Movses Khorenatsi, a collection of medieval Armenian dialects ( (1668), Arakel Davrizhetsi's "Book of Histories", "Celebration" (1669), Sharakanots (1665, 1669).
 1669 The printing house moved to Livorno, then with the consent of King Louis XIV of France, settled in Marseilles (1672), published eight books, including for the first time the Book of Gregory Narekatsi from "Book" (remained unfinished).
 During the 26 years of its existence (operated until 1686), the printing house that published 40 Armenian books in three cities was named Voskanyan in honor of Voskan Yernts.
Voskan Yerntsi is the biggest face of the old Armenian printing after Hakob Meghapart.
He founded a continuously functioning Armenian publishing house, prepared an Armenian printer. Galayjian A., The Great Grateful of Voskan Yerevantsi Armenian Printing, - "Zion", 1966, No. 2-3, pp. 89-104.
 Ananian P., To the letter of Voskan Vardapet, "Bazmavep", 1967, p. 298.
 Sahak Jemjemian H., Armenian printing և Rome (17th century), Venice-St. Lazarus, 1989.
  Poghosyan N., The Experience of Comparative Analysis of the Manuscripts of Voskan Yertsants և Printed Translations, "Banber Yerևan University", Armenology, Vol. 138.1, pp. 46-58.
 Brief Armenian Encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2003, vol. 4, pp. 99-100.
publishers.
  Voskanyan's editions were of such high quality that they were repeatedly reproduced in the same way by later publishers.
Grammar works have a special place among the golden books.
  His (Latin Thomas) grammar with commentaries has been preserved in manuscripts, later he published two grammatical works և 1.
While studying the grammatical works of this period, Gևorg Jahukyan states from the point of view that in the XVII century. grammarians had a rationalist attitude towards grammar. Grammar was seen as a set of rules established by grammarians.
 This attitude creates a basis for "reforms" in grammar at its own discretion.
  When making various changes, the grammars are guided either by the "rational" necessity or by the principle of attributing the grammatical peculiarities of the languages ​​considered more rational, especially Latin, to Armenian.
XVII century In grammar, rationalism is intertwined with Latin studies. acquaintance with various works written in Latin լ Latin; Greek-Armenian authors had a time in relation to Greek, especially since Latin-speaking authors uncritically accept many provisions of the Greek-language school, often referring to them as ready-made material.
In this century, the attempts to introduce "reforms" in the Armenian grammar by the example of Latin grammars, to introduce new grammatical understandings, new names begin.
 Grammars are written with the example of Latin, sometimes Latin grammars are translated եմ I adapt to Armenian. Some authors uniquely combine the traditions of Latin grammar of the Thracian commentators.
One of these grammars belongs to Voskan Yertsants.
  Voskan tries to "correct" the language of Armenian printed books according to his idea of ​​the perfection of the Armenian language.
 In the same spirit he died in 1666. He publishes the "Book of Grammar", which, as the author notes, he translated from "Dalmatian" and adapted to Armenian. "I beg you to remember Mr. Voskan in a helpful way," he writes in the book's memoirs, "because I worked as a translator to translate dialects into Armenian. I created a short collection of flowers in my field, studied the most useful, and gathered a lot."
 In addition to the humility of the pronouns, pronouns, and pronouns attached to the adjective, it is regulated by rules and regulations. ”
In addition to this grammar, the Matenadaran after Mashtots In 2295 manuscripts (as well as in many other manuscripts) the interpretation of that grammar has been preserved, which also belongs to Voskan's pen, as the scholars are convinced.
 Printed grammar, by its general nature, is a more Latinized work.
  In addition, Voskan Yerntsi in 1671 publishes the textbook "Book of the Alphabet", where it gives some grammatical information (letters, their types and classification, examples of syllables ավ monosyllabic, two-syllable and polysyllabic words, types of "something", spelling rules), an Italian grammar with Italian conversations - "Principle" Summary of the Italian language "with the title 2.
In addition to G. From Jahukyan, H. referred to Voskan's grammatical works. Mkhitaryan, N. Poghosyan, H. Nerses Der-Nersesian և other researchers 3.
 The latter has a great contribution to the preservation of the book ribbon of our study.
"Alphabet և Christian".
  We mentioned Voskan's famous and frequently used books above.
  We would like to draw your attention to another, infrequently mentioned book in the scientific circulation, the "Christian Alphabet".
It consists of 64 pages.
 It is eight o'clock, the press is in Armenian letters.
 The size of the book is 12.5X10 cm.
 There are 2 engraved images on 2 և 33 pages.
 The original is in cursive, captions are used և notarized.
1 For more details, see N. Poghosyan, pp. 46-58.
2 Jahukyan G., History of Grabar grammar, Yerevan, 1974, pp. 63-67.
3 See H. Mkhitaryan, Voskan Yerntsi as a grammar scholar, "Echmiadzin", 1966, pp. 210-217.
 Der-Nersesian H. N., The grammatical understandings of Voskanvardapet, "Bazmavep", 1966, 11-12, pp. 310-321.
 Poghosyan N., pp. 54-68.
We made the description from the book ribbon, which was sent to the National Library by Father Nerses Ter-Nersesyan.
 A. The copy seen by Ghazikyan ("Armenian New Bibliography", p. 131) was made in the same year, 1666 ․ published after Voskan Yertsantsi's "Grammar".
  Գ. Zarbhanalyan mentioned "Christian" twice in his bibliography, with the Primer (p. 26) and separately (p. 714) 1.
It is written on the cover page WITH GOD.
 A book from the alphabet, from a young boy, from the uneducated children. without those who have not yet been educated, to whom it may be helpful to attain the practice of education in the practice of reading.
For example, in the printing house of St. Etchmiadzin, Սարգ St. Sargis Zoravari. Of the city of Yamsderdam.
 Including the savior, 1666. And the Armenians, RJE. January 3.
It is noteworthy that from the very first page the author mentions that his book is aimed at teenagers, but that does not seem to be enough.
  Voskan also addresses his words directly to the reader.
 Browsing one page, we see the following lines: Who are you, a kind child, a teenager with a careful mind?
To be able to build from the letter of the soul with great longing and constant education.
For the child Jesus, the goddess, is an example to you of your childhood.
From the title of the book it can be noticed that it has not only educational, but also educational nature.
 These are just some of the goal setting shareware that you can use.
• From the previous degree of the letter. which are pronounced with one voice.
• Yaghags syllable.
• The word Yaghags.
• Consistency date according to Armenians և according to Romans.
• Yaghags children. to education և practice in the religion of Christianity.
• Chapter Two for Faith.
• Until we become believers.
• According to Gregory, the Holy Enlightener.
• Chapter Three for the Lord's Prayer.
• Chapter Four of the Ten Laws.
• Chapter Five of the Seven Councils of the Church.
• Chapter Six of the Divine Virtues.
• Chapter Seven on Initial և Intrinsic Sin.
• Chapter Eight of the Virtues.
• Ninth Yaghag deliberately greets you, Mariam.
• Tenth. Yaghags commanded the Holy Gospel of the Nine Blessed Sacrament.
• A word… memoir was written.
The material is taught with questions and answers, which is like a live dialogue between the teacher and the learner.
 In the first five points, the alphabet is taught, and then there is a transition to moral education.
As you learn the alphabet, the following questions are considered: • How many letters are there?
• How many vowels are there?
• How many consonants are there?
The answers given to the taught material are clear. The letters are thirty-eight, of which eight are vowels and thirty are consonants.
  The letters are marked separately.
  But what attracted our interest? The consonants are completely mentioned, and only seven of the presented octaves are mentioned: a, e, e, h, i, o, o.
  And where is the AND vowel?
  Did he leave it out of study, considering the succession?
 One interesting fact 1 Voskanyan N., Korkotyan K., Savalyan A., The Armenian book in 1512-1800, Yerevan, 1988, pp. 43-44.
should also be recorded. In his book Grammar, Voskan mentions eight vowels, but, unlike this book, he also mentions the letter as a vowel.
Then we move on to the lexicography, examining the following questions: • What is a syllable?
• What is a word?
First giving the definition of the word syllable `, the author explains in detail the syllables and words in their degrees.
 The AND vowel is also omitted here, which testifies to the fact that in the previous case there was no mistake.
Give examples of syllables by their degrees: • Second degree syllable. ba, be, be, be, bi, bo, bo, • from the third degree of the syllable. bab, beb, beb, beb, beb, bob, bob, • fourth degree from the syllable. բաւ, բեւ, բեւ, բիւ, բու.
Another question that arose while studying. The fourth degree of a syllable is formed by the letter u, that is, the letter է is a vowel, և´ a consonant, is that why it is considered a fourth degree syllable?
Referring to the word, we can say that the author mentioned the first degree, second degree, third degree, fourth degree, fifth degree, sixth degree, which are respectively the words monosyllabic, binomial, triangular, quadrangular, pentagonal and hexagonal.
 Here are some examples: • From the first degree word: nation, fear, man, eye, star, prison, hill, snowstorm, • From the second degree word: wrestler, heir, meaning, language, darkness, flower, • From the third degree word: author, vowel, leader, ray, • from the fourth degree word - secular, reception, dictation, • from the fifth degree word - geometric, rhetorical, • from the sixth degree word - astronomical, philosophy.
We mentioned only ordinary names, but the author mentioned personal names in parallel with them.
 Let us add that the author does not mention one-syllable, five-syllable and six-syllable personal names, let us bring some examples from the rest: • from the second degree word: Adam, David, Mashtots, Narek, Vardan, Ruben, • from the third degree word: Baghdasar, Komitas, Mariam, Michael, • From the word of the fourth degree: Absalom, Aramaean, Gregory, Eliezer.
The author wrote them in small letters and presented them in the same line with ordinary names.
 Here we find several geographical places, such as Cyprus, Sodom, Babylon, Byurakan, Lebanon, Israel, Armenia, Jerusalem, which are also marked in lower case.
Voskan in his printed book "Grammar" also asks the answers to the above-mentioned questions, but not in as much detail as in the book we studied.
 In "Grammar" he brings one or two examples, sometimes he misses the examples.
The author did not miss the dates, which are presented in detail.
 The letters of the Armenian alphabet are brought next to the digits.
 Numbers from one to one hundred and ten, without omission, indicate all the numbers in numbers, letters and in parallel, the letters corresponding to the numbers, the round numbers are indicated and some examples are given to guide the reader.
 Let's bring some examples: a-one-1, b-two -2, c-three -3, d-four -4, e-five-5, f-six-6, e-seven-7, h-eight -8, nine-nine, ten-ten, i-twenty-20, j-hundred-100, r-thousand-1000, r-10000, mr-200000, rr-1000000 և etc.
The above makes up almost half of the booklet, but in addition to providing grammatical knowledge, the author's goal is to make a person a Christian with all his worthy qualities.
  The other points mentioned in the content are aimed at that very goal.
  To make our speech more obvious, let us mention what questions the author asked with those points. • What does it mean to be a Christian?
• Christ God is beautiful.
• What is the degree of faith?
• You know our heavenly Father.
• How many are the works of the law which you have given to God?
• How many are the sacraments of the church or what power do they have?
• What are the divine virtues?
• What are the forces that move hope?
• What are the gifts of the Holy Spirit?
This little book of gold is of great importance not only in the transmission of knowledge, but also in the formation of a true Christian.
 It is a small but substantial work.
 Being able to become a real person, Voskan puts two important virtues, education and upbringing, side by side and develops at the same time.
In other words, for Voskan Yertsants, in this case, grammatical knowledge is not an end in itself, but serves a deep, Christian uplift.
Hripsime Kostanyan VOSKAN YEREVANTS '"ALPHABET AND CHRISTIAN" WORK Keywords: Voskan Yernts, "Alphabet և Christian", booklet, grammar և Christian knowledge.
