RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN JUDICIAL ACTS IN STATE LEGISLATION In the current period, along with the development of various spheres of public relations, the spheres of cooperation of the states cover a wider scope.
 In the conditions of such development of relations between other national legal entities, the risks of the need to protect subjective rights increase, which are regulated differently by the legislations of different countries.
Naturally, the citizens and organizations of other states outlining areas of cooperation with the citizens of the Republic of Armenia have the right to receive certain guarantees that the rights established by the judicial authorities of their states will be protected outside their own country.
 This is why it is necessary to talk about the possibility of the institution of admissibility of recognition of foreign judicial acts.
In studying the international experience, we come to some of the most widespread principles, the interpretations of which underlie the definition of the concept of this institute [1].
  The systematic interpretation allows us to conclude that this institution is connected with both the actual recognition procedure of the foreign judicial act and the consequences it caused.
Recognition of foreign judicial acts is a legal act by which a state endows a foreign judicial act with the legal features endowed with the legal acts of the courts of that state that have entered into legal force. in the territory of the state of origin of the act.
 As a result, it acquires undeniability, exclusivity, pre-trial nature, and obligation, and the judicial acts to be enforced also become enforceability [2].
The former CCP did not stipulate the permissibility of the execution of foreign judicial acts, but the execution.
 The problem is that as long as the requested foreign act is not recognized by the requested state, that is, the state is not endowed with the characteristics of undeniability, exclusivity, prejudice or obligation, it cannot acquire characteristics of perfection.
At present, there is a system in the Republic of Armenia for the issuance of an exequatur for the recognition of foreign judicial acts, according to which states are classified into the following groups: 1) states where judicial review is possible, 2) states where the possibility of review is limited, 3) states where recognition The subject judicial act is not reviewed in any case, ie it is of a mechanical nature [3].
The Republic of Armenia belongs to the third group of countries, which derives from Articles 2476 և 2477 of the former Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the former CCP).
 In fact, it determined which court of first instance could recognize the relevant judicial act, who submitted the judicial act of recognition, as well as the extent to which the sub-judicial act of recognition meets the requirements set by the international treaties of the Republic of Armenia.
  If the requirements were met, there were no grounds for refusal under the Treaty, the court was subject to recognition.
 A decision on this was made in accordance with the RA Law on Compulsory Execution of Judicial Acts [4].
The precondition of the international agreement was interpreted in two ways. In the first case, the existence of an international treaty was not interpreted as a mandatory condition for the recognition and enforcement of judicial acts; in the absence of a treaty with the state, they were guided not by the existing treaty but by the general rules of other international treaties concluded by Armenia; in the second case, the existence of an international treaty was mandatory. The regulation of the conditions for allowing execution was reserved for international treaties.
 The second option was used in practice.
In such conditions, a situation was created when the Republic of Armenia, which, without having an international treaty, could not ensure the regulation of the institute by sectoral legislation, often used the institute of execution of court orders [5].
Let's try to analyze in a comparative way, to identify the main changes that have taken place in the new Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the new CPC).
 Prior to the amendments to the CCP, the principle of reciprocity was not enshrined in the legal system of the Republic of Armenia.
 The problem was that the former CCP considered the existence of an international treaty as a mandatory condition for the recognition of a judicial act of a foreign state, which was a big obstacle for the development of legislation, as Armenia, being a developing country, does not have international treaties with a number of developed countries. , when the Republic of Armenia, not having an international treaty with any state, in fact recognized the judicial act of that state within the framework of the principle of reciprocity [6].
  Recognition և Enforcement on the basis of reciprocity presupposes that the requested State links the recognition և enforcement of a judicial act of a foreign state with the recognition սեփական enforcement of its own judicial acts in the respective foreign state.
However, there are different ways of applying the principle of reciprocity in international practice.
 For example, in order to recognize or enforce foreign judicial acts in China, proof is required that the judicial act has been recognized in the country concerned or will be recognized in a similar situation.
 The German model applies reciprocity if a study of the legislation of that state reveals the possibility of recognizing a judicial act.
 And here are the third groupings, for example, Armenia, guided by the presumption of reciprocity, which implies that reciprocity exists, while the opposite has not been proven.
 The reciprocity itself presupposes the implementation of the same reciprocal action, if the Republic of Armenia, choosing the milder version of the principle, acts as a concessionaire by recognizing another state judicial act, it is assumed that in a similar situation the state will recognize its judicial act.
  We face a serious problem only in connection with the recognition of foreign judicial acts in the presence of international agreements ․ Individuals who are unable to obtain protection of their legal interests suffer, and the mildest version of the principle already excludes the situation when the two states wait for mutual recognition, as in this case the RA court does not have a mandatory condition for recognition of a judicial act recognized by another state. the existence of the fact of being.
  Therefore, we believe that the opportunity to challenge the application of the principle of reciprocity should be left to the party against whom the judicial act was made.
We believe that the principle of reciprocity should be applied within the framework of partial applicability, according to which the principle will work if in a similar country there is no case law in the case law of a state requesting recognition or denial of a judicial act, as full reciprocity, in our opinion, can be an extreme approach. to lead to a deadlock.
On the other hand, in order to effectively apply the principle of reciprocity, it is necessary to create a database, which will contain the list of states that have refused the recognition and enforcement of judicial acts of the Republic of Armenia.
 It is at this point that it is necessary to discuss the main shortcoming of the principle of reciprocity.
The problem is that it should be taken into account that judicial acts that have already entered into legal force are submitted to the state for recognition and implementation.
To do this, first of all, it is necessary to focus on the fact that the institution of admissibility and recognition of foreign judicial acts is a means of protection of a subjective right, while the court of the recognized state deprives the person of the right to exercise his right of defense, and the right recognized by the court. becomes unrealizable [5].
We agree with this approach, because if the purpose of judicial recognition is the protection of the already recognized right of a person or its applicability outside the borders of his country, then we face the public-private interest, in the conditions of which the private has priority.
In this situation, in fact, the refusal of one state to recognize a judicial act is a ground for another state to refuse to recognize a judicial act, without taking into account the substantive aspect.
 And if a state refuses to recognize and enforce a judicial act on an unjustified basis, spreading to other states, a situation is created when states oppose each other without taking into account the interests of the individual.
 The principle of reciprocity, of course, applies, but states reciprocate by their unlawful conduct, as a result of which the citizens of the states suffer.
 Moreover, it is possible that the refusal is due to the existence of one of the grounds for refusal.
 The question arises as to the extent to which in such cases it is lawful to refuse the recognition and execution of a judicial act on the basis of mutual denial.
 Therefore, we consider that the best option for the Republic of Armenia would be to renounce both the precondition for the existence of an international treaty and the principle of reciprocity, based on recognition, enforcement, and the absence of grounds for judicial recognition or denial of enforcement.
In the framework of the question, it is necessary to refer to the scope of those works, which, regardless of the existence of an international treaty, are obligatory for the recognition and implementation.
 These are: 1) judicial acts on the legal status of persons, 2) foreign judicial acts on divorce or recognition of marriage as invalid by a foreign citizen, 3) on invalidation of a divorce between a citizen of the Republic of Armenia or a citizen of the Republic of Armenia, a foreign citizen or stateless person.
Unlike the previous CCP, which did not lay down grounds for refusal to recognize judicial acts and reserved them to international treaties, the new CCP defines cases of restraint in the presence of appropriate grounds for rejection (ie, the judicial act has not entered into force under the law of the state where has been made).
First of all, it should be noted that the new Article 351 of the CCP, defining the list of claims submitted to the application, as an attached document, also sets out the requirement to submit a document approved by a foreign court stating that the judicial act has entered into force if it does not follow the content of the judicial act.
 It is clear that the requesting party must present the relevant evidence at the same time as the application, therefore, on this basis, the burden of proof is initially placed on the requesting party.
  Otherwise, the court shall return it, giving the requesting party time to complete the list of documents.
 A problem may arise when the judicial act has not yet entered into force ․ The third-party interested party under Article 354 of the CCP is given the opportunity to re-apply to the competent court in the conditions of review of the same grounds in case of rejection of the application on this ground.
  Therefore, the refusal to recognize and execute a judicial act on this basis is not an obstacle to applying to a court of the Republic of Armenia with the same motion after the entry into force of a judicial act by the state that made it.
 In a number of countries, the state that made the judicial act has separated this founder from the grounds that are not enforceable according to its legislation, but the legislator in this case made a legal distinction, because otherwise it would be impossible to reject the judicial acts that are not enforceable.
  According to the Convention on Legal Assistance in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters (Minsk, 22.01.1993), the Convention on Legal Assistance in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters (Chisinau, 07.10.2002) - Works that do not require execution by their nature should be performed without further proceedings.
The grounds for rejection are three cases: when the judicial act has not entered into force, there is a more advanced decision on the same case at the domestic level, և if it belongs to the exclusive jurisdiction of the recognizing state շարք a number of grounds, for example, simply ignore that judicial acts contradict public order .
 In our opinion, the legislator has rightly established that in the presence of points 1-7 of the grounds for refusal, judicial acts that do not require compulsory execution are subject to rejection.
The next ground for rejection exists when the party has been deprived of the opportunity to participate in the trial.
 First of all, it should be noted that the mandatory document attached to the application, Article 354 of the new CPC, requires proof that the party who did not participate in the trial (...) was notified of the time and place of the trial.
  However, in any case, when determining the appropriateness of a notification, it is necessary to examine whether the notification was made in accordance with the law of the State which made the judgment.
  On the other hand, we think that the approach according to which the factual proof of the defendant's proper notification is put on the party requesting the recognition of the judicial act is not legal.
  In this case, the obligation to prove should have been placed on the party who disputes the fact, and if it was not disputed, it should simply have been considered confirmed.
 In such circumstances, if the respondent's objection is notified, the certificate provided by the foreign court may not be considered sufficient evidence; և the court should be able to request additional evidence.
 The third ground for rejection states that there is a judicial act made by the same court on the same subject, on the same subject, a judicial act made by a court of the Republic of Armenia, or a judicial act made by a court of a foreign country, recognized by a court of the Republic of Armenia. Judicial act entered into legal force by the RA court. In the context of this question, we must pay attention to the simultaneous existence of two conditions.
 In other words, the judicial activation by the RA court is not yet a sufficient basis for refusing the recognition, as it must have entered into legal force.
 This is a novelty, as in the past only the fact of making such a judicial act was sufficient as a ground for rejection.
 This approach is justified, as long as the judicial act has not entered into force, it can be appealed, as a result of which the dispute may remain unresolved.
Judicial act made by a court of another state ճանաչ recognized by a court of the Republic of Armenia. We are talking about the cases when the state that is already claiming the same case has recognized the judicial act.
 In this case, the time limit does not refer to the judicial activation by a foreign state, but to the submission of a motion for recognition of the act before that.
 The provision of such grounds makes it possible to avoid making a decision on identical claims.
 The next ground is aimed at avoiding the identity of the lawsuits, which presupposes the existence of earlier proceedings initiated on the same subject in the RA court on the same subject.
 As part of the basis, we must draw your attention to the edge that appeared earlier.
  It turns out that in each case the RA court must find out in which state the proceedings were initiated earlier, which can cause a special complication, as the proceedings are considered initiated in different countries.
 Therefore, in our opinion, in each case we should be guided by a separate procedure, taking into account the legislation of the country where the submitted decision on recognition was made.
The next ground for rejection stipulates that the case on which the judicial act of the court of a foreign state was made belongs to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Republic of Armenia.
 We must interpret exclusive powers based on the rules of exclusive jurisdiction.
 The problem may arise to the extent that different areas of exclusive competence are defined for each state.
  Therefore, the development of a common approach at the international level is difficult, but the separation of the next ground, the case on which the judicial act of the foreign state has been made, does not belong to the international jurisdiction of the court of that state.
In this context, International Jurisdiction should be interpreted as an area of ​​substantive affiliation with a given judicial act տվյալ not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Justice [3].
The next ground for the rejection is connected with the contradiction of the public order of the RA recognition and execution of the judicial act.
 The term "public order" has not received a unified approach in the international video-practical spheres.
 Examining the international experience, we come to the conclusion that we should define public order in the moral, legal, political and economic spheres, linking it not with the judicial act itself, but with the consequences that may disrupt the normal functioning of the state in the above-mentioned spheres.
 At the same time, the new Article 355 of the Criminal Code allows for the recognition of a foreign judicial act in the presence of an opportunity to recognize it partially, if some legal implications of a foreign judicial act reveal the legislation of the Republic of Armenia (...).
 In other words, it is possible to recognize the judicial act as partial, if a part can contradict the public order of the Republic of Armenia.
  And any case explanation that contradicts the public order should already be left to the competent court of the Republic of Armenia.
Let's refer to the terms of recognition and submission of judicial acts.
 According to the RA Law on Compulsory Execution of Judicial Acts, the writ of execution for the execution of a judicial act may be submitted for execution for the first time within a year, starting from the day when the judicial act enters into legal force (...).
 In its decision EKD / ​​0024/16/12, the Court of Cassation expressed its position on the one-year term, stating that the one-year period for submitting the writ of execution must be calculated from the date of entry into force of the decision of the competent court of the Republic of Armenia.
  Thus, as long as the foreign judicial act is not recognized in the territory of the Republic of Armenia in the manner prescribed by law, it is not subject to execution, regardless of the fact when the mentioned judicial act was made in a foreign state or when it entered into legal force.
  Article 348 of the new CCP stipulates that a foreign judicial act subject to compulsory enforcement may be submitted to the competent court of the Republic of Armenia for recognition or enforcement within three years from the moment the foreign judicial act enters into legal force.
  The period of entry into force of a foreign judicial act shall be determined by the legislation of the state where the judicial act was made.
Hence the right of the interested party to be submitted for recognition within three years from the moment of adoption of the judicial act in accordance with the legislation of the host state.
  The omission of the term is a ground for rejecting the application for recognition, and the one-year term of the writ of execution must be interpreted within the framework of the analysis made by the Court of Cassation.
 However, we think that it would be right to establish an exception, according to which the cases subject to mandatory recognition և execution must be recognized և performed, regardless of the deadline for its submission.
  On the other hand, there is a possible situation when the need for recognition or enforcement arises within three years after the entry into force of the court order, but in unfounded conditions it will not be able to present it within the recognition period.
 In this case, the cases should be considered, in which case the omission of the term will be considered respectable, and the submitted application for recognition will not be rejected.
  At the same time, it is necessary to set a separate statute of limitations, in the expiration of which, regardless of the reasons for not submitting the judicial act, it will not be recognized.
Summing up this scientific work, let us emphasize that the institute of recognition and execution of foreign judicial acts in Armenia is still in the development stage, even with changes in the CCP, it has a number of gaps.
 Let us propose to leave only the judicial recognition as a precondition in the basis of recognition բաց the absence of grounds for refusal of execution, and to bring the grounds for refusal in line with the RA legislation in accordance with the requirements presented in the work.
 In addition, it is necessary to define the scope of the proceedings that must be accepted և recognized without limitation, as well as to include in the version of recognition դիմ application for enforcement ության the statute of limitations.
LITERATURE [2] Petrosyan R. G., Civil proceedings in Armenia, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2007, Page 680.
[3] Tadjosyan P. D., "Recognition and Enforcement of Judicial Acts in Civil Cases of Foreign Courts in the Republic of Armenia", Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2014, pp. 49-50, 102, 170.
[4] HO-211, adopted May 5, 1998.
[6] 12.10.2011 of the Court of First Instance of the Kentron և Nork Marash Administrative District of the city of Yerevan. The decision was made by the Los Angeles Supreme Court on April 26, 2011. on recognizing the decision made in the Republic of Armenia.
[7] Article 59 of the Chisinau Convention, adopted on 07.10.2002.
Avagyan GOAL RECOGNITION AND ENFORDABILITY OF FOREIGN JUDICIAL ACTS IN NATIONAL LEGISLATION Keywords: foreign judicial acts, recognition of judicial acts, principles of judicial acts, execution of judicial acts, term of reciprocity
