FEATURES OF THE MOVEMENT OF THE EARLY WORLD PERIOD, ACCORDING TO THE WORLD'S FIRST PRINTED BOOKS
  In the 17th century, a new stage in the development of the Armenian language began - the world language (early world language, the formation of the world language, the early period of the modern Armenian language).
  The world's first printed books were published in this period, for example, "The Perfect and Perfect Craft of Consideration" (1675), "Clarification of the Spiritual Psalms of the Prophet David" (1687), "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the Whole World" (1699).
  The linguistic examination of these books is very important for the origin of the geography, to form an idea of ​​the language of the period, to study the development of the early geography, the branching of the Armenian language.
Our work is devoted to the study of the language conjugation systems of two of the world's first printed books, The Complete Perfection of Craftsmanship (1675), The Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers, and the World (1699).
In the introduction to the book "Preface to the Complete Perfection of Crafts", we read in the concluding section entitled "The End" that it was intended especially for Armenian merchants: "The enjoyment of the common Armenian merchants".
The world's first printed work is a mathematics textbook.
The preface of the book "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the Whole World" ("Towards my Armenian merchant-loving brother") mentions the purpose of the work, the memorandum states that it was published for Armenian merchants2.
 The first observation of the language conjugation systems of the world's first printed books shows that they contain many new world-realities.
Through them, it is possible to trace how the prototype of the conjugation of Ashkharhabar was expressed in the language of Vagharkhabarian works, to what extent the realities of Eastern-Western dialects were expressed in the originals, serving as a basis for differentiating Armenian-Armenian-Armenian during the further development of the Armenian language.
Examination of the language conjugation systems of the works "Complete և Perfection of Crafts" և "Treasure of Size, Weight, Numbers and Money of the World".
  We present the examination of the language conjugation systems of these works on the basis of their special և descriptive features3.
 We have singled out the most common uses of verbs, which, in our opinion, greatly characterize the language of the given works.
a) In the system of conjugation of the language of the song "Craft Consideration", the present is formed by the (k, k) mode (with the exception of the preface - "Preface grgoys", the ending - "Vakhchan", in which the present Grabarian forms are used).
According to H. The first evidence of Acharyan's particle was given in the 12th century, Mkh. Heratsi has two uses: it comes, it exists.
 Later, in the Cilicia period, for its authors, 1 Craft Perfection's Perfect, Marseille, 1675, p. 145.
  From now on, we will only mention the page from the examples from this book, and the examples will be presented in the correct spelling և punctuation.
2 Vanandetsi J., A treasure of size, weight, number of drams from all over the world, Amsterdam, 1699, page 80.
 From now on, we will mark the page with the copies brought from this book, and they will be presented in the spelling համապատասխան corresponding to the original.
3 From now on, we will use the title of the book "The Perfect and Perfect Craft of Counting Crafts" with the conditional abbreviated version - "Craft Counting", and the book "Treasure of the World in Size, Weight, Number of Money" - "Treasure".
 For easy reading, next to the pages next to the original copies, the titles of the books will be given in conventional versions: "All և Perfect Craftsmanship" - PC, "Treasure in size, weight, number of money all over the world" - C.
has become a common reality1.
 The composition of the present and past imperfect tenses of the borderline tense is considered in Armenian linguistics as a distinguishing feature of the "post-Grabar regions" of Grabar, which is expressed by their composition, with the particle "Without it".
 During the development of the Armenian language, the Armenian language became the dominant language in Western Armenian and became obsolete during its time, but it was typical of some Western dialects.
Among the humble forms of the language of the "craft of counting", the present tenses are the absolute majority.
 Let us bring, from the present two examples, which will teach the way of writing numbers (AH 1), and the tenth that will be said to be zero. (AH2), When a letter is written in the first place, only he will mean Ts. (AH 3),…. Then we pull a notch inside and start gathering the units together. Let's see if the number of contents is written in one letter. (AH 5)
 There is no example of the present in an imperfect derby.
  In the dialect of Tbilissi (Tbilisi), the present tense is composed of u, but R. Ishkhanyan mentions that those horses could not influence the language of the song, because at the time of the publication of the book he was not from Tbilissi, even if he were, his dialect influence could not have any significance2.
In the "Gandz" language conjugation system, the present tense is formed by the ku (k, k) method (except for the preface and the suffix "Memoirs", which are written in Old Armenian), for example, kane (G 21), kj dzgen (G 32 ), will be sold (C 41), will enter (C 62).
  Some of the examples of imperfect tenses found in the Gandz language in the past tense are Grabarian formations, such as weighing (C 7, 8), weighing (C 8), kame (C 50), having (C 72).
It should be noted that the spelling of modifiers is not clear in the language of the works, they are found both together and separately, sometimes even the same verb is found in different scripts, for example, found (AH 29) // found (PC 34), shows (AH 61) // shows (AH 62, 73), gives (C 38) // kutas (C 39), kugay (C 43) // comes (C 54) that this may be a printed reality .
b) The system of conjugation of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness" is characterized by the parallel use of the Grabarian -mk և dialect-vernacular-endings of the first person plural of the prepositional verbs.
  They are used in parallel in the present tense.
 - The superiority of the Mk ending is a Grabar reality.
 In Old Armenian at present the suffixes of the faces are -m, -s, -y, -mq, -yq,.
  They are common to all bows3.
  - The use of the suffix is ​​Middle Armenian և. It is known that in Middle Armenian the endings of the present (imperfect present) tense of the border tense are: -m, -s, -e (y), -q, -q, -4.
 This was later transferred to Eastern Armenian և Western Armenian.
 Interesting is the fact that in the language of the work "Craft Consciousness" there are such uses when the first component of some inflected verbs ends in -nq, the second - -mk, for example, we want to throw out (AH 9, 16), we want to know (AH 34).
  In the system of conjugation of the tongue, there are even uses of the same verb with the suffix -mk և -knq, such as we want to do part-by-part (PC 9) we want to complicate (PC 5) - we want to make a compound (PC 6) we want (PC 15, 70) we put (AH 6) we keep (AH 6) we complicate (AH 6), we bury (AH 7) we want (AH 11, 15, 33) we put (AH 5, 7) we keep (AH 6, 7) The majority in the parallel usage of the suffixes -mk ք is the Grabarian -mk suffix.
 The parallel use of these suffixes is also typical of the first person plural of the auxiliary verb, as we // are.
 This reality is expressed in the past, in the past.
 During the examination we have singled out 1 Acharyan H., Complete grammar of the Armenian language, vol. IV A., Yerevan, 1959, page 389.
2 Ishkhanyan R., New literary Armenian in the XVII-XVIII centuries, Yerevan, 1979, p. 57.
3 Abrahamyan AA, Grabar manual, Yerevan, 1976, page 109.
4 Ghazaryan SD, A Brief History of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1981, p. 253.
19 uses of the positive conjugation of the past tense (some of which have been repeated, not to mention them), one use of the past participle.
 We have used the horse 6 times, we are the horse - 5 times, for example, we are good complexes (PC 17), we are straight creators (PC 16), we are multipliers (PC 42, 44,49), we are complex complexes (PC 9, 11) , 14, 16), we said (AH 88, 90).
In contrast to the work of "Craft Consciousness", in this system of conjugation of the language of "Treasure" there is no observed consonant preface և ending to "Memoir").
c) In the language of the "Craft Consciousness" file, in the third person singular of the singular verb conjugated in the present tense of the present tense, the suffixes of -e, are used in parallel, for example,  -e-teach (Azerbaijani Preface grgoys), teach (AH 1), kushanak (AH 1, 2), add (AH 2), show (AH 3, 4), buy (AH 116), put (AH 119), gain (AH 119) ,n, --kasvi (AH2 , 3, 4), will be put (AH 2, 3), will be written (AH 3, 5), will be (AH 6, 7), will be found (AH 12), will reach (AH 33), will be done (AH 41) , meet (AH 72).
In the present case, the majority are the -s dimensional eggs, which are peculiar to the Armenian-Armenian language, of course, there is a correspondence with the Middle Armenian և partly with the Old Armenian.
The parallel use of these symbols is also typical of the Gandz language conjugation system, for example, say (C20), write (C69), sit (C52), hold (C68).
  In contrast to the language conjugation system of the song "Craft Consciousness", the language conjugation system of "Gandz" is dominated by the letters formed by the's character, which are typical of Eastern Armenian (in the language of "Gandz" the's -e has 18 uses, the's meaning has 32 uses) .
d) In the system of conjugation of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness" I have only the third person singular form of the auxiliary verb in the present tense, for example, what is (PC1), is one craft (PC1), is the letter (PC2), is the last ( AH 2), is equal to (AH 15, 17, 27) // is equal to (AH 16), is greater (AH 17), is necessary (AH 32).
 R. Ishkhanyan mentions that I am the third person singular form of the auxiliary verb, the conjugation corresponds to the Old Armenian, Middle Armenian, Western dialects.
 In contrast to the language of the "Craft" language, in the "Gandz" language conjugation system, the auxiliary verb is also used in conjunction with the third person singular of the present tense, such as pikul ay (G34), ushur ay (G35). ), connect it (C 36), how many (C 65), Ikmin ay (C 68), number a (C 69), number a (C 69), large ay (C 71), easy ay (C 76) .
The use of the horse is typical of the third person singular of the auxiliary verb e, which is typical of Old Armenian, Middle Armenian, and Western dialects, and this horse is typical of Eastern dialects.
 Today, in the colloquial versions of Eastern Armenian, I am the third person singular of the auxiliary verb. Instead of the horse, the egg is very often used.
 R. Ishkhanyan mentions in his work "History of the Language of Armenian Poetry". Ա .a or is the third person verb և this, that, that or this, that, those pronouns and their constituents are among the most used words in the Armenian language, therefore, և their choice of one or the other of the orthodox parallels in Grabarian and usage becomes immediately noticeable in the language ».” 2.
 These figures are immediately noticeable in the language of the works we have examined.
e) The prepositional and past prepositional tenses are typical of the language conjugation system of the "Craft Consciousness" file.
 Early tenses were formed by a dependent derby ending in -s.
  In the found examples, the auxiliary verb is written as separate from the derby, for example, it was (AH 8), the letters are (AH 8), we are straight complex (AH 9, 11, 14, 16), we are moments (AH 36), and together , for example, we kept in mind (AH 6), complicated (AH 8).
 We meet several times in the past tense with the past preposition. We bowed to the horse (AH 128, 130, 132, 139), which, unlike other examples, is composed of the prepositional verb ending in -el.
 Unlike the song "Craft Consideration", in the language of "Gandz" there are no uses of prepositions of the past prepositions.
It should be noted that the preposition with -er is typical of a number of Western dialects, such as Karin, Mush, Kharberd-Yerznka, Arabkir, Shapin-Garahisar.
 1 Ishkhanyan R., New Literary Armenian in the XVII-XVIII centuries, p. 59.
2 Ishkhanyan R., History of the Language of Armenian Poetry, Yerevan, 1978, p. 234.
There are special examples in the Eastern dialects, such as Araratyan, New Julfa, Astrakhan, Agulis, and in the Karabakh dialect Gandzak sub-dialect, in the Karchjan dialect.
 According to the El-i -al version, the preposition is typical of these Eastern dialects, for example, Artsakh, Shamakh, Agulis, Meghri 1.
Thus, in the language of the work "Craft Consideration", the composition of 19 points ending in prepositions is connected with the letters corresponding to the Middle Armenian dialects.
 In Western Armenian, the prepositional verb is formed with the -er ending, in contrast to Eastern Armenian, where it has the -el ending.
f) The conjugation of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness" is characterized by the conjunctions formed by the prepositional verb, the indefinite article or the inflected verb.
  Piti is used as a prepositional verb, it occurs both with the dz and the plural of the first person, which occurs with the parallel suffixes -nq մ -mq - pitink // pitimq.
  It should be noted that the + should + indefinite or should + conjugate verb conjunctions are less than the plural + indefinite conjunction (about 47 points), that is, the plural is used more frequently in the language of the song.
• We have to separate the following points: we have to put (AH 69), we have to load (AH 76, 78, 79), we have to "throw out" (AH 76), we have to look like (AH 109), we have to build (AH 109) )… .Divide (AH 110), we will divide (AH 115), we must multiply բաժ divide by the first (AH 118), they must multiply բ .complicate…. Put (AH 119), will write…. multiply… .barde (AH 121), will… .dne (AH 126, 137),… multiply… .divide (AH 126).
• You have to meet only with the indefinite verb, for example, you have to go back, try (PC 9), leave out the numbers to load գրել write the rest (PC 9-10), have to see (PC 15), try to have (PC 26), We should see (AH 33), we should put under (AH 53), we should write (AH 54), we should not scare (AH 81), we should know (AH 86).
In contrast to this song, in the language of "Gandz" pitink is not found, only the indefinite + indefinite or conjugated verb conjunctions are used, for example, should…. to open (C 72), to do ջ .jam to do (C 76), to have (C 70).
The above-mentioned conjunctions of the verb piti և in the further development of the Armenian language should have corresponded to the compulsory tense of Eastern Armenian, the past tense of Western Armenian, the past tense of the past tense.
 In the works we examined, they express a compulsory, necessary action.
g) One of the features of the language conjugation system of the "Craft Consciousness" song is the use of adverbial conjunctions.
  We have singled out the following uses: it must be placed (AH 5, 18), it must be pulled out. (AH 18), must be written (AH 53), must be complicated (AH 81), must be subtracted (AH 81), must be multiplied (AH 91), must be divided (AH 96, 103), must be built day (AH 107), It will be built in a month (AH 107), it will be built (AH 108, 109), it will be loaded (laid in AH 116).
  It plays the role of a must-have in these relations.
 There are two titles with a derivation in italics: How to complicate a fragment (AH 81), How to subtract a fragment (AH 86), How to multiply a fragment (AH 91), How to divide a fragment (AH 96) .
 R. Ishkhanyan considers such uses N. The result of the influence of some dialects of the Jugha-Yerevan-Artsakh series2.
Such formations are not used in the "Gandz" language conjugation system.
h) The use of V suffixes is considered to be one of the characteristic features of a new literary language.
  This suffix in Eastern Armenian կր is a passive gender in Western Armenian.
 It should be noted that there are no significant semantic-structural differences between the two language branches regarding the conventional gender.
The suffixes with the suffix V are also present in the conjugation systems of the works we have examined, for example, it is pronounced (AH 2, 3, 4), put (AH 2, 3), written (AH 3, 5), used (AH 14) // will be found (Azerbaijan 34.57) // will be found (Azerbaijan 47, 48), will be sold (C 30, 31), will be changed (C 53, 54), will be built (G 64).
  In the system of conjugation of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness", negative verbs are found with the suffix v, could not be removed (AH 20, 21), could not be found (AH 56, 61).
i) In the bilingual conjugation system of "Craft Consideration" there are only a few uses of the time of the first Grabar's day: caritsen, 1 Abrahamyan AA, Armenian derivatives և their ological meaning, Yerevan, 1953, pp. 180-184.
2 Ishkhanyan R., New literary Armenian in the XVII-XVIII centuries, p. 62.
The reader, reminded (Azerbaijani Preface grgoys), one or two applications of the second april ևis cold, as they exceed, litsin, which is used in the mentioned litsin compound tense (Azerbaijani Preface grgoys).
  These are found only in the preface of the book, which, as mentioned above, is written in Old Armenian.
 In the system of conjugation of the language of "Gandz" there are some uses of the second day, for example, statue (C3), arasten (C5), Baestsi (C15, 67), remember (C80), kamijik (C5).
j) In the language of the book "Craft Consideration" there is only one application of the Grabarian imperative: the mentioned lijik, which was used in the part of the song written in Old Armenian called "Vakhchan", as և. և you remember the lijik in the garment of Christ. Amen (146).
 As for the language of "Treasure", here to meet the user of the imperative imperative.
 It should be noted that the imperative imperative has disappeared in Middle Armenian, it has been passed on to the world-famous, some of the authors' words are Old Armenian.
k) One of the characteristic features of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness" is the following: the connection of uzelba's opposite dz + opposite verb, for example, we want to throw out (AH 9), we want to know (AH 34), we want to know (AH 35), we want to complicate (AH ).
 In very few instances the uzelba's opposite horse is associated with the indefinite verb, for example, we want to try (AH 15), we want to divide (AH 73, 98, 102), we want to divide (AH 53), we want to complicate (AH 81), we want to know (AH 112) .
 This reality is not specific to the language of "Treasure", but such an example is encountered, he wants to know (C 75).
 Although some of the above examples adopt a moderator that is not typical of Eastern dialects, but the preposition verb + preposition verb is generally considered typical of Eastern dialects, such as Yerevan, Nor Jugha.
 R. Ishkhanyan notes that this feature is not stable in Western dialects1.
l) In the system of conjugation of the language of the work "Craft Consciousness", the composition of the present tense forms with the non-negative particle ր ending in the dialects typical of the Armenian dialects (in Armenian Armenian the negation of the imperfect present of the imperfect present tense is formed by substituting the indefinite example) It would not stay (AH 11, 13, 44), it would not increase (AH 57), it could not be removed (AH 20, 21, 22, 30), it could not be pulled (AH 24).
 In the language of "Gandz" the composition of the negative does not end in a derby with the ending r, except for the imperative (C5) inhibitory imperative.
  In the language of the "Craft Consideration" file, the negative is the auxiliary verb, it is used in the vernacular, not in the Old Armenian language, for example, it will not be (PC 54), we should not extend it (PC 73), but in the language of "Treasure" it is not negative. Will not lie (C 54).
 In the language conjugation systems of the two parts there are also the following compound forms: do not have (AH 19), do not lengthen (AH 51), do not increase (AH 67), do not connect (C 31), do not (C 32), do not exist (C 35, 37) ), does not have (C 37, 73), do not be surprised (C 54), we do not multiply non-negative particle formations (AH 100), we do not subdivide (AH 100), we do not want (C 5), say no (C 54), as The following negative composition with a conjugation derby is not known (AH 106) // not known (G 68, 69, 70).
Conclusion.
  Summing up the examination of the characteristic features of the language conjugation systems of the above-mentioned books, it can be said that we are dealing with pre-worldly's forms, they reflect the prototype of the conjugation of the world language, the language that has not been normalized yet.
  Below is a table listing the features of the Eastern-Western dialects in the language conjugation systems of the above-mentioned works, with a corresponding division.
 The table shows the verbal realities extracted from the language of the works we have studied, distributed according to the Eastern և Western dialects.
  We think that the table below will give a better idea of ​​the geographical nature of the language convergence systems of the above-mentioned works. past participle of the present tense և past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the past participle of the present participle of the past participle of the singular past participle Use of the third person-edimanish, 1 Ishkhanyan R., New literary Armenian in the XVII-XVIII centuries, p. 62.
 I am the third of the present singular of the auxiliary verb  I am the use of the third person of the present singular of the auxiliary verb (this egg occurs only in the language of "Treasure"),  must + indefinite verb or inflected verb, must + use indefinite past participle (this connection occurs only in the language of the "Craft Consciousness" file),  should + adverbial conjugation usage (this conjunction is not found in the language of "Treasure"), կիրառ use of suffixes with the suffix, զ want the adverb և + the adverb և is more stable in dialects.
is the use of a horse in the face, դրական present positive conjugation forms,  preposition կազմ past prepositional composition in the language of the word "Craft" (the present tense is not used in the language of "Treasure"),  adjacent derby և I use the auxiliary verb present tense (did not know AH106 ), which is accepted in ArmArmenian as a common present tense, կիրառ use of suffixes with suffixes,  negative verbs with a non-negative particle ր ending in a derivation in the language of the work "Craft".
The examination of the language conjugation systems of the above-mentioned books substantiates the fact that in this period (17th century) the verb system is characterized by linguistic features peculiar to Eastern Eastern dialects at the same time.
 Conjugation in the Old World is characterized by linguistic faculties typical of Eastern Armenian dialects, presenting itself as a system of conjugation specific to the common Armenian, and the dichotomy of the Armenian language gradually began to appear in the normalized branches of Eastern Armenian in the 18th century.
Tamara Poghosyan FEATURES OF THE MOISTURE OF THE EARLY REGION OF THE WORLD: ACCORDING TO THE WORLD FIRST PRINTED BOOKS Keywords: early world , Western dialects.
