BLOOD FLOW V. VOSKANYAN'S "BOOK OF WHISPER" NOVEL Varuzhan Voskanyan has chosen a symbolic title - "Book of Whispers" - for his novel, which is written with realistic principles and, moreover, has a documentary conviction.
 This phrase, which is often found in the pages of the novel, symbolizes the unique reaction of our people to the blows received from time throughout history.
 The author's view is especially focused on the current of time, the so-called twentieth century, where "God has been more inattentive than usual."
  In the novel pages we meet the explanation of the nominal similarity. "Deep down, the Book of Whispers" begins with another book, because just as people are born of people, books are born of books and grow up later, - a book written by Grigor Narekatsi a thousand years ago is called the Book of Tragedy.
 The fact that it was a guide to pray in one of the books, and lamentation was often considered the only cure of the time, that is, the lamentation book was used against diseases, and when there was no other way, it was placed under the patients' heads as the last hope of healing.
 The fact that the book is called "Book of Tragedy" and this is "Book of Whispers" does not mean that the way from mourning to whisper was a way of healing.
  It means that at that time people had not yet lost the freedom to mourn, Ն In Narekatsi's hymn to God, the Lord was still in his hands.
 From that mourning to these whispers, my suffering is not replaced by anything else, but the only difference is in the mourning and the silent mourning. "[1]
         Much has been written about the tragedy of the Armenian Armenians at the beginning of the century, and a whole literature on the genocide has been created from the stories of massacres and exile.
 But what "forced" the author to refer to the bloodiest cases of Armenian folk history?
       The author, as it is mentioned in the novel, always as a child always attended the conversation of his grandfathers, his peers, who spoke with such warmth about their lost homeland as if they were there.
The description, mixed with the relentless pain of life, is very apt for very painful recollections, at the same time for the grandson of the third generation of a very vivid family, who spent the time of his life in front of the new television, telling the stories of homeless Armenians. imagining before his eyes the image of the lost homeland.
To mention that only the stories of his relatives, the descriptions of the genocide, the events before and after Zdran, guided the author in writing the "Book of Whispers", will not be fully exhausted.
  The main motivator is the internal irreconcilable, rebellious attitude of the patriotic Armenian intellectual against the blatant falsification that continues today, which the Turkish government uses out of words, diplomacy in general, for the mercenary reasons of the superpowers, in the position of supporting them.
        The logic of life itself reveals in a certain way why the third line of the house of an Armenian with a Nansen passport should be handed over to the court of the thinking part of humanity, the "Book of Whispers".
Armenians had just settled in foreign countries; basic living conditions were needed.
  This established first generation did not integrate into that society at all, and the second generation was already somewhat excluded from that society.
 The fate of the third generation was difficult here, who has the freedom to express themselves in the given society, they would not sin against the truth, saying that not everyone is familiar with their roots.
 It is here that the memory of blood makes itself felt, when the blood "urges" freedom to pursue the necessity of "force" [3], because freedom, which in this case is the third generation of the Armenian genocide victim, is old by its own days. he must live not only his life, but also the life of his great father. "You are old because of our days.
 What we have not experienced will be added to you. "[4]
  The way to freedom is already being pointed out.
To live with great responsibility, his life, the unhappiness of his predecessors, because "he lived a greater responsibility on this earth more than Jesus Christ."
  You must have equal reasons to dare to do so… And if you do not չունեն… Orm must be seen… It is clear that many people on earth will live longer than Jesus for no reason.
 These words, which sound like a guideline from the previous generation, are threatening, obliging.
 Indeed, you need special reasons to live.
          The responsible sense of accountability to his ancestors prompted V. Voskanyan to study the affirmations of the Genocide policy planned and subsequently implemented by the Turkish government, as well as the statements of the Turkish authorities from those days until today that the Genocide did not happen, the deportation of Armenians was to protect them.
 The author, having enough evidence, factual-documentary materials, a collection of open and secret laws of the Turkish authorities to solve the "Armenian Question", materials about the members of "Nemesis" - secret instructions, did not avoid using them in the novel, extracted them as factual evidence Written in quotation marks.
        These contexts not only emphasize what is to be said, but also give validity to the fictional story.
 The novel as a whole is not about the Great Genocide, but about the Genocide, which is an ongoing phenomenon, and will remain so until it is condemned.
     The "Book of Whispers" tells about the Armenian family that survived the Genocide, describing their daily life in a foreign country. The author gives an idea of ​​the lost homeland, with a description of one family, gives an idea of ​​the thousands of such families that had to live, "because without the state people existed, like our homeless people, but without a person who knows the state" [1 ].
The novel summarizes several stories, which, in turn, are separate complete stories.
 The novel begins with descriptions of the life of the author's grandfathers, Karapet Voskanyan և Sedrak Melikyan.
 They both have different ideas about life, but they have both seen the same disasters in their lives. The two exiles were Young Turk-Siberian, one with almost unyielding horror.
 Surviving the fears of these two exiles, they continue their lives, giving their thoughts to their successors.
        Karapet Voskanyan, who was an esthetician by nature, he wanted to photograph the empty mirror without being reflected in it, he wants people not to try to change the world, because they can not do that, because they will just distort it. In his life he always instilled a sense of responsibility in the environment, looking for the "wonderful moment" whose existence he never doubted.
Sedrak Melikyan was a "philosopher of blood", he saw the annihilation of his family, he witnessed all that as a punishment, or it would be "fair" for him to be a victim.
 He heard the slaughter of the executioner, remembered the name of the executioner, told "what did you do with your tribe?"
 Life forced him to avenge himself with a unique egg, to save the blood of his race.
 Speaking about his maternal grandfather, Sedrak Melikyan, this time the author leaves the title of the novel in a unique way.
He mentions that as a child one of his grandfather's favorite games was tying rope cufflinks.
  "Sometimes I imagined the rope as a thick rope tied by a bell that could swing the wind or a solitary arm.
 Then the bell might ring.
 This is how I always imagined the bell, as the most powerful bell of the race.
  Every knot that was clenched like a fist must have been one of my grandfathers.
 The rope was, in fact, a string of clenched fists. "[1]
 And according to the knots of that rope, one could go to the radii, the first of which was the rebellious Melik, who always rebelled, the closest knot, which sounded like a four-wheeled horse.
  The nodes follow each other on the same principle, և the last one seems to be the author, the last line of the big family. The node is very far from the bell;
          If we try to give the formula of the novel, we will get the following. The operations are performed from the first loop to the last loop, which is the question "What should happen now?"
 The unusual answer to that question is remarkable.
  In response to the question "What is there to do?" I will take one last breath. "[1]
  In response to the question, each of the heroes of the novel brings what is "left" of him, in which his identity and existence are hardened. All the "answers" are put in the ark and buried.
The ark containing many answers to a question is buried in the only empty mausoleum of the Armenian cemetery.
 And while burying it, it seemed that maybe the world that knew those who brought "answers" was as narrow as the tomb, and the tomb was as wide as the new world.
  "And so, burying the ark of the Relic, it was proved that such responses of people also die, leaving life to move forward." [1]
 In life, of course, they too will one day be resurrected.
In the novel "Book of Whispers" we have tried to combine several acting people - the process of living, acting, finding the similarities of living eggs, "their" justifications "for living longer than Christ".
Those people are Karapet Voskanyan, Sedrak Melikyan, Sahak Sheytanyan, Misak Torlakyan.
 The main connecting link of this series of heroes is receiving the same blows of fate in the twentieth century after Christ.
  The genocide, in its preceding and subsequent cases, has hit them with every possible "strongest egg", diverting them from the normal way of life, forcing them to go through the seven hellish contents of the earth and greet them.
The above-mentioned heroes are united not only by the same destiny - nationality, but also by the sense of responsibility for the genetic memory of blood, which we will try to address in a subtle way.
Karapet Voskanyan is essentially an artist who thinks that the real creators of history are not the generals, but poets, there is no need to look for real battles under the hooves of horses.
  He was firm in his convictions, like a tree ծառ all his life he tried to change the world in his own way, but not for the better, but from the unstable to the simple.
 Seeing the beauty in simplicity և "Sometimes a German soldier would stop him to take a photo to prove to his family that he was still alive in the war against the Russians."
  Then he took photos of the Russians, who wanted to prove to their families that they were still alive in the war against the Germans.
 Then he took photos of the Germans, who wanted to prove to their families that they were still fighting against the Russians.
  Finally, he photographed those returning home who, having no people to send the photo to, wanted to convince them that they were still alive. ”[1]
The picture of life is different for Sedrak Melikyan, if Karapet Voskanyan was an artist with his convictions, then Sedrak Melikyan was a kind of "blood philosopher".
 He saw with his own eyes the massacre of most of his family, he lived "due" to the punishment-kindness done by the executioner. "To remember, to tell what I did to your tribe."
 The man who saw all this had a unique protection against blood in his life.
  However, it should be noted that based on the defense, he had an obligation to continue living, because blood is alive only when it mixes with blood.
 The genocide deprived Sedrak Melikyan of everything from an early age, disturbed the balance.
  His whole life was spent restoring the original balance, as he lived against the executioners and passed his blood on to the heirs-heirs. "When the blood is tired, it will become a wand.
 To say that blood is like a wand inside you.
 Everyone will rely on his own blood. "[1]
 In his life, as a last message, he urges his heirs to take care of the blood. "Do not forget, your blood is like a sword that will pierce the ground."
 Sedrak Melikyan is able to clarify the initial situation, which "fell out of his way".
The situation is different with Sahak Sheytanyan, who passed through Der-Zor with seven hellish contents on earth, survived, committed an incomparably great act compared to his age, to establish contact with the caravans as a messenger, which, if discovered, was an exact death with the most cruel egg.
 He was the grandson of one of the women who hid artillery bombs under the Armenians during their occupation of the Ottoman Bank.
Sahak Sheytanyan's image is a unique link between Sedrak Melikyan and Misak Torlakyan, for whom living for the former was the only possible means of revenge, and for the latter revenge was the only way of life.
 Sheytanyan is the only character in the Romanian-Armenian reality of the novel who dares to speak about the armed uprising for the first time in a foreign environment, alluding to "Dro's Weapons", a crazy myth for the Diaspora, a unique attempt to liberate the homeland. because he is not crazy enough. ”
  His kind in the idea of ​​Bolshevik flattening, when he had lost any hope of rebellion, must have been in reality, if only to give hope.
 The hope to live in a local time, which was so necessary and vital at that time.
The character of Misak Torlakyan, one of the devotees of "Nemesis" in the novel, is different, who in the novel is the ideological complete manifestation of the above-mentioned image.
 On July 18, 1921, in Constantinople, Misak Torlakyan assassinated Behbud khan Jivanshir, the organizer of the massacre of the Armenians of Trabzon, fulfilling his duty to the innocent people who bore his blood.
 Unlike Sedrak Melikyan, he solved revenge by living, restoring the balance of life, S. Misak Torlakyan, who's so necessary but absent in a balanced life, took revenge on Misak Torlakyan on the principle of "blood against blood", which in this case was no longer restoring a broken balance, but was one of the most important attempts to heal justice in the twentieth century.
 It should be noted here that justice has not yet been restored, as the Turkish authorities have not yet recognized or condemned the genocide.
Since life in a foreign country is somewhat balanced, Armenians continue to live, so it is necessary to "guide" Armenians living outside the homeland with the message of living right. "The blood is the same in all the veins, if you let it run freely, the difference between the executioner and the victim will be recognized."
Thus, if we try to give the above from the point of view of structuralism, we will get the following: 1. Axiomatization - as a basis that does not need further proof, we took blood as a symbol of life և genetic memory.
2. Dissociation - we singled out the characters of Karapet Voskanyan, Sedrak Melikyan, Sahak Sheytanyan, Misak Torlakyan to live their lives, who are only different in their lives. They all have one goal: to live by the essence of their blood.
3. Association - in general, what associations did they have with the hero of the novel?
4. Identification - the purpose of the heroes is the same, you are different due to the difficulties caused by life.
5. Integration - integration is measured by the intensity of blood flow. For Sedrak Melikyan, blood flows slowly as a symbol of life, for Sahak Sheytanyan, he is rebellious, for Misak Torlakyan, he is a rebel.
It should be noted that with the presented ideas, the characters in their spheres are complete, obtained և successful, and taken as a whole, complement ևcontinue each other.
LITERATURE [1] Voskanyan V., "The Book of Whispers", Yerevan, 2014, pp. 430, 208, 190, 304, 17,448, 457, 109, 57, 419.
[2] Տուրգենև Ի. S., "Selected works", Yerevan, 1985.
[3] Տուրգենև Ի. S., "Selected Works", Prose Poems, Yerevan, 1985.
[4] NECESSITAS, VIS, LIBERTAS (Necessity, Power, Freedom), p. 679.
Mihran Hovhannisyan, Yeghiazaryan Samvelyaryan FLOW V. VOSKANYAN'S "BOOK OF WHISPER" NOVEL Keywords: Varuzhan Voskanyan, blood flow, "Book of Whispers", massacre.
