EASTERN PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM IN PARLIAMENTARY DISCOURSE OF ARMENIA, GEORGIA AND MOLDOVA 2009 by the European Union (EU) The Eastern Partnership (EaP) program, which has been implemented since 2007, has undergone many changes over time and has undergone various developments in Armenia, Georgia and Moldova.
  The method of semi-voiced in-depth interviews was chosen to study the existing approaches to the development of relations with the EU within the EaP within the framework of the EaP.
 2017 from November to 2018 Eleven representatives of the parliamentary factions of the three countries were interviewed in February.
 Before proceeding to the analysis of the interviews, it is necessary to introduce the political forces represented in the parliaments of the three countries.
The last parliamentary elections in Armenia will be held in 2017. Representatives of the two parties ("Republican Party of Armenia", "Armenian Revolutionary Federation"), two blocs of parties ("Tsarukyan" »" Yelq ") took parliamentary seats in the National Assembly (NA) on April 2, forming four parliamentary factions with seats. with the following distribution: "Republican Party of Armenia" (RPA) faction - 58 seats, "Tsarukyan" faction - 31 seats, "Yelq" faction - 9 seats և "Armenian Revolutionary Federation" (ARF) faction - 7 seats.
  The total number of deputies is 105.
2017 On May 11, a coalition was signed between the RPA and the ARF.
 The next parliamentary elections are planned to be held in 2022.1.
The last parliamentary elections in Georgia will be held in 2016. As a result, four political forces took seats in the parliament in the following proportions: "Georgian 1 2015 As a result of the referendum held in Armenia on December 6, 2006, the new constitution of the country was adopted, according to which Armenia is transitioning to a parliamentary system of government.
 The new constitution enters into force in 2018. Since April, after the end of the term of office of the incumbent President Serzh Sargsyan.
Dream-Democratic Georgia "bloc - 115 seats," United National Movement "party - 27 seats," Georgian Patriots Alliance "- 6 seats," Industry will save Georgia "party - 1 seat, 1 seat won an independent candidate.
  The total number of deputies is 150.
 The next parliamentary elections are scheduled for 2020.
The last parliamentary elections in Moldova were held in 2014. As a result, the seats were distributed among the five forces in the following proportions: "Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova" (MHSK) - 25 seats, MLDK - 23 seats, ICO - 21 seats, MDK - 19 seats - "Liberal Party" - 13 seats .
 However, in most of the Moldovan parliamentary factions serious changes took place in the following years, the ratio of their seats changed.
As a result of the influx of deputies from the MLDK, the IOC, and the Liberal Party, the MDP faction expanded, the European People's Party of Moldova was formed, and some deputies became independent.
 At present, the seats in the Moldovan parliament are distributed in the following proportions: MDK - 42 seats, MHSK - 24 seats, "Liberal Party" - 9 seats, "European People's Party" - 9 seats, ICO - 6 seats, MLDK - 5 seats, independent deputies - 6 seats .
  The total number of deputies is 101.
  The next parliamentary elections will be held in 2018.
In order to present the existing approaches to relations with the EU in a more systematic way, the information obtained from the analysis of in-depth interviews is grouped into three main categories: .
It can be said that there is a consensus among the parliamentary forces of Armenia on the EU.
  With the latter 2 2010 A new constitution was adopted in a referendum held in Georgia on October 15, 2013, according to which after the presidential elections in 2012 The elected parliament formed a new government, thus beginning the country's parliamentary rule.
 2012 year. As a result of the parliamentary elections, the "Georgian Dream" party founded by billionaire businessman Bidzina Ivanishvili won, and the "United National Movement" party led by incumbent President Mikheil Saakashvili lost, becoming the opposition.
3 2000 After the constitutional amendments, the parliamentary system of government is used in Moldova.
  As already mentioned, in 2009-2012. During that time, the Moldovan parliament was unable to elect a president, as no political force won a sufficient number of seats.
Cooperation is generally perceived as a source of comprehensive development and reform, but is not considered a foreign policy direction.
Armen Ashotyan, Chairman of the RA NA Standing Committee on Foreign Relations, considers that during the years of the EaP implementation the EU has contributed to ensuring a safe and prosperous life through democratization in Armenia4.
  According to the representative of the RPA faction, the EU, as a structure created by the experience of the establishment of nation-states, is a development guideline for Armenia5.
 Besides, he emphasizes that Armenia is in the field of European values ​​and civilization, it would be illogical not to develop relations with the EU.
According to the respondent, the primary benefit of Armenia-EU cooperation is the development of domestic political culture.
  "From our system of government and the role of parties to civil society and fundamental freedoms, the role of the EU, the Council of Europe and the European family is great in our progress," he said.
  In the opinion of Naira Zohrabyan, MP of the "Tsarukyan" faction, Chairman of the RA NA Standing Committee on European Integration, the main benefit of cooperation with the EU is the development of civil society, which, however, did not contribute to the development of democracy.
  "I can say that after the participation in the EaP, the civil society in Armenia developed very quickly and became a flag bearer.
 Today we have a society that is one step ahead of political parties.
  "The national platform of the EaP Civil Society Forum is among the six partner countries in terms of agenda setting," he said. Zohrabyan7.
  However, according to him, the EU has not been able to effectively present the benefits of cooperation to the public, as a result of which the EU has recently taken root as a value system that does not conform to national traditions, causing a backlash8.
  According to Artak Zeynalyan, a member of the RA NA Standing Committee on Foreign Relations, member of the RA NA Standing Committee on Foreign Relations, Armenia's involvement in the EaP promotes the spread of European values, which is in Armenia's interests. և We want it to happen 4 Interview with Armen Ashotyan, Yerevan, 13-12-2017.
5 Interview with the representative of the Republican faction of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, January 19, 2018.
6 In the same place.
7 Interview with Naira Zohrabyan, Yerevan 27-11-2017.
8 In the same place.
he »9.
 At the same time A. Zeynalyan believes that as a side effect, the EaP can contribute to the strengthening of democratic values ​​in Azerbaijan, which will have a positive impact on regional stability10.
 According to Armen Rustamyan, head of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun faction and member of the NA Standing Committee on Foreign Relations, »11.
  According to him, cooperation with the EU is especially important in terms of building and strengthening parliamentarism, as the best international experience is in Europe.
 However, A. According to Rustamyan, it is impossible to build internal democracy with external intervention. it is conditioned by internal resources12.
 Therefore, cooperation with the EU can only serve as external assistance.
There is clearly a common approach to the EU among the Georgian parliamentary forces. It is, of course, considered a priority of the country's foreign policy, and EU membership is a priority.
 2008 Such an approach to the EU after the severance of relations with Russia is not surprising.
In the new realities, it is, in fact, the only realistic foreign policy and geopolitical choice of the country.
According to Isko Daseni, a member of the Georgian Dream bloc and a member of the Georgian parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee, the EU is the main driving force behind Georgia's democratization: "The EU has promoted a peaceful change of government in Georgia; today it is strengthening democratic governance."
 I. According to Dasseni, the signing of the PC with the EU and visa liberalization allow Georgia to be even closer to the "European community", which significantly contributes to the country's geopolitical goal of EU membership14.
  He agrees with Sergi Kapanadze, Deputy Speaker of the Georgian Parliament, Member of the United National Movement, Member of the European Integration Committee, who believes that Georgia's membership in the EaP has greatly contributed to democratization of the country, judiciary and security 9 Interview with Artak Zeynalyan, 24-11-2017 .
10 In the same place.
11 Interview with Armen Rustamyan, 18-12-2017.
12 In the same place.
13 Interview with Isco Dasseni, online, 16-02-2018.
14 In the same place.
for the improvement of the sphere 15.
 Georgia-EU PC is defined by the latter as follows: "The Association Agreement, especially the Deep" Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement ", is important for institutional stability.
  Through them, it is possible to enshrine the principles of market economy and property rights in the Georgian legislative field, to be rooted in Georgian society ”16.
 The Alliance of Patriots of Georgia fully supports full European integration in the field of foreign policy.
  Ada Marshania, a member of the party and a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Georgian Parliament, says. "After the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU, visa liberalization, Georgia's next step should be full membership in the EU, the whole Georgian society should strive for it" 17.
In the case of Moldova, the parliamentary approaches to the EU are more different than in the case of Armenia and Georgia.
 Here, both the issue of national identity and the ideological differences of the parties have led to the formation of different parliamentary positions on the development of relations with the EU.
  Whether Moldova's declaration of European integration is a foreign policy priority, Moldova has come as close as possible to the EU (like Georgia) with the signing of the DCFTA and visa liberalization, yet there is no common approach to foreign policy among the country's parliamentary forces. .
Violeta Ivanov, a member of the MDC parliamentary faction and chair of the Committee on Foreign Policy and European Integration, sees the EU as a force for Moldova's overriding interests that can significantly improve the country's economy. "We try to use cooperation with the EU to improve living conditions and democratization in Moldova, at the same time developing relations with the CIS countries. 15 Interview with Sergi Kapanadze, online, 02-12-2017.
16 In the same place.
17 Interview with Ada Marshania, online, 16-12-2017.
18 It should be noted that although the MDC has a majority in the Moldovan parliament, the post of President in 2016 Igor Dodon, the leader of the MHSK, who, unlike the MDK, has reservations about the EU, won the October 30 by-elections.
  Therefore, in contrast to Armenia and Georgia, there are significant differences in the foreign policy course between the President of Moldova and the parliamentary majority.
with "19.
  IHRC MP Adrian Lebedinski, Member of the Moldovan Parliament's Committee on Foreign Policy and European Integration, said that Moldova's participation in the EaP did not significantly contribute to the country's democratization and development, as "people-parties" continue to operate in Moldova and the political system is unstable.
 According to him, as a result of the EaP, Moldova has found itself in such a situation that the country's authorities are simply trying to get EU financial support. "The Association Agreement does not bring significant economic and political benefits to Moldova.
  It was signed on the eve of the parliamentary elections.
Thus, the authorities were trying to show the population that Moldova is close to EU membership, to get parliamentary seats. ”21
  They also adhere to the MDC approaches. Representatives of the two parties that formed the "European Integration Alliance" with the latter, the "Liberal Party", the MLDK, as well as the "European People's Party", which consider Moldova to be naturally connected with the "European community".
  For example, Valeriu Gilecki, Vice-Speaker of the Moldovan Parliament, Member of the European People's Party, Member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and European Integration, who states: "Deep relations with the EU can stimulate the recovery of the Moldovan economy. We must try to get the most out of the implementation of the Association Agreement, striving for full integration."
 The ICO has changed its approach to the EU over time, and at present it is difficult to clearly outline it.
  In the 2000s, during Vladimir Voronin's presidency of the ICO majority in parliament, the country's authorities largely supported deepening relations with the EU, declaring European integration a foreign policy priority.
  2009 After losing the parliamentary elections, the ICO adopted a Eurosceptic approach, but in 2014 On the eve of the parliamentary elections, he returned to the pro-European political course.
From a geopolitical point of view, the development of relations with the EU causes more significant positional differences than the general approach to the EU.
  The EU and Russia, being the most influential players in the post-Soviet region, have become small states, in this case Armenia, Georgia և Mall 19 Interview with Violeta Ivanov, online, 11-02-2018.
20 Interview A ․ With Lebedinski, online 19-02-2018.
21 Ibid.
22 Interview V ․ With Giletsky, online, 18-01-2018.
The main directions of Dova's foreign policy orientation.
Having scarce natural resources and being involved in ethno-political conflicts, the three countries had limited potential to pursue a self-sufficient foreign policy, which is clearly reflected in the positions of the parliamentary forces.
Both Armenia and Moldova are in different regional situations, they have different internal and external problems, but in the case of both countries there is the problem of maintaining balanced relations between the EU and Russia. Even the most pro-European or extreme pro-Russian parties emphasize the need for more balanced communication with the two forces, mainly due to security issues.
Armen Ashotyan այլ Another representative of the RPA faction thinks that in different spheres, especially in the security sphere, the close relations between Armenia and Russia are natural, as the EU contributes to regional stability, but does not have the political and military potential to guarantee it23.
  According to them, Armenia's foreign policy is mainly based on the security factor, where it's a priority; at present it has no rival with the strategic alliance with Russia, the CSTO and the Russian military base in Armenia24.
 Therefore, both respondents consider Armenia's accession to the EEU as a result of a normal process, as it was a pursued strategy to which there was no alternative25.
  A. According to Ashotyan, Armenia's entry into the EEU was conditioned by economic factors as well, as Armenian goods, labor and services are more competitive in the Russian market than in the European one26.
  According to Naira Zohrabyan and Artak Zeynalyan, deputies of "Tsarukyan" and "Yelq" factions, Armenia's membership in the EEU was a "forced political choice", as the economic benefits of the EEU membership are not visible at present27.
  However, both figures agree that EU involvement in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is declarative in nature; և No alternative security models have been proposed by the EU28.
 ARF MP Armen Rus 23 Interviews with Armen Ashotyan ներկայաց Representative of the RA NA RPA faction.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid.
26 Interview with Armen Ashotyan.
27 Interviews with Naira Zohrabyan և Artak Zeynalyan 28 In the same place.
According to Tamyan, Armenia has been able to maintain an effective balance between the EU and Russia ել to cooperate with both sides in the most favorable framework for Armenia29.
Moldova in 2014 signed, և 2016 Azerbaijan has already entered into force with the EU, but even the country's pro-European forces are not ready to reduce the level of relations with Russia as a result.
 MDC representative V. Ivanov fully supports Moldova's full European integration, but according to him, it should not have a negative impact on relations with Russia. "We are a small country, we depend on the dynamics of relations between the main regional powers.
  "We are already an associate member of the EU, because that is the logical policy of Moldova, but at the same time we are sure that it will not disrupt cooperation with Russia."
 This approach is anchored in the discourse of the MLMK, the Liberal Party and the European People's Party.
 The representative of the latter V. Giletsky notes that Moldova has many ties to the EU and should strive to join the latter, but he considers Russia a partner of Moldova, with which it is necessary to maintain mutually beneficial relations31.
MHSK representative A. From a geopolitical point of view, Lebedinski is skeptical of deepening relations with the EU, saying that Moldova should not lose its traditional partner, Russia, and that cooperation with the EU should be limited to certain areas, as the latter has no role in resolving the Transnistrian conflict. Russia, on the other hand, has enormous resources to influence their dynamics32.
In the case of Georgia, there is a noticeable mutual consensus among the parliamentary forces in terms of geopolitical positioning.
  As a result of tense relations with Russia, it occupies a secondary place in Georgia's foreign policy agenda.
  Both the ruling and opposition parties consider full European integration to be an unconditional foreign policy priority of the country, and Russia is generally perceived only as a threat and not as a partner.
 In other words, the parliamentary discourse of Georgia almost lacks the image of the EU and Russia - the need to maintain a balanced relationship.
 Representative of "Georgian Dream" bloc I. This is 29 Interview with Armen Rustamyan.
30 Interview with Violeta Ivanov.
31 Interview V ․ With Giletsky.
32 Interview A ․ With Lebedinsky.
notes with a sigh. "Our main foreign policy goal is the EU's membership in NATO, which Russia is trying to prevent in every possible way - to divide Georgia, to create trade barriers, etc.
However, we have come a long way; in time we have realized that we can do without Russia. ”33
  S. Kapanadze, a member of the United National Movement party, has a similar position.
  A., a member of the "Georgian Patriots' Alliance", has a slightly softer position on relations with Russia. "We are in favor of full European integration, but it is in Georgia's national interest to maintain certain relations with Russia," said Marshania, who sees European integration as Georgia's top foreign policy goal, but also said it needed to find ways to normalize relations with Russia. .
In the next part of the article, based on the analysis of the previously presented realities, the prospects and main obstacles to the further development of the relations between Armenia, Georgia and Moldova are discussed.
The representative of the Republican faction of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia, defending the need for EEU membership, considers that the relations with the EU are "important for Armenia" and now it is necessary to take measures for their development, as "the new agreement is a milestone, after which it can deepen to be cooperation ”36.
  Chairman of "Tsarukyan" faction N. Zohrabyan considers AWSC to be the key to success given to Armenia, the use of which depends on the effectiveness of the planned reforms. "Armenia has been given a homework, it is necessary to show political will to solve it" 37.
 Or the representative of "Yelq" faction A. Zeynalyan thinks that in 2013, however, it was possible to sign Azerbaijan with the EU, but, according to him, there are still wide opportunities for cooperation with the EU. "We could not sign the Republic of Azerbaijan because there was pressure from Russia, but today, fortunately, we have a new document, 33 Interview with Isco Daseni.
34 Interview with Sergi Kapanadze.
35 Interview with Ada Marshania.
36 Interview with the representative of the RPA faction of the RA NA.
37 Interview with Naira Zohrabyan.
we must try to move forward. ”38
 Chairman of the ARF faction A. Rustamyan sees the further foreign policy development of Armenia in the development of balanced relations with the EU and Russia. "Armenia must use the opportunities provided by complementarity, in the spheres where the interests of the EU and Russia do not contradict.
 Only in this way is it possible to solve the socio-political problems facing the country ”39.
Thus, the foreign policy agenda of Armenia for at least the next few years is clear - it will probably not undergo significant changes, as the parliamentary elections in Armenia took place in 2017, fixing the parliamentary mandates until 2022.
  This period will allow the current authorities to strengthen the adopted foreign policy line, ensuring stable membership in the EEU and the effective implementation of the ASEAN.
  It can be said that Armenia has already avoided being the focus of the EU-Russia-geopolitical clash, creating an opportunity to combine military and economic ties with Russia for political modernization, cooperation with the EU in other social spheres.
The hostile attitude towards Russia is mainly present among the Georgian parliamentary forces, the compromise approach is not even discussed by either the government or the opposition, due to the basic perception that Russia can not interfere in Georgia's European integration in any way.
  In particular, the deputy of the "Georgian Dream" bloc I. Dasseni believes that Georgia should move towards full European integration, that is, towards EU membership, and the settlement of conflicts depends on the negotiating approach of the Russian Federation. "Conflict settlement may take a long time, as Russia contributes in every way to Abkhazia and Russia. In Ossetia to take a tough stance towards the rest of Georgia.
  It is difficult to say what the reaction will be from Russia if Georgia joins the EU, but it is the same, we must strive for it. ”40
  United National Movement MP S. Kapanadze sees withdrawal of Russian troops from Georgia as the only solution to the conflict in the near future, but does not expect it in the near future, which is why he believes that European integration should not be linked to it, as Russia is the same. With Artak Zeynalyan.
39 Interview with Armen Rustamyan.
40 Interview with Isco Dasseni.
will continue to maintain military control in Abkhazia In Ossetia. "We can not negotiate with Russia over the territories, we can only negotiate over the withdrawal of Russian troops."
In this issue, only the representative of the "Georgian Patriots Alliance" party A. Marshania, who has a relatively mild position, believes that it is necessary to find a solution to the conflict through dialogue, which can only contribute to European integration. "We do not dispute in any way the priority of the European path, but it is not possible to live in permanent military danger" 42.
Thus, it is obvious that in the coming years Georgia will continue to pursue its main foreign policy line, will strive to become a full member of the EU as soon as possible.
  It is obvious that this process will still be combined with tense relations with Russia.
Georgia's next parliamentary elections will be held in 2020, but even in the event of a change of government, no change in foreign policy is expected.
  It should be noted that although Georgia's priority is full membership in the EU, but Abkhazia և Hv. In the context of the conflicts in Ossetia, it is still difficult to expect the EU to grant Georgia the status of a potential candidate for membership.
Opinions on European integration differ in the Moldovan parliamentary discourse.
  MDC representative V. Ivanov believes that Moldova has done most of the steps necessary to join the EU, and expects that Moldova will receive candidate status in the future. "We have gone through various difficulties, but we have managed to reach the maximum of this moment, the association.
  In a few years we will be eligible to become an EU member ”43.
  MHSK representative A. has the opposite position. According to Lebedinski, there is no motivation to seek EU membership, as it can only restrict Moldova's freedom of association with third countries. "At the moment, the associated status is more favorable, because we can speak on an equal footing with the EU, and after membership, the majority will make a decision for us."
  These two parties play a decisive role in shaping Moldova's foreign policy today, as the MDK, forming an alliance with the Liberal Party, has a majority. 41 Interview with Sergi Kapanadze.
42 Interview with Ada Marshania.
43 Interview with Violeta Ivanov.
44 Interview A ․ With Lebedinsky.
In the parliament, he holds the post of the Prime Minister and most of the ministerial portfolios, and the MHSK holds the post of the President.
 Such divergent positions can lead to unpredictable consequences, especially since 2018. Moldova will hold parliamentary elections, as a result of which the formation of the government and the further development of the country will depend on the distribution of parliamentary seats.
  At the same time, according to public opinion polls, about 40% of the votes will go to the MHSK, 16% each to the MDC and the "Action-Solidarity" party, led by Maya Sandu in 2016. in the presidential elections I. Together with Dodon, the second round passed, and about 7% - the IOC ՀԿ to the "Dignity և Right" party45.
  Even if Azerbaijan is not annulled if the ICRC comes to power, EU membership will temporarily lose its relevance in Moldova's foreign policy and relations with Russia will intensify.
Another precondition for European integration for Moldova is the connection with Romania.
 Many Romanian-speaking Moldovans can obtain Romanian citizenship, thus becoming EU citizens, which, of course, will primarily contribute to the already worrying emigration.
  It is theoretically possible that it will join Romania, through which Moldova will automatically become a member of the EU.
 In this case, Moldova will not need to meet the Copenhagen criteria through a "long negotiation" process.
  However, this idea is not widespread at present, especially in the conditions of the influential role of pro-Russian political forces, its implementation is not realistic.
Mher Hakobyan "EASTERN PARTNERSHIP" PROGRAM IN PARLIAMENTARY DISCURT OF ARMENIA, GEORGIA AND MOLDOVA Keywords: "Eastern Partnership", parliamentary discourse, foreign policy orientation.
