ARMENIAN HATE IN AZERBAIJAN Tell me what moods prevail in the minds of children, I will tell you about the character of the next generation.
E. Berk One of the issues on the agenda of the two newly independent Armenian states, the whole Armenian people, has been the valuation, preservation and development of their own identity from day one, against which the entire Azerbaijani political machine, from the lowest-ranking official to the president, is directed.
The anti-propaganda launched more than two decades ago has gained new momentum due to the advancement of the latest technologies.
 But it is more important that we focus not only on what happened, but on the whole event.
  As we know, the policy aimed at sowing hatred of Armenians, aggression, falsification and misappropriation of historical and cultural values, and the realization of a number of other insidious goals is not a novelty. The roots are very deep and have been planted for a long time.
 Such a policy has been repeatedly mentioned by Azerbaijani President Ilham Ali "does not back down from his word", his goal was to restore the "historic lands" of Azerbaijan1, one of the many "dirty methods" used by Azerbaijan to sow hatred of Armenians in Azerbaijan or to assimilate the history of others. through the creation of its own history.
  An integral part of this policy is the sowing of anti-Armenianism, one of the most prominent of which is I. This is Ali's recent statement, which states: "Youth, children must live with the idea of ​​returning our historical lands, including Armenia" 2.
The purposeful bases of the policy pursued by Azerbaijan are presented more accurately by A. Sargsyan. "The multi-faceted falsifications observed in Azerbaijan are aimed at undermining the historical and legal basis for the self-determination of the Artsakh Armenians, to create an Azerbaijani with a claimant identity to Artsakh, as well as to inflame the atmosphere of anti-Armenianism."
The most common և large-scale platforms for sowing xenophobia are literature, school textbooks, the media, and so on.
  "Tell me, 1 Excerpt on January 22 in Ganja http.
//www.ilur.am/news/view/23823.html.
2 See ibid.
3 See A. Sargsyan, Anti-Armenianism in Azerbaijan. at the crossroads of recent's authoritarianism, Yerevan, 2013, p. 13.
(Treasure) From Ali's speech.
  See in more detail, writes Burke, - what moods prevail in the minds of children, "I will tell you about the character of the next generation."
  From here it becomes clear what is the real purpose of the Azerbaijani school textbooks that sow hatred and violence.
  At the same time, the factor of Azerbaijan's "caviar-petrodollar policy" should be emphasized, due to which the events taking place on the front line are distorted from a number of high European forums, the situation in Azerbaijan and Armenia is, to put it mildly, biased.
  But there are a few facts to note: • Azerbaijan's resources are not unlimited, eventually the petrodollars2 will be used up, which creates the "office-based" history of Azerbaijan.
• In the current anti-propaganda struggle, Armenia is behind Azerbaijan., Definitely, our resources in this field, despite the agenda of the issue, are limited.
• We have an advantage only insofar as we try to defend our own, and Azerbaijan tries to edit history կեր to make history in the background.
In order to avoid misunderstandings of the meaning or wording in the following text, it should be noted that it is wrong to use the word "Azerbaijani", because such a nation simply does not exist, but there is a territory called Azerbaijan, and those who live there can be called Azerbaijanis.
  A. made clarifications on this issue. Manasyan, who writes. "At the beginning of the 20th century, the territory under the control of present-day Azerbaijan north of the Araks or part of it gained independence.
  It was decided in advance that it would be called "East-South Transcaucasian Republic", but "Musavat" was able to change this decision and rename the country "Republic of Azerbaijan".
  By this decision, the local peoples, who before that were called Turks or Caucasian Tatars by common names, became Azeris already in the 30s.
 This is how the Azerbaijani "nation" was born3.
Before the intensification of Azerbaijan's anti-Armenian policy, Azerbaijan tried to drown the newly independent Artsakh in blood, trying to privatize the Armenian history and historical territory with weapons.
 The result was the war imposed on the Armenians.
  A. Manasyan explains the event in detail. "Azerbaijan was trying to bring the newly independent republic to its knees by force of arms, to annihilate its population.
  Artsakh accepted the challenge և, as the subsequent events showed, came out of the ordeal with honor ”4.
  It should be emphasized that the Azerbaijani side 1 See "Aphorisms about childhood և children". http:
//www.qezhamar.com/?p=34937, 30.05.2013.
2 See S. Manukyan, three quarters of Azerbaijan's state budget is financed by the oil sector.
//times.am/?l=am&p=4456, 05.02.2012.
3 See A. Manasyan, A. Gondyan, Nagorno Karabakh. how it happened…, Yerevan, 2011, page 19.
4 See ibid., P.
The claims that the Armenians won due to the mercenaries of foreigners and militants are, to put it mildly, absurd, as the socio-economic situation in the Republic of Armenia was so dire that there were no means to meet basic necessities, so it was obviously impossible to use mercenaries.
 We can not ignore the words of the Chechen militant Shamil Basa. "Fighting in Artsakh (Karabakh) is not expedient, the Azerbaijanis cannot, you will not defeat the Armenians.
 We had come to fight in Karabakh not for titles, but for the idea of ​​jihad, but when we arrived and saw the situation, we realized that there was no sign of jihad.
  There were very few high-ranking officers in the Azerbaijani army who could be trusted.
 The Armenians were better prepared for the war… Give me twenty Armenian Fida, և I will conquer all of Russia ”1.
Names play an essential role in the formation of identity or change of its nature, about which H. Petrosyan writes. "To call նշանակում means to create" 2.
  As a result of the above-mentioned two quotations, we can mention that, being called Azerbaijan, they "created" Azerbaijan and Azerbaijan, but at least it is ridiculous.
 In other words, by naming within minutes, they do not create a nation, let alone its centuries-old culture, history and identity.
 And to overcome the identity crisis, they started to use all possible and impossible means.
  We can single out two main methods in their policy of overcoming the "Azerbaijani" identity crisis.1. Exalt by humiliating.
  This method is the most popular in today's Azerbaijan, because they, trying to show the piety of their own nation, exemplary, superiority over other nations, all possible positive attributes that can be attributed to them, want to increase their "qualitative advantage" over Armenians, slandering , humiliating and distorting the Armenian identity.
2. Sinusoidal policies or quests in the past.
  With the help of this method, they find a root phenomenon in history that does not have an unequivocally established owner, they try to appropriate it, to present it as their own, and in case of failure they do not care, because, by and large, they do not lose anything.
Considering it necessary to use the epic as the best "encyclopedia" of the nation's worldview and value system in the examination of national identity, it should be stated that, based on logic alone, the so-called Azeri people simply do not have an epic, A number of other facts, including the three approaches of the Oghuz epic, can be attributed in part to the present-day Azeris 1 See Torosyan D., Shamil Basa on Armenians և Artsakh, http.
//azatatenchhayer.blogspot.com/2014/01/Shamil-Basaevy-hayeri-ev-Arcaxi-masin.html, 26.01.2014.
2 See Petrosyan H., The traditional symbols of the Armenian identity և their modern manifestations. The Ark of the Ark և The Lost Paradise, "Problems of Armenian Identity in the 21st Century: Conference Materials", Yerevan, 2013, p. 132.
3 It is better known in the professional literature as the "Book of Korkut" under the names "Deda Korkut" or "Book of my grandfather Korkuta".
to the ancestors, where, as we will see, the basic principles of identity building are beheading, shedding blood, killing people, and so on.
 About this Professor H. Mirzoyan writes. "It is not a secret that in all the epics" murder "and" bloodshed "take place, but all that is done or shown during the direct clash of the compulsory forces on the battlefield.
Like all other epics, the Oghuz epic is rich in such insights.
  However, it differs from all other epics in that beheading and bloodshed take place not only during a clash with enemies on the battlefield, but also in ordinary living conditions, that is, beheading and bloodshed are seen as a criterion for the maturation and masculinity of a boy and a mature man. for it is a condition of courage, honor and dignity. ”1
  H. After the publication of this article by Mirzoyan, he rightly quoted the Armenian folk saying about the uproar in Azerbaijan: "The thief is the first to shout, catch the thief."
  We all know in the Armenian epic "Sasna Tsrer" the reasons for the boy to become a man, the means of gaining and preserving human dignity, glory and honor, as well as the circumstances and conditions of killing a person or shedding blood.
  The themes taught in the educational system of Armenia և their nature are a brilliant հակ contrast of the Azerbaijani reality and the epic (in a positive sense).
  Naturally, some passages from the "Sasna Tsrer" epic are included in the literature of the elementary-middle grades, in particular, in the textbook of the subject "Literature" of the 6th grade, where the quoted passage says: Who is asleep, stay awake, Who is awake, horses! saddle, Who is saddle, tie weapons, Who is saddle, get up, ride, Do not say, David came thief-thief, thief-thief went 2.
A circumstance is noteworthy here: the above-mentioned "who is asleep, stay awake" is more than an accurate answer to the act of Ramil Safarov who shot the sleeping Armenian officer Gurgen Margaryan3.
  In a number of other parts of our epic, many aspects of the value system and identity of Armenians are shown, the most emphasized of which are the respect for the great and the peaceful population, if, of course, they can be called peaceful, the tendency not to massacre.
Hearing the plea of ​​the old man in Melik's army, David does not kill the villagers who were forcibly brought to fight, but continues the fight with Melik4.
 The non-massacre of the villagers is opposed by the regular violations of the tripartite ceasefire agreement by Azerbaijan, as a result of which the enemy opens fire on peaceful, unarmed and defenseless villagers in the border region, as evidenced by 1 Mirzoyan H., Epos , "Issues of Armenian Identity" collection of scientific articles, Yerevan, 2012, p. 28.
2 Mnatsakanyan L., Nersisyan V., Literature, textbook for the VI grade of the general education school, Yerevan, 2001, page 25.
3 See Ter-Sahakyan K., 10 years have passed since the brutal murder of Gurgen Margaryan in Budapest, http.
//www.panarmenian.net/arm/details/176025/, 19.02.2014.
4 See Mnatsakanyan L., Nersisyan V., pp. 25-26, 31-32.
The recent attacks on the NKR positions, in the following days of which the enemy was shelling the border regions1.
As we have already mentioned, the Azerbaijani side falsifies the reality, edits its own history and the Armenian epic in the background, falsifies and interprets the following words with the world-famous poet Al. Pushkin out of context. "You are a coward, you are a slave, you are an Armenian" ("You are a slave, you are a slave, you are an Armenian").
  This idea has been widely exploited even in the rallies, posters, books and press after the collapse of the USSR.
 The quote has been analyzed and covered many times, but misunderstanding and bias are obvious in various Azerbaijani sources.
 Let's present the situation and the context more clearly and concretely.
 Tazit was a Chechen teenager whose upbringing his father entrusted to a Circassian (according to one of the poem's writers, a Christian).
  "You are a coward, you are a daughter, you are an Armenian," said the robber father when Tazit said that his son had committed three sins that were indecent to the Chechen.
 Tazit had not killed or robbed a defenseless Armenian traveler, he had not caught and put the ring around the neck of his father, the slave who had escaped from them և, most importantly, he had not taken revenge on his brother alone, wounded and unarmed.
  That is why the enraged father considered his son cowardly, because, according to him, only a coward will not kill and a robber, a slave, because only a slave is able to appreciate his similarity, և, finally, an Armenian, because only an Armenian will not allow himself to take revenge on the wounded and unarmed from the enemy.
 Thus, Al. Pushkin did not slander and humiliate the Armenians, but revealed to the world the uniqueness of the Armenian identity and some of the positive aspects.
The unfriendly attitude towards Armenians in all spheres becomes more than obvious, as well as the fact that the state apparatus is behind such a policy.
 It is obvious that the future generation in Armenia is not brought up with the ideology of xenophobia in an atmosphere of hostility.
  This was more than confirmed when the Hungarian leadership extradited the murderer of the sleeping Armenian officer to Azerbaijan, which is why during the protests in Armenia, when the Hungarian state flag was being burned, RA President Serzh Sargsyan called on the people not to burn the state flag2.
After all, by and large, the current rampage can only be considered a beginning, as anti-Armenian lobbying is gaining momentum.
 Therefore, it is necessary to prepare for a day to counter this insidious policy and this time to deliver the last և destructive blow3 with lock documents, the main part of which is fake, to the state… 1 See Ghazaryan L., URGENT. Chinari and Movses are shot. People are kept in the depths of the house, http.
//henaran.am/news_view.php?post_id=34981, 23.01.2014.
2 See "Serzh Sargsyan urges not to burn the Hungarian flag", http.
//news.am/arm/news/119601.html,04.09.2012.
3 See "The Strike Will Be Destructive, The Last," http: // www.
//www.aravot.am/2010/11/16/344970/, 16.11.2010.
Davit Torosyan HATREDISM IN AZERBAIJAN Keywords: anti-Armenianism, war, NKAO, RA, Azerbaijan.
