THE FAILURE OF SADDAM HUSSEIN'S ADMINISTRATION. ACTIONS "Desert Fox", "FEAR AND SHOCK" One of the most important periods in the recent history of Iraq is the period of Saddam Hussein (1979-2003).
 His regime has become an obstacle for Western countries, especially the United States, that want to strengthen their position in the region.
 At the same time, during Saddam Hussein's rule, two exhausting wars for Iraq took place: the Iran-Iraq war and the Gulf War.
 The United States was able to use this reckless policy in its favor.
 Already during the "Gulf War", which began with the annexation of Kuwait by Iraq, the US carried out the military operation "Storm in the Desert" with the anti-Iraqi coalition forces.
 As a result, Iraqi troops were forced to leave Kuwait, and the country's independence was restored.
After the end of the war in the Persian Gulf, the UN faced a problem that had never been required to be solved before, which was to disarm the country without military occupation.
 That mission was assigned to the Multinational Group of Specialists of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
  According to UN Security Council Resolution 687, a special commission arrived in Iraq to oversee the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and the cessation of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, as well as the development of long-range missile programs.
 Under the auspices of the commission, Iraq destroyed 40,000 chemical warheads, 700 tons of chemical weapons intended for the development of chemical weapons, 3,600 tons of banned chemicals, and more than 100 pieces of equipment used to produce chemical weapons.
  The commission successfully carried out its function until 1998, when Iraq refused to cooperate further.
 At that time, US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright wrote: "Saddam Hussein was one of the most unpleasant and persistent problems inherited from the Clinton administration, unresolved in 1991. From the Persian Gulf War 3.
 Saddam's actions were direct violations of the agreement reached with the UN.
This meant that Kofi Annan's reputation was in jeopardy.
  The Russians and the French publicly expressed concern, and in fact, surprise.
  President Clinton's Middle East Peace Activities և My Visits to the Persian Gulf Countries 1 The Gulf War was a US-led war in Iraq (January 17 - February 28, 1991) aimed at liberating Kuwait and restoring independence. .
 The latter was occupied by Iraqi troops in Iraq in 1990. on August 2.
2 Albright M., Madam Secretary-General.
 Memoirs of Madeleine Albright, Moscow, 2004, p. 358. 3 Ibid., P. 356.
They brought diplomatic dividends. "
  Eight Arab countries, including Syria and Egypt, announced: "Iraq must take into account all UN Security Council resolutions and implement them in order to avoid a military conflict."
The US President secretly approved the mass bombing plan for Iraq, scheduled for November 14, and ordered military exercises in the region to give the impression that the US would not strike before the end of November.
However, the Iraqi leaders again sent a letter to the UN Secretary General promising to resume cooperation.
  "I understand that the letter from Iraq to the UN has weakened the diplomatic support of our military operations, the opinion has changed in Washington as well.
 The president believed that we should not endanger the lives of hundreds of Iraqi citizens, given that the Iraqi government has publicly agreed to our demands, even if we think it is in Baghdad.
 That is why the hostilities were postponed again. ”1
In 1998, when President Bill Clinton took office, the US Congress even passed the Iraq Freedom Act, which provided material and moral support to the Iraqi opposition outside to overthrow Saddam Hussein's regime, and US forces had to do everything possible to achieve that goal. number 2.
1998 After refusing to cooperate with international inspectors in Iraq in December 2007, the United States and Britain carried out a 70-hour "Fox Desert" operation against Iraq.
  The aim of the operation was to deprive Iraq of the opportunity to produce and use weapons of mass destruction after Iraq refused to cooperate with the UN International Commission.
  The head of the UN Special Commission Richard Butler in 1998 A report submitted to the Security Council on December 15 stated that Iraq was not cooperating with UN experts and that the Iraqi government had imposed new restrictions on the commission.
 In particular, Iraq does not provide the International Commission with some necessary documents related to ballistic missiles4.
 Saddam's strategy was to try to use the controversy in the Security Council to blame the failure of the inspections on UN experts5.
The "Fox Desert" military operation had two purposes: political (weakening Saddam Hussein's regime, intensifying opposition forces) and military (to maximize damage to the design, production, storage facilities of weapons of mass destruction, supply of biologically toxic military substances) 6.
The US Air Force, Navy Air Force, Marine Corps, as well as the Royal Air Force of Great Britain were involved in the air offensive operation.
2 See http.
//tamernb.arabblogs.com/Tamer442007/archive/2008/4/553751.html.
3 The operation was named after Erwin Rommel, a German field marshal and commander of the Axis troops in North Africa, nicknamed the Desert Fox.
4 See http.
//digital.ahram.org.eg/articles.aspx?Serial=219384&eid=4285.
6 See http.
//old.vko.ru/article.asp?pr_sign=archive.2005.24.18.
The ground forces did not take part in the hostilities.
  The first blow was dealt in 1998. on December 17.
  14 rocket-propelled grenades were fired in the direction of Iraq, the last one on December 19.
  The next day, the US military leadership announced the end of the operation.
The planes of the USA և Great Britain made more than 650 flights.
  More than 415 rockets were fired.
  The Iraqi air defense air force was passive, the American-British air force did not suffer any losses.
  According to the Pentagon, 85% of the points hit at that time, of which 43 objects were completely destroyed.
American society in general supported the military operation against Iraq.
  Strong criticism was voiced by Japan և Russia.
  As a sign of dissatisfaction, Russia temporarily recalled the ambassadors from Washington and London.
 The most pronounced "long-term" effect of Operation Desert Fox was that Iraq's air defense system intensified its operations in the country's no-fly zones.
  The American-British air force, which was patrolling these areas, launched retaliatory strikes on air defense facilities.
  The first such incident took place in 1998. in December, periodically repeating until 2003. March.
2003 From March 20 to May 1, the United States մի anti-Iraqi coalition forces conducted a military operation against Iraq.
  Washington officially called it "Fear Shock".
  Later the operation was called "Iraq Liberation" 1.
  The official reason for the invasion was that the Iraqi government was accused of continuing the work on the creation and production of weapons of mass destruction, organizing and financing international terrorism2.
2003 On February 14, Saddam Hussein signed an order banning the import and production of weapons of mass destruction.
  But for the US it did not mean anything anymore.
  On March 18, US President George W. Bush issued an ultimatum to S. Hussein և offered to resign voluntarily and leave the country within 48 hours, otherwise he declared the inevitability of hostilities.
 Ս. Hussein refused to accept the ultimatum.
2003 On March 19, the coalition troops entered the Iraqi-Kuwaiti demilitarized zone. Ջ. Bush ordered the start of hostilities.
  The expeditionary force was led by General Tommy Franks4.
2003 On March 20, the United States launched its first missile strike on Baghdad.
 Cavalry expeditionary groups և 3rd Mechanized Division crossed the border և launched ground operation in Iraq.
  On April 9, Baghdad was occupied by federal troops.
 Its symbol was the removal of one of Saddam's numerous statues from the pedestal.
 On April 10-11, Kirkuk and Mosul were taken.
  On April 14, US troops captured the last stronghold of the Iraqi army, the city of Tikrit.
 The campaign lasted 43 days և 1 See http.
//ria.ru/politics/20090320/165480935.html.
2 See Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq, http:
//georgewbushwhitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/10/20021002-2.html.
3 See http.
//news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/special_report/bbcrussian/2002_07/newsid_2761000/2761615.stm.
4 See http.
//ria.ru/politics/20090320/165480935.html.
ended on May 1.
  The idea of ​​using military force against Iraq was supported by 45 countries, 6 of which were former Soviet states (Azerbaijan, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Uzbekistan) 1.
  98% of the invading troops were provided by the USA and Great Britain.
  A month and a half ago, the coalition suffered 172 casualties (including 139 Americans և 33 Britons).
There is no exact data on the losses in Iraq.
Ս. Hussein's government finally fell in 2003. on April 17, when the remnants of the Medina Division capitulated.
  By May 1, the Americans's coalition allies were gaining control of the country.
  In Operation Red Dawn 2 to capture the Iraqi president, the Americans deployed 600 special forces troops, the US Army 4th Infantry Division engineering troops and support forces.
  Ս. Hussein was arrested in 2003. on December 13 at 8 p.m.
On the 30th, on a farm near the city of Ad-Daur near Tikrit3.
2005 The trial of the former president of Iraq began on October 19.
 Especially for him, the death penalty was restored in Iraq, which had been suspended for some time by the occupation forces.
  The trial is taking place in the former presidential palace.
 2006 On November 5, the Iraqi Supreme Criminal Court found S. guilty. Hussein was sentenced to death by hanging for killing 148 Shiites4.
  Ս. Hussein was executed on December 30 and buried the next morning in his native village near Tikrit in 2003. to the grandson of the dead sons.
2005 On January 30, the first multi-party elections in half a century took place in Iraq.
  They took place during the actual occupation of the country by the coalition forces, in the absence of international observers.
 According to official data, 58% of the ballots were considered valid. This means that the number of Iraqis who took part in the voting was higher.
 In an interview with the Saudi "al-Watan" newspaper, the secretary of the "Iraqi Tribal Council" Raad al-Hamdani said that in fact 20-35% of the Iraqi population participated in the elections.
 According to the results published on February 13, the Shiite "United Iraqi Alliance" received the highest number of votes - 48%, followed by the "Kurdish Alliance" - 25.7%, the "Iraqi List" was in third place with 13.8% 5 .
Already in April, a transitional government was formed, the task of which was to prepare a new constitution.
 During the process of drafting the Constitution, serious contradictions appeared between the political parties.
 The rift in Iraqi society was evident in the referendum on the adoption of the new constitution on October 15, 6, when there was a festive atmosphere in Shiite neighborhoods and polling stations were not open at all in some Sunni cities.
  Nevertheless, the constitution was adopted.
 On December 15, new parliamentary elections were held, as a result of which the permanent government of the country was to be formed.
1 See http.
//ria.ru/politics/20090320/165480935.html.
2 See http.
//news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/news/newsid_3318000/3318847.stm.
3 See http.
//www.ibtesama.com/vb/showthread-t_6558.html.
4 See http.
//ria.ru/incidents/20061105/55387872.html.
5 Лукоянов А., Выборы в Ираке.
 итоги и перспективы, http:
//www.iimes.ru.6 See http.
//gazeta.zn.ua:
2005 The Shiite "United Iraqi Alliance" won the December 15 parliamentary elections, winning 140 seats out of a total of 275 seats.
  The "Kurdish Alliance" got 75 seats, the "Iraqi List" - 40, the Sunnis - 17.
  The rest of the seats were distributed among "small religious parties" of different ethnicities.
 On April 3, Sunni Hajemal Hassan was elected President of the National Assembly.
 On April 6, the assembly elected the president, the two vice-presidents, and the prime minister was approved at their suggestion.
 71-year-old Jalal Talabani, the leader of the "Kurdistan Patriotic Union", which is part of the "Kurdish Alliance", became president.
Ս. Hussein, for whom power was the most important, sought to show his power in every possible way, his ability to oppose the Western superpowers.
  Striving to become the most influential country in the region, he was against increasing the influence of European countries or the United States in the region.
 Taking all this into account, the United States tried in every way to neutralize him.
 And he succeeded. The United States was able to skillfully use Hussein's mistakes, strengthening its position and overthrowing his regime.
Hermine Arakelyan FALL OF SADDAM HUSSEIN'S ADMINISTRATION: ACTIONS "DESERT DESERT", "FEAR AND SHOCK" Keywords: Iraq, USA, "Fox in the Desert", "Fear"
