THE AUTHORITY OF THE TIME STRUCTURE OF THE "NEW CHRONOLOGY" What is time?
When I am asked about him, I know what he is talking about, but if I start explaining, I do not know what else to say ... Augustine BlessedIntroduction One of the most important issues in history is the concept of "historical time".
 Before reaching its theoretical elaboration, historical time was confused with chronology, although we can fix historical reality as a starting point for understanding as chronology.
 The point is that the events must be separated from each other.
80s of the last century From the beginning, a group was formed by the Russian mathematician Anatoly Famenko, around which scientists with a scientific orientation tried to fundamentally review the holes of world history.
 That discipline was called the New Chronicle.
 In particular, the notions of space and time are relatively harshly criticized.
A. Famenko 2 և G. This term is often used in English literature to refer to the alternative theory of the same name by the English Egyptologist David Roll.
  D. The role tends to move with the holes of the 19th-25th dynasties of the Egyptian pharaohs.
 According to him, this will allow the Bible։ to bring the events of the Bible into line with ancient history.
  See Rohl, D, A Test of Time for details.
  The Bible — from Myth to History. London, 2 Anatoly Tifomevich Famenko (born 1945) is a Russian mathematician, full member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, author of 27 monographs և 10 textbooks.
3 Gleb Vladimirovich Nasovsky (born 1958) is a Russian mathematician, best known as A. Co-author of Famenko in "New Chronicle" research.
Joseph Scaliger 4 4 և Dionysius Petavius ​​5 chronological system, which is still used today.
We have set ourselves the task of clarifying, once again confirming the false science of the "New Chronicle", especially by examining the problem of the falsification of historical time.
The Roots of the New Chronicle In the 1920s and 1930s, Nikolai Morozov, a mathematician and member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, published his seven-volume book,
Already in the 1960s, the forgotten mathematician M. Մ. Postnikov և in his lectures repeatedly referred to N. Morozov's views.
Young A. was present at those lectures. Famenko, at the request of M. Postnikov in 1974 Մ. 4 lectures consisting of 50 lessons at Moscow State University after Lomonosov Hovsep Justus Scaliger (1540-1609) is a French humanist, linguist and historian.
 Studied at the Sorbonne University.
 He has traveled in Italy, England and Scotland.
 He fought as a soldier in the Huguenot armed groups.
 After Bartholomew's night, he took refuge in Switzerland and became a professor at the University of Geneva.
 He later moved to Leiden, the Netherlands, where he lived for the rest of his life.
He is considered one of the founders of modern chronology.
5 Dionysius Petavius ​​(1583-1652) is a French historian-poet.
 1605 He joined the Jesuit Congregation.
 1621 In Paris he became a professor of positive theology, and in 1639 - cardinal of the Catholic Church.
Continued by H. Scaliger գործ գործ's case is, in fact, one of the founders of modern chronology.
6 Nikolai Alexandrovich Morozov (1854-1946) is a Russian Narodnik revolutionary.
  According to some sources, he was a member of the Masonic lodges.
 He is the author of numerous works on controversial issues of physics, chemistry, history, astronomy, biology.
  Ն. Marozov's views have not been unequivocally accepted by contemporaries, in some cases being sharply criticized.
L.
 Gosizdat, 1924-1932, 2nd ed. -M., Kraft +, 1998.8 The term "New Chronology" was first used by historian N. Մ. NikolskyN. In the critique of Morozov's seven-volume book (Nikolsky NM, Astronomical translation 1925, № 1, pp. 156-175;
 Morozov N. А., Новый взгляд709).
organized a series.
 Abstracts of these lectures A. Famenko's XI. Mishchenko later became large-scale multi-volumes.
 A. According to Famenko, in the 1970s. He became acquainted with 9 researches by Robert Newton, the author of which was a rigorous examination of 10 reports of the 2nd century geographer Claudius Ptolemy.
 After that, he had an idea that R. N. can help confirm the legitimacy of Newton's programs. Morozov's "forgotten" theory.
After a number of joint works in the 1980s, A. Famenko և M. Postnikov's ways were divided.
 It was at this time that the New Chronicle group was formed, which included a number of physicists, mathematicians, and even historians, for whom the ideas of the New Chronicle were quite appealing11.
An attempt is made to develop a research system, which, in the opinion of the group members, would give N. To carry out a revolution in the scientific world by improving Morozov's theory.
 Their articles were published in a number of magazines in the 1980s and became the subject of heated debate.
A. Famenko և G. The term "New Chronology" was first used in Nasovsky's work in 1995, noting the fallacy of classical chronology, ostensibly based on modern scientific methods.
This year became a turning point.
 Starting in 1995 To date, many books have been published in which the above-mentioned authors try to integrate and fully formulate their new theory.
Already in 1998 At the sitting of the Bureau of the Russian Academy of Sciences, it was decided to consider the "New Chronicle" a false scientific system, a distortion of enormous volumes of historical facts.
 After that began 9 Robert Russell Newton (1918-1991) American physicist, celestial mechanics specialist.
 He devoted most of his life to the study of the universe, particularly to the theory of the motion of celestial bodies.
 He is the author of a number of works, some of which use the work "The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy" to study the topic (for details, see Newton R. R., Presumption of Claudius Ptolemy. -M., Science, 1985).
10 The problem is mainly related to the classic "Almagest" in the ancient world,, in which Ptolemy included all the Greek "Near Eastern" knowledge of the celestial bodies of the universe.
  But Ptolemy makes a mistake by placing the planet Earth, not Earth, at the center of our galaxy.
11 V. stand out from them especially. Kalashnikov և G. Nasovsky.
To publish a series of articles dedicated to the denial of this false discipline12.
2004 A. Famenko և G. Nasovsky was awarded the "Abzac" prize in the "Honorary Illiteracy" category as a punishment for crimes against the Russian language in the "New Chronicle" series13.
Despite all this, the authors of the "New Chronicle" have not stopped their "fruitful" activity, becoming a subject of public discussions.
2. A. Famenko և G. Nasovsky's scientific inventions Before referring to the science of "New Chronicle" questions, we consider it necessary to mention that A. Famenko և G. Nasovsky was not able to establish a solid chronological system that would be able to withstand "the blows of the opponents."
  At first glance, their system resembles a mosaic, some of the relics of which are lost.
 Rejecting the previous chronological systems, the above-mentioned authors were not able to formulate their new system.
Any narration of historical holes is meaningless without time counts, in which the events work։ disappear.
 The study of the structure of time has become one of the most important questions in historiography and archeology nowadays.
The deeper we go into history, the more difficult it becomes for us to build a solid time system14.
 Meanwhile, A. Famenko և G. For Nasovsky, the history of the Old World is invented and written in later centuries.
  In particular, in their opinion, the history textbooks are glued from 4 similar chronologies, which together form a global chronological system.
In order to get such a system, it was necessary to move the chronology of the 10th-16th centuries by 330, 1050, 1800 years, that is, one. The Famenko group has published about 90 monographs.
  The reports of their opponents are published in the series of "Anti-Famenco" articles, of which only seven have been published (in particular, see Myths "New Chronology", M., 2001).
13 Antipremia "Abzac" (http.
//bookmix.ru/groups/viewtopic.phtml?id=745) 24.04.201614 From the point of view of the study of the temporal structures of the Old World, the greatest trust belongs to E. Bickerman, who was able to fully cover the chronological systems of Ancient Middle East ին Ancient Greece (for details, see Bickerman, Chronology of Ancient World).
 Ближний Восток и античность, М., 1975).
to arrange the holes of the year in four different dimensions, as a result of which a series of historical figures are identified. Ivan IV the Terrible Tsar with Diocletian և Constantine the Great, Chingizkhan with Prince Rurik, Ivan Kalita with Yaroslav the Wise և Batu Khan, Jesus Christ with Andrew the God15.
 This series can be continued indefinitely 16.
Not believing in the credibility of all types of sources known to historical science, A. Famenko և G. Nasovsky relies on highly contradictory astronomical data.
 However, they fall into the trap they have prepared.
  Let's present a passage A. From the work of Famenko. "Несмотря The question arises how to date an event, the authenticity of which we are not entirely sure.
In ancient times a specific chronological scale did not exist.
 History was measured by the years after the reign of the kings, which were very important after the event.
The local timeline was predominant, constantly in need of correlation with global time, but global chronology was not compiled for a long time.
 On the religious ground, this division became more widespread, the rift widened, and the global remained a utopia18.
 In view of all this, the authors of the New Chronicle build their chronological system on the basis of Bible accounts.
 But the thing is that the birth of Jesus Christ takes place in K. h. 1086
15 For details, see Носовский Г. V., Fomenko A. T., New chronology and ancient concept16 It is noteworthy for us that A. Famenko tries to find similar coincidences with the reigns of the Armenian Catholicos և Roman emperors, which he substantiates with the coincidence of the dates of their rule (Fomenko AT, New Chronology of Greece, Antiquity in the Middle Ages, M., 1996, vol. 2, Appendix 5).
18 1700s August Ludwig Schlotzer offers an interesting timeline for the division of history, which is still in use today.
 The word is Q. և Q.h. It is about registration.
19 1984 The first International Conference on Scriptural Archeology was held in Jerusalem in April of that year, attended by more than 1,200 people, including more than 500 archaeologists from 60 countries.
 The participants of this conference argued that the Bible և archeology are in harmony with each other, just as the data of scientific archeology are always close to the information of the Bible (for details see Vasiliadis N., Bible և archeology, E., 2014, p. 15).
And. Chashchikhin, examining A. This report of Famenko expresses an opinion that. 1. Or academician Famenko lacks a scientific method, 2. or academician Famenko is engaged in slander, 3. Or academician Famenko lacks the knowledge of elementary astronomical facts20.
A. A reference to Claudius Ptolemy's Almagest, which was the target of Famenko's research, completely destroys the temporal structure of the New Chronicle.
 The point is that Claudius Ptolemy describes the Sirius star of Marcus Tullius Cicero, Lucius Aeneus Seneca, as a bright red star.
 And in 11th century Arabic literature, Sirius is described as a white star (this is how Sirius is in the 21st century.
).
 The reason is that Sirius, burning over time, turned from a red giant to a white dwarf21.
 These two different reports come to prove that the ancient world existed long before the Middle Ages, denies A. Famenko's statement that the medieval աշխարհ ancient world is identical.
They do not withstand the examination. Famenko's other arguments as well.
 For example, how can the kings of a number of different countries be considered the same person, based only on the fact that they have the same years of rule22.
In the end, the question arises, who is A.? Famenko's goal.
 In almost all of their monographs, the authors of the New Chronicle consider historiography to be a false, ordered science.
 According to them, the current chronological system was created to get rid of European domination by Europeans23.
chronologies Fomenko-Nosovskogo (http:
//www.cnt.ru/users/chas/fomenko.htm) 24.05.201622 But this fight alone is not enough to identify historical figures.
  The names of the kings of pre-Jewish, Greek, Roman, and other chronologies do not coincide at all; more often than not, one can encounter a situation where the years of a king's reign are different in two different sources.
  A. Famenko, avoiding discussing such issues, tends to create artificial coincidences.
23 Moreover, A. According to Famenko, Moscow is the third Rome, the concept becomes a historical truth, because, according to him, the first Rome becomes Egypt, the second Rome coincides with the current city of Rome, and the third Rome becomes Moscow.
It will not escape the eye of a vigilant researcher that this false discipline is an example of classical Slavophilia, it has no right to be called in the field of science.
Summary Famenko և G. Nasovsky's research was quickly criticized.
 Their "New Chronology" was considered unscientific, but until now A. Famenko և G. Nasovsky's activity has not stopped.
They claim that human history is accurate է known only from the beginning of the 18th century ությունները the events that preceded it were altered for political purposes և falsified.
  In particular, the story should start from the 10th century, and Jesus Christ, for example, was born in the 12th century.
Naturalistic scholars are critical of the reports of well-known ancient sources, considering them to be fictional.
In our opinion, A. Famenko և G. One of Nasovsky's main mistakes is the incompatibility of the disciplines related to history.
  However, this does not prevent them from spreading their views in a wide range.
The funny and dangerous thing for Armenians is the lack of information about Armenia in this false discipline.
 The Ottoman Empire is mentioned many times, but that empire is considered a political entity separate from the united empire, which can be a screen for the eastern and western neighbors of the Republic of Armenia.
  Unfortunately, this false discipline has not been studied in the Armenian scientific environment so far, it has not been given a worthy counterattack.
List of used literature 1. Vasiliadis N., Bible և Archeology, Yerevan, 2014.
2. Antipremia "Abzac" (http.
//bookmix.ru/groups/viewtopic.phtml?id=745) available on 24.04.20163. Bickerman J., Chronology of Ancient Peace.
 Near East and Antiquity, Moscow, vols. 1-7, Moscow-Leningrad.
 Gosizdat, 1924-1932; 2nd ed. –Moscow, Kraft +, 1998.156-175; вместе с ответом Morozova pereizdana.
 Morozov N. А. New look at (http:
//www.cnt.ru/users/chas/fomenko.htm) is available on 24.05.2016.14. Colavito J., "Who Lost the Middle Ages?", (Http:
//jcolavito.tripod.com/lostcivilizations/id13.html) is available on 24.05.2016.15. Rohl D., A Test of Time.
 The Bible — from Myth to History, London, 1995. Gurgen Muradyan FALSE SCIENCE OF THE STRUCTURE OF THE "NEW CHRONOLOGY"
Summary.
