"CAPOETA SP" OF BUTTERS: METHODS OF EROTHROCHITES DEPENDING ON POLLUTION POLLUTION Introduction.
  In recent years, the mining industry has been widely developing in Armenia, which leads to an increase in the pollution of natural reservoirs with various wastes and heavy metals.
  Among the heavy metals are copper, iron, zinc, lead, cadmium, etc.
Heavy metal contamination is known to have cytotoxic-genotoxic effects, it causes DNA destruction, nucleological-cellular disorders in cells, including nucleus destruction, cell mutations, etc. (Witeska and Kosciuk, 2003; Velcheva et al. 2014 և etc.).
 In this regard, a number of studies have been conducted in Armenia, which are dedicated to the impact of heavy metals on soil, water, plants and human health (Saghatelyan, 2004; Amirkhanyan, 2007).
  At the same time, in recent years, works on the effects of heavy metals on animals have been published (Stepanyan et al., 2011; Stepanyan IE, GH Karagyan. 2012; Hovhannisyanet al., 2012; Harutyunyan et al., 2014), which particularly show copper and zinc. The effect of lead ions and other metals on certain cell characteristics of various organisms, including fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
It should be noted that most of the cytotoxic-genotoxic studies were performed on fish (Romanov, Kovalev 2003; Furnus etal., 2014, etc.).
  For this reason, in order to study the effect of heavy metals on the animals found in Armenia, we preferred to choose the widespread and numerous fish species, such as the capoeta Valencian species, 1842, which are represented in Armenia in two species: Capoeta sevangi. Cap "Capoeta capoeta capoeta" next to the Kura.
 These fish species are systematically close to each other և are often considered as different subspecies belonging to one species, they are found in almost all large aquifers of Armenia - in rivers, reservoirs, also in Lake Shana (Pipoyan, 2012).
 Buttercups are considered valuable fish species and are widely used by the population as food.
  It should be noted that the spouses living in Sanalj are included in the Red Book of Animals of the Republic of Armenia (2010).
  In order to determine the possible effects of heavy metals on the ribs, we have focused our attention on their erythrocytes in this work, which, being highly specialized and large cells, are more often subjected to cellular changes, which can lead to incomplete implementation of processes in the body, even death.
  Based on the above, the aim of our study is to find out through comparative analysis what kind of cytological changes in heavy metals in the red blood cells of cows living in separate rivers of the Republic of Armenia (Tashir, Debed, Araks) with different pollution.
Working material և methods.
  Eleven individuals of mates, which were caught in 2014-2015, served as material for the study. Debed (near Alaverdi), Tashir (near Tashir) և Araks (near Armash village) rivers.
  To make the erythrocyte samples, we took lubricating blood ointments on the degreased glass, then dried the blood samples in air, fixed them with 95% methanol, and then painted them with 4% Gimza paint.
We received digital photos of the cells with a light microscope ("NU-2E" (Germany), magnification - 1125 (from 90 times to 12.5 times), equipped with a CANON EOS 600D camera.
 We received the images in "JPEG" resolution, 960 × 720 pixels.
We used ImageJ 1.48 v (Rasbend, WS, ImageJ, USA Nationalhttp) for comparative cell analysis and statistical data processing.
//imagej.nih.gov/ij/) Excel "Excel 2007" (MS Corporation, USE).
The results of the study.
 Examining the changes in the erythrocytes of the spinal cord, as well as the destruction of the nucleus, the following types of changes were found. oblique, droplet, wrinkled, swollen, ridged, crescent-shaped, amoebic, dicotyledonous erythrocytes, the nucleus of which is not in the center (it is possible that there is an intracellular parasite inside) (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Mutations in erythrocytes: 1-normal mature erythrocyte, 2-diagonal erythrocyte, 3-dotted erythrocyte 4-wrinkled erythrocyte, 5-inflated erythrocyte, 6-pointed erythrocyte, 7-erythrocyte, 8-erythrocyte 9-amoebic erythrocyte, 10-double-walled erythrocyte.
Approximately 7.6% of the total erythrocyte count was altered by blood cell samples from the Tashir River urchins.
  Swollen, wrinkled, droplet-type changes are relatively common.
 Approximately 25.6% of the total erythrocyte count was altered by blood cell samples from the Debed River cows.
  Both in the Tashir River and in the erythrocytes of the tributaries of the Debed River, inflated, drip-wrinkled type changes are relatively common.
Approximately 2% of the total erythrocyte count was altered by blood cell samples from the Araks River.
 Droplet, wrinkled, swollen type changes are also relatively common in erythrocytes.
All erythrocyte translocations studied and described in the samples of the tributaries of the Tashir, Debed and Araks rivers occur with different frequencies, which is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. The figure shows the percentage of erythrocyte changes in the Tashir, Debed և Araks rivers.
Concentrations of some heavy metal ions found in the Tashir, Debed և Araks rivers և Permissible values ​​(limit for MAC for fish farming) of these metals are presented in Table 1.
 Table 1 Heavy metal content in riversMetalsCopper (Cu) Chromium (Cr) Manganese (Mn) Iron (Fe) Lead (Pb) Zinc (Cd) Cadmium (Cd) c. Tashir (Tashir) v. Debedg. Araks (Alaverdi) (Armash village) No data No data No data No data No data No data No data No SCC Conclusion.
 Examining the cell-morphological characteristics of erythrocytes taken from three rivers of Armenia (Tashir, Debed և Araks), to make a comparative analysis of the degree of erythrocyte's exchange rate, combining them with the quantitative and qualitative ionic composition of some heavy metals in those waters, we came to the conclusion There are 9 types of erythrocyte mutations that occur at different frequencies.
The following three types of changes are more numerous: inflated type (7.43%), drip type (6.72%) and wrinkled type (4.36%).
The highest changes in the erythrocytes of the cohorts are observed in the Debed River (around Alaverdi - 25.6%), relatively less in the Araks River (around the village of Armash - 2%).
In Debed և Tashir rivers the most common is the change of inflated type of erythrocytes - 4.81% և 2.4%, respectively, and in Araks - drip erythrocytes - 1.12%.
The chemical composition of the rivers, studying the content of heavy metals, we found that the dirtiest of the rivers was Debed with a rather high content of Zinc Copper.
Literature лягушки Rana ridibunda Pallas, 1771 Саратовского водохранилища // Самарская Лука.
2. Pipoyan S. Х. 2012. Ichthyofauna Armenia.
  stages of formation and modern14.
 557-563. Mountain Areas-Ecological Problems of Cities, Yerevan, pp.
 16-19. L. Martins. 2014. The hematological profile of farmed Sorubim lima.
  reference intervals, micronucleus test. Environ. Toxicol., 22.
 422-435. assessment of heavy metal pollution of the territory of Yerevan. Nat.Sci. New Electr.J., 3.
pp.
 36-41.Problems of Cities, Yerevan, pp.
 63-69. the cyto-morphological characteristics of erythrocytes of Bufo variabilis (Anura.
 Bufonidae) and Darevskia raddei (Sauria.
  Lacertidae) in Armenia // Proceedings of the international International Symposium of Ecologists of Montenegro, Sept. 20-25, Kotor, pp.
 155-161. zinc exposure. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int, 10.
 284-286. Pelophylax ridibundus (Amphibia).
 Anura) // J. of Envir. Scien. and Techn., 4.
 172-181 "CAPOETA SP" OF RODS: EYTHROTYCITE MODIFICATIONS DEPENDING ON AQUATICS OF AQUATICS Keywords: Armenia, fish, cocoon, erythrocyte, cellular changesAlopa Khachatryan.
