PUBLIC SERVICE RECRUITMENT SYSTEM In the modern world, the advanced public service models of a number of leading countries show that well-developed employees have become crucial in increasing the competitiveness and efficiency of public service in key countries.
 One of the methods of having well-developed employees is rotation, due to which employees get the opportunity to gain not only new knowledge, but also invaluable experience in various fields, at the same time improving the professional qualities of employees.
According to Lat. rotatio - encyclopedic explanation of the word "rotation" - the horizontal transfer of rotation employees from one workplace to another to be familiar with the various tasks of the organization.
Rotation involves a planned relocation or a significant change in an employee's formal responsibilities.
  Job change is considered a positive phenomenon, these transfers contribute to the more efficient use of human resources.
The rotation of public servants is the horizontal transfer of employees to other official positions in the same or other state bodies.
 Rotation is done to improve the efficiency of the service և it is seen as a means of fighting corruption.
  However, relocations will have a positive effect if: • the relocation is viewed as a re-election result; • the employee is explained the reason for the relocation;
The development of a competent և proper rotation system has a number of advantages, among which are: 1. • reduction of staff flow, • strengthening of commitment և loyalty, • reduction of stress, • increase of profitability, • effective method of teaching.
It is very possible that the rotation will be carried out at the right time, because the unrealized rotation will have negative consequences at the right time, which can include: • Staff turnover, • Improper response to external and internal changes, • Decreased innovation capacity, Reduction, • Decrease in staff capacity, • Decrease in competitiveness, • Increase in corruption risk.
In any case, there are rotation defects that must be taken into account when organizing the rotation2.
 These are: • Decreased productivity due to long-term adaptation of the employee, • Employee disagreement to move to a new job, • Treatment of rotation as a "reshuffle".
• "Staff reassignment" is the uncoordinated transfer of managers once every 3-6 months.
  It is not possible to avoid conflicts with the wrong transfer.
  Constant, unreasonable transfers lead to superficial knowledge.
Before carrying out the rotation, it is necessary to clearly separate the goals of the rotation, which can be presumably divided into 2 groups: motivational և organizational 3:.
Motivational goals depend on the needs of each employee են are aimed at solving problems such as ensuring the professional growth of the employee, career advancement 2 Source: http.
//hr-portal.ru/article/mehanizmy-rotacii-kadrov.
3 In the same place.
a job change when an employee has been in the same position for a long time և wants to gain new knowledge ություններ skills.
The selection of employees is done according to the following principle: "find the right employee in the right place".
The organizational goals of the rotation are to increase the efficiency of the staff, to solve the following problems: • to train the next generation of leading specialists; train substitute specialists in case of employees' illness, vacations or business trips; • prevention of internal conflicts; • prevention of corrupt behavior; • activation of internal organizational communication և development.
In general, rotation solves the problem of replacing each other, eliminates tension, allows employees to stay motivated, generally reduces employee turnover, increases their efficiency.
However, the rotation in the public sector should not only improve the skills and knowledge of public servants, but should also have one important primary goal - to be a means of combating corruption.
  That is, the main goals of the rotation in the public sphere are: • training of highly qualified personnel, • implementation of anti-corruption policy in the public sphere.
Therefore, rotation in the public sphere can more often be considered as a means of fighting corruption, which, of course, has a more "narrow" direction.
  At the same time, rotation in the public sector differs from rotation in other organizations in that the rotation can be considered as a transfer of public servants, which requires the following requirements: can not be carried out without changes in the employee's employment contract, is not allowed to transfer a public servant, which is contraindicated in his health condition, • it is expedient to use the planned rotation.
The rotation must be carried out taking into account the employment contract.
  Therefore, it is necessary to clearly separate the main principles of rotation in the public sphere, they are 4: • principle of mandatory rotation. Mandatory rotation in the public sphere should be carried out for the public positions for which the rotation is predetermined.
  Mandatory implementation of rotation is first of all an anti-corruption factor.
• Principle of planned rotation in the public sphere. implementation of rotation in the public sphere, based on a pre-designed plan, which is a necessary condition for the implementation of the rotation system.
 In order to carry out the process, it is necessary to determine the following stages of staff rotation: 5. preparatory, 2. analytical, 3. planning, 4. Preliminary, 5. rotational, 6. final.
In the preparatory phase, a clear decision is made on the rotation, which should be based on the statistical results of the following data: • labor productivity, • external-internal staff flow, • employee satisfaction level, • corruption risk level.
In case of a positive decision, it is necessary to create an organizational structure, which will be responsible for the implementation of the rotation, will evaluate the effectiveness of the implemented measures, will exercise control over the rotation process.
 In order to guarantee the work efficiency of the organizational structure, it is necessary to compile a relevant document, which will clearly define the structure of the structure, the rights, responsibilities, working methods and methods of the group members.
At the analytical stage, the demand for staff rotation is analyzed.
 At this stage, statistical data are analyzed, as well as those positions where the risk of corruption is quite high.
At the planning stage, the list of positions for which the rotation should be carried out is clearly defined and approved.
 At this stage, the types of rotation are determined and approved.
 The type of rotation for each public servant is determined taking into account the results of the activity of the given servant, the level of qualification, professional education, length of service of the public servant, the influence of the factors that contribute to the increase of corruption risk.
Scientists Shid և Khapov played a big role in the classification of rotation.
 They proposed to classify the rotation based on the following features: 6. According to the frequency of movement: 1. annual, 2. daily, 3. hourly, according to the transfer schedule: 1. ring when the employee returned to the position after some time, 2. irreversible when the transfer is irreversible, 3. relocation, when employees at the same level change positions according to the degree of specialization: 1. for other profession, 2. related professions, 3. change in the nature of work, but within the same profession, 4. Insignificant change in the nature of the work, according to the transfer of the initiator: 1. organization administration, 2. on the initiative of the employee, 3. on the initiative of the head of the personnel management department, according to the object of transfer: 1. Heads, 2. Specialists, according to the volume of rotation: 1. internally within the organization, 2. External, within one region, between the subdivisions of the organization, 3. interregional with change of residence, 4. with or without training rotation.
  For positions in the public sector with a high level of corruption risk, it is advisable to apply the rotation without training, according to the specifics of the career space: 1. Real.
 It is a virtual-modern device, which is implemented using the Internet այլ other computer technologies.
 This type of rotation is performed in virtual organizations without a human-physical presence.
  It should be noted that by moving public sector employees to another area, they should be provided with apartments.
According to the procedure of rotation of civil servants in our country, when rotating a civil servant outside the place of permanent residence, the civil servant is reimbursed for expenses (accommodation, vehicles, etc.) in the amount prescribed by law.
 Even in many countries, the rotation involves relocating not only the employee but also his or her family members, ensuring that they will be employed in the new location.
 And these problems increase the budget burden, depending on the relocation of the public servant, his family members, and the provision of housing.
  Therefore, in the case of employees who are transferred for new knowledge, skills, training, it is advisable to use the virtual rotation type, which will reduce the costs associated with the transfer.
 However, the list of positions whose corruption risk is high, նախատեսված rotation is designed to reduce it, the use of this type of rotation is wrong և unacceptable.
According to time orientation, the following types of rubation are distinguished.2. planned, 3. factual.
According to the purpose: 1. Training of management staff, 2. conflict prevention or resolution, 3. Training of universal specialists, 4. In order to strengthen communications, 5. training of replacement staff.
After analyzing the personal data (educational level, international internship, attestation, testing results, characteristics of employees և managers, marital status, health status, etc.) the organizational structure makes a preliminary decision on the list of employees to be rotated.
 The final list, however, is clarified after the relevant test, after which it is necessary to make a transfer plan.
At the preliminary stage, the necessary documents for the transfer are prepared.
After signing the documents, the rotation phase begins.
 Relevant candidates are transferred to a new position, during which the rotation process must be monitored.
In the final stage, the evaluation of the rotated candidates is carried out.
  Based on the results of the evaluation, a decision is made to carry out a new rotation, leave the employee in his previous position or transfer him to a new position.
Principle of rotation timing.
  It is assumed that it is necessary to determine in advance the period when the public servant should be transferred to another department or another position.
 In order to carry out effective rotation, the optimal time of transfer is determined in advance և when to carry it out.
 Determining the timing of rotation in the public sector depends on a number of factors, in particular: • Determining a period of relocation that prevents corruption; • Deciding on an optimal period, it is advisable to take into account the period of adaptation of the public servant in the workplace. be effective, it can not be less than one year, and the maximum period should not exceed five years, • the employee should be taken into account as an individual (abilities, level of education, gender, age, health status, character traits), • it is advisable to take into account to gain work experience, • it is necessary to use the type of activity և specialization (planning, sales, production, etc.).
Germany is one of the countries with a well-developed public service system.
 In order to fight and prevent corruption in Germany, first the positions that are more corrupt are analyzed, the term of service in higher positions is limited to five years, that is, every five years such positions are considered rotation.
In the People's Republic of China, rotation is considered a planned transfer of public servants who have held the same position for more than ten years, moving to another area of ​​a similar position.
In Japan, the rotation of public servants is a guarantee of a multifaceted development, training, qualification and successful career.
 Here the transfer of employees takes place horizontally and vertically every 2-3 years, every year about 30-40% of the staff are transferred.
  However, when moving in Japan, do not ask for the employee's consent, except for transfers in which the employee has to change his / her place of residence.
Principle of providing a guarantee to a public servant.
 During the rotation, the public servant must be provided with the following guarantees: • Provision of accommodation at the new place of service.
  In other words, when moving public servants, many problems arise, such as the issue of providing the servant with an apartment in case of moving to another area.
 And it can be mentioned that this is quite a big problem in the public sphere.
  The problem is that in many areas the housing stock for public servants is very meager. Reimbursement of expenses with his family members; • Medical insurance of public servants.
If a public servant is transferred to another position, at the same time his / her salary should not be less than in his / her previous job.
In our country, the rotation of public servants is considered one of the weaknesses of the sector, as it is almost not used as an HRM tool to improve the quality of public services, develop staff capacity and assess the workforce.
According to the Civil Service Reform Strategy7, the Civil Service Law very briefly addresses rotation.
  There is a certain rotation within the same state body, but the rotation of civil servants from one body to another is not a priority; it is rarely used.
  It is obvious that the "Civil Service Reform Strategy" refers to the idea of ​​rotation, but it is not clear in what order and by what mechanism it will be implemented.
It is obvious that there are "difficulties" and problems related to the implementation of the rotation.
  And for the effective implementation of the rotation, as a result of which there is a more developed, non-corrupt public sector, the following changes are necessary in the public sector.
• Lack of a unified system of rotation in the public sphere.
 For the effective solution of this problem it is necessary to create normative-legal acts, in which the rotation will be clearly defined, the mechanisms of its implementation, types, terms of implementation, conditions of implementation in the public sphere will be defined, at the same time the rotation must be continuous. It is necessary to fix a clear mechanism of mobility.
• Difficulties in solving social problems during the transfer of a public servant or his / her family members.
• Uncertainty in the management structure of the public servants' rotation system.
  To create an appropriate structure in the public sphere, which will be responsible for the organization, implementation and control of the rotation process.
  At the same time, the 7 Sources of that structure are https.
//www.e-gov.am/sessions/archive/2015/12/29.
Activities, rights and responsibilities will be set out in the relevant document.
• Use in a "narrow" direction of rotation.
  In other words, the rotation of public servants can more often be considered as a means of combating corruption, the "difficulty" of using this method does not allow to develop clear mechanisms of rotation of public servants, which will be aimed at the professional growth of public servants.
 It should be noted that the problems in the public sphere are quite large, so it is wrong to implement the rotation mechanism to solve only the corruption problem.
 A well-developed rotation mechanism will help to train qualified specialists, as well as to ensure their multifaceted development.
• Clearly define in the law the mechanism of rotation in the public sphere.
  The peculiarity of the rotation in the public sphere is that here the rotation is carried out only with the consent of the public servant, it must be in writing.
In certain cases it is allowed to refuse the transfer, և those reasons must be clearly separated in the law, in particular: • The employee is ill, և the transfer is contraindicated, • The employee's family members can not be transferred due to his / her health condition.
At the same time, the law clearly states the cases, the appropriate methods of solving them, how the rotation of public servants will be carried out, if they do not give their consent to these transfers, if the above-mentioned reasons are absent (dismissal, dismissal, reassignment, etc.).
In general, we can single out the international experience of personnel rotation in the field of public service, the application of which in the field of our public service will contribute to the improvement of the rotation system, in particular, the rotation system should be expanded, as in Japan and China.
  In China, rotation is universal, that is, it extends to all levels of government.
  In addition, it should be possible to rotate not only within subdivisions, but throughout the structure, from one subdivision to another, as is the case in the Japanese model, where the rotation is broader. »For the employees of the central structure.
 The positive thing in this situation is that there is an exchange of information at the central և local level և knowledge։.
The rotation of employees in our public sector should be mandatory և carried out on the basis of a detailed plan.
  It is possible to introduce և develop the Japanese model, where the transfer of public servants is mandatory, և every 2-3 years there are horizontal և vertical transfers of employees.
 At the same time, there should be vacancies in each governing body, a reserve of positions, which will be designed to hire public servants in the framework of the rotation, as is done in the rotation system of the People's Republic of China.
The rotation of a civil servant in our public sphere can be carried out within the higher group of a civil service position or a higher subgroup of the same group, if the civil servant meets the requirements set by the passport of the given position.
 However, it already contains a restriction. Lacking the appropriate qualities, the employee is not rotated.
 For this problem it is necessary to introduce the experience of the rotation system implemented in the public sphere of the People's Republic of China. Employees may be transferred to another functional unit or to a higher position, having previously undergone appropriate training.
Thus, it can be concluded that the above-mentioned problems և after solving the difficulties, rotation will become an integral part of the public service system, և the existence of a clear rotation mechanism, as well as its continuous (continuous) implementation will allow highly qualified և versatile staff, an effective means.
Anahit Tadjosyan PERSONNEL ROTATION SYSTEM IN PUBLIC SERVICE Keywords: rotation, rotation classification, rotation principles, corruption, public service, public servant Summary.
