THE SOURCES OF AZERI NATIONALISM. IDEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENTS WITH THE 20TH CENTURY EARLY HISTORICAL-POLITICAL REALITIES 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev became the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
The policy of "Reconstruction" and "Publicity" proclaimed by him did not go unnoticed by the Union Republics, including Azerbaijan.
  The impact of the "Reconstruction" policy in Azerbaijan և the subsequent developments are closely connected with a number of peculiarities of the transformation of the bases of the Azerbaijani nationalist ideology և national theoretical concepts.
The process of forming the ethnic identity of Azerbaijanis began in the early 20th century among the Caucasian Tatars living in the territory of present-day Azerbaijan1.
 In this case, the tsarist statistical bulletins of Tsarist Russia of the late 19th and early 20th centuries are as great as the terms "Tatar" or "Caucasian Tatar" were used for Turkic-speaking Muslims living in the territory of the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan.
 See First personal description of the settlement of Rozhdestvenskaya st. √7, 1897, http.
//elib.shpl.ru/ru/nodes/15163-vyp-1-naselenie-gorodov-po12.04.2015.
See also Dubrovina N., History of War and Russian Governments in the Caucasus (Volume 1, Book 1) After the emergence of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan in 21918, the term "Turk" came into circulation, symbolizing the linguistic identity of the Turkic-speaking Muslims living in the area. the ability to identify.
This was opposed by the religious identity of the Turkic-speaking people, the Shiite sect of Islam, which at that time had political and cultural contradictions with Sunnism, that is, with Ottoman Turkism, a religious commonality with Iranian Shiism.
V. had a certain role in the choice of the "Turkish" ethnic identity of the Turkic-speaking Muslims of the Ice Caucasus. Lenin-M. Kemal Russian-Turkish alliance, by which private agreements were reached on Azerbaijan.
  However, in the 1930s, the USSR political authorities raised the issue of emphasizing the ethnic identity of the Turkic-speaking peoples of Azerbaijan.
  1937 From the beginning of the census, the term "Azerbaijani" was introduced, gradually turning from the name of the inhabitants of the territory of Azerbaijan into a term expressing ethnicity.
  See Özcelik Y., The Development and9 (2013), p. 27.
 Taking into account the mentioned circumstances, the significance of the 20th policy within the framework of this article.
  According to the American author Michael Croisant, "the economic developments of the Russian Empire in the late 19th century led to the deepening of social stratification among Armenians and Azeris. The latter were mostly poor, unprofessional, engaged mainly in agricultural work, while the Armenians lived in the city as entrepreneurs and traders, holding lucrative positions.
  These realities contributed to the emergence of anti-Armenian sentiments among Azeris at the domestic level.
 And the rise of Pan-Turkism among the Azeri-educated class provided an intellectual basis for those moods. ”2
On the one hand, due to the development of the oil industry, the deepening of socio-economic equality, on the other hand, due to the policy pursued by the Russian regime, during the Armenian-Tatar clashes in 1905-1906, anti-Armenian sentiments appeared among the Tatars for the first time.
The Czech historian Miroslav Hroչ notes that the existence of a serious social or ethnic conflict is a precondition for the propaganda of national ideologies and its turning into a mass movement, which was very pronounced in the Caucasus in 1905-09 և1917-1921, including We consider the term "Caucasian Tatar", but we leave unchanged the name "Azerbaijani" used by some of the authors we refer to.
2 Croissant M., The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict.
 Causes and implications, London, 1998, p. 8. 3 Tsarist Russia intended to achieve the complete Russianization of the Ice Caucasus, both culturally, economically and politically.
 In this way, it was impossible not to take into account the already established factor of the Armenian intelligentsia, so at the beginning of the 20th century a policy of inciting ethnic clashes was launched to avoid possible revolutionary movements hindering the expansion of the colonial policy of the tsarist government.
 In the case of Armenians և Georgians, cultural and religious commonalities խաղում the contacts existing over the centuries played a big role.
 Therefore, the attempts of the Russians to interest the Georgians in the Armenian capital and wealth did not bring success.
  Thus, it was more expedient to incite the Caucasian Tatars, who professed Islam in the Ice Caucasus, against the Armenians.
 1896 Grigory Golitsyn, who was appointed Prime Minister for the Caucasus, took steps to strengthen the role of Muslims in the empire and weaken the Armenians.
 For example, after drastically reducing the number of Armenians holding 50-90% of positions in the civil service, he handed over those positions to Muslims.
  Golitsyn's policy was continued by Baku Governor Mikhail Nakashidze.
 1905 In January, he allowed Muslims to acquire large quantities of weapons.
 That weapon was used during the Armenian-Tatar clashes.
  See Swietochowski T., Russian-Azerbaijan 1905-1906.
  The Shaping ofNational Identity in a Muslim Community, London, 2004, pp. 40-41.
4.
  Polish historian Tadeusz Svitokowski emphasized. "For the first time, the 'Armenian-Tatar war' promoted the unity of Muslims for a cause that transcended local or religious affiliation. From now on, these divisions ceased to be a serious obstacle to political action.
 The symbol of unity was still the green flag of the Prophet, but the religious protest mainly had the function of mobilizing the Muslim population for ethnic conflict.
  "The slogan was 'death to unbelievers', but it was mainly directed against Armenians, excluding the use of violence against Russians, Georgians and other Christian nations."
  The Armenian-Tatar conflict turned into a multifaceted one. Along with its religious and cultural orientation, it included factors such as the dissatisfaction of the fledgling Azeri bourgeoisie based on uncompromising struggle, the clash of unskilled Tatars, Armenian businessmen and merchants, and the hatred of 6 predominantly rural Muslims and urban Armenians.
At the same time, at the beginning of the 20th century, the "ancestors" of "Azerbaijani" nationalism appeared on the scene, who played a significant role in leading the political ferment among the Caucasian Tatars.
 Among them were Ali bey Huseynzade, Ahmed bey Aghaoglu, Alimardan bey Topchibash և Mamed Emin Rasulzadeh7.
 It is noteworthy that at the beginning of their activity they were more ideologically inclined to play a major role in the religion of Islam.
 1905-1907 The Azeri political organizations that emerged during the revolutionary movements did not aim to fight the Azeris as a self-sufficient ethnic group. 4 Reference according to Shissler H., Between Two Empires, Ahmet Ağaolu and The New Turkey, IB Tauris, London, 2002, p. 11.
5 Swietochowski T., ref. work., page 42.
6 Swietochowski T., ref. work., page 39.
7 This period is marked by the weakening of the Iranian influence on the Muslims of the Caucasus, the strengthening of the Turkish influence, which was especially expressed in the published press.
 Thus, "Irshad", "Hayat" newspapers (1905-1906) and "Fuyuzat" magazine (1906-1907) were published in the Istanbul dialect of the Ottoman language, which played a major role in increasing Turkey's influence and in the process of developing an all-Turkish identity among Turkic-speaking Muslims in the Caucasus.
 Through the press, the term "milliyətçilik" ("nationalism"), or rather the word borrowed from "nationalism" came into use, և the newspapers began to call their readers not only Muslims, but also Turks of the Caucasus or just Turks.
  Details: Swietochowski T., ref. op. cit., pp. 56-63.
for the national rights of the whole, but for the rights of all Muslims in the Caucasus8, which was natural because there was no "Azerbaijani" ethnos.
 Therefore, at this stage, the identity of the Caucasian Tatars was not based on the national ethnic consciousness, it was built around religious-regional affiliation, therefore, the attempts to unite around religion were natural and explicable.
 These processes are marked by cultural growth in theater, journalism and other fields9.
 At the same time, it is noteworthy that the cultural rights of Islam were discussed exclusively for the Turkic-speaking peoples, the Caucasian Tatars. The Muslim Caucasian-speaking Lezgins, Avars and other groups were not part of this discourse.
On the basis of religious perceptions, the Nashians were divided into Sunnis, moreover, the Shiites were mainly Turkic-speaking, except for the Iranian-speaking Tatars, the Talysh, and the Sunnis were Caucasian-Muslims (Lezgins, Avars, Tsakhurs, etc.).
1905-1907 During the period of the Russian Revolution, in the program provisions of the political organizations that appeared among the Caucasian Tatars (among them were "Heyrat", "Difay" Gail) the place was given to the ideas of Islam, at the same time the struggle against the Armenians began to become an essential factor.
 It became especially acute after the Armenian-Tatar clashes10.
9 For example, in 1908. The play "Leyla աջ Majmun" was staged for the first time.
  For details, see Swietochowski T., op. work., page 56.
 It is noteworthy that the Baku newspaper published in Baku in 1911, which presented the life of Baku residents, had two clear divisions: "Armenian life" and "Muslim life".
 See Baku, 1911, Resurrection, January 9; Tuesday, January 24; Wednesday, February 9, etc.
 In other words, there was no word about "Azerbaijanis" here.
10 The most influential of these organizations was a secret group called the Difa (All-Muslim Defense Committee of the Caucasus), a Muslim "self-defense" organization, which, according to Schisler, represented the Armenian Revolutionary Federation in the Caucasus.
  See Shissler H., op. Cit., P. 127.
 One of the tasks of the organization was to target terrorists suspected of being pro-Armenian in a position considered dangerous for the Muslim population.
  See izzizov E., Difai, XX ixsrin əvvəllərində'snaqişin -vvəllərlinə münaqişəsinin ilkin tarixişərtləri və səbəbləri, Bakı-2009, p. 93.
  It is noteworthy that the party also made a decision related to Karabakh. With the help of the capitalists of Baku, the Taghis և Asadulas, it was planned to buy from the Armenians the estates of Prince Utsmi և near Aghdam, as well as all the lands from Aghdam to Khojalu station,
 See Bagirova I., Political Parties and Organizations of Azerbaijan in the Early Century.
 1900-1917, Baku, Elm, 1997, p. 91.
Taking into account the mentioned realities, it can be argued that at the beginning of the 20th century the first elements of the formation of nationalism began to appear among the Caucasian Tatars.
  The significance of the Armenian-Tatar conflicts was great in that process, which played the role of a unique "catalyst" in the rise of nationalist ideology among the Caucasian Tatars.
 Attempts by various new political organizations to unite all Muslims in the Caucasus to use religion as a basis for pan-Islamist ideological goals were unsuccessful, so step by step Turkism began to play a major role in the national ideological movement.
 This was due to the strengthening of Turkey's influence in the region on the one hand, and the fact that the Tatar intelligentsia was strongly influenced by the Turkish ideology on the other.
 As a result, Turkism began to have a decisive influence on the further formation of the ideologies of the nationalist movements that had begun among the Caucasian Tatars.
The first signs of the transition from "ummah" to "nation" and from Islam to Turkism appear in the social and political life of Azerbaijan11.
 The role of Mamed Emin Rasulzadeh, the founder of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan (1918-1920) and the "Musavat" party led by him since 1913, is great in this process.
 Still in 1911. In the beginning, the ideological basis of the party was Islam, but gradually it gave way to Turkism.
  1917 In his writings on the eve of February 1945, Rasulzade based the nationalist ideology on Musavat, which ultimately contributed to the party's transition from the concept of Islamic Union to the struggle for the rights of Azerbaijanis and Turkic peoples12.
  The motto of the "Musavat" party was "Turkification, Islamization, modernization" 13.
These processes conditioned the choice of the name of the state.
 Rasulzade, speaking in 1918-1920. On the formation of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan, he noted. "The name" Azerbaijan "is 11 Balaev A., Azeri Nation.
  The basic stages of settlement on the ruins of the XIX-XX centuries, was not even chosen as the name of the young republic.
It was preceded by discussions, during which the option of calling it "Turkey" was discussed from "Azerbaijan", as the Republic of Turkey did not exist yet (the neighboring country was officially called the Ottoman Empire) "14.
 Eventually, the name "Azerbaijan" was confirmed, because, according to Rasulzade, "Azerbaijan" referred to the Turks of Azerbaijan as an ethnonym15.
  The name of the first republic was Azerbaijan, while the name of the nation was Turkish, and the language was Turkish16.
 It is noteworthy that the naming of the newly created republic in Azerbaijan caused dissatisfaction both inside and outside the country17.
  In particular, the Turkish bourgeoisie was against such a name, they suggested calling it the Turkish Republic of the South Caucasus18.
Thus, the nationalist movements, the tendencies of ethnic unification, which started among the Caucasian Tatars at the beginning of the century, were combined with 1917. The political situation in the region after the October Revolution, in particular, the growth of Turkish influence, was conditioned by 1918-1920. The emergence of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan19.
14 celzcelik Y., ref. work., page 28.
15 Ibid.
16 ələkbərov F., We are different.
 National Azerbaijan, or Soviet Azerbaijan ?, http:
//modern.az/articles/21059/1/, 4.05.2012. 17 It should be noted that the name "Azerbaijan" or "Azerbaijan" originates from the name of the area called Atrpatakan.
 The name Azerbaijan given to the north-eastern part of the Ice Caucasus did not correspond to the historical-geographical traditions. Historically, Azerbaijan was called the area south of Araks, east of Lake Van, with Tabriz in the center.
  Different peoples gave different names to certain parts of "Ice Caucasus": Paytkaran, Aghvank-Albania, Syunik, Sakasen, Ran, Shirvan, Gandzak, etc., because there was no common name for that area.
  See All-Russian (1923), Contemporary Azerbaijan, p. 167. The proclamation of the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan caused great discontent in Iran, where the name "Azerbaijan" of Aran «Shirvan was seen as an obvious manifestation of territorial claims to the Atrpatakan province of Iran.
  It was even suggested to rename the Atrpatakan province Azadistan, but it was not accepted.
 For details, see Reza J., http:
//modern.az/articles/22735/1/, 18.09.2012.19 For more details on the peculiarities of CIS formation, see T. Hayrapetyan, Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan. Historical necessity or successful diplomacy? "Collection of articles of the jubilee scientific period dedicated to the 90th anniversary of YSU", YSU Publishing House, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 261-268.
In the Soviet period, the active steps aimed at the use of the term "Azerbaijani" as an ethnonym were decisive in the process of developing "Azerbaijani" self-consciousness, creating an ideological basis for the transition from Turkic to Azerbaijani.
 If in the first years of the formation of the Soviet Union the term "Turk" was used for nationality in the personal documents of Azerbaijanis, then in 1937 it was replaced by the "Azerbaijani" 20.
 The name "Azerbaijan" in terms of nationality and language began to be used after the establishment of the Soviet regime, only in 1937. It received official status, and the term "Turk" was banned21.
 During the Soviet period, a number of often conflicting theories about the origin of the Azeris were circulated by Azeri historians, from which three main ones can be distinguished, conventionally calling them Afghan, Iranian-Turkish-Turkic theories22.
During the Soviet years, the national policy of the communist regime was in fact aimed at establishing the ethnic self-consciousness of the Azerbaijanis on the one hand, and on the other hand, at proving their "nativeness" in the region.
  According to the American-Armenian historian Ronald Sunny, "the Soviet Union became an incubator for the creation of new nations" 23, which was clearly manifested in the case of the "Azerbaijanis".
Thus, at the beginning of the 20th century, the first elements of the national identity of the Caucasian Tatars, now Azeris, began to form.
The emerging national ideologies are based on Islam, which is later replaced by Turkism.
The idea of ​​fighting a common enemy, in this case, against the Armenians, becomes a possible factor of ethnic unification.
 These peculiarities of the nationalist ideology were also revealed later, during the years of reconstruction, during the reopening of the Karabakh conflict, az 20zcelik Y., op. work., 29.21 ələkbərov F., We are different.
 Milli Az yrbaycanın, yoxsa Sovet Azərbaycanın ?, 11.02.2012, http:
//modern.az/articles/21059/1/, 4.05.2013. 22 For details on these theories, see T. Hayrapetyan, Some Peculiarities of the Basic Theories of Azerbaijani Genealogy, “Middle East. History, Politics, Culture ", collection of articles, volume VIII, National Academy of Sciences, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 212-224.
23 Link according to Cheteryan.
 See Cheterian V., War and Peace in the Caucasus.
 Ethnic Conflict and New Geopolitics, Columbia University Press, New York, p. 45.
They came in the process of the rise of identity, the revival of nationalist ideologies, the emergence of anti-communist forces.
Ms HayrapetyanADRBEJANAKAN NATIONALISM AKUNKNERE.GAGHAPARAKHOSAKAN linked to the early 20th century historic REALITY HETBanali words, Azerbaijan, the Caucasian Tatars, nationalism, Islamism, tyurkakanutyun, adrbejanakanutyun, etnanvanum, haytatarakan clashes, Mamed Emin RasulzadenAmpopum.
