AMIRDOVLAT AMASIATSI LANGUAGE FEATURES OF TWO MEDICAL TERMS "BENEFITS OF MEDICINE"
 In the Armenian Middle Ages (even much earlier than that) we had medicine with a rich history, and our famous doctors were aware of the existence of various diseases and mastered the secrets of their treatment, created their own medicine based on reliable folk remedies and foundations.
A. Amasiatsi, creating a lasting medical heritage, has used many terms in his medical works, the study of the structural-grammatical features of which is presented in this article.
The purpose of the realization of the semantic-structural study of medical terms is to understand and imagine not only A. The scientific pictorial language of Amasiatsi, but also the whole medieval scientific linguistic thinking.
A. In the new Armenian linguistics, S. referred to the terminology of Amasiatsi's scientific works. Vardanyan. "The analysis of Amirdovlat Amasiatsi 's medical terminology, which is a specialized part of his vocabulary, allows conclusions to be drawn about his language" 1.
Amirdovlat Amasiatsi is the author of a number of medical works: "Akhrapatin", "Angitats anpet or dictionary of medical material", "Benefit of medicine".
  In the center of our study were, in particular, the study of the linguistic peculiarities of the term "Benefit of Medicine" 2 առ in it.
 We performed the semantic examination of the terms according to Ruben Ghazaryan «Henrik Avetisyan's" Dictionary of Middle Armenian "3, as well as" New Dictionary of Haigazian Language "4.
A. Amasiatsi's "Benefit of Medicine" consists of two sections, which have the following titles: "Study of Medicine" and "Book of Medicine".
As a result of the study, we have singled out more than six hundred medical terms, the explanation of many of which was presented by A. Amasiatsi, which, of course, speaks of the author բ բ's high level of medical mastery.
A. The medical terms of Amasiatsi's "Benefit of Medicine" work are classified into four categories: 1. word words, 2. words indicating diseases, 3. words and phrases meaning organic medical actions, 4. words indicating medical tools (as can be seen from our classification, we We do not single out the names of herbs, considering them beyond the scope of our study).
1) Keywords are terms related to physique (anatomy), for example: garbage (teat), gut or gut (gut, intestines), gums (teeth), gums or gills (gums, gums), groin, empty mustache (end of colon) part, forearm), member, incisors (retina, inner lining of the eyeball), booty or booty (appendix, appendix), vagina (genitals of a man or an animal), uterus, mouth, vein, face, kidney, uterus (tongue, tongue, groin), welded (joint), joint, lung, tongue, gallbladder, larynx, wit, chin, knee, skin, chin, eyelid, back (back, slope), forehead, finger, urethra, meat, 1 Vardanyan S ., Amirdovlat Amasiatsi և Medieval Armenian medical terminology, "Historical-Philological Journal", № 4, Yerevan, 1990, p. 106.
2 Available at: http.
//www.digilib.am/digilib/?menu=5&wrk=8&captn=306&wrpg=0&aupg=0.
3 Ghazaryan R., Avetisyan H., Dictionary of Middle Armenian, Yerevan, 2009.
4 Avedikian G., Surmelian Kh., Augerian M., New Dictionary of the Haigazian Language, Venice, 1836-1837.
yanapi or yanapia (iris, iris of the eye), seat or seat, shiryan kamshiria (pulse), ventricle, spine, bone, puck (beak, throat), seed, heart, stomach, throat, neck, eyebrow, spleen or vagina ( in the brightest way), money, belly, etc.
2) Words indicating diseases, for example: Achilles (rot), earaghan (jaundice, jaundice), urupu (asthma, convulsions), deaf or dumb (indefinite disease), madness (madness), kavars (skin disease, scarlet fever), refutation (skin disease, which), humrai (acute inflammatory skin disease), ghapz (constipation), jaundice (indefinite disease), nuzj (abscess, abscess), shakika (severe headache, hangar), barsam or brsam, zatlcha Inflammation of the thorax: pneumonia, pleurisy, sciatica (tuberculosis, tuberculosis), sciatica or cerebral palsy (cerebral palsy, cerebral hemorrhage), lard (mucus) ), fall (paralysis of half of the body) և etc.
3) Words and phrases meaning medical և organic actions, for example, to urinate or water (urinate), to take a vein, to make the tongue heavier, to sew, to break, to break or to break (to break, to break: about joints), to crack (to break, to break) to tie meat, to be skinned, to shine (shot. about the eyes), to breathe, to be a bone, to have a half-full stomach, to be weak (to weaken. about the work of the heart, to weaken), to sneeze (to shed, to shed), to thorn tremble, tingle), vomit, rot or rot, have foam փ etc.
4) Words indicating medical instruments (these words were obviously few in number compared to the words of others), such as needle, hokna (tired), scissors, sunarai (pen cutter, small knife, razor blade), etc.
The next question we referred to refers to A. To the source science of the medical terms used by Amasiatsi.
A. The medical terms of Amasiatsi's "Benefit of Medicine" are derived according to their origin. B) Persian loans - atashi paras (atāši-bārās), brsam (bārsam), ghapz (ğābz), sarsam (sār-sam) և etc., C) Turkish loans - hayz (heyiz), cigar (ciger) և etc., D Greek borrowings - խski, flegmone, etc., E) Latin borrowings - ileus or ileus, etc.
Ս. Vardanyan writes. "J. (A. Amasiatsi - S. Gasoyan), in addition to native Armenian words, used borrowed terms from a number of languages ​​(Greek, Latin, Arabic, Persian, Turkish)". However, in addition to the five languages ​​mentioned above, he often uses borrowed terms from other languages ​​(Hindi, Ghpchagh), as well as dialects of Persian (Shiraz, Khorasan, Balkh, Bukhara, Samarkand).
  The author mentions this in relation to "Angitats anpet", which is completely applicable to the terminology in the work "Benefits of Medicine".
 It should be added, however, that we come across such terms-words, in which case it is difficult to determine which language the word is borrowed from. Amasian, for example, the word "nikris", which has the meaning of "gout", has its equivalents in three languages ​​at the same time: Arabic (niqris), Persian (neğras), Turkish (nιkris).
 Or, the word "tukhmay", which has the meanings of "stomach cramps - constipation, indigestion, indigestion", has its corresponding equivalents in two languages: Arabic (tuxma) and Persian (toxme).
 In such cases, it is difficult to state unequivocally that the given word was borrowed from a specific language, that is, which language served as a source for the existence of that word.
It should be noted that Amasiatsi used his Armenian equivalents in parallel with the borrowed words in both of them, as well as the original Armenian or such terms, in which case we know exactly from which language it is borrowed, for example, eye, eye, April (live), tears, mouth, tongue, scab, flower (disease), suture, rib, rib, fracture, fracture, blindness, disease, shepherd or wolf (wolf, lupus), indigestion, rash or rash (pregnant), warm, heart, sight, vomit, sleep և etc.
Ս. Vardanyan rightly mentions in this regard. "J. of Amasiatsi affairs. The analysis of the specialized part of the vocabulary, medical terminology, shows that although in it 1 Vardanyan S., p. 105.
Many foreign languages ​​were borrowed from Greek, Latin, Persian, Arabic, and a number of other languages, but the author used the endless possibilities of his native language to express medical concepts.
  Amasiatsi, and three centuries before him Mkhitar Heratsi, chose the only right way to develop Armenian medical terminology. not avoiding foreign borrowings, at the same time they paid great attention to the native Armenian words, creating original terms, some of which were taken from folklore ”1.
This circumstance is remarkable. A. In Amasiatsi's work we notice a tendency to call the same ևspecific տարբեր different terms համար to define համար in different terms,, which adds to the attractiveness of what is to be said և և անգամ once the author's wide horizon փաստ has an unusual linguistic mindset.
  Let us bring relevant examples.1. "Intermittent warm" - apart from ghip, mutpaghay, mutpighay, mutpghay, much al ghip, shatralghgh, 2. "malignant tumor, cancer" - khechepar, khechepar, khechipar, khul, saratan, saratain, saratan, varam, uram. "Itch, leprosy" - leprosy, lamentation, chitam, chutam, paras, parash, 4. "epnavnutyun, vernotutyun" - sarah, saray, saray, khtkhtavorutyun, patafkan, uchukh, 5. "Muscle, muscle, muscles" - azalaunq, mkun, yajalani, 6. "sheets, eyelash" - eyebrow, blink, eyelash, 7. "water theft" - eagle, zmast, siskhay, sskhay, skhavaiva, 8. "drowsiness, delusion »- աղվաշութիւն, ճունուն, մանիա, 9. "Swelling" - istskhay, according to skhay, swelling, edema, 11. "inflammation of the larynx, pneumonia, pleurisy" զաթլճամբ, զաթըլճամպ, զաթլճան, զաթլճանբ, շավսա, պարսամ, 12. "Flu" - tavam, zukam, zukeam, nuzlay, 13. "eye garek, ladyblondz" - garek, garek, tahachur, shairai, purt.
Examining the above-mentioned medical work of Amasiati առկա the terms contained in it, we came to the conclusion that these terms, depending on the composition, can be: A) simple words - groin, needle, blood, medicine, vein, face, tongue, heel, flower, knee , sneeze (sore, piercing), rib, cough, pill (pill, tablet), forehead, person, scissors, sneeze (pulse, pulse), shaf, shhus (sleep change), breath, heart, tigh (melting, exhausting fever, warm), type (treatment, medicine), money, belly, wind (arthritis), fatkh (catastrophe, hernia, vomiting) և etc., B) compound words.1. Complications: ringworm or eardrum (earlobe), ringing in the ears (gums, gums), tingling, numbness (foresight), headache, tingling, tingling, tingling in the back, tingling, numbness
According to the grammatical affiliation, the terms are: 1. Nouns: member, blood, doctor, chief physician, vein, rash, birth, life, chin, cow (body, body), cough, hakim, disease, front, human formation, digestive 1 Vardanyan S., p. 119.
2 We present the main types of complications, without specifying the others: attachment, relative, real, etc.
sudden death or mark mafachan, sign, nutul (drug), shapakhay or shapakia (retina, inner lining of the eyeball), breath, palm or phlegm (mucus, bile, sputum), paise (moon, eyeball, white spot of deer) , ptuni tmagh (brain), warm or ghip, ghp, nerve or pivant, tendon, sapat or supat (lethargic sleep), savtay or savtay, svetaykam s bile, heart, stomach, vision, pain և etc., 2. adjectives - healthy , female, ram, ram or ram (crazy), halemmash or halemash (exhausting, exhausting, dying), deadly, thin, udder, horny or horny (pregnant, causal, laryngeal), gastric disorder (with stomach upset), etc. . verbs - April, to be healthy, to gossip or water, to take medicine, to take a vein, to be heavy, to taste the tongue, to make the tongue heavier, to pierce (to form an ulcer, to appear, to become an ulcer, to change an ulcer…), to sew, to break,
As can be seen, the numerals և verbs are almost balanced in numerical ratio, and the adjectives are obviously inferior to them in number.
A. We have studied the medical terms in Amasiatsi, many of which have ambiguous words or homonyms, with "synchronic" and "diachronic" concepts.
  We have presented the results of the analysis made within the framework of the simultaneous (synchronous) point of view in the above-mentioned essay.
We conducted the study from a diachronic point of view, and as a result of our research, we found that there are a number of medical terms that have undergone semantic changes over time, experiencing semantic expansion or narrowing (for example, nature, type, attitude, etc.).
The term "nature" was an ambiguous word in Old Armenian, losing its previous meanings in Middle Armenian and beginning to be used to mean "plants in the abdomen (intestines, stomach)", and in modern Armenian, lost again.
 In other words, this word experienced a semantic narrowing due to the transition from Old Armenian to Middle Armenian, and a semantic expansion after the transition from Middle Armenian to Modern Armenian, with a preliminary loss of medical meaning.
The word "type", which was also a polysemous word in Old Armenian, got the following meaning in Middle Armenian, with the loss of its previous meanings - "treatment, medicine".
This meaning has not been preserved in modern Armenian, despite the current meaning of the word under study.
  In other words, the word "type", like the previous one, is a semantic narrowing in the middle Armenian, and in modern Armenian - an expansion of the meaning, which was accompanied by the loss of the meaning "treatment, medicine".
The word "attitude", which in Old Armenian և is classified as a polysemous word in modern Armenian, in Middle Armenian, as in the previous words, has retained only one meaning, that is, "vomiting, vomiting, snoring", and it is used only in the middle Armenian terminology.
 In other words, this word also experienced a semantic narrowing in the terminological layer in Middle Armenian, compared to Old Armenian, և a semantic expansion in comparison with modern Armenian.
Thus, studying A. The medical terms of Amasiatsi's "Benefit of Medicine", we noticed that many of them, so to speak, were invented according to the peculiarity of the external signs of the disease or the names of some animals, which was due to the existence of certain beliefs associated with those animals.
Introduce a number of the above medical terms: garbage or fountain, fountain (eye tear), fox or fox (hair loss), mulberry (eye disease when mulberry-like meat grows under the eyelid), pig (pig) nest, flower, rye (dog, wolf appetite, wolf's, dog's appetite), mushroom (mushroom-like flesh, tuber, mulberry), snake, meaning "rot, rot", give the term wolf և, etc.
It should be noted that in the dictionary articles related to these terms in the Middle Armenian dictionary, as relevant original examples, the sentences of Amirdovlat Amasiatsi's "Benefit of Medicine" are mainly given, which once again comes to prove the author A. Amasiatsi, the uniqueness and reliable source of the work in this field.
By studying the linguistic peculiarities of the medical terms of the Amasiatsi work, we rightly highlighted the work done by the author and the really great contribution to the history of Armenian medicine, one of the cornerstones of which, of course, is the serious medical study of "Benefit of Medicine".
Silva GasoyanMIRDOVLAT AMASYATSI LINGUISTIC FEATURES OF TWO MEDICAL TERMS "BENEFITS OF MEDICINE" Keywords: medical term, borrowed term, terminology, language, linguistic.
