THE ISSUE OF THE BOUNDARIES OF THE JUDICIAL PROCEDURE IN THE CONTEXT OF THE JUDICIAL SETTLEMENTS OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS The limits of the judicial examination are the most important condition of the judicial examination.
 They outline the boundaries of the criminal case to be decided by the court as a result of it, which are predetermined by the accusation of the defendant complying with the requirements of the criminal procedure during the pre-trial proceedings, the indictment drawn up by the prosecutor, the accusation defended by the prosecutor during the trial.
The constituent parts of the limits of the trial are the limitation of the trial in terms of the subject (in personam), ie the trial is conducted exclusively against the person against whom the court has decided on the appointment of the trial, սահմանափ the limitation of the trial with the specific charges attributed to him in the indictment; with the attributed facts (in rem) մամբ with the criminal legal qualification given to it, as well as with the evidence underlying the accusation.
 Thus, the court may not examine evidence relating to other convicted persons ներին to the charges against them, since the judgment is made solely on the accused defendant, the court may not refer to the judgment և assess the actions of those who have not been sued.
At the same time, in legal practice, it is often necessary to investigate the guilt of persons who have committed a crime in association with a defendant but have not been prosecuted for various reasons.
  Such a need arises from the factual circumstances of the crime or crimes or from the criminal qualification.
  In this work, the subject matter of the investigation of the criminal acts of the accomplices who have not yet been prosecuted in the cases of crimes committed with complicity, for whom the case has been separated in a separate proceeding, has become the subject of a thorough investigation.
First of all, it should be noted that in certain situations, the possibility of separating a part of a criminal case with the participation of several persons, examining it separately or sending it to court is generally provided for in Article 28, Part 2 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. It is separated by the decision of the investigator, the prosecutor or the court, if it is necessary due to the circumstances of the case, it cannot affect the completeness and objectivity of the case. ”
Analyzing the provision of the law, it can be concluded that the power to separate criminal cases is discretionary, but its legitimacy requires the simultaneous existence of certain conditions, ie: 1) based on the circumstances of the case, there is a need for it, 2) it can not affect the completeness and objectivity of the case. .
Due to the circumstances of the case, the need to separate the cases may be evidenced by various situations that arise in practice, for example, one of the members of the group is wanted, the person is diagnosed with a serious illness, recovery time is required, the crime is committed in a state of insanity. Compulsory medical measures will be applied, in which case the rights of the other accused (accused), especially the detainee (in particular, within a reasonable time) will be violated if the case is not finally resolved.
  These circumstances arising regardless of the will of the preliminary investigation body make it objectively necessary to separate the criminal case in a separate proceeding.
  However, the study of the case law shows that whenever the preliminary investigation body makes a decision to separate from the criminal case without any objective grounds for it, which leads to many problems during the trial (this will be discussed in more detail below).
 Therefore, cases of dismissal of criminal cases should be the exception, not the rule, moreover, each such decision should be clearly substantiated, that is, in addition to the requirement of completeness and objectivity of the case, all competing interests should be taken into account.
Due to the joint nature of the criminal acts committed by a group of persons, it is sometimes impossible to separate their actions և to separate the act that is blamed on a specific accused.
  That is, in those cases it is impossible to conduct a full, objective, comprehensive examination.
  The fact of committing a crime together with another person, his / her role in the mechanism of committing the crime, the degree of participation in the crime, the confirmation of the nature may affect the criminal qualification of the accused act, as well as the imposition of a sentence.
  At the same time, in the case of the investigation of the actions of the accused's accomplices during the trial, if the case against them has not been assigned to a trial, the boundaries of the trial will be violated, as well as the rights of those persons.
  Thus, the data of the persons who did not appear before the court in a separate case, to describe the actions attributed to them in the accusation against the specific defendant, to make them the subject of a trial, to confirm them in a judicial act, violate the principle of presumption of innocence.
 In case the accusation against the defendant is confirmed or proved by the court, in addition to the violation of the mentioned rights, the outcome of the separated case will be determined by the force of factual judgment, which endangers the independence and impartiality of the judge examining the case.
Taking into account the above, the following questions arise, which need a comprehensive analysis. • Is it lawful for the prosecuting authority to give such a wide discretion to dismiss the case? • Can the prosecuting authority state in the indictment of the separated case the personalizing details of the persons about whom the case has not been assigned to trial? • Can the preliminary investigation body describe in the indictment the actions of the persons not prosecuted, և if so, within what limits; • can the court examine the actions of the accused who has not appeared before the court in a separate case during the trial, և if so, within what limits? • can Does the court use the personalized data of the accused in the separated case in the verdict?
Thus, the first issue we want to discuss is the authority of the body conducting the proceedings to separate the criminal cases.
 As already mentioned, the legitimacy of the authority to dismiss a criminal case depends on such conditions of an evaluative nature, such as, depending on the circumstances of the case, its necessity, the ability to reflect on the "objectivity" of the completeness of the case.
  The draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code demonstrates a similar approach, stating that "new proceedings may be separated from proceedings instituted by more than one person for the commission of one or more alleged offenses if dictated by the need to protect the interests of justice" and may not adversely affect the fairness of the proceedings. Article 2, part 2).
It should be noted that the authority mentioned in the legal practice is often abused, part of the main case is separated without objective grounds, it is sent to court.
  In order to substantiate this observation, we consider it necessary to cite the verdict of the Court of First Instance of the city of Avan-Nor Nork administrative districts (hereinafter the Court) in the case of Armen Abrahamyan in the case of Armen Abrahamyan, by which the Court found the situation inadmissible. when in cases of alleged crimes committed by several persons (including a group), when all the accused are charged with the same thing (facts և legal assessment), it is actually based on the same body of evidence, but is partially separated from the case and sent to court, and the rest The investigation continues, especially when not only are the alleged perpetrators known, they are involved as defendants, but they are also at the disposal of the body conducting the proceedings.և There is no legal or technical obstacle to sending the case to court և for joint examination [2].
In this regard, the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court) in the case of Navalny et al. V. Russia stated that if the nature of the charge does not allow the judge to avoid making conclusions about third parties to the crime in separate proceedings, those conclusions may affect third parties. In deciding whether to prosecute, such a situation can be seen as a significant obstacle to the segregation of criminal proceedings.
A study of some international experience shows that in the criminal procedure codes of individual countries, without pretending to provide an exhaustive list, certain grounds are nevertheless separated.
 Thus, for example, Article 154 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that: «1. The investigative body, the investigator may separate the ongoing proceedings from the new proceedings: 1) in case of crimes committed in connection with individual defendants, if the person to be involved as the accused is unknown, the accused hid from the investigation, or his location is not known for other reasons, the accused is seriously ill կարող can not participate in the proceedings, the location of the accused or suspect is known, but his participation in the proceedings is possible.2) against a juvenile defendant who is prosecuted together with an adult; 3) to other persons, the accused or the suspect, if features of another crime have been found;
2. It is allowed to separate a separate proceeding from the criminal case, if it does not affect the full, objective, comprehensive investigation of the case. ”
Taking into account the above, we find it more expedient to envisage such grounds for separating criminal cases in the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 Although some of the above are envisaged by different articles of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, but taking into account the possible situations arising as a result of the separation of criminal cases, we think it is more expedient to envisage them in one article as grounds for separation of criminal cases.
  Separation from a criminal case should be the exception, not the rule.
Now we consider it necessary to discuss the questions whether the court can use the personalized data of the defendants in a separate case, refer to the actions of the defendants in a separate case, and if so, to what extent?
It is accepted in practice that if the factual circumstances of the accusation allow separate criminal cases on accomplices to be examined separately, then the investigator, for example, separates part of the criminal case on the alleged accomplice (accused), suspends the investigation and sends the main criminal case to court.
In practice, in such cases, the court often mentions the personal details of the accused wanted in a separate case, which gives the impression that not only the accused in the main case but also the alleged accomplice wanted in a separate case is found guilty. [4]
Examining the position of the European Court in the already mentioned case of Navalny և Others v. Russia գործ, we have come to the conclusion that presenting the circumstances related to the co-accused (not participating in the trial) in order to determine the criminal responsibility of the defendant in the trial does not in itself violate human rights. to the requirements of the European Convention, if: first, an analysis of such circumstances is necessary to assess the actions of the defendant participating in the trial; It is inadmissible to describe in the verdict circumstances related to the accomplices who did not participate in the trial, which are not directly related to the actions of the defendant participating in the trial. Second, the main verdict on the crimes committed with complicity does not predetermine the guilt of the accused who did not participate in the trial (avoiding the investigation); Third, the verdict in the main case does not contain information about the accused who did not participate in the trial.
Moreover, for the purpose of the last question, in the criminal procedure it is suggested to mention in the verdict the data of the accomplices not in full (name, surname, patronymic) but, for example, only the first name or the first letters of the first and last name [5].
 Some theorists have suggested that other accomplices in a separate case should be called "unidentified persons."
Or, for example, A. According to Ghambaryan, the verdict in the main case should not include the name of the alleged accomplice who did not participate in the trial, but any information that would allow identifying (personalizing) the alleged accomplice who did not participate in the trial. [7]
 The latter position is also expressed in the already cited case of Navalny's Others v. Russia, where the domestic court mentioned the first letters of the surname of the accomplices who did not participate in the trial, but referred to their positions, They undoubtedly testified as to who they were talking about, indicating their involvement in the crime for which the applicant had been convicted.
 Considering the position that there should be no identifying data of third parties, at the same time we think that the use of the terms "unidentified persons" or "unknown persons" is also inexpedient.
 In case of using the mentioned terms, it will be impossible to distinguish the accomplices.
  Therefore, in such cases, we suggest using a conditional symbol, such as X, Y, etc., which will allow you to differentiate between accomplices without using personalizing data.
Referring to the issue of describing the actions of other accomplices in the verdict և personalizing data, it is necessary to note that a certain problem arises in the issue of criminal characterization of the act.
 The reason is that in most of the articles of the special part of the RA Criminal Code the aggravating circumstance is envisaged that the act was committed by a group of persons with prior consent or by an organized group.
 In case the qualification of the act in the indictment by a group of persons or an organized group, the mentioned circumstance, as required by Article 309 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, should be the subject of forensic examination;
The European Court has clearly stated its position that the orphanage should refrain from proving the guilt of other persons.
 In fact, if the court considers the fact that the act of the accused was committed by a group of individuals to be confirmed, the legal position adopted by the European Court will be violated.
  Even if the term "unknown persons" is used, only the party will be provided with it.
 Besides, in this case the requirement of reasoning of the verdict is violated, its fairness is questioned.
 We think that using the term unknown people should not be an end in itself.
  If the alleged accomplices are unknown, then in general this aggravating circumstance cannot be blamed on the person.
  In addition, if the accomplices are unknown, it will be impossible to determine the degree of involvement of each of them, in particular, the defendant in the crime, the role in the mechanism of the crime, the nature of the actions, which also need to be confirmed.
  In connection with this issue, the Court of Cassation in the case law of 08.05.2013 EEKD / ​​0168/01/12 expressed the position that the qualification of a person's action by a group of persons with the feature of prior consent is Article 18 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. It is a violation of the principle of non-reliance on the presumption of guilt of a person, as well as of all unresolved suspicions in favor of the accused, in cases where the identities of the other members of the group have not been established.
At the same time it should be noted that any case is unique, it is difficult to apply this approach to all cases.
 However, in order not to violate the rights of the persons who have not been sued in the mentioned cases, we propose the solution that in these cases the court should make a verdict in terms of mitigation of the criminal qualification in terms of mitigation and not a norm establishing criminal responsibility for a quality crime.
  Definitely, in this situation, a certain violation of the victim's interests is possible, as in case of a milder article, the defendant will be sentenced to a milder punishment.
However, taking into account the possibility of such dangerous consequences as violations of the presumption of innocence, the right of the accused, the principles of a fair trial, and the limits of the trial, it can be said that these well-known principles prevail in this case.
 In the context of the above, it can be concluded that the reason for such disagreements is that in the RA Criminal Code, committing a crime by a group of persons with prior consent is considered as a feature of a qualified crime.
  However, let us refrain from an in-depth discussion of this issue, as it is not the subject of this study.
The question of whether the pre-investigation body can use the personalized data of those in whose case the case is not sent to court, describe the actions of those persons, and if so, within what limits, needs to be discussed.
According to Article 196 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, one of the ways to complete the preliminary investigation is to draw up an indictment.
  The RA Constitutional Court of Cassation իրենց the Constitutional Courts have referred to the significance of the indictment in their numerous decisions, արդյունքում as a result of a comprehensive analysis of the verdicts we have come to the conclusion that the indictment is a judicial document that ends the preliminary examination. guilt մասին the legal qualification of his actions.
The fact that it emphasizes the limits of the trial proves the importance of the indictment.
 In addition, the significance of the indictment is that it enables the accused to exercise his right of defense.
Given the importance of the indictment in emphasizing the limits of the trial and ensuring the right of the accused to defend himself, we believe that the bodies of the preliminary investigation should be obliged to comply with the criteria set by the European Court.
  We therefore propose to add the following requirements to the list of requirements for the content of the indictment.1. The indictment should not mention the personal data of those in the separated case, about whom the case is not sent to court; 2. The indictment should not contain any wording which, if confirmed by the verdict, would determine the guilt of the accused who did not participate in the trial, violate their right to defense, the presumption of innocence, The actions of third parties should be described in the indictment only to the extent that to what extent is it necessary to prove the guilt of the accused, to give an assessment of the acts he is accused of? The actions of third parties should be described in such a way that it is possible for the worm to carry out an objective, full, comprehensive investigation of the circumstances of the case, without going beyond the bounds of the trial, and beyond the bounds of the evidence conditioned by it.
The other group of questions we have discussed is whether the court can examine the actions of the accused in a separate case that has not yet been tried, during the trial, to what extent, what is the legal status of those persons in the sent case.
  These questions are closely interrelated, համար for the final conclusion it is necessary to make a comprehensive analysis of them.
From the legal requirement to conduct the case already mentioned in court only against the defendant, it can be assumed that the accused in the separated case, which is still at the preliminary investigation stage, cannot be tried, and a verdict has been passed.
At the same time, as we have already mentioned, sometimes during the trial there may be a need to reflect on the actions of other people.
 In addition (especially if qualified by a group of persons with prior consent or by an organized group), this requires a full, objective, and comprehensive examination of the case.
In connection with the above, it is first necessary to state that by what status, by what rights and responsibilities the persons mentioned are endowed, their actions should be examined to the extent necessary to give a legal assessment to the defendant's action.
There are different approaches to the status of these people in the theoretical literature.
 There is an opinion that they have the status of an accused and a judge, according to which they have the right to remain silent, they are free from the responsibility for giving false testimony.
 Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online. Proponents of her case have been working to make the actual transcript of this statement available online.
  Some scholars are inclined to give these individuals full rights and responsibilities.
Let's agree with the approach of endowing the mentioned persons with the status of a witness for the following reasoning: First, in case of interrogation as a witness, a person's right to remain silent in his / her own case as an accused may be restricted.
 In fact, if his testimony can be used during the trial of the accused, then that testimony can also be used in his case, no matter how much the court tries to ensure that he does not reflect on the actions of other persons, in fact, it is impossible in case of cohabitation, because an objective, full comprehensive investigation The court must find out the degree of participation of the accomplices, the nature of the actions, etc.
 Second, if the persons are accomplices, we think that it is inexpedient to give them different statuses just because they are in different proceedings.
 And finally, if the person participated in the commission of the given crime, he cannot be a witness.
The testimony of the suspect or accused in a separate criminal case is envisaged as an independent type of evidence (Article 1131 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code).
 According to the law, the information provided by the person about the crime has been committed, he can be interrogated both in that case and in the case in which he was involved in the interrogation, in another criminal case the suspect or the accused or the accused is interrogated. , in accordance with the established procedure for interrogation of the defendant.
 Analyzing this legal regulation, it can be concluded that the legislator, envisaging this type of evidence, intended to insure this category of persons from the interrogation in the manner prescribed for a witness.
 At the same time, however, it should be noted that the Criminal Procedure Code does not provide for a proper procedure for obtaining them.
We believe that this category of persons should have the right to participate in the trial, which is carried out against the accomplice, to ask questions to the accomplice, as well as to give testimony.
 At the same time, taking into account the possibility of refusing to testify, we propose to establish the possibility of publishing the testimony of the accused in another criminal case, which is missing in Article 337 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, which defines the procedure and grounds for publishing the accused.
LITERATURE [1] Bravilova EA, Lands of fateful understanding.
  dis. канд. юрид. In the case of Armen Abrahamyan, the verdict of the Court of First Instance of the Avan-Nor Nork administrative districts of the city of Yerevan, No. EN / 0030/01/16.
[3] ECHR Navalny և Others v. Russia Case No. 46632/13, 04/07/2016.
[4] Ghambaryan A., The interaction of the accusations of the accomplices in the context of the exculpatory nature of the judicial acts ադատ Legality ”2017, No. 97, p. 13.
[5] Hayrapetyan J., Issues of Judgment as a Justice in the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 Candidate's dissertation, 2015, page 70.
[7] Ghambaryan A., The interaction of the accusations of the accomplices in the context of the exclusionary nature of the judicial acts, "Legality", 2017, No. 97, p. 13.
[8] Մ. The decision of the Court of Cassation in the case of Hakobyan on May 8, 2013 in the case No. EKD / ​​0168/01/12.
BORDER PROBLEM KREAKANGORTSERE DISCONNECTS Petrosyan LaraDATAKAN REVIEW PROCEEDINGS KARGAVORUMNERIHAMATEKSTUMBanali words, borders the trial of criminal cases shutdown, nakhadateliutyun, presumption of innocence, the right to meghadryalipashtpanutyan, judgment, judicial review, meghadrakanezrakatsutyun, but one of the accused to testify in a criminal case, the defendant testified.
