THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TECHNOLOGIES IN THE PROCESS OF EDUCATIONTechnology is a Greek word, which means science about art, mastery.
  60s of the 20th century. The concept of pedagogical technology was introduced in pedagogy.
  In one case it is understood as a set of technical means - its application (G. Selevko), in the second case - as a micro-system, which consists of scientifically grounded and grouped elements - pedagogical problem, corresponding means and methods, tricks (B. Likhachov), In another case, a program, the implementation of which presupposes a predictable result (G. Ksenzova, A. Kolechenko).
In order to solve the new problems set for the organization of the modern pedagogical process, various research works are carried out, which are aimed at the study, testing and dissemination of new methods, effective ways of organizing educational work, different means.
 The effectiveness of the pedagogical process is not conditioned by separate tricks, methods, but only by the system of their complex application - pedagogical technologies.
 The whole pedagogical process is aimed at solving various problems, each of which requires the development and application of targeted technologies appropriate to the problem.
 At the core of the organization of the pedagogical process are pedagogical technologies, which work in combination with methods.
Pedagogical technology is a program aimed at transforming the ways and means of activity; an activity built in accordance with that program.
 Pedagogical technology, which is a successful step-by-step solution to a problem, created for a specific purpose, is in fact an effective system in a specific situation.
 Examining the views of Russian Foreign authors, we can give some definitions of the concept of social-pedagogical technology: • Pedagogical technology is the art of a pedagogue, his skill that allows him to change the situation (VM Shepel) 1, is a program aimed at the creation and implementation of an action, taking into account human և technical resources և their interaction, which aims to optimize development processes (UNESCO) 2.
Komensky said. "For a didactic machine, one must search and find: a) clearly defined goals, b) clear means to achieve those goals, c) certain stable rules on how those means can be used to achieve the set goals."
Pedagogical technology is a plan of planned, pre-designed, sequential actions aimed at solving a problem, which is a goal-oriented activity consisting of interconnected, logically successive stages: diagnosis-prediction. Diagnosis of the object, diagnosis of the pedagogical problem, clarification, prediction of its further, possible development perspective.
Thus, pedagogical technologies are aimed at solving the problem of improving the quality of education, which is implemented with the help of innovative means of organizing the teaching process in the higher education institution.
  Modern pedagogical technologies make it possible to carry out active, self-oriented learning, which promotes communicative-conscious development.
In order to achieve the full result of the pedagogical activity, the pedagogue is required to choose an expedient or optimal technology that ensures the achievement of the goal, individualization of the selected type of technology, taking into account the peculiarities of the pedagogical activity subject, requirements, professionalism, skills and conditions of technology implementation.
All this is followed by the implementation phase of the technology itself, during which the pedagogue evaluates the effectiveness of the pedagogical technology implementation, compares the results predicted at the beginning of the technology implementation, planned and achieved after the technology implementation, evaluation in accordance with the pedagogical work1.
The pedagogue must be able to choose the pedagogical technology that is more expedient in a particular situation և The main thing is to be able to provide all the conditions that ensure the high efficiency of its implementation.
Thus, we can say that pedagogical technology is considered as a set of stages, methods and means of pedagogical activity, which ensure the effective sequence of activities, which is aimed at solving certain pedagogical problems, effective organization of the teaching process.
Pedagogical technologies are characterized by a number of features: • Existence of goals developed according to clear, sequential didactic principles: • Development, condensation և system of material or information to be mastered, • Systematic use of didactic, technical, computer means in teaching և examination process; • Teaching գործ upbringing Emphasis added: • Guarantee of high quality training.
In the application of any pedagogical technology, the following should be taken into account: • the level of application, • the philosophical rationale, • the leading concept of knowledge acquisition, • the nature of the content of education, • the forms of teaching, • the predominant method of teaching, • the qualitative characteristics of learners.
When choosing a technology, it is very important to have a goal, that is, for what purpose and for what result the program is implemented.
 The nature of the chosen technology depends on the goal 2.
Thus, the correct and timely application of pedagogical technologies depends on the competence of the specialist, the pedagogue, the individual approach, the ability to objectively assess the situation.
Pedagogical technologies have their classifications, the types according to which, depending on the situation, they are used: • The use of traditional (reproductive) teaching technology implies:  teaching new material,  strengthening,  testing,  evaluation.
However, in case of using this technology, the learner is in the role of a passive object, he is not an active subject, his creative abilities are limited, the expression of abilities.
 The learner assimilates the given material, the information ադրում reproduces, there is no presentation of one's own point of view, individual approach, independent analysis.
Thus, traditional (reproductive) technology has the following limitations: 1 Petrosyan H., Modern learning technologies, Yerevan, 2010, p. 121.
։ Insignificant opportunities for personalization, differentiation,։ Incomplete expression of learners' mental qualities, capacities, որոշակի Some opportunity for creative development.
• Collaborative learning technology is characterized by the following features:  personality development և personality development,  psychological և physical health,  stress management, և healthy relationships.
When using this technology, the cooperation of both parties, the unity, the full participation of the learner in the learning process, the creation of a healthy moral and psychological atmosphere in the learner-teacher relationship are used.
The elements of collaborative learning technology are:  Ensuring positive interdependence,  face-to-face interaction,  individual reporting և responsibility,  interpersonal or small group work skills, խմ group process development, գործըն interactive or interactive task performance.
• In case of application of problem-based learning technology, independent research work is assigned under the guidance of the pedagogue, which implies the development of new knowledge, abilities, skills, development of creative thinking and other personal qualities.
In case of application of problem-solving training, the specialist pedagogue does not transfer ready-made knowledge to the learner, but presents the problem or issue that needs to be solved, presupposes the search for different ways of solution.
 The specialist tries to interest the learner with the presented problem, arouses interests in him / her so that he / she studies the existing problem in all aspects, finds a correct solution, that is, creates an initiative to solve the given problem.
When using interactive teaching technologies, the cooperation with the pedagogue also changes. His activity gives way to the activity of the students, the task of the pedagogue is to create conditions for their initiative.
  Learners in interactive technologies act as full-fledged participants, their experience less important than that of a pedagogue.
 The latter does not so much give ready knowledge, but stimulates the students' independent search.
In interactive technologies the pedagogue plays several main roles.
In each of them, he organizes the interaction of the participants with this or that part of the information environment.
  In the role of informant-expert, the pedagogue writes the text material, shows the video, answers the participants' questions, follows the results of the process, etc.
In the role of organizer-facilitator, he organizes the interaction of the students with the social-physical environment (divides into groups, encourages them to collect independent data, coordinates the execution of tasks, preparation of presentations, etc.).
In the role of a consultant, the specialist applies the students' professional experience, helps to find the solution of the already formulated problems, to formulate the new ones independently.
Let's talk about interactive technologies և methods by which the interactive learning model can be introduced in the learning process: • work in small groups in pairs, rotating triplets, "two, four, together", • carousel method, • lectures with problem essays, • heuristic conversation, • lesson -seminars (in terms of debates, exchange of ideas), • conferences, • business games, • use of multimedia tools (computer classes), • full collaboration technology, • modeling technology or project method (as an extracurricular activity) 1.
Each pedagogical technology is applied in stages, an epoule process is carried out: • Preliminary stage.
 At this stage, actions are taken to identify, evaluate and classify the problem during the learning process, to identify the factors that caused its occurrence.
 The pedagogue prepares for the solution of the problem, completes his moral, psychological-professional potential.
• Targeting phase.
  At this stage, the primary formulation of the goals of the pedagogue's work takes place.
  The goal determines the choice of means և ways to achieve it, the directions of search for additional sources of information.
  It can be said that the organization and implementation of any activity presupposes a specific goal.
  In order to achieve any set goal, it is necessary to use the resources, the possible means ացնել to perform the right և sequential actions.
• Information processing stage.
 At this stage of the technological process, additional sources of information are searched, information is collected և in the system, new analysis և is generalized.
Before carrying out the activity, it is necessary to plan and organize it so that we can ensure efficiency.
• Control-analytical phase.
 This is the final stage of the technological period, in which the results of the activities of specialists are analyzed, the factors that contribute to the positive solution of the problems of pedagogical activity are revealed, and the ways of eliminating the shortcomings are mentioned.
Thus, to use the pedagogical technologies to carry out the teaching process correctly and effectively2.
Each technology is aimed at solving a specific task, revealing the situation, that is, we choose and use pedagogical technologies depending on the situation, the situational approach is used, as well as the age, individual, psychological characteristics of the student.
At present, one of the most important problems of pedagogical science is the study of pedagogical activity, its content, purpose, methods, technologies, principles, problems, application features, conditions, objects, subjects, analysis of the obtained results, comparison, generalization, coordination, as well as opportunities for their further improvement. Development, which requires scientifically grounded, purposeful, planned pedagogical activity, development and application of appropriate pedagogical work methods and technologies.
Pedagogical technologies are aimed at solving the problem of improving the quality of education, which is implemented with the help of innovative means of organizing the process of teaching in a higher education institution.
Mary Sukiasyan THE ROLE OF TEACHING TECHNOLOGIES IN THE TEACHING PROCESS Keywords: pedagogical technology, teaching process, situational
approach:
.
