MANIFESTATIONS OF NATIONAL IDENTITY IN THE LEBANESE-ARMENIAN PRESS IN 1960 Preservation of national identity is a daily task in the Armenian Diaspora. On the one hand, the Armenian type must be preserved in a foreign environment living with other manners; on the other hand, one must accept social isolation; on the other hand, one must forget the national, accept a new culture;
 My third option can be ․ According to Zekiyan, the game is by the rules [1].
 After all, communication with other ethnic communities is the source of the nation's thinking, through which the cultural traditions, customs and ideas are re-evaluated [2].
 Identity fluctuations occur ․ according to G. According to Pltyan, what is close to him becomes a stranger, only to become close again [3].
A question arises. Isn't it necessary to differentiate the Diaspora identity of those living in the Diaspora instead of the generalized national identity?
 It is a kind of hybrid, it is not petrified, it changes, expands, includes new values, which, however, are in line with the identity and complement it.
  According to S. Holly is the result of both being certain in the past and becoming someone else in the future.
Armenian theorist Kh. Speaking about the "Diaspora" event, Tololyan singles out the idea of ​​"multilocal" to live in or connect with many places, when the Diaspora representative realizes that there is one place that is important, with which he is not physically but mentally connected. 5].
V. According to Sahakyan, the identity is situational. in certain circumstances one emerges, in another environment the other.
 Let's bring an example. In any event organized by the Lebanese state for its citizens (be it an election or a meeting), an Armenian participates as a Lebanese, as the decisions made will affect his civic activities.
 And he participates in the organization of commemoration events in memory of the victims of the Armenian Genocide as an Armenian.
 Thus, the dichotomy of the image of living in the Diaspora becomes inevitable.
Consider the issue of identity by the example of the Armenian community in Lebanon և its reflection in party periodicals in the 1960s.
In the 1960s, the Armenian community in Lebanon was considered a Diaspora center, with clear self-organizing structures, from school to party club, which trained future clergy, teachers, doctors, and party figures for other colonies.
  Nevertheless, even in Lebanon it is difficult to speak about a common identity or the identity of Lebanese-Armenians.
  The division of party affiliation, the succession of the branches of Christianity, the differentiation of ARF, Ramkavar or Hunchak districts, cultural, educational and public institutions according to political orientation, leads to the assumption that in the case of Lebanese-Armenians we are dealing with sectoral identities.
The first layer, ethnic identity, is followed by different political-ideological orientations in all spheres of life, which can be conventionally called "party" identity.
  Increasing the daily life in the Arab world, it turns out that the Arab-Armenian identities are inseparable from the Lebanese-Armenians.
Consider the next link in the chain. Nationality is one thing for those who appear in Lebanon, another for those who appear in the United States, due to the foreigner who is definitely present in them, տես the type of national relationship with the foreigner.
  In addition, the identity of the Soviet Armenians was being formed in the USSR, which was gradually spreading in the Diaspora, counterbalancing the Diaspora identity striving to preserve the national type in parallel with the exchange of environmental values.
 The language, culture, Haydat, the national type were key for the latter, and the idea of ​​"the homeland of every Armenian is Soviet Armenia" was not unequivocally perceived by everyone.
The fermentation of the Lebanese-Armenian identity could not but be reflected in the local Armenian press.
  The expression of the multi-layered identity of the Diaspora Armenians, in this case the Armenians living in Lebanon, can also be seen in newspaper publications.
 In direct relation to each other, the direct and indirect efforts of the press to influence the notions of identity in the formation of a multi-layered identity are noticeable.
One of the distinctions is made on the basis of party affiliation or ideological orientations, which in turn dictates the differentiation according to the attendance of the educational, cultural, religious, youth, youth and even sports structures of the given party.
  "Azdak" represents the life of the Armenian community in Lebanon mainly through the ARF, "Zartonk" through the ADL, and "Ararat" through the initiatives of the Hunchakian Party school, sports club, women's union and similar structures.
  It turns out that the followers of the ideology of each party are bearers of identities formed by different values.
The party newspapers seem to dictate a corresponding way of life, conveying the message to the reader with the help of publications.
  Reflecting the real life of the bearers of the "coexistent" identity, the newspapers thus create a model of identity.
Another version stems from a disagreement over the perception of Soviet Armenia.
  The Hnchakyans and Ramkavars, in their periodicals, considered Soviet Armenia a homeland, the center of the Armenians, and the Armenians of Lebanon and the Diaspora a direct follower of the events taking place there.
  "Ararat" and "Zartonk" even talk about the identity of the Soviet man, trying to put the identity of the reader on the same level with the identity of the ideologue of socialism living in Armenia or a citizen of the socialist republics, by abolishing the territorial divide [7].
 Soviet Armenia is presented as the embodiment of the hopes of the oppressed nations for peace, [8] which is again the product of Bolshevik ideology.
  The ARF "Azdak", without denying the existence of the homeland, nevertheless put in the center the united, free, independent Armenian nation, the Armenians of the Diaspora and the relatives who were not carried away by the regime.
The newspaper sharply criticizes the Diaspora Armenians with the communist ideology, noting that they also renounced the homeland, land, nation, history. It is the same for them: Artsakh is an Armenian land, a post-Soviet one, because it belongs to the "Soviet homeland family" [9].
"Azdak" does not connect the present and the future of the Armenian people with the Soviet Union; it strongly criticizes those who accept the idea of ​​becoming part of one empire. [10]
From the difference between the attitude towards the past, the history, the perception, the problem of giving nuances to their reflection in the sectoral identities of Diaspora Armenians arises in the periodicals.
 For example, the role of the First Republic was ignored in the Hunchak periodical. "October was a Mesopotamian state" [7], "From 1918 to 1920 Armenia was boundless, with tragic levels of misery, epidemic, famine, powerlessness, and terrorist tyranny.
 But he did not have elementary "freedom" ["[11].
 In line with the pro-Russian position, the historical twists and turns of Sardarapat were distorted, attributing the glory of victory to the Bolshevik army, on the other hand, the fame of self-defense battles was attributed to the ARF, hiding the apologies of certain figures of that party.
The periodicals did not show marked separatism in the issue of sowing Armenian culture, Armenian education and upbringing.
  On the one hand, they presented the national values ​​and the great Armenians, on the other hand, they contributed to the formation of the consciousness of that heritage, the national pride.
In general, the idea of ​​a united nation, homeland and Armenian identity is circulating in all three newspapers.
 Simply, two of the newspapers see the realization of that united homeland through the establishment of the Soviet regime, and the other through struggle.
 As a result, the dichotomy of the positions and value orientations of the Diaspora Armenians leads to the separation of Soviet Armenia-homeland.
The influence of the environment, the mediated communication with another culture, inevitably leave a mark on the identity of the individual.
  The Diaspora identity is flexible, situational, it can be manifested in one way or another at any moment.
The organized activities of political parties and relevant educational and cultural structures, on the one hand, contributed to the upbringing of Armenians, the preservation of national roots, and, on the other hand, led to the formation of groups within the community due to marked differences.
  These ideological divergences turned into debates in the official newspapers of the parties, which involuntarily involved the readers.
  The position of the newspaper was acceptable to each audience, which eventually led to a multi-layered expression of identity.
LITERATURE [1] Zekian P. L., Armenian identity, "Identity issues" yearbook, Yerevan, 2002, page 42.
[2] Margaryan M., National Thought և Self-Government, Yearbook "Identity Issues", Yerevan, 2002, p. 58.
[3] Beldian G., The Experience of Identity in the Diaspora, Yearbook of Identity Issues, Yerevan, 2002, p. 104.
[4] Hall S., Cultural Identity and Diaspora, Identity.
 Community, Culture and Difference. [5] Tololyan Kh., Part 1, URL.
 https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=xvZ74kGxA5w (recording of the lecture, the link was made on 16-05-2018).
[6] Sahakyan V., "Changing Diasporas. Concepts և Approaches ”summer program, Armenian Higher Education Initiative, AUA, Yerevan, July 10-21, 2017.
[7] Vanik, On the Fiftieth Anniversary of the October Revolution, Anton Kochinian Speech, "Ararat", No. 8, November 24, 1967.
[8] Vanik, The New Rise of the Ancient People, "Ararat", July 8, No. 201, 1967.
[9] Armen Azat, On the Relationship between the Armenians of Armenia and the Diaspora, "Azdak", No. 117, July 22, 1963.
[10] Papazian B., on the occasion of the 75th anniversary of the ARF "," Azdak ", No. 244, December 18, 1965.
[11] Andreasian A., The New Landmark of the Armenian Cause, "Zartonk", No. 275, August 25, 1967.
[12] Jaghetian G., The money stolen from the ARF bosses from Armenia and the report, "Zartonk", No. 122, February 20, 1968, Aghan Taronetsi, "Those Responsible for the Taron Genocide", "Zartonk", No. 151, March 26, 1968.
  Torgom Vezirian, Some facts from the national activities of group leader Sepuhi, "Zartonk", No. 78, December 27, 1968.
Gayane Avagyan MANIFESTATIONS OF NATIONAL IDENTITY IN THE LEBANESE-ARMENIAN PRESS 1960S Keywords: Press, Identity, Diaspora, Soviet Armenia, Lebanon, Diaspora Identity, "Azdark", "Azartak"
