CIRCUMSTANCES TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT FROM SERVICE TO TERMINATION
Ս. Sorokin considers as such a circumstance the fact that the convict maintains the regime established in the correctional facility, the absence of disciplinary penalties for a certain period of time [1].
  O. "Pilipenko considers the convict's conscientious attitude to work, observance of the penitentiary regulations, attendance at educational events, observance of relatives, confession of guilt, etc. [repentance, etc.] to be taken into account as circumstances taken into parole."
  T. Minyazya considers that the convict's direction is one of the criteria for his exemplary behavior while serving his sentence, his kind, respectful attitude towards other convicts, co-workers of the correctional system [3].
Point 18 of Recommendation Rec (2003) 22 on the parole of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, adopted on 24 September 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe), stipulates that the criteria If they are sufficient to obtain parole, they must be clear.
 They must be realistic in the sense that they must take into account the personal characteristics of the person deprived of liberty, the socio-economic circumstances, as well as the possibility of social rehabilitation programs.
Part 1 of Article 76 of the RA Criminal Code stipulates that the court concludes that the convict does not need to serve the rest of the sentence to be corrected, as he / she behaved properly while serving the sentence, the probability of the convict committing a new crime is low.
  And the circumstances on the basis of which the court decides that the convict has shown appropriate behavior during the serving of the sentence, the probability of him committing a new crime is low, are fixed in parts 1.1 և 1.2 of the same article, according to which: “1.1. The following circumstances shall be taken into account when assessing the proper conduct of a convict: 1) Existence of encouragement while serving a sentence. 2) Existence of a disciplinary sanction during serving a sentence. 4) working for at least three months while serving the sentence, if there was an opportunity to work, or if the non-work was not conditioned by the health problems of the convict;
1.2. The following circumstances are taken into account when assessing the probability of a new crime being committed by a convict: 1) age of the convict, age of the convict at the time of committing the crime; 2) nature of the crime, public danger; to make a written commitment to compensate or otherwise compensate for the damage caused or otherwise compensated. 6) his / her attitude towards the criminal subculture. 7) certain inclinations, possible addictions, preferences. contact with family or the outside world or the presence of caregivers.10) social environment.11) health;
The definition of the circumstances taken into account in parole in the RA Criminal Code should be considered a positive progress, at the same time it should be stated that there are some shortcomings in the system of the above-mentioned circumstances, the elimination of which will contribute to the improvement of the institution of parole.
In our opinion, there is a defect in Article 76, Part 1.1, Clause 4 of the RA Criminal Code.
  According to the mentioned point, when assessing the proper behavior of the convict, it is taken into account to work for at least three months while serving the sentence, if there was an opportunity to work, or if the non-work was not conditioned by the convict's health problems.
That is, if the convict has worked for less than three months, it will not be taken into account as a circumstance proving that he / she behaved properly during the serving of the sentence.
 In our opinion, the provision of such a term causes negative consequences, especially for those serving a short-term imprisonment or serving in a disciplinary battalion.
 The entry of a person into a penitentiary institution is followed by the process of adjusting to living in prison, during which most of the convicts, due to their psychological condition, do not express a desire to work.
  When a person begins to work after the psychological state has stabilized, there are cases when the person has not worked for three months while discussing the issue of parole, after which the fact of working as a result will not be taken into account when assessing the criminal record.
 This may lead to other convicts in such a situation refusing to work.
The question arises as to how long the convict should work in order to take this into account when describing his behavior.
We consider that the answer to the mentioned question depends on the terms of the sentence imposed on the convict by imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion.
 For example, working for one or two months as of the date of consideration of parole for a minor sentenced to six months' imprisonment for a minor offense should be considered as a circumstance of a convicted misconduct while serving a sentence while serving a life sentence. Three months' work as of the date of consideration of parole by the other party should not be considered.
The inexpediency of setting a minimum period of work by law is evidenced by the fact that the legislator did not set a minimum period in case of participating in educational programs, sports or cultural events or spontaneous associations of convicts while serving a sentence.
Moreover, it is necessary to mention that the minimum period of work is not defined by Article 91, Part 1, Clause 3 of the draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia.
Thus, we propose to remove the phrase "at least three months" from Article 76, Part 1.1, Clause 4 of the RA Criminal Code, to establish that in each case, the issue of taking into account the convict's misconduct must be resolved on the basis of on the fact that he / she has actually served the sentence of imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion ելու during that period.
Among the circumstances taken into account when assessing the probability of a new crime being committed by a convict, the nature of the crime և public danger is mentioned.
The RA Court of Cassation has registered in the criminal case ESHD / 0029/01/08 that the nature of the public danger of the crime is the qualitative side of the crime, it is determined by the type of guilt, the motive of the purpose of the crime, as well as the social significance of the public relations protected by criminal legislation. complete data.
  In determining the degree of public danger of an act, the court must determine the extent of the damage caused by the crime committed, the manner of committing the crime, the degree of realization of the criminal intention, in case of complicity, the act committed by the criminal, the degree of his participation in the crime.
In our opinion, the problem is that in law enforcement practice, the public danger of an act is often identified with the type of crime.
The result is a situation in which the type of crime simultaneously becomes the basis for determining the minimum period of probation required for parole - a circumstance taken into account when parole is served.
 In our opinion, such an approach is not acceptable, as the legislator has already taken this circumstance into account, setting the minimum term to be actually served, depending on the type of crime.
Thus, we consider it necessary to note that when assessing the likelihood of a convict committing a misdemeanor, it is not the type of crime that should be taken into account, but the nature and degree of public danger, in particular the motive for the crime, the motive of the crime. the amount of damage, the manner of committing the crime, the degree of realization of the criminal intention, in case of complicity, the act committed by the criminal; the degree of his participation in the crime.
In our opinion, it is problematic to comment on the convict's attitude towards the crime committed by the convict from the circumstances taken into account while serving parole.
In law enforcement practice, the fact that the convict pleads guilty or not is often taken into account as the above-mentioned circumstance.
  Meanwhile, we find that when envisaging this circumstance, the legislator did not mean that the convict found himself guilty, but regretted the act he had committed.
It is necessary to add that a person's regret is not connected with pleading guilty.
 A person may not plead guilty to finding that he or she committed the act without guilt, or he or she may find himself or herself partially guilty, finding that his or her criminal assessment is wrong, but regretting what he or she did.
  It is the right of a person not to plead guilty or to plead partially guilty; in case of exercising this right, no negative legal consequences should be envisaged for the person.
 The same legal position was expressed by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.
Based on the above, we propose to define "the convict's remorse for his act" instead of the phrase "attitude towards his crime" in point 4 of part 1.2 of Article 76 of the RA Criminal Code.
In assessing the likelihood of a convicted person committing a new crime, the written obligation to compensate or otherwise settle the damage caused by the crime shall be taken into account.
The first issue related to this circumstance is whether the above-mentioned circumstance affects the probability of the convict committing a new crime.
 It follows from the current regulations that if a person has not compensated or otherwise repaid the damage caused by the crime and has not made a written commitment to the chamber, he is more likely to commit a new crime.
 It turns out that a person who does not need to serve the rest of the sentence for imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion may not be released on parole because he has not fulfilled his civil obligations.
 In other words, a person who no longer poses a danger to the society will continue to serve the sentence of imprisonment or detention in a disciplinary battalion, because he has not compensated the damage caused to the victim of the crime or has not otherwise settled it.
 We consider that such an approach is not acceptable, և the person should be released from serving the sentence conditionally early, if he needs to serve the rest of the sentence to be corrected, regardless of the fact that the damage is compensated or otherwise settled.
Another problem is that the convict's assumption of a written obligation to compensate or otherwise compensate for the damage caused by the crime is considered a circumstance that reduces his / her likelihood of committing a new crime.
  It is unacceptable to consider a written undertaking by a convict as a circumstance that reduces his / her likelihood of committing a new crime, on the grounds that the court imposes on the paroleer the obligation to compensate the actual damage caused to the victim or otherwise obligatory. has not done so yet [5].
In such circumstances, the assumption of a written obligation by the convict upon parole does not cause any additional legal consequences for the latter, it is of a figurative nature, does not contribute to the correct conclusion of the court on the probability of the convict committing a new crime.
Thus, it is necessary to remove the above-mentioned circumstance from the list of circumstances taken into account when assessing the probability of a new crime being committed by a convict; to consider it only as an obligation imposed on a person in case of parole.
 Such an approach is based on Article 8 of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers' proposal that individual parolees should be able to apply individual conditions to reduce recidivism, including compensation or redress for victims.
Based on the above-mentioned arguments, we propose to declare Clause 5 of Part 1.2 of Article 76 of the RA Criminal Code invalid.
It is noteworthy that the list of circumstances taken into account during parole is not exhaustive in the RA Criminal Code.
 Article 76 1. 1.1 և 1.2 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia stipulates that other circumstances not mentioned in the list may be taken into account when assessing the proper behavior of the convict հավանական when assessing the possibility of committing a new crime.
We consider that such an approach is not acceptable, as it contradicts point 18 of the proposal of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, which stipulates that the criteria that must be met for a conditional release of a person deprived of liberty must be clear.
 In addition, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, referring to the principle of legal certainty, has expressed a legal position that the principle of the rule of law requires, among other things, the existence of a legal law that should be sufficiently accessible: legal entities should have the opportunity to determine What legal norms are applied in this case?
 A norm cannot be considered a "law" if it is not formulated with sufficient accuracy to enable legal entities and individuals to adjust their behavior to it; they must be able to predict the consequences that the action may cause.
  The European Court of Human Rights has expressed the same legal position.
Thus, there can be no question of the clarity of the circumstances taken into account during parole in the case when the independent commissions and courts are given the opportunity to take into account circumstances that are not provided by the RA Criminal Code, are not known to the convicts.
  The possibility of taking into account other circumstances has led to the fact that in practice the law enforcer states his / her findings as another circumstance, etc.
If in theory or as a result of summarizing legal practice it is substantiated that in case of parole it is necessary to take into account circumstances not provided by the RA Criminal Code, they should be taken into account when discussing parole only after being enshrined in the RA Criminal Code.
Almost all the circumstances taken into account in the draft Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia while being released from parole are enshrined in the current Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, except for those provided for in Article 91, Part 2, Clause 5 of the draft Criminal Code, ie changes in circumstances .
 It is important in assessing the likelihood of a person committing a new crime.
 If the circumstances that contributed to the commission of the crime are still preserved, he is more inclined to commit a new crime than when the circumstances that contributed to the commission of the crime have disappeared.
  An example of such a circumstance is the financial situation of a person.
Therefore, this circumstance should be envisaged by the RA Criminal Code as a circumstance taken into account when assessing the possibility of a new crime being committed by a convict.
Based on the above arguments, we conclude that there are some shortcomings in the system of circumstances taken into account when parole is served, the elimination of which will contribute to the improvement of the institution of parole.
LITERATURE [5] The RA Criminal Code, HO-528-N, was adopted on April 18, 2003, Part 2 of Article 76.
[6] Decision SDO-753 of the RA Constitutional Court, 13.05.2008.
[7] The Sunday Times of the European Court of Human Rights. Clause 49 of UnitedKingdom case, complaint No. 6538/74, 26.04.1979.
Babakhanyan ARMAN PENALTY ACCOUNTED CIRCUMSTANCES FOR RELEASE FROM CONDITIONAL Keywords Keywords: incentives, disciplinary penalties, convict's work.
