COMPARATIVE EXAMINATION OF THE ARMENIAN SYSTEM OF TALISHER AND NEW AZARI SPEECHS Talysh և The new Azeri dialects belong to the Caspian group of the northwestern branch of the Iranian languages.
Talysh is spoken in the southern part of the Republic of Azerbaijan in Iran.
  In the Republic of Azerbaijan, Talysh is spoken in the regions of Astara, Lankaran, Lerik, Masali, Yardimlin.
  In Iran, the east of Ardabil (from Anbaran to Khalkhal) and Gilan (Karganrud, Asalem, Talesh-Dulab, Shanderman, Masal) are Talysh speakers.
  Modern Talysh is divided into three dialects: southern (Iran), central (Iran), northern (Iran, Republic of Azerbaijan) 1.
In Iranian studies, the terms "Tatar Tatar dialects" 2 or "Tatar language group" 3 are used as common names for new Azeri dialects spoken in Iran.
  E. Yarshater uses the term "Atrpatakan dialects" together with the definition of "Tat dialects", taking into account the fact that these dialects are spoken in the territory of historical Little Marastan or Atrpatakan4.
He divides these dialects into five subgroups: 1. South-west of Ghazvin և dialects spoken in Eshtehard, 2. South-west of Zanjan, dialects spoken in the surrounding villages in Khoin, 3. Tarom և Khalkhal dialects, 4. Harizand և East ից Ghazvin իս North-East բ Dialects spoken in Rudbar 5 Alamut5.
D. Stilo includes the Natasha dialect in the new Azeri dialects. He divides the new Azeri dialects into ten subgroups: 1. a. Dialects of Harzan region, b. Dysmar region dialects, c. Dialects of Hasanu region, 2. a. Northern Talysh, b. Central Talysh, c. Southern Talysh, 5 See ibid., pp. 17-18.
3. a. Shahrud dialects, b. Dialects of Koresh-e Rostam, c. Dialects of the city, 4. a. Verin Tarom dialects, b. Rudbar dialects, 5. Dialects of Khoyin և surrounding villages, 6. a. Ramand dialects, b. Eshtehard dialect, 7. a. Dialects of Kuhpaye region, b. Verin Tarom "Maraghe" dialects, v. Alamut dialects, 8. Saveh region dialects (Alvir, Vidar), 9. Wafs dialects, 10. Sefidrud valley dialects 1.
Based on the latest classification, the new Azeri or Tatar language group can be divided into three subgroups: 1. Northern dialects (a. Harzan dialect, b. Caringan dialect, c. Kalasur dialect), 2. Central dialects, 3. southern dialects.
The verb of the southern dialects of Talysh can be divided into three groups: simple, prepositional, complex.
The main prepositions used in prepositional verbs are: o, e, pe, be, da.
The preposition o has the meanings "back, opposite".
  It gives the verb the meaning of division, separation, end of action, for example, blush. (հս.) o gate maintain, o garde - turn around, paw. (Hrz.) O be - to return, o birie - to cut.
The preposition E indicates a downward direction և, day: blush. (hs.) e varde - to take out, take out, e γande - to put down, tat. (Hrz.) E dasie - to kneel, e sie - to be cut off.
In the Caringan dialect, the above meanings are expressed by ar, vi prepositions 2, for example, ar gineste - to fall, ar karde - to fill, vi bie - to close, vi due - to press.
The prefix Pe / pu indicates an upward direction, e.g. (As.) Pe gate - to raise, pe karde - to awaken, paw. (Hrz.) Pe be - to stand, pe doe - to raise, paw. (Stone) pe due - to accumulate, pe šie - to boil, to spill.
The main meaning of Be is the meaning of division, separation, separation, for example, paw. (Hrz.) Be ome - to go out, be še - to go out, tlsh. (հս.) beγande - to throw, be krnie - to drag.
Da corresponds to the modern Persian dar, the preposition "in", for example, pa. (Hrz.) Da ome - to come, da noe - to put, to insert, tlsh. (Ass.) Da parseste - to ask, da vašte - to run, to jump.
Complex verbs are formed by combining parts of a noun և auxiliary verbs, e.g. (Ass.) Rušun akarde - to enlighten, bidar akarde - to awaken, to empty xali abe, paw. (Stone) var due - to allow, mavna yie - to shout, kuf šie - to swing.
Verb inflectional verbs are divided into two groups: simple (formed with the help of adverbial prefixes, verb bases և front endings) և descriptive (formed from the inflectional verb և be - "to be" auxiliary).
  The transitiveness and imperfection of verbs are expressed in past tense forms, in ergative-nominative sentences.
  The ergative structure has the following features.1. is typical of past tenses of the transitive verb. (As.) Az izerem nun pata. I baked bread yesterday.
  Tlsh. (հս.) Ai nun harde. He ate bread.
 Tat. (Stone) Bar-e-š ukard-e. He opened the door.
 Tat. (Cal.) Te vut-em - a. You listened to me.
The passive gender in Talysh (Hs.) Consists of the past participle of the inflected verb և be - from the past tense of the auxiliary verb "to be", eg Vil okarda beda. The flower will open.
 Čič nivišta ba? What is written?
In the Asalem dialect, the passive gender is formed differently. 1. giving a passive meaning to the active base of the present increases i, 2. to the active base of the present adds i, to the latter, st, which gives a passive meaning to the past base of the verb 2, eg Vier virite-kā faqat camuše ba-zer-ist. Only the shoes were torn from running too much.
  Piraeus offers a composition similar to the common one for the southern dialects3, for example: Im pul bedehiste Hasane4. This amount was given to Hasan.
  From the southern dialects, there is no clear way of composing the dialect in the 5 գ Kalasur 6 5 dialects of Caringan, for example, Kar. Deriste - torn, Be-deriste - to be torn, Cal. Em izem onjāre berond ni. This wood is not broken.
Causal horses are formed as follows: • In the Asalem dialect, -ān is added to the present tense for the present tense, and -est is added to the present tense for the past tense, eg xur-ān / xur-ān- est to make people laugh, har--n / har- ān - est to feed, • in Northern Talysh, -ovnie, -nie is added to the verb.
 Verb-based vowels can be changed: a> o, a> i, i> o, for example: hardehardovnie - to feed, larze- larzovnie (larzuvnie) - to tremble, • -un, -en, for example, is added to the present tense of the Caringan Tat dialect. Biš serun. Make me laugh!
 Bare ma-larzen. Do not slam the door.
• In the Kalasur dialect group, the causal form of the verb is formed in the same way as the Asalem dialect.
 For the present tense, -un is added to the present tense, and for the past tense, the present tense is added to -ir, for example, Emherdani ma-vrit-un. Do not run this child.
 Ahem mušte ke emi bebram-unem. I want her to cry (make her cry).
In contrast to the Talysh language, the verbs of the Southern dialects distinguish two bases: the present and the past.
  The main part of the verbs in Talysh is basic, it works either present or past 7.
 The Northern Talysh umbas are one-sided, they have only the present tense, which is formed by the reduction of the indefinite article -e ending, eg rase - ras to reach, tarse - tars to fear, duše - duš to milk, toše - toš to shave, kaše - kaš to pull, take - tak to explode .
If the ending of the indefinite article is preceded by the consonants t, d, or the vowels i, est, the present tense forms the basis of the indefinite article of these sounds. 5 Ibid., The Dialect of Karingani, p. 460.
6 Ibid., The Tati Dialect of Kalsur, Iranic 8, Wiesbaden, 2005, p. 279.
7 See ibid., P. 197.
with the subtraction, for example: vašte - vaš to burn, umuste - umus to swell, swell, vinde - vin to see, tušte - tuš to clean, grate, kande - kan to dig, marde - mar to die, gineste - gin to fall, naveste - nav to look for.
In the dialect of Asalem ներում In the southern dialects (here the verbs have two bases) there are sound changes during the formation of the present tense, e.g. xande - xun read, xete - xes sleep, pate - pej bake, due - da give, gate- ger take, vate - vaj escape, žae - խan hit, paw. dašte - daž ցավել, vašte - važ ցատկել, verušte - veruz փռվել (արևին), lešte - les լիզել.
 Miller singles out some verbs in Northern Talysh that have both present and past tense1.
Verbs that end in ie can be classified as ambiguous verbs.
 The present tense of these verbs is formed by the ending of the indefinite verb, and the past tense is formed by the suffix e.
  For example: činie - čini - čin to reap, risnie –risni –risn to reach, vitovniye –vitovni - vitovn to drive, ginie - gini - gin to fall.
In Talysh (Hs.) Only the past tense has verbs whose indefinite pronouns end in -te (eg kašte - kašt to sow, nivište - nivišt to write, nište - ništ to sit, vite - vit to run away) or de, to which precedes r or n, (eg hande - hand to read, mande - mand to stay, šande - šand to send, karde - kard to do).
 In Southern dialects, the past tense is formed by the following forms from the present tense.1. is added to the present tense -t / -d, eg ne ՝un - nešund sit, keš- kešt kill, carry bar-bard, the last consonant of the present tense can be changed to 2, eg nevi – nevešt write, ris - rešt rot (v ) ել, miz - to urinate, faz - to leave, 2. the last consonant of the present tense falls, e.g. tan - ta to take, take, nan– nu put, 3. adding i to the present tense, for example, cut ber - beri, fill kern - kerni, reap čen čeni, pour uren - ureni, 4. adding (e) st to the present tense, eg ser - serest to laugh, berem - beremest to cry, si - sist to break, larz - larzest to tremble, 5. the last u vowel of the present tense is changed to i, for example, bu - bi to be , to become šu – ։i.
In Talysh և, in the Southern dialects, the faceless verbs are the indefinite verb, the past tense and the present tense.
The indefinite article is formed by adding e to the basis of the past, e.g. harde to eat, xuruste to laugh, paw. kerne to paint, veyrte to run.
However, in other Tatar dialects, the indefinite article is formed by adding -an (Esfarvar, Takestan, Sagzabad, Khiaraj, Ebrahimabad, Khoznini) or -en (Chali, Takestan) to the past verb.
  Moreover, the prefix be 3 is added to simple verbs, for example: Chali baten to say, to speak, biašten to run, Tak: bogostan to wish, u-vazasten to dance, Ash. berenten pour, Khrj. bešurden wash, Heb. bemian come, bešian go, Sagz. bezian bite, Esfar. to make biardan.
In Talysh և in Southern dialects the past tense is formed by adding a to the base of the past.
  In Northern Talysh, the second syllable of the past tense is formed from the prefix նախ bi prefix, e.g. (hs.) gate - gat –bigat taker, dizdie - dizd - bidizd thief, thlsh. (Ass.) Da marda - dead, ā - hasta yurd1 See Yarshater E., The Tati Dialect of Kalsur, p. 200.
2 Ibid., The Dialect of Karingani, p. 451.
3 Ibid., A Grammar of Southern Tati Dialects, p. 253.
- abandoned tent, paw. (Cal.) Derista - torn, paw. (Stone) arista ruven - shed, beria tanef - cut rope.
In Talysh, the present tense is formed by adding a to the present tense, for example, karde - aka, barde - aba, As. xunde - axun, mase - amas.
 There is no present tense in Caringan և Kalasuribar dialects.
  In the Kalasur dialect group there is a past participle consisting of the base of the past և ani ending, for example: Em ādam estar - ani ni. This person is not a buyer (he does not intend to buy).
 However, from the Tatar dialects, the dialects of Takestan, Ebrahimabad and Sagzabad form the present tense, adding a / e և be1 to the basis of the past, for example, Heb. vaj-a saying, be - si- a going, Sagz. We ādam be like me. This person is not staying (he is not going to stay).
 Secret. Vaj-e neyma. I can not say.
In Southern dialects, the system of temporal forms is based on the present-past opposition of verbs.
  And in Talysh, where the verb is mainly monosyllabic, the temporal opposition is expressed with the help of verb prefixes, front endings.
 If the verb ends in a consonant, then vowels are inserted into the base's front end, which are time-indicating2.
In Talysh և in the Southern dialects, in general, four modes can be distinguished: borderline, conditional-subordinate, clause, imperative.
 Negative eggs are formed with the help of ni / ne և ma particles.
 The Ma bar is used in imperative mode.
Boundary mode expresses an action that is perceived by the speaker as possible, real, happening or to happen in the future.
 The negative egg does not change the meaning of the borderline weather.
The present tense indicates the multiplicity of action, the continuity, the action of the moment, the action usually performed.
In Talysh (Northern), the present tense is formed by adding the indefinite past participle da և to the ending, for example, votedam - I speak.
  According to Henning, the basis of the past participates in the composition of the present 3.
 In contrast to Northern Talysh, where the present tense is indefinite, in the Asalem dialect the present tense is formed from the past tense, to which are added the prefix ba and the front ending4, eg bavindiš - you see.
 In case of negation, ba is replaced by ne, for example, you do not see nevindirun.
 This verb can be used both with ā-prefix and without it 5.
  In the Southern dialects (Kalasur, Caringan) the present tense of the border tense consists of the prefix be / ba, the past tense of the verb և the front endings.
 Sometimes the past tense can be followed by e, eg ba-dur-emun - I give, be-het-ende - we sleep.
The present continuous tense indicates an action that is currently underway.
  In Talysh և in the Southern dialects the intransitive tense կազմ is formed with the help of indefinite derby։ frontal endings.
  In Talysh, the continuum of action is kar / kara, to which are added the front endings of the verb be "to be" 1 See Yarshater E., A Grammar of Southern Tati Dialects, pp. 251-252.
Present tense verbs ան indefinite verb, e.g. kar-in-virite - run.
  The kar / kara index is absent in the southern dialects of Caringan և Kalasur.
 In the Kalasur dialect, the present tense of the self-used forms of the verb be "to be" is used as a front ending: enim, eniš, ena, enemun, enerun, enin, which precede the indefinite verb, eg Enem gāndem kust-e. I sow wheat.
 Embe ulat .ešte. We wash the clothes.
In Talysh, the past participle 1 is formed from the past tense (Asalem dialect) from the 1 ba prefix և front endings, for example: bakardemon - we will do, bavaštem - I will jump, avotnin - will not speak, nibavardeš - will not bring.
  The time of day 1 expresses 1. a condition or action that will take place on the day after death, 2. an action that usually takes place in the present.
  In the Caringan dialect, the function of aparni is performed by the intransitive tense, and in the Kalasur dialect, the aparni derbia participates in the composition of aparni, adding the past tense -ani, և be, to be the present tense of the verb, for example, Ave ru utema umarani nim. I told him I would not come.
The past perfect indicates an action that began in the past and ended in the past.
  In Talysh և in the Southern dialects, the past perfect is formed from the base of the past ություններից from the frontal endings, for example: vritimun - we ran, genestim - fell, ši-mbe - we went.
  In the case of the negative, ni joins the verb.
In the case of derivative or compound verbs, ni is placed after the suffix or the nominative part of the verb, eg Paido na kardiše. He did not find it.
 In both languages, transitive verbs in the past perfect form an ergative structure (the underlined sentence in the sentence's number agrees not with the subject but with the direct problem).
In Talisheren (Hs.) There is no definite form of the past continuous, while the past imperfect has two forms. 1. It consists of the present tense, which is joined by the prefixes a- prefix և.
 In the dialect of Asalem, the past imperfect is formed in the same way.
 The negative is formed with the help of na, it indicates an unfinished or continuous action in the past, for example: akain - they did, they performed, avrijimun - we ran.
2. It is formed from the present tense և to be from the past perfect of the verb: bim, biš, be, bimon, bion, bin, for example: čardeda biš - you were grazing.
  In the Asalem dialect, the past participle is formed with the help of the auxiliary verb kar (kar-ka want), which is joined by the front endings and the past participle of the bowing verb, eg kar-im virite - I ran, I ran.
 The negative na joins the front ending: kar nim vrite - I did not run.
 Formations with kar do not form a negative structure2.
In the Caringan Southern dialect, the past imperfect functions as a continuous past.
  Both the imperfect past and the continuous past have separate uses in the Kalasur dialect group.
  The past participle is formed with the help of the prefix be, the indefinite article և front endings (be to be the past perfect tense verbs of the verb), for example, behete-umun - we were sleeping.
 The past participle is formed by indefinite past participles and prepositions (be - to be perfect past participles of the verb), for example, en-urun šuste - you were washing.
In Talysh և the prepositional tense in the Southern dialects կազմ consists of the past tense և front endings.
 Prehistory shows an action taken in the past, the result of which continues in the present, eg Ni-me šia, Hasan en-šia. I did not go, Hasan went.
 Te vute-em a. You told me.
The past participle is mainly used to indicate a past action that took place before a past action took place.
  It is formed by adding the be derby of the past (except for the Kalasur dialect, here the derby of the past replaces the basis of the past) to be, to be the perfect's's verbs.
 As in the past perfect prepositions, transitive and intransitive verbs have differences in the conjugation system (mainly in Talysh), eg ništa bim - I sat, arišta be broke.
 The negative ne is placed between the past tense և auxiliary verb և virita nebim - I did not run away.
 As already mentioned, in the Kalasur dialect, the past participle is part of the past participle, with the adverbs ending in the verb be: -um (-un), -uš, -un, -umun, -ur, -und, e.g. Te umar-uš, mon šerun. You came, I left.
  Transitive verbs, when put in the past tense, also form an ergative structure, for example, Kar. Dezdšun geta binde, barde-šun binde hasb, kešta- šun bende. They caught the thieves, took them to prison and killed them.
Conditional subordinate clauses indicate an action that is considered possible and desirable by the speaker.
 The present tenses are the present-the future and the conditional past.
 The present tense is formed by the prefix bi (be, biš / bi), the front ending of the present tense.
  Derived verbs are not accepted bi (vi, be, biš / bi) when used in the present tense.
  The negative is formed with the help of ni / ne particles, which replaces bi (be, biš / bi), for example, to see bivindin, viger-i - as if, vikarend - to do, do, šu-mbe - to go.
 The present tense can be used instead of the conventional present tense.
  In Talysh և in the southern dialects the conventional present has almost the same composition as in the present tense, only the frontal endings change (past adjectives of the verb be).
 In Northern Talysh, there is no clear distinction between the present and the present tense.
  The conditional present tense is mainly used in sentences expressing an unreal condition.
The composition of the conventional past tense in Talysh is quite different from the composition of the conventional past tense of the Southern dialects.
 In Talysh (Northern) the past tense of the bowing verb participates in the composition of this tense, be bay from the verbs bam, baš, bai, baimon, bajon, bain, for example: Agarba sa haisa hešta baim1… If I sat on a donkey… And instead of the dialect of Asalem comes the present tense of the verb to bow, for example, bakarerun - do.
  In the Kalasur dialect group, the past participles are added to the base of the past, the adverbs of the past tense be be.
 In the Caringan dialect, ay is added to the past perfect as a conditional weather indicator, e.g., Mon agar rav bešera-im, barusne-um. If I had left sooner, I would have arrived.
 Agaharde-mun ay… If we ate… In the Talysh և Southern dialects, the ghoul weather is not very pronounced և is almost identical with the present-future tense և.
Miller singles out the past tense of the past tense, past tenses, which are seldom used1.
  The verb apzdzakan's is composed of the verbs of epaparni (anin added to the past tense) և be from the verb ghdzak's forms: bibom, biboš, bibo, bibomon, baboon, bibon, for example, handanin bibomon - to read.
  The past participle of the past participle and the verb be participle without bi, for example, davorda bim - fly.
The imperative mood in both Talysh and Southern dialects is formed on the same principle: the prefix be / bi is added to the present tense.
 The singular numbers of the second person have zero suffixes, and in the plural case the suffix -a / -an / -un is added to the base.
  In the case of the negative, the prefix be / bi is replaced by the prefix ma, e.g. soxte - bisoxt - bisoxtan burn - burn - burn, vote - bivot - bivotan - speak - speak - speak, cal. beser laugh, spring - eat, stone. biš keš - wait, biž dua - give.
Hripsime Torosyan VERY SYSTEM COMPARATIVE EXAMINATION OF TALISHEREN AND NEW AZARI SPEECHS Keywords: verb system, verb faceless forms, temporal forms.
