MOBILE PHONE AS A SOCIAL PHENOMENON It is difficult to imagine our life without a mobile phone.
  If before it was only an indicator of financial opportunities, now almost everyone has a mobile phone.
  The advent of the cell phone has become so entrenched in our lives that it seems as if it has always existed.
 In fact, the cell phone has a history of about 60 years.
 The idea of ​​creating a mobile phone came from AT&T Bell Labs.
 1946 The first radio telephone was created, which was a hybrid of telephone և radio.
 With the help of a radio transmitter installed in the car, it was possible to transmit a signal to the automatic telephone system (ATS) և to make a phone call.
  These devices were quite heavy - 30-40 kg, it was impossible to imagine that they would be portable.
Until the 1960s. At the beginning, many companies refused to do research on mobile communication, because I all thought that it was impossible to create a small mobile phone.
  One of the reasons was that AT&T Bell Labs offered a "road service" to businessmen and drivers traveling from New York to Boston in 1947.
  Due to the failure և due to the scarcity of customers, this service is closed after 5 years.
 Radiotelephone networks were established in a number of US cities, but in many cases were not commercially successful.
In those years, Motorola was famous for its mobile radios, it had no idea about mobile communication.
 1954 Martin Cooper got a job at that company.
  He was an ordinary employee, developing new mobile devices.
  1967 His department created the first mobile radios for the Chicago police.
 After working in Motorola for about 20 years, M. Cooper realized that he could create a relatively small cell phone.
  He spent տարի 100 million for that project for 15 years.
It took about a year to build the first compact cell phone, and at the same time the company was trying to convince the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that private companies would need free frequencies to introduce mobile.
  The proposal to provide a new frequency immediately met with a wave of skepticism, as AT&T Bell Labs experts insisted on the impossibility of creating a compact phone.
  Eventually, Motorola was given the opportunity to demonstrate the possibility of creating a small mobile phone.
They urgently began to prepare for the field tests scheduled for 1973. on April 3.
 On that day, the first base station was located on the 50-story Alliance Capital Building in New York.
  The first prototype of a mobile phone could serve up to 30 subscribers by connecting them to other landlines.
  It was called Motorola Dyna-Tac, a headphone weighing 1.15 kg և 22.5 x12.5x3.75 cm.
 There were 12 buttons on the panel: 10 digits և 2 buttons for sending a call ելու to interrupt the call, and no other function.
The battery lasted only 35 minutes, but it took 10 hours to recharge.
  It was with such a phone that on April 3, 1973, M. Cooper dialed Joel Engel, head of research at Bell Labs.
  It is M. It was the victory of Cooper և Motorola.
They became the author of a revolution in the field of communication.
 Being evaluated by Bell Labs was the biggest guarantee of success for the project implementers.
  Years later, Richard Frenkel, head of software at Bell Labs, said of the Dyna-Tac phone: "It was a real victory.
At that time we used 14 kg phones in our cars.
 Their trick, to fit everything necessary in 1 kg, was a breakthrough. ”1
However, the first commercial mobile phone appeared on the market 10 years ago, in 1983. March 6.
 It was significantly lighter than its prototype - 800 g, the battery with the ability to work 8 hours - cost 3995 dollars.
Motorola was the first to launch mass-produced cell phones. It has long been the world's leading wireless maker.
  The success of the mobile phone was dazzling.
  The telephone companies could not provide mobile communication to everyone who wanted to, because they limited the frequencies, the AAA overload, the number of mobile phones, etc.
 For example, the Bell System company, which launched its mobile phone model half a year after Matarola in 1978, had 545 customers in New York, while 3,700 people were queuing up to buy a phone.
 20,000 people were waiting in line to buy Bell System phones throughout the United States, but they were told that they could wait 5-10 years.
1983 There were 1 million subscribers in the world, and in 1990 - 11 million subscribers.
 The spread of mobile technologies has made this service more affordable, high-quality and more accessible.
 According to the International Telecommunication Union, in 1995 There are 90.7 million mobile phones in the world, their number has increased more than 10 times in the next 6 years, becoming 956.4 million.
 2003 That number reached 1.174 billion, and in 2010 - 4 billion 2.
According to a study conducted by Ericsson, in 2011 mobile phones had 6 billion subscribers - 70% of humanity.
  However, the company representative stated that although the formal number of mobile users is 6 billion, the actual number of mobile users is 4 billion, as many are subscribers of several operators at the same time.
According to the company's statistics, the number of mobile phone users has increased by an average of 13% in previous years.
 35% of 180 thousand new subscribers are residents of India and China.
 75% of users use GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) և 15% use 3G / HSPA (High Speed ​​Packet Access) systems.
 2011 30% of the phones sold are smartphones.
  The number of mobile voice users continues to grow rapidly, especially in developing Asian countries3.
1 See http.
//smtelserv.ru/info/poiav_mobil.php.
2 See http.
//newsland.com/news/detail/id/898675/.
3 In the same place.
According to the Global Mobile Suppliers Association (GSA), in 2013 The number of mobile subscribers is 6.78 billion, growing by 6.25% in one year.
 The number of users of the third generation (3G) mobile connection increased by 279 million last year (1.47 billion), and the number of users of the fourth generation (4G / LTE) connection increased by 125 million, amounting to 200.1 million.
  According to the GSA, 274 mobile operators in the world have launched the fourth generation mobile connection in 101 countries.
 Experts predict that by 2014 By the end of the year, the LongTerm Evolution (LTE) network will be introduced in many countries1.
The population of the planet Earth, according to official data, is 7.2 billion people.
 In fact, the number of mobile subscribers is almost equal to the population of the country.
To imagine the volume of diversity of mobile phone range, let us present the world market of mobile phone.
  There are 447 brands of mobile phones, each of which in turn releases many models of phones.
 Matarola, for example, has released 18 series of mobile phones, Nokia - 17 series, in only one of which - 10-20 models.
 If we try to count all the models of all the world's brands, we will be dealing with thousands.
 It is difficult to say that there is another technology that is so diverse and so uniform.
The main importers of mobile phones in the world market are these 6 companies: Motorola, Nokia, Samsung, Sony Ericsson, Siemens, LG.
  The list is currently undergoing some changes depending on market competition.
Both landline and mobile subscriptions are growing all over the world (mobile phone is faster).
  Growth rates vary from country to country, depending on economic conditions, but this process continues in both poor and rich countries.
The penetration of wireless telephony has different reasons in different countries, for example, in countries with underdeveloped fixed communication infrastructure, mobile replaces fixed lines, in countries with developed infrastructure, the transition to mobile is due to economic factors.
  For NIC (network interface controller) countries such as South Korea, the provision of technology equipment and software has played a key role in the country's financial stability.
Statistics by Western sociologists show that the highest and fastest cell phone uptake was shown by European countries, followed by several Asia-Pacific countries: South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, China and the United States.
  By the way, the USA is the leader in the absorption of mobile internet.
  Indicators show that in countries with high growth rates, the number of people related to mobile technologies may have a low proportion of the population.
Մ. Castells notes. "We have discovered some facts that explain the difference in the rates of wireless communication around the world, including the GDP, the existing fixed line infrastructure, the market structure, the state policy.
 A study of wireless access data օգնում helps to conclude that the introduction of mobile technology 1 See http.
//www.gsacom.com/news/gsa_402.php.
The rates of penetration do not develop in accordance with the geographical-regional borders.
  By the way, South America is the only region where mobile penetration rates are evenly distributed. ”1
With the global modernization, the mobile phone has become an integral part of everyday life.
 As a global media, the mobile phone is an insurmountable phenomenon that demonstrates the importance of a local outline in adapting and adapting to global products and technologies.
  In the 1980s, the former symbol of the social status of the businessman և class, the mobile phone, developed to various roles և functions, often paradoxical, individual, socio-cultural, transnational 2 on global levels2.
  Adaptation and use of mobile phones are symbolic.
  They can be perceived as user-style, expression of identity, etc.
American sociologist M. Castells notes that the frequent use of mobile devices is perceived և interpreted as a function of consumerism.
  The mobile phone is used for all kinds of purposes: professional activities, family life, organizing life, establishing communication channels, commercial transactions, gathering and disseminating information, disseminating music, creating and disseminating images, social and political mobility.
 Մ. Castells compares a cell phone to a car, saying that it is nothing more than a car,։ seeking to become dependent on consumption or status.
For a cell phone, as for a car, the layout and settings are possible.
  In the case of young people, the signs of individual identity (color, bell signal, appearance), as well as equipment fashion trends are among the areas of use of technological equipment.
As part of everyday life, the mobile phone gives the user many different meanings in the experience of social coordination.
  As a cultural artifact, the mobile phone is a "feast table" of possibilities, a signal of the owner's taste, values, identity system, such as class, gender, and cultural background.
Let's present our research.
  To find out the social significance of the mobile phone, we conducted a survey among students.
 The sample focused on students aged 17-21, as at this age there is an active socialization of the individual, bearing a relatively strong influence of the reference groups.
 We have included 9 questions in the questionnaires we have compiled.
 The purpose of the survey is to find out for the mobile phone actor, the external significance of the phone, the functions, the branding, the frequency and purpose of use, the frequency of changing the phone.
 140 students took part in the survey: 29 boys և 111 girls.
More than half of the respondents, 58%, consider the mobile phone as a means of communication, 36% - a necessity, but often the participants insisted that these two options are the same, that is, the mobile phone is a means of communication, without which life is impossible to imagine.
  We disagree 1 Castells M., Mobile Communication and Society.
 A Global Perspective, MIT Press, 2006, p. 36. 2 Hjorth L., Mobile Media in the Asia-Pacific.
 Gender and the Art of being Mobile, New York.
 Routledge, 2009, p. 1.3 In the same place.
to this point of view.
  The means of communication are diverse, so communication and communication remains accessible even without a mobile phone.
For only 3%, the mobile phone is part of the occupation։ image.
 However, it is enough to pay attention to young people on public transport. It is obvious that most of them are busy playing mobile games or listening to music, and the compatibility of mobile accessories with clothes proves that the phone partially complements the image of an individual.
 Besides, to another question of the same questionnaire, "What color cell phone do you prefer?", Only 23% answered "it's one for me". The majority have clear preferences: 69% - this, 31% - white, 10% - another color.
The most preferred brands of mobile phones for students are Nokia - Samsung, iPhone, then - often not mentioned brands, but the operating system - Android.
  86% of the surveyed students prefer the classic models, 46% - the sliders, and the foldable mobile phones are no longer fashionable, they are used by 2% of the respondents.
  The answers to this question can be freely distributed to all students, as even the naked eye can see the relevance of the results of our study to mass consumption.
The next question, "Which features are more important to you?", Allows us to make assumptions about the development of the phone.
  If all mobile phones have the function of compiler (calculator, calendar, clock, etc.), then more expensive և advanced models have a camera, MP3 player, GPS-compass և Internet access.
  Our survey results are as follows: 29% prefer internet access, MP3 player - 25%, camera - 24%, organizer - radio - 8% each, games - 3%, GPS compass - 4%.
  The latter is less commonly used for those living in a small settlement.
On a scale of 1-5, 45% rated the frequency of mobile phone use as 5, 31% - 4, 19% - 3, 4% - 2, 1% - 1.
 Moreover, while answering the next question, 67% of the participants mentioned that they receive calls, 37% - make calls.
  The results of these two questions give rise to doubt. If most people receive calls, it is difficult to predict the potential of each of them, so the potential of the cell phone becomes questionable in terms of communication.
 Maybe it can be used for entertainment.
4% of the respondents have the opportunity to change the phone several times a year, 14% have the opportunity to have a new phone every year, և 82% change the phone less often.
  We think this indicator speaks more about the economic situation.
In general, our study provides an idea of ​​the role of the cell phone for the student.
  Cell phone messages, in our opinion, are basically two: "I am one of you" և "I am different from everyone", that is, the mobile phone, being the most widespread communication technology, is an indicator of being from the same social environment of the users, belonging to the same class.
  However, the diversity of the mobile phone, its external form, its development և various other features allow the user to express his own taste, identity, etc., that is, to be different from the others.
There are still few studies on the social significance of the mobile phone and the role of socialization, especially on the peculiarities of our region.
Astghik Avetikyan MOBILE PHONE AS A SOCIAL PHENOMENON Keywords: mobile phone, wireless connection, subscription, social indicator.
