THE OPPORTUNITY OF THE DEFENDANT TO GIVE FALSE TESTIMONY The opportunity for the accused to give false testimony or the "right to lie", as such, is provided for in the current RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter the Code).
 The existence of this "right" stems from the fact that, unlike the witness ողի victim, who are subject to criminal liability for giving false testimony (RA Criminal Code, Article 338), the accused (suspect) is not subject.
 There are different approaches to defining the essence of such a possibility in theory.
 The opinion is expressed that the legislator considered the possibility of giving false testimony to the suspect or accused as a component of the right to remain silent1.
 The RA legislation does not provide for a provision on liability for the accused to give false testimony, but the possibility for the accused to give false testimony is in no way conditioned by the constitutional right of the presumption of innocence2.
  In our opinion, the possibility of lying to the accused, according to the logic of the Code, should be considered as a component of the right to defense of the accused, because according to Article 65 1 1. "The accused has the right to defense.
 The body conducting the criminal proceedings enables the accused to exercise his right of defense by all means not prohibited by law. ”
  That is, in essence, the legislature gives the accused the opportunity to exercise his right to protection, because the accused does not have the obligation to give correct testimony.
As already mentioned, the "right to lie" of the accused is often considered in the legal literature as an element of the right to remain silent.
 Neither the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, nor the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the European Convention), nor the Code directly provide for the notion of "right to silence".
 In particular, according to Article 22 of the RA Constitution, no one is obliged to testify about himself, his spouse or close relatives.
  In accordance with this constitutional provision, the Code stipulates among the principles of criminal procedure the freedom from the obligation to testify (Article 20 of the Code).
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has repeatedly stated in its case-law that, although the right to remain silent and not to testify against it is not enshrined in Article 6 of the European Convention, it is still regarded as the universal recognition underlying Article 6 International standards 3.
 In other words, by saying the right of the accused to remain silent, one should understand the latter's right not to testify about himself, his spouse or close relatives, and within the meaning of Article 20 of the Code, he should not provide materials substantiating the guilt of himself, his spouse or close relatives.
 Apparently, the "right" to accuse is not an integral part of the right to remain silent at all, the granting of the right to refuse to testify to the accused, to remain silent, does not in itself imply the provision of the opportunity to sit.
The obligation to testify truthfully is inextricably linked to the right to remain silent.
 As it was mentioned, the current legislation envisages such an obligation only 1 See the application of European standards for the protection of human rights արար fundamental freedoms in RA criminal proceedings, edited by Ghazinyan GS, Yerevan, 2010, p. 159.
2 See Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, vol. Editor: G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, Page 257.
3 See ECHR, John Murrey v. the United Kingdom, Judgment of 8 February 1996. Reports, 1996-I., Para.45.
4 See Application of European Standards for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in RA Criminal Procedure, p. 158.
Witness ողի for the victim.
 Such an obligation is not provided for the accused, therefore he can not be held liable for giving false testimony.
  The Code provides for one exception to this general rule.
 Thus, according to Article 65 3 3 of the Code, "… The accused may not be held" responsible "for the explanations of his testimony և, except in cases when he has declared that he has committed a crime by a person who is obviously not related to the crime."
  Moreover, in this case he should be held responsible not for giving false testimony, but for the crime of perjury (Article 333 of the RA Criminal Code).
In contrast to the current legislative regulations, Article 228 of the Draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) provides: "... The investigator explains to the accused his right to remain silent, clarifies that the exercise of that right can not be interpreted to his detriment, as he informs that his testimony during the criminal proceedings can be used as evidence.
 If the accused expresses a desire to testify, the investigator informs him of the obligation to testify correctly; warns him of the responsibility for giving false testimony.
 This fact is confirmed by the signature of the accused. "
  This legislative innovation, however, is not unequivocally perceived by theorists and practitioners.
  Arguments are brought by a number of pros and cons by practical lawyers.
 This paper will discuss these positions, և an attempt will be made to answer the questions of what problems can be solved by the regulation proposed by the Draft, և whether it is expedient to prosecute the accused for giving false testimony.
First, it should be noted that the existing legal regulation in the current Code has caused serious problems in practice1.
  First of all, most of the interns, due to the fact that the accused actually has the opportunity to lie without fear of being prosecuted for it, initially assess his testimony as unreliable.
  Second, the accused himself, realizing that in case of lying there is no threat of state coercion, often misleads the bodies conducting the proceedings, thus obstructing the investigation.
 The above gives grounds to conclude that the Draft is already trying to solve these problems with the legal regulation proposed in Article 228 already mentioned.
 Let us now consider them separately.
Thus, D. Khachatryan, analyzing the ECHR case law on the admissibility of evidence, expressed an opinion that. "Because of the procedural right to testify falsely, the accused is deprived of the right to testify on equal terms with the" warned "witnesses who testify against him.
As a result, when the accused testifies in court, thus actually inviting himself as a defense witness, the requirement of Article 6 3 3 (d) of the Convention that he has the right to be "examined" by his witnesses is violated. under the same conditions as witnesses who testify against him. ”
 As a result, in fact, the type of this evidence is almost not evaluated; when making an accusatory verdict, it is simply stated that it "does not correspond to the reality, pursues criminal responsibility, aims to avoid punishment" 2.
For a deeper explanation of this problem, we think it is necessary to discuss another issue.
 Most judges, without hesitation, call the right of the accused to lie unrestricted by law his right.
  However, a question arises here: is it a "right" for the accused in the full sense of the word?
 M. Strogovich mentions in this connection. "If the suspect or the accused had the right to give obviously false testimony, the investigator or the court would be obliged not only to clarify their right, but also to facilitate its implementation.
  It is not about the right to test, but about the lack of criminal responsibility for lying, which, of course, are not the same ”3.
  We think that the accused really has no such right.
Stealing is immoral, և it is natural that a lie cannot be legalized by a legislator.
  It 1 See "The accused will be held accountable for giving false testimony" is available at www.armversion.am/2012/10/23.
2 See D. Khachatryan, Basic Precedent Positions of the European Court of Human Rights on the Admissibility of Evidence, Journal of the European Court of Human Rights, Yerevan (3), p. 11.
3 See Problems of fateful ethics, ed. Strogovich M., Moscow, 1974, p. 138-139 Does the fact that the accused has the right to defend his rights by all means not prohibited by law (and lying is not prohibited) do not mean that the latter has the right to lie?
We think that such an interpretation of the legislative regulation, the practice spread as a result, is not acceptable.
 Existing practice is the result of such an interpretation.
 In other words, the problem is that one should not be guided by the presumption that the accused's testimony is false.
  Referring to D. In Khachatryan's position, we think that the current legislative regulation would not contradict the conventional requirements at all, that is, the right of the accused to call his witnesses (including himself) on the same terms as the witnesses who testified against him, if in practice the accused is criminally liable. The fact that he was not warned would not be accepted as a justification for the presumption that his testimony was false.
  Some study of the case law of the ECHR suggests that the ECHR does not have a precedent for declaring such a "right" to be contrary to the European Convention, while in many of the countries party to the Convention there is a similar legal regulation.
  In particular, for example, in France the accused cannot be interrogated in his case as an "ordinary" witness.
 According to the French Code of Criminal Procedure, the accused who testifies in the case is called an assisted witness, նրան he / she is prohibited from being questioned under oath, ie he / she cannot be prosecuted for his / her false testimony1.
  The German Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that it is forbidden to interrogate the accused by oath. thus, in fact, he is not warned of being prosecuted for giving false testimony2.
 The question arises: with such a legal regulation, did not these countries face the same problem as we have?
  We think that the problem is first of all in our legal consciousness, misinterpretation of the law, not in the law itself.
In addition, one important circumstance should not be forgotten. The accused, the victim, the witness do not have the same judicial status.
 If the witness's participation in the criminal proceedings is intended to assist in the administration of justice, and the victim is the one who seeks that justice, who's supposed to assist in the administration of justice (after all, it is a duty for him to testify in addition to being a right). for the accused.
  After all, the accused participates in the criminal trial first of all to defend himself, not to promote the administration of justice.
 Of course, this does not mean that he has the right to hinder the administration of justice.
  Thus, referring to the second issue raised, that is, the misleading and misleading of the bodies conducting the proceedings by the accused, it should be noted that the hunt stems from the level of public awareness, the incorrect application of the law.
Thus, according to paragraph 2 of Article 18 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, everyone has the right to protect their rights and freedoms by all means not prohibited by law, and paragraph 2 of Article 42 stipulates that everyone is free to do what is not prohibited by law. և does not violate the rights of others և freedoms.
It follows from the analysis of the above-mentioned constitutional provisions that the right of a person to defend his rights and freedoms by all means not prohibited by law is "limited by the rights and freedoms of others."
 If we interpret the current legislation in this light, we can state that the right of the accused to defend his rights by all means not prohibited by law (including by giving false testimony) is not unlimited, if the accused clearly abuses his rights, including his right to defense. , of course, there must be some negative consequences for him.
  For example, if the accused has repeatedly given false testimony, which as a result of the examination turned out to be untrue, when assessing the evidence, the relevant subjects in this situation may form an internal conviction that they are unreliable.
As already mentioned, the Project tries to solve the problems in practice with the proposed regulation.
 We can not disagree that if the accused had been prosecuted for giving false testimony, the questions raised would not have arisen.
  However, it should also be borne in mind that any new legal regulation raises new issues 1 See Criminal Procedure Code of the French Republic, art. 113-7.
2 See The German Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung), para. 60.
contains the danger of causing it.
  It is not a secret that the approach expressed by the Code is conditioned by the psychology of the person suspected or accused of committing a crime, the interest pursued by the latter, the natural desire not to harm him.
 If the accused is warned about being criminally prosecuted for giving false testimony, it is natural that in this case he will already feel constrained.
 In such a situation, he will either have to exercise that right reserved for him or he will have to tell the truth.
Some lawyers are of the opinion that in this case, any misinformation provided by the accused, which is important for the resolution of the case, և relates to the subject of proof, will cause him to be prosecuted.
  However, we think that this approach is "unacceptable", in fact the provision proposed by the Draft should not be interpreted that way.
 We think that the settlement proposed by the Draft refers to the cases when the accused gives such a false testimony, which aims to mislead the investigation, to mislead the bodies conducting the proceedings, the court.
This provision of the draft may cause another problem.
 Taking into account the psychology of the accused, it can be said that the fear of being criminally prosecuted or punished for false testimony may force him to remain silent.
 In other words, it will turn out that he will be "forced" to use that right.
 After all, it is the right of the accused to be free to testify or to remain silent. Եւ Psychologically, the accused realizes that his or her silence may reinforce the accusation or suspicion against him or her.
 The exercise of the right to remain silent, of course, cannot be interpreted to the detriment of the accused.
 Such a guarantee for the protection of the rights of the accused is also provided by the draft.
 However, we should not forget that this right is not absolute.
 It cannot be ruled out that the exercise of the right to remain silent in circumstances where the need for an explanation of the suspect or accused was evident could be taken into account by the court in assessing the evidence of the prosecution1.
  Referring to this issue in the case of "Moors v. The United Kingdom", the ECHR particularly noted: "It cannot be demanded that the refusal of the accused to testify be taken into account by the court when assessing the evidence proving his guilt.
 The question whether the exercise of an unfavorable opinion on the accused in the event of exercising the right to refuse to testify is a violation of Article 6։ 1 of the Convention must be settled in the context of all the factual circumstances of the case ... ”2.
 That is, in some cases, silence can still testify against the accused.
 It turns out that in such a situation he must either remain silent, thus testifying against himself, or he must give a confession, because otherwise he will be prosecuted for giving testimony.
Some practicing lawyers state that criminalizing a witness or victim for giving a lie is generally not practiced in practice.
  The Court of Cassation also addressed this issue, expressing a legal position that: "If any testimony is assessed as" false "before the assessment of that testimony by the final judicial act in the given case, it will undermine the essence of the Constitutional function of justice.
  The Court of Cassation finds that it will be possible to investigate the existence or absence of the crime of giving false testimony under Article 338 of the RA Criminal Code only after the relevant act has been made3.
 Besides, as already mentioned, any false testimony cannot be assessed as an objective side of this crime.
Summing up the above, we conclude that the current legislative regulation on the issue under discussion does not contradict the precedent positions of the ECHR.
  We think that the position according to which the absence of responsibility for giving false testimony is equivalent to the right to lie is not acceptable.
  In our opinion, the settlement proposed by the draft can really solve the existing problems, but at the same time it can cause other problems, which, we find it difficult to answer, will be less important than the existing problems or vice versa.
 Therefore, we think it is more expedient to correct the existing practice by obliging the bodies conducting the proceedings to substantiate their falsehood when assessing the accused's testimony (not to be guided by the presumption of their falsehood), և only relevant justification 1 Harutyunyan G., Vagharshyan A., Comments on the RA Constitution , Yerevan, 2010, page 262.
2 See ECHR, John Murrey v. the United Kingdom.
3 See in the criminal case of the Court of Cassation No. LD / 0301/01/09, 27.08.2010.
in this case, to assess them as unreliable.
  As for the accused who misleads the investigation, his abuse of his rights should have negative consequences for him, in particular, the latter's testimony is false or not credible.
Kristine Galstyan THE POSSIBILITY OF THE ACCUSED TO GIVE FALSE TESTIMONY Keywords: right to silence, right to defense, opportunity to give false testimony, "right to lie", to mislead the investigation, to assess the testimony as unreliable.
