After the declaration of independence, radical agrarian transformations were carried out in Armenia.
  The first years of privatization coincided with the years of blockade.
"Along with the immediate decline of production, the scientific base of agriculture and its gene-fund production experienced a deep crisis.
 During the first three years of the radical agrarian reconstruction, in addition to the peasant collective farms, the other public means of production belonging to the collective agricultural state enterprises of the Republic of Armenia were privatized.
Due to the dissolution of agricultural collectives, the unified, centralized system of agricultural maintenance was abolished, the modern technical base of the branch was dissolved, with which mechanized intensive agriculture gave way to extensive agriculture1.
 About 90% of the machine-tractor set used in agriculture was used for 10-15 years longer than the normative period2.
Referring to the privatization of agricultural machinery, it should be noted that the problem of mechanization of production processes is especially difficult to solve in farms.
The existing old equipment was able to treat only the lower, in the best case, the vineyards, in the conditions of small size of the farms.
1 See Manaseryan N., The Agrarian Question Yesterday and Today, Yerevan, 2005, p. 111.
2 See Movsisyan V., On the fate of the land. Reflections on Slaughter, Yerevan, 2001, p. 248.
248.
From the point of view of servicing the technical farms with technical support, it was possible to establish agricultural machinery operation stations adjacent to "Armagroservice" և "Hayberriutyun" production units1.
The park of agricultural machines of the republic was not renewed for years.
  Most of the cars were old, physically and morally worn out.
  Some of them were not in good condition, so they were not used.
 Low productivity of used machines and work efficiency.
  The low efficiency of the use of agricultural machinery was, moreover, conditioned by the fragmentation of privatized plots of land.
  As a result, manual labor was dominated by physically heavy, low-productivity labor, which made it impossible to start and finish seasonal agricultural work in a short period of time.
It is noteworthy that at the initial stage of privatization, most of the agricultural machinery, equipment and other funds were to be handed over to the local councils for the purpose of serving the farms.
  This weakened the material interest of the producers and the responsibility to maintain and use those funds effectively.
 On the other hand, these means do not always serve the interests of the producers properly.
  Very often, individual parts of agricultural machinery were sold at high prices, and the machinery was turned into waste.
  The dusting of the agricultural machinery base dealt a big blow to the agricultural production.
  In the village, the technical center was concentrated in the hands of separate people, who offered such prices that the villager did not have the opportunity to cultivate his land.
  There was not even an organized mass production of primitive agricultural tools in the republic.
According to the principle of privatization, those who used the equipment had the primary right to privatize.
 They became the owners of agricultural machinery.
 It is necessary 1 See Mkrtchyan H., Land Relations հիմնական The main directions of modern agrarian policy in Armenia, Yerevan, 1997, p. 18.
It should be noted that one of the reasons for that was that in those years the refugees were not solvent, and those who had the least opportunity had moved to the city a few days ago, even abroad.
  Thus, most of the villages inhabited by refugees were deprived of agricultural machinery1.
In order to purchase agricultural machinery, the Armenian government signed a number of agreements with different countries.
  Thus, according to the agreements signed between the Governments of the Republic of Armenia "Japan and China" in 1998. 15 grain combine harvesters worth 8.5 million drams were brought to the republic from Japan.
 1999-2000 With the sum of 300 million provided by Japan, new batches of up to 4 dozen small grain harvesters and spare parts were imported to the republic.
  1999 100 tractors were brought from China, which together with combines were sold in the regions by open auction.
2 2000 78 small tractors (spare parts) of 70 types were imported to the republic by the Chinese government for 3 million.
  Both the Japanese and Chinese governments provided them to the government in 2000. By the decision of January 26, which was qualified as a humanitarian aid program.
3 They provided sufficient productivity.
  The material and technical base of more than 333 thousand farms in the republic in 2000 The following is the picture: power tractors, republic • tractors - 13.1 thousand pieces, trucks - 12.7 thousand pieces, • tractor plows - 3.6 thousand pieces, • tractor seeders - 1.6 thousand pieces, cultivators - 2 thousand pieces, mowers - 0.8 thousand pieces, 1 Poverty և Democracy in Armenia, Yerevan, 2000, page 14.
2 Minasyan E., Socio-economic transformations in the Republic of Armenia (1990-2003), Yerevan, 2003, p. 93.
3 Official Bulletin of the Republic of Armenia, vol. 2, February 14, 2000, pp. 50-51.
in modern Armenia • tractor mowers - 1.4 thousand pieces 1.
Agricultural grain harvesters - 1.3 thousand pieces, silo harvesters - forage harvesters - 0.4 thousand pieces Small farms required (in accordance with the requirements of mining, small-scale production) to build machinery.
 Therefore, it is necessary to take care of the care and maintenance of the means of production in the republic, to increase the efficiency of their use.
  This technique could be centralized for shared use.
  At the same time, when developing a complex program, it is necessary to take into account the demand for 50-horsepower tractors - the fact that the set of agricultural machinery was not updated for several years, only 2.7% of which was released in 1994. Then, there was no auxiliary equipment, there were no various intermediary companies importing materials, companies, equipment rental points.
In fact, agricultural services were inefficient due to unresolved payment issues.
The rates of privatization of production and non-production funds were low.
  The canteens were privatized, the repair shops were privatized by 30.5%, and the administrative buildings by 11.9%.
The non-privatized fixed assets were left without owners and were not used2.
During the privatization, 1682 out of 52840 square meters of useful area of ​​repair workshops in the agro-industrial complex of the republic were privatized. 1116.
 Besides, 450 out of 931 forage harvesters in the republic were privatized during the same period, with an average of about 9762 rubles, out of 4865 tractor plows - 2602 - about 447 rubles 1 Statistical Yearbook of Armenia 1999-2000, Yerevan, 2001.
2 Mamikonyan H., The problems of the development of the agricultural production of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 1997, page 20.
39.2%, sheepfolds - 34.8%, at an average price, 2344 seeds were sown from cars - 1176 at an average price of about 1163 rubles 1.
  If we take into account the devaluation of the ruble in those years, it is not difficult to guess from the figures given that the privatized production resources were sold at rather low prices that did not reflect their real value.
  On the other hand, the figures show that more than two thirds of the main public agricultural funds of the republic were not privatized during those years (1991-1994).
  It is true that some of the non-privatized fixed assets remained in the still-maintained state farms, used by them, and some were attached to the village councils to serve the newly established farms. .
  Most of them were not used in agricultural production!
In other words, the feeling of the national wealth of the Republic turned into dead capital.
The privatization of agricultural means of production was, in fact, carried out without the simultaneous privatization of the other possible branches of the agro-industrial complex2.
  As a result, agriculture worked for a long time as private property, and the branches serving it as state property, which had a negative impact on the results of the entire agri-food complex.
Summing up, we can state that the agrarian transformations carried out in most of the rural settlements of the Republic led to the formation of a self-sufficient natural-economic system.
  Intensive agriculture was practically impossible in the cut plots, located at great distances from each other.
 The peasantry did not have the economy, great opportunities, it could not organize the sale. necessity, results, problems, Yerevan, 2003, p. 142.
2 See Manaseryan N., op. work., page 105.
With the offer, the efficiency of agricultural activities was naturally reduced.
AGRICULTURAL AND OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF UMIRAKANATSVATS AGRICULTURAL ARTADRAMIJOTSNERISEPAKANASHNORHMAN process and reforms HAMATEKSTUMGevorgyan Marine (1991-2000 BC) katarvatsBanali words - agrarian reform, agricultural machinery, privatization, farms agroardyunaberakanhamalir, mekenatrakatorayin station.
