BIBLE ALBANISMS IN FANTASY LITERATURE Algebra is a stylistic trick in which abstract ideas are presented through fiction.
  It is an artistic image or description, where its direct, hidden, figurative meaning is not essential.
 Tales, fables, proverbs, riddles, as well as works of other genres are built on this principle [1].
 The allegorical picture does not describe in detail the referenced phenomenon, but simply hints, expecting that the reader has a sufficiently hidden level of knowledge to notice, analyze, and record its potential in the text.
 Allegory is often used to make the author's idea clearer and clearer, so that the reader understands the complex meaning of the text, comparing his impression of a situation or incident he is already familiar with.
  Similarly, Bible allegories immediately catch the reader's attention, but in order to notice them, one must have at least a prior religious upbringing, a special attitude toward religion, or simply an interest in the Bible.
At first glance, it may seem that the genre of fantasy completely lacks religious allegories, everything is based on the propaganda of fairy tales, magic, "anti-religious" phenomena.
 Various representatives of the Church have repeatedly spoken out against books and films of this genre, claiming that they defile the inner world of people and disturb the imagination.
However, often the child's soul is more accessible than "It happens, it does not happen" than "Do not" և "Do not have", և sometimes the message hidden in the fairy tale template can direct a person to an earlier age. care more about God than the Bible, especially when there are biblical allegories in the work of art.
Biblical allegories in the Harry Potter series.
The novel about the rescued boy is known all over the world, whether it is enjoyed by children or adults.
 The author, Joan Rowling, was able to create a world where good always defeats evil, the main characters are guided by hope, faith and love.
  The latter, according to the author, is the main, the most powerful weapon, the only way to salvation.
 Sequence of books: "Harry Potter և The Philosopher's Stone", "Harry Potter և The Secret Room", "Harry Potter երը Prisoner of the Nation", "Harry Potter և Fire Cup", "Harry Potter և Phoenix Congregation", "Harry Potter", "Harry Potter" The pots պ the gifts of death! ”
 Rowling's narration is rich և from the aesthetic point of view of a valuable language, and allegories have a special place in the novel.
 For example, Rowling speaks of equal rights for women through her struggle for the freedom of domestic elves.
Let us now turn to the biblical allegories. In the last book of the novel, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, the author quotes directly: "The Last Enemy That Shall Be Destroyed Is Death" (1 Corinthians 15).
26 [3]).
 This sentence, which can be considered the embodiment of the Christian faith, is engraved on the tombstone of Harry Potter's parents in a village called "Godrick Valley".
 According to the story, it sums up the whole novel. Disappointed, Harry, trying to understand the meaning of this sentence, suddenly begins to realize that this is his destiny - to win the final victory over death. Live beyond death.
 That's how it happens ․ After sacrificing himself for the sake of humanity, the boy regains his life.
 That is the mission of a man full of faith.
The element of fairy tale is so present here that Harry returns to living friends, relatives to live a mortal life, and according to the Bible, after death a person continues to live, but already in a different state, somewhere else.
When Harry voluntarily goes to the Forbidden Forest to be killed by his մտ close enemy Voldemort, fear arises inside the boy - pain, death ․ He does not want to be responsible for everything, he does not want to do heroic deeds, but to be an ordinary teenager, to live as everyone lives.
  This episode is reminiscent of the words of Jesus Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane as he addresses his Father ․ "Abba, Father, do all you can, take this cup away from me. but not as I will, but as you will ”(Mark 14).
36) [3].
 But Christ's love for mankind is so strong that he puts aside his doubts and moves on.
 So does Harry, who is visited by the ghosts of his parents, godfather, family friend, and urged to go to the end.
 After his death, Harry is resurrected in the same way as Jesus Christ, but he still returns.
Throughout the novel, Harry's teacher is Albus Dumbledore, principal of Hogwarts School, who guides and counsels the boy as John the Baptist did to Jesus Christ.
 Of course, it would be wrong to identify the characters in the book completely, but Rowling did not intend to reproduce the Bible in the same way.
  He simply created a work full of Christian lessons, teachings, and examples.
 On one occasion, Albus Dumbledore plays Harry ․ "Do not pity the dead, Harry, pity the living, especially those who live without love."
 It would be hard to imagine a stronger Christian counsel.
Bible allegories in his novel The Dark Forces.
This little-known trilogy by Philip Pullman consists of the following books: "Brilliant" (known in North America as the "Golden Compass") [6], "Flexible Knife" [7] և "Amber Binoculars" [8].
 The author has been repeatedly criticized for his rude attitude towards religion and for preaching the latter.
 Pullman likens the church to a politician, a leader who uses the Scriptures to justify his decisions.
 It is very likely that Pullman, being agnostic from the beginning, would not mind accepting the church as a caring, unifying structure if it corresponded to reality everywhere.
 Seeing that many churches had become "materialistic" and non-discriminatory, Pullman described himself as an atheist and wrote the trilogy "His Dark Forces" with the intention of sobering people up.
However, reading the books gives the impression that the author, being anti-religious, is not an atheist at all. The deepest pain in his soul, the frustration և, no matter how surprising it may seem, is a man of faith who condemns the activities of the church, claiming that the church, particularly the Catholic Church, is primarily responsible for the evil on planet Earth.
 The main goal of the book heroes is to destroy the Heavenly Kingdom and build a Heavenly Republic instead.
It is noteworthy that the Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams expressed his support for Pullman, adding that the latter's work at school should become an integral part of the religious education program.
According to Pullman's books, we are surrounded by thousands of worlds, some of which are reflections of each other, some of which are parallel measurements, and sometimes people manage to travel through those worlds.
For the first time in the novel we meet the term "Dust".
 Dust comes from space or the sky, it can be seen only through a special camera, glass or binoculars.
 This is not the dust that can be seen on tank furniture ․ This dust only affects adults, adults who bear the traces of Adamic sin on their demons.
 Who are the demons? In the world of the young heroine, the young Lira Belakva, people are always accompanied by creatures, talking animals, which, while the child is growing up, are not yet clearly formed, they can change depending on the emotional և caring state of the child.
  These creatures are called endemons; when a child reaches puberty, the demons eventually take on the appearance of a single animal; they do not change.
 People can not live without demons ․ Animals are an integral part of their souls.
 Interestingly, the original word "daemon" has different meanings. Sometimes it can refer to the devil or any evil spirit, while in Greek mythology it has no negative meaning, it refers to the supernatural creature found between God and man.
The first book of the trilogy contains an addition to Adam դամ Eve's Bible և When Adam և Eve eats the forbidden fruit, their demons cease to change և take on a form, and Poshina touches Adam և Eve for the first time.
 Pullman alludes to the link between Adamic sin, the puberty of children, and the stabilization of demons.
 The children are not yet "sinners" և "dusted"; According to him, the demons are the bearers of the original sin, and the Dust is the material proof of that sin.
After the operation, the children turn into vegetables, they die very often, and the few who survive just survive without a soul, not realizing the realities happening around them.
One might think that "separation" is somehow identified with Baptism, but in the latter case a person does not suffer physically or mentally.
Pulmen's goal was probably, not to criticize the Baptismal ceremony, but to record the fact that in order to assert his influence and authority, the Magisterium was even willing to take the life of a child.
Leah's father, Lord Ezriel, insists throughout the novel that he seeks to destroy the Dust, to free all worlds from sin, shame, and death, while his real purpose is to save the Dust and keep it safe, because the Lord thinks it is beautiful, thanks to the Dust. People realize և perceive the unimaginable և influential.
 It is noteworthy that the trilogy does not know the answer to the question of whether Posh is really a sinner - every reader must find the answer in his soul.
Dr. Mary Malone lives in our world, she does not have a demon, she has not even heard of the existence of such people.
  However, in addition to work, he studies dark matter ․ One day when he saw that Dust was leaving the Universe, the doctor decided to save it.
 When Mary meets Lira, her new boyfriend Will, she does not yet know that the two will become the new Adam of the next generation, Eve, and that Dr. Malone will play the role of the Serpent.
 Reading that prophecy on a special device designed to communicate with the dust, Mary's skepticism և doubts fly away ․ he hurries to save the children - Dust, not focusing on his mission Snake.
 In one of the last chapters of the third book, Dr. Malone tells Lyra և Willie tells his first love story արին Years ago a young boy entertained Mary with a sweet tooth, և the moment the boy put his fingers on the girl's lips, Mary had a strange feeling that turned into a pleasant emotion և.
 Lira and Will look at each other, understand what is waiting for them, Lira picks up fruit at dinner, close to Will's lips.
 After a while, they start kissing, and Mary sees Dust return to the world.
 It is at this point that Lyra և Willie's demons finally form, և they are touched by Adam's sin, which, according to Pulmen, can be considered a natural development, not an ominous և filthy phenomenon.
Biblical allegories in the "Chronicle of Narnia" series.
 The author of the novel, Clive Staples-Lewis, has used countless, sometimes even very obvious, biblical metaphors to make the Bible accessible to the young reader.
 The books in the sequence of logic are: "The Magician's Cousin", "The Lion, the Witch - the Cabinet", "The Horse և His Son", "Prince Caspian ․ "Return to Narnia", "Journey by Dawn", "Silver Chair" և "The Last Battle".
Narnia is a magical world created by the Great Lion Aslan in the first book.
 Aslan inhabits the area with talking animals, centaurs, other supernatural creatures, declaring Narnia king, queen, honest, kind carriage, his wife.
 Aslan wants to plant a special tree in Narnia, which will protect the country with its inner strength from the evil White Witch Jade, who is presented in the novel as the daughter of Adam և Lilit.
To save Narnia, Aslan needs the apple of a magic tree growing in a mysterious garden to plant a similar tree in Narnia.
 The Garden Tree already reminds the reader that we are talking about the tree of knowledge of Eden, the Good and the Evil.
  At that time there are two children in Narnia, Digori և Polly ("Adam's daughter և is called Aslan by them"), ինDigori takes on the responsibility of bringing the fruit of the tree to Aslan.
Arriving at the garden, picking the fruit, Digori suddenly sees Aides eating one of the apples.
 The witch insists that the other is immortal, and begins to persuade Digori that the latter will reap the fruit not of some kind of lion, but of his sick mother, who can be cured by the apple.
 Here ՋJadis plays the role of a seductive Snake, but, nevertheless, the Witch makes a multifaceted mistake ․ He urges the boy to leave Polly, to enjoy the end of his life, hiding from his mother that the apple has been stolen.	
Enter through the golden door or do not enter at all, Either steal something here, or crawl through the walls, You will deserve sorrow in the form of pleasure.
(The translation is mine: KO.) Digori immediately regains consciousness from the magic of Jadis, rejects him, hurrying to Aslan.
 The boy throws the apple in the wet soil, and after a while a beautiful, giant tree is formed there.
 Aslan thanks the children, adding that the fruit harvested at the right time does not make anyone unhappy.
Lewis may have thought that Adam and Eve would sooner or later have to reap the fruits of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but they did so at the wrong time because of the temptation of the wrong creature.
 The lion knows that Digori's mother is sick, it is obvious that she is sad like a boy (just as she is sad about Christ, she cares for humanity).
 Aslan allows one of the Digorin healing apples to be taken to his mother, saying that it is quite possible to live indefinitely in the human world, but it is still possible to be healthy.
It refers to God's compassion for people, especially those who are loyal to HIM.
Another striking example of biblical allegory is found in the book The Lion, the Witch, the Cabinet ․ Edmund Pevens betrays his family members (according to Judas), for which he must become the victim of the White Witch, because, according to Narnia law, the betrayers belong to Jadis.
 Seeing that Edmund regrets, Aslan decides to sacrifice himself instead of the boy.
 Jadis agrees with great enthusiasm, ordering his supporters to catch the lion, tie him up, beat him, cut him, and put him on the Stone Table built by Aslan's father before the creation of the world.
 The fate of Christ is very clearly outlined here, և if from some parts of the novel we can assume that Aslan is God, then from the episode it becomes clear that Lewisnavel is more inclined to connect the Lion with Christ.
 The White Witch kills Aslan անում leaves, but the next morning the Stone Table breaks, և Aslan is resurrected, becoming even more powerful.
 Evil և ambition had so blinded Jadis that he had overlooked many facts ․ If an innocent being unselfishly sacrificed himself instead of a real traitor, the Stone Table would be broken և Death would be defeated ․ "The last enemy to be destroyed is death", as in the "Harry Potter" novel.
In the "Chronicle of Narnia" it often happens that a person feels the presence of Aslan, tries to convince the people around him that he will appear like a lion, and the rest start insisting that if they do not see Aslan, Aslan is far away or not at all.
 Later, almost everyone regrets what is described in the novel.
 The cause of skepticism is lack of faith ․ Many people believe in the existence of God without seeing him, but there are people who keep their eyes closed, are unwilling or afraid to let God in, trying to convince others that they too are wrong.
In the last book, the self-proclaimed ones try to capture Narnia, և the kings and queens of all time leave the ordinary world և return to take part in the last battle.
 The Narnians are defeated, but Aslan appears, opens a door through which all the positive heroes move to the more beautiful, magical Narnia.
 When the Pevens և ask the rest not to send Aslan with them Աս, Aslan replies that in the Shadow-Lands (as Aslan calls it the land of ordinary people) they all died in a train crash, their time was up there, the dream was over,, The dawn came.
 After saying all this, Aslan changes his attitude, but the author of the novel emphasizes the lion's appearance, simply emphasizing that he becomes indescribably big and beautiful.
 Lewis adds that now the real story of the heroes begins, which will be endless.
 It is, of course, about eternal life in Eden after death.
 At the end of the series, which is considered children's literature, all the heroes, in fact, die, but that death only awakens a bright sadness, gives the reader to imagine, and, most importantly, an opportunity to believe.
It is noteworthy that one of the queens of Narnina is absent both during the last battle and when moving to the new Narnia.
  The sister's brothers and sisters say that she is no longer Narnia's friend, as she is now more obsessed with dresses, lipstick, and refuses to remember her time in Narnia, considering it a childish արդյունք game և game.
 This causes Susan's family members to die, move to Narnia forever, and the girl continues to live in the Land of Shadows.
 From this it can be concluded that for Lewis the new interests following puberty contradict the Christian faith.
 If in Pullman's trilogy Posh ին "maturity" was of a positive nature, then for Lewis the interest in lipstick is tantamount to betrayal, for which the author has been repeatedly criticized.
  Of course, it is wrong to forget Narnia, but the reason for judging Susan so harshly, presenting her as anti-Christian և negative should probably be sought in the author's personal motives.
Biblical allegories in the trilogy The Lord of the Rings.
 The "Lord of the Rings" trilogy Ջ Ջ R ․ R ․ It is the continuation of Tolkien's book "The Hobbit".
 The trilogy consists of the following books: The Brotherhood of the Ring, Two Castles, and The Return of the King.
 There are countless political allegories in the books, which can be talked about in a hypothetical way ․ For example, Mordor, described in the books, essentially symbolizes the Third Reich բար the morals that prevail there.
 But first of all, it should be noted that Tolkien, being a devout Christian, could not refrain from biblical references, և it is first of all reflected in the descriptions of the heroes ․ Gandalf Gray warns his friends not to be deceived by the voice of Saruman, one of the main villains, as the latter promises to quench his thirst for knowledge at a very high price.
  Here Sarumannak clearly embodies the Serpent who tempted Eve.
 Saruman is just an instrument that serves Sauron, the main antagonist of the trilogy, which most likely embodies Satan (Lucifer).
 Gandalf the Gray dies in the first book, but is later resurrected, posing to everyone as Gandalf the White (referring to the resurrection of Christ as God);
The third book is called "The Return of the King", where one of the heroes, Aragorn, has to take on the role of the king of the Mediterranean, the people are waiting for him, just like mankind, for Jesus Christ.
 The hobbit named Frodo Baggins (a representative of the short people invented by Tolkien) becomes the bearer of the Ring; he must reach Mordor to destroy the ring.
 Frodo faces suffering and temptation almost every day, his burden is really heavy, but the hobbit is able to overcome all the trials, it should be noted that Frodo is accompanied until the last moment by his gardener friend Sam, who seems to be the guardian angel of the hobbit.
 Frodo sacrifices his mental harmony, cheerfulness for the Mediterranean, saying that sometimes in order to save something it is necessary to give it up.
  At the end of the trilogy, he leaves with the Elves, which clearly reminds of Jesus' ascension to Heaven after completing his mission.
It can be concluded that in order to use and understand the allegory accurately, համար in order to comment, it is necessary to have a basic knowledge of the object / person / person վկայ to analyze the text in depth.
  Sometimes it is difficult to give a clear meaning to this or that allegory, but it is still advisable to try, because it breaks stereotypes, that is, the genre of fantasy becomes the object of serious research; otherwise it is not perceived as purely children's literature.
[1] Ghbashyan Ed (cid.
0), Makhchanyan H (cid.
0), Literary Dictionary, Yerevan, LUSGRAPHY Publishing House, 1980, page 12.
[3] New Testament, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin, 1992, 732 pages.
URL.
 http:
//www.samizdat.qc.ca/arts/lit/PDFs/MagiciansNephew_CSL.pdf (Accessed.
Ohanyan Kristine BIBLE ALBANIANS IN FANTASY LITERATURE Keywords: Bible, allegory, reference, fantasy, God, Jesus Christ.
Allegory is a stylistic trick in which abstract ideas are presented through artistic images.
