INSTITUTE OF NON-MATERIAL DAMAGE IN RA CIVILIZATION LAW In the RA Civil Code, damage is defined as the expense of a person who has violated the right, who has done or should do to restore the violated right, loss of his property or damage (real damage), uncollected income , if his right was not violated (missed benefit), as well as non-pecuniary damage.
  Thus, in 2014 The amendments to the Code for the first time mentioned the right to receive compensation for non-pecuniary damage, and defined its concept.
 Nevertheless, in many legal acts the term "moral damage" is used instead of non-pecuniary damage.
  It should be noted that the application of both the first and second terms can be found in the civil codes of many countries of the world.
 Thus, the civil codes of Belgium, Sweden, Denmark, Italy use the term "non-pecuniary damage" 1, and the Russian Code 2 uses the term "moral value" (Russian morality), such definitions are given - Ukraine 3, Belarus 4, Kazakhstan in the codes.
 In order to define the concept of "moral damage", it is first necessary to find out what "morality" means.
 "Morality" (Latin: moralis) is a philosophical concept, which is defined in encyclopedias as the main regulator of human social behavior, a form of public consciousness, a special type of social relations5.
 According to another definition, morality is part of the human worldview, which includes 1 See Belgian, Italian, Swedish and Dutch law-Ius Commune Casebooks, pp. 1-12.
2 See GK RF, ct. 151.
3 See ГК Украины, с. 1167.
4 See GK Belarus December 7, 1998, N 218-3, p.152.
5 See Bolshevik Soviet Encyclopedia, M., 1972, Soviet Encyclopedia, pp. 14-42.
ideas of evil, justice, conscience, and the meaning of life.
As for moral damage, it is interpreted as an encroachment on high human values, justice, human conscience, which ultimately harms the whole society7.
 The notion of "moral damage" was also referred to by the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, in which he said that by moral damage we mean mental or physical suffering caused by an action (inaction) that is a violation of human birth or non-property goods (life) , health, honor, dignity, business reputation, privacy, etc.) or against personal non-property rights (use of one's own name, copyright և related rights) or property rights of a person.
  Moral damage can result from the loss of a loved one, the loss of a loved one, the impossibility of pursuing an active social life, the loss of a job, the disclosure of privacy or medical secrets. the resulting physical suffering և etc.8.
  However, we think that it is more expedient to use the term "non-pecuniary damage", as it already includes the notion of "moral damage" and mostly reflects the content of the institute.
Until 2014 The Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia did not contain any provisions on non-pecuniary damage, but defined the right to compensation for damage caused to honor, business reputation, ie the institution of compensation for non-pecuniary damage, nevertheless, existed in the civil law of the Republic of Armenia.
  Moreover, the term "moral damage" was used in a number of legal acts. Thus, Article 268 of the RA Code on Administrative Offenses stipulates: The victim is a person who, as a result of an administrative offense, is moral, physical or 6 See Philosophical Dictionary, M., "Prospect", 2000, p. 247.
7 See Possession of "Moral Value Compensation", Velikomyslov Ю. J., 2007.
8 See p.2 Establishment of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation from 20 December 1994, №10, "Some issues of application of legislation and compensation of moral value".
property damage was caused ”9.
 The term is also enshrined in a number of provisions of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, in particular in Article 6, Clause 45, in which the term "damage" is considered as "moral, physical, property damage subject to monetary measurement" 10.
 Part 1 of Article 58 of the same Code, defining the notion of "victim", stipulates: "A victim is a person whose morally, physically or property damage was directly caused by an act not permitted by the Criminal Code.
 A victim is a person who could be directly caused moral, physical or property damage if he / she commits an act not permitted by the Criminal Code ”11.
  Part 1 of Article 104 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administrative Proceedings" entitled "Grounds for Compensation for Non-Property Damage" stipulates that "Restriction of a natural person's liberty through unlawful administration In cases of violation of the inviolability of life, infliction of non-pecuniary damage by defamation of his honor, reputation or dignity, that person has the right to demand monetary compensation or elimination of the consequences in proportion to the non-pecuniary damage caused by unlawful administration.
2013 On November 5, 2012, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, in its decision based on the application of Arthur Khachatryan, stated that “.... a number of normative legal acts of the Republic of Armenia provide relevant provisions on material compensation for moral damage, and the disputed Article 17 of the RA Civil Code. Part 2 of Article 2 does not include moral damage as damage, however, Article 1087.1 1 1-8 of the RA Civil Code provides for the possibility of monetary compensation for damage caused to a person's dignity, honor or business reputation. respectively, in case of insult, up to 1000-fold of the minimum wage, and in case of slander, 2000-fold.
  Moreover, point 11 of the same article stipulates that the offense 9 See RA Code on Administrative Offenses, Article 268.
10 See RA Criminal Procedure Code, Article 6, Clause 45.
11 See RA Criminal Procedure Code, Article 58, Part 1.
12 See Part 1 of Article 104 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings".
In determining the amount of compensation in cases of defamation, the court should not take into account the property damage caused by the insult or defamation.
 The fact that the court does not take into account the property damage in determining the amount of compensation for damage to honor, honor or business reputation directly indicates that the purpose of the regulation under consideration is not to compensate for property damage.
 On the contrary, it is designed to regulate the possibilities of material compensation for moral damage caused to a person.
 A study of international experience shows that the regulations on monetary compensation for damage to a person's dignity, honor or business reputation refer to the institution of material compensation for moral damage (such an institution is envisaged, in particular, in the Russian Federation, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia, etc.). according to the legislation of the countries).
Based on the above, the Constitutional Court notes that the legislation of the Republic of Armenia provides for many cases of material compensation for moral damage, but the institution is not fully regulated, which allows to ensure legislative harmony in regulating the cases, grounds and order of such compensation. in its turn, hinders the effective protection of the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the RA Constitution. ”
In fact, the RA Constitutional Court "registered the gap of the existing law in the RA Civil Code" and the necessity of defining non-material damage.
  As a result, in 2014 Amendments to the Code և In Article 17 of the Code, damages were considered not only the expenses of the infringer that he has incurred or should incur to recover the infringed right, the loss or damage of his property (real damage), the unearned income he would have received under normal civil turnover; if his right was not violated (missed benefit), but not material damage.
 It was established that non-material damage is subject to compensation only in cases provided by law.
 Article 162.1 of the Code defined the notion of "non-pecuniary damage": "1. For the purposes of this Code, non-pecuniary damage is physical or mental suffering caused by a decision, action or omission that infringes on the material or immaterial goods that a person is born with or by law or violates his / her personal property or non-property rights.
2. The person, and in case of his / her death or incapacity, his / her spouse, parent, adoptive parent, child, adoptee, guardian, have the right to demand compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused by the court, if the criminal prosecution body or court has confirmed that The following fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia հիմն the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. as a result of a decision, action or inaction have been violated: 1) the right to life; 2) the right to impunity for torture, inhuman or degrading treatment իրավ The right to inviolability. 4) The right to a fair trial. 5) Respect for private and family life;The right to the inviolability of the apartment.6) The right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion, freedom of expression. 7) The right to freedom of assembly and association.8) The right to effective remedies.9) The right to property.
3. If a convicted person has been acquitted under the conditions laid down in Article 3 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, he shall have the right to seek redress for non-pecuniary damage (within the meaning of this Code, compensation for unjust conviction).
4. Damage caused to honor, dignity or business reputation shall be compensated in accordance with Article 1087.1 of this Code, and non-pecuniary damage caused as a result of violation of fundamental rights (unjust conviction) in accordance with the procedure established by Article 1087.2.
5. Non-material damage caused by unlawful administration is subject to compensation in accordance with the procedure established by the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Legal Principles of Administration".
An opinion has been expressed in the literature that non-pecuniary damage is envisaged only for Article 1087.1 of the Code for damage caused to honor, dignity or business reputation, հոդված Article 1087.2 for non-pecuniary damage caused by violation of convention rights with unjust conviction.
 In essence, the Code restricts the right of individuals to claim non-pecuniary damage under other legal acts, such as the Law on Advertising13.
 It should be noted, however, that the Code, in defining the term "non-pecuniary damage", does not limit the possibility of obtaining it only in those few cases (for non-pecuniary damage due to damage to honor, dignity or business reputation, violation of convention rights, unfair conviction), but not material Defines the procedure and conditions of compensation for damage only for them.
  We believe that despite the fact that the Code has not established the procedure and conditions for compensation of damages for other cases, the person still has the right to receive them.
  In particular, the Code states that non-pecuniary damage is subject to compensation only in cases provided by law. It is physical or mental suffering caused by a decision, action or inaction by a person born or violating his / her property or non-property rights against material or non-material goods belonging to him / her by force of law.
  That is, if, for example, a person who does not have the right to withdraw money in deposits has received a deposit from a citizen either in violation of the law or in accordance with the banking rules adopted in accordance with it, the depositor may demand immediate return of the deposit, as paid by Article 411 of this Code. Interest provided for in Article, in addition to the amount of interest, to compensate the damages caused to the depositor.
  The mentioned damages should include the non-material damage caused to the person, as it is impossible to imagine material և no 13 See G. Bekmezyan, on the number of issues of compensation for non-pecuniary damage under the RA civil legislation, collection of materials of the conference of the teaching staff of YSU Faculty of Law. Dedicated to A. On the 100th anniversary of Yesayan's birth, Editor-in-Chief: G. Ghazinyan, Yerevan.
 YSU, 2015, pp. 190-206.
material damages are separate from each other.
 There is an opinion in the literature that in any case, when producers, sellers of goods, service providers sell low-quality goods or provide low-quality services to consumers, during the services provided to consumers by financial institutions, their rights are abused or their duties are insufficiently fulfilled. Material damage can be accompanied by significant anxiety, deprivation, ie non-material damage14.
Thus, performing the above analysis, we come to the conclusion that it is necessary to apply the institution of non-pecuniary damage in full, not limited to the cases defined in the RA Civil Code, as Part 4 of Article 17 of the Code provides such an opportunity, stating that non-pecuniary damage Persons acquire the right to compensation in cases provided by law.
 In fact, it is necessary. Make an addition to the Code և provide for a procedure for compensation for all these cases.
We consider it necessary to refer to the circle of subjects entitled to apply for non-pecuniary damage.
 ՀՀքաղ. The analysis of Articles 162.2, 1087.1-1087.3 of the Code shows that only individuals are entitled to non-pecuniary compensation, which seems logical, as the subject who has a mental world is able to feel mental suffering, and in the case of physical suffering : Body 15.
  The opinion has been expressed in the literature that the non-pecuniary damage caused by defamation of the business reputation of legal entities through insult or slander is unique.
 In this case, it is not a subjective, but an objective concept, the content of which is expressed through the negative opinion that arises in the perceptions of third parties about the legal entity, the services նրա (or) products provided by it.
  It is necessary to keep in mind that in addition to property damage, other problems inevitably arise in connection with the management of a legal entity. Bekmezyan, in the same place.
15 See O. В. Dmitrieva, Some problems of the Institute of Compensation are morally valuable.
 available at https.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/v/nekotorye-problemy-instituta-kompensatsii-moralnogo-vreda man, with the inconvenience of decision-making և planning և finally with the inconvenience անձ of the persons involved in the management of the legal entity16.
The business reputation of a legal entity is formed as a result of its public activity through positive information disseminated by the latter about its activities, as well as confidential information17.
The business reputation of a legal entity is in fact classified as an intangible asset and is subject to monetary valuation.
  Thus, for example, in foreign countries it is valued at the current market price of the conditioned organization.
  It is a variable quantity, it is directly proportional to the opinion given by the society to the given legal entity.
  Therefore, the fact that the latter is positive is very important, as the development and sustainable progress of the organization largely depend on it18.
The RA Civil Code does not contain any provision on the right to compensation for non-pecuniary damage of legal entities, but there is a provision on that, for example, in the RA Law on Advertising.
In particular, according to Article 23, Part 1 of the RA Law on Advertising: "1. The legal and natural persons, whose rights have been violated due to unscrupulous advertising, have the right to demand a court in accordance with the established procedure: a) compensation for damages; b) life and health of citizens ում Compensation for property damage. c) Compensation for moral damage. d) Public denial of advertising.
16 See В. В. Karpenkov, Business reputation яридических лиц.
  общий взгляд на probleму.
  В.В. Karpenkov // Management in social and economic systems.
 м-лы ХVII Международнойредкол.
 Н.В. Drought [et al.]. - Minsk, 2008. [Electron. ресурс] - Режим доступа.
http:
//elibrary.miu.by/conferences!/item.uses/issue.xvii/article.275.html. - Date available.
 22.01.2018.17 See Business reputation of legal persons and legal protection (GG Ivanenko, candidate).
18 See ibid.
It should be noted, however, that no effective mechanism has yet been developed for the procedure for compensating non-pecuniary damage to legal entities.
Performing the above-mentioned analysis, we come to the conclusion that in the RA Civil Code it is necessary to directly envisage the right to compensation of non-material damage to legal entities, to define the order of its decision.
Anna Harutyunyan INSTITUTE OF NON-MATERIAL DAMAGE IN RA CIVIL LAW Keywords: non-pecuniary damage, non-pecuniary damage compensation, international experience, Sweden, Denmark, Italy, Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Belarus, legal person, non-legal person.
