ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SYRIAN-ARMENIANS. SYRIAN ARMENIANS IN ARMENIAArmenians have settled in Syria since ancient times.
  The Armenian community in Syria was reorganized after the Armenian Genocide and the Armenian massacres in Cilicia.
 The territory of Syria was the first refuge where the masses of Armenian repressed reached.
 Over time, Armenians began to self-organize as a community, demonstrating political organization by integrating into Syrian public life.
  Gradually, the mass of deportees grew into an organized, vibrant community that sought to preserve its national identity.
Acquisition of citizenship was a significant event not only in terms of the formation of the Armenian community as an institutional structure, but also in terms of the development of various Armenian-Arab relations.
 In the following years, the Armenians, already as citizens, actively participated in the national liberation movements in Syria.
More favorable conditions were created for the Armenians to carry out nationally beneficial activities when Hafez Al Assad came to power (1971-2000).
  During his time, a tolerant policy was pursued towards minorities.
  Under Hafez al-Assad, the agreements reached by the Armenians with the state were fixed.
  Dozens of Armenian sports-cultural associations, charitable institutions-schools started operating in even more favorable conditions.
 The ties with Armenia became closer.
 At the same time, Armenians took an active role in the socio-economic and cultural life of Syria.
 The restrictions imposed in 1967 after the Arab-Israeli war were lifted.
Hafez's policy towards minorities enabled Syrian-Armenians to organize community life on the spot without nationalist restrictions.
Thanks to the good name of their contribution to the development of Syria, the Armenians were able to enjoy the sympathy of both the society and the authorities.
 As full citizens of the country, they significantly contributed to the revitalization of Syria, particularly socio-economic and cultural life.
  The national life of the Armenian community in Syria was organized through the active activities of Armenian organizations and unions.
  All three Armenian communities in Syria, apostolic, catholic, evangelical, through their religious-secular structures, played a significant role in the creation, preservation of material values, as well as in the settlement of community issues.
Since Hafez Assad, although Armenians have hardly participated in the country's political developments, focusing on the preservation of the Armenian identity, they have been involved in the social and cultural processes of Syria, realizing themselves as full-fledged and valuable citizens of Syria.
Syria has been divided into two conflict camps since March 2011.
  The military-political actions taking place in that context are mainly interpreted in the domestic news feed from the point of view of the security of the Armenian communities.
 The current political and military developments in Syria are largely dependent on foreign intervention.
 This particularly refers to Turkey, which is trying to play its political games in this war.
 This is where the concern of the Armenians lies; this fact in turn forced the Armenians to leave Syria.
In the summer of 2012, Armenians immigrated to Armenia.
 According to the Ministry of Diaspora, 15,000-16,000 Armenians have immigrated to Armenia so far, 1/3 of whom have gone to a third country.
  During the past 10 months, about 5,000 Syrian-Armenians have entered Armenia.
  This was announced by the Minister of Diaspora H. Hakobyan 1.
 At the same time, it should be noted that another source states that 3248 of them have officially applied for citizenship2.
 Vazgen Mesropyan, a member of the administrative body of the Social Democrat Hunchakian Party in the northern Syrian city of Aleppo, told reporters that about 5,000,6000 Syrian-Armenians had migrated to Armenia because the Armenian government had shown great support to them3.
 Lena Halajyan, chairwoman of the Coordinating Committee on the Issues of Syrian-Armenians, says that there are 10,000 Syrian-Armenians in Armenia today, "everything is being done to meet their needs."
//news.am/arm/news/123553.html, available on 12.05.15.
2 http.
//www.tert.am/en/news/2012/07/29/syrian-armenians/556088, available on 05.06.15.
3 http:
//m.lurer.com/?p=42215&l=en, available on 07.06.15.
To keep in Armenia, 5000 of which are needed.
  Today their flow to Armenia continues4.
  Firdus Zakaryan, Chief of Staff of the RA Ministry of Diaspora, head of the group dealing with Syrian-Armenians, told Armenpress that the number of Syrian-Armenians living in Armenia has increased, reaching about 6,500.
He said that since the beginning of the year, their number has been 10,500, of which 4,000 have returned to Syria, and 50-60 families have left for other countries.
 The question in their minds is when and how this conflict will end.
  However, the complexity of the issue is that during these two years Syria has penetrated such forces that are uncontrollable, the solution of the issue already depends on them more than the possible Russia-US agreement, the elimination of the government-opposition conflict, etc.
As for the Armenians, they are the only minority living in Syria who have a nation state behind them.
The Syrian-Armenians partially felt the existence of the state when Armenia created conditions for the Syrian-Armenians who wanted to take refuge in the homeland.
  In Armenia, steps are taken as much as possible to alleviate their concerns in terms of education, care, culture and other privileges.
  The problem, however, is that the majority of the Armenian community remains in Syria, its existence is being questioned day by day.
 It is here that Armenia has serious work to do; it should have already used its diplomatic levers to ease the situation of its compatriots inside Syria.
The vast majority, if not all, of the families living in Syria are descendants of Western Armenian immigrants who, having lived in Syria for generations, were well integrated and adapted to the Muslim environment.
In Aleppo, the Armenians were mainly engaged in trade, handicrafts, particularly jewelry, and already in the vicinity of Kessab, they were mainly engaged in agriculture and cattle-breeding, moreover, there was a large Kurdish-speaking area here.
 The trade, the business of the Syrian-Armenians, which was significantly different from the Western business, was to some extent influenced by the East, nevertheless it provided the average to above-average level of social security of the Syrian-Armenians.
54 http:
//ankakh.com/article/619/%C2%ABnvor-halyep%C2%BB, available on 08.05.15.
5 Ա. Hakobyan, / MPI /, Yerevan, 2015, interview with ethnographer A. With Hakobyan.
One of the most common occupations was the repair of individual parts of cars.
 Many families were selling embroidery, which was a source of income.
 In addition to these activities, many families in Syria had small restaurants and taverns.
  Moving to Armenia, they tried to reopen them in the homeland, of course, with some restrictions, as the Armenian environment was slightly different in terms of tax and finance.
  The difficulties were conditioned by the fact that Armenia did not have the jobs in which Syrian-Armenians could be involved.
 There are many obstacles to integration in Armenia: tax, financial, linguistic, social, economic, psychological, etc.
Tax policy in Syria was milder than in Armenia; in terms of social security, Armenian families in Syria had a higher standard of living than in Armenia6.
It should be noted that today a small part of the young Syrian-Armenian generation is engaged in traditional, family activities.
 Most of them are now seeking higher university education.
According to the average data, the family consisted of 4 members.
 And even if one member of the family worked, the family could provide an average living wage7.
  This model broke down a bit after coming to Armenia.
  The conditions in Armenia forced the other members of the family to work.
From the point of view of linguistic integration, it should be noted that being fluent in Armenian-Armenian, Syrian-Armenians face certain difficulties in communicating with Armenians, as in many cases there is a problem of mutual misunderstanding, as a result of which certain linguistic changes are observed.
In the field of work and education, the lack of knowledge of Russian presents a certain difficulty, because unlike the people of Armenia, for whom the knowledge of Russian is, if not obligatory, required, the Syrian-Armenian did not need to learn Russian, the knowledge of Russian was amateur.
 It should be noted that certain work is being done in this direction, Russian language courses are being organized, etc.
6 In the same place.
7 Ա. Hakovyan, / MPI /, interview Av. With Keshishyan, Yerevan, 2015.
When talking about the integration of Syrian-Armenians in Armenia, not so much cultural as economic factors should be used.
  No matter how high the cultural level of the integrated sector is, there are not enough economic conditions, the problem of integration becomes much more complicated8.
 Therefore, the issues related to difficult integration should be sought in economic factors.
 In other words, if the Syrian-Armenian finds it difficult to adapt to the new environment, it means that everything is not smooth at the financial and economic level.
 These difficulties, as well as the lack of profitability of previous traditional occupations in Armenia, force Syrian-Armenians, especially young people, to abandon them and get involved in other areas, mainly in the service sector.
 Knowledge of languages, especially English, helps them in this regard.
From the point of view of integration, let us add that the psychological side of the issue plays no less a role.
  First of all, from a psychological and social point of view, we should mention that the Syrian-Armenian has never considered himself a refugee, in many cases it offends their dignity.
 Many families arrived in Armenia with the expectation of returning to Syria under certain security conditions; in many cases, they did not intend to live permanently.
Syrian-Armenian Meghrik Giveryan lived in the New Village district of Aleppo.
 Speaking about the families he knew, he informed them about their family relations, behavior, traditional occupations, even the kitchen.
During the interview with the speaker, we recorded a fact: Syrian-Armenians arriving in Armenia encounter the disappointing attitude of Armenians living in Armenia.
  In other words, an Armenian who has lived in a foreign land for many years comes to Armenia longing for his homeland, where he meets Armenians who think about how to leave the country and go abroad, and even more, they recommend the same to the Syrian-Armenians.
 Nevertheless, the Syrian-Armenian youth are received quite well among the youth and deserve their warm treatment.
The Syrian-Armenian speaker mentioned that even after the end of the war in Syria he does not intend to return to Syria.
  And because they are not insured against war, if this generation of the family, returning to Armenia, managed to escape, then yes. 8 In the same place.
They are not convinced that after returning to Syria they will be able to save the next generation.
Thus, the civil war that started in Syria led to the disintegration and disintegration of the prosperous "strong community" in Syria.
Leaving a whole life behind, the Syrian-Armenians found refuge in the homeland, and some went to a third country, facing a number of difficulties related to integration.
 The latter, in their turn, changed the socio-normative culture of the Syrian-Armenians.
Ani Hakobyan CHANGE OF THE ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SYRIAN-ARMENIANS AS A RESULT OF THE SYRIAN CONFLICT. SYRIAN-ARMENIANS IN ARMENIA Keywords: Syria, civil war, integration, Diaspora, issues, Syrian-Armenians, cultural characteristics Summary.
