THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SELF-SELF-DETERMINATION AND SELF-ASSESSMENT IN THE PROCESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL-PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT Self-realization is a requirement, a tendency that we each carry from birth.
 It gives us the opportunity to express our potential, talents and abilities.
 One of the ways to satisfy the need for self-realization is the field of work.
 At present, it is impossible to imagine a productive employee without personal-professional self-realization.
 However, before talking about personal-professional self-realization, let us mention what self-realization is.
The term "self-realization" was first used by K. Goldstein.
  He argued that the body needed to use certain abilities.
 From the beginning, he believed that the existence of conflict is a possible condition for self-realization.
 A healthy և normal organism overcomes obstacles in the process of realization և self-realization is possible only when the self-realization of another person is guaranteed.
 "And the inability to realize oneself is a 'cause' or 'back' of mental illnesses," K. claimed. Goldstein [5].
Self-realization can be studied as a demand, goal, means, process, situation, result.
 It is a necessary component of a person's development և due to a certain strategy of life activity [2].
I. A. Idinov distinguishes three stages of self-realization: actualization-weakening.
 The stage of actualization exists insofar as the demand for self-realization at the same time acts as a goal.
  Tension can arise on the way to the goal as a result of motivation, and the implementation of motivation can reduce tension.
 Then the cycle repeats.
 Each stage, according to A. According to Idinov, he has a number of "self-processes", for example, self-knowledge, self-awareness, self-goal, self-modeling, self-choice, self-control, self-analysis.
  Satisfying his self-realization needs, man develops և develops his potential [1].
Our theoretical analysis suggests that parallels can be drawn between Adler's notion of the pursuit of transcendentalism and "realization."
 In his early thoughts A. Adler noted that people strive for excellence, և that aspiration is different from the complex of excellence.
And in the last years of his life he came to the conclusion that the pursuit of excellence is the basic law of human life. it is innate, we will never get rid of it, because that aspiration is life itself.
 However, this feeling needs to be nurtured and developed if we want to realize our potential.
 Adler believed that this process begins in the fifth year of life, when the purpose of life is formed, becoming a source of motivation over time.
          He affirmed that the pursuit of excellence is normal for everyone in pathology.
 The pursuit of excellence is accompanied by the expenditure of energy.
 It is manifested both at the level of the individual and the society.
 We strive to transcend the culture of our society.
We believe that self-realization gives an opportunity to realize one's own self, with positive-negative sides, to recognize, feel, accept one's own essence.
  Helps the person to discover, study և usability.
 It helps to break stereotypes and create a non-critical attitude towards other people.
Thus, knowing what self-realization is, what stages it has, how it is manifested, a question arises. How is self-realization manifested in the professional sphere?
Speaking of professional self-realization, we consider it as a special form of the cognitive process of a person, who expects to discover, study and evaluate his own possibilities, ambitions, the means of their realization in the profession.
 In other words, the ability to seek professional self-realization "in yourself in the profession."
 During professional self-realization, a special way of self-regulation of a person's social behavior takes place, a system of value orientation is formed, and, accordingly, means for the organization of life and professional activities.
Personal և professional self-realization can be affected by low levels of self-awareness, self-reflection [3], as well as self-esteem, as it is constructed of cognitive-emotional components (the first reflects a person's knowledge of himself and the second reflects his attitude towards himself). Development of a sense of self-esteem, a sense of self-worth և a positive attitude towards one's self.
 For this reason, negative self-esteem expects self-denial, the rejection of all that is embedded in human identity.
 In other words, if a person's level of self-esteem is low (either negative or inadequate self-esteem), then the person's perceptions of their own identity, who they are, their abilities and attitudes towards them are distorted.
          Psychologist A. A. In an article entitled "The relationship between self-esteem and self-realization in the context of psychological health" Berezovskaya presented the 2007 the results of his research.
  Examining 30 people aged 23-70 working in the Ministry of Sport and Tourism of the Republic of Belarus, they found that self-esteem is directly related to a person's level of self-realization, ie adequate physical and psychological self-esteem will enhance psychological health ինքն self-realization can occur [4].
There is a lot of work dedicated to revealing the connection between self-realization and self-esteem, but we have not come across any work that studies the differences between self-realization and self-esteem, the connection between self-realization and self-esteem.
Thus, we aimed to find out whether there is a connection between self-esteem and self-esteem, whether the level of self-esteem changes at different stages of the psychologist's development, we proposed a hypothesis that there is a connection between self-esteem and self-esteem. մակարդ The level of self-realization changes at different stages of a psychologist's professional development.
The experimental study was conducted with 42 respondents, 15 of whom are 3rd year students of the Department of Psychology of YSU Faculty of Philosophy and Psychology, 14 are 1st year students of the same institution, the same Master's program, and 13 are more than 3 years old. Persons under the age of 40 working in the field of psychology.
The main methodological composition of the research G. Ն. Kazantzaya's self-esteem diagnostic questionnaire is և E. Shostrom's "Samual" test of self-realization.
       E. V. Shostrov's "Samual" test of self-realization allows to determine the level of self-realization through 11 variables (temporal orientation, values, views on human nature, need for recognition, creativity, autonomy, spontaneity, self-understanding, autosympathy, sociability, communication flexibility).
Ներկայացվում է յուրաքանչյուր փոփոխականի թվային փոփոխությունն ու դինամիկան հետազոտական երեք խմբերում`Բակալավրիատի  Մագիստրատուրայի 3-րդ կուրս1-ին կուրսԺամանակի հանդեպկողմնորոշումԱրժեքներԱշխատողհոգեբաններՄարդու բնույթիհանդեպ հայացքներՃանաչմանպահանջմունքՍտեղծարարությունԱվտոնոմությունՍպոնտանությունԻնքնահասկացումԱուտոսիմպատիաՇփվողականությունՇփման ճկունությունԻնքնագնահատական  M=3.9, σ=2.97Աղյուսակ 1. Ինքնիրացման մակարդակը որոշող փոփոխականների ևինքնագնահատականի միջին ցուցանիշները, ստանդարտ շեղումները` հետազոտականերեք խմբերումԻնչպես  երևում  է  աղյուսակ  1-ից՝  բակալավրիատի  3-րդ  կուրսի  մոտ  ամենիցբարձր  իրացվել  է  ստեղծարարությունը,  իսկ  ամենից  ցածրը`  շփվողականությունը,մագիստրատուրայի առաջին կուրսի և աշխատող հոգեբանների մոտ ամենից բարձրնիրացվել  է  ժամանակի  հանդեպ  կողմնորոշումն,  իսկ  ամենից  ցածրը`  սպոնտանությունը։
 When comparing the data of the three groups, we get the following image: the self-assessment of the 3rd year of the bachelor's degree has an average level, and the groups of the first-year master's degree working psychologists have registered high self-assessment.
Of the 11 variables that determine the level of self-realization, 9 variables were the highest in the group of psychologists, there is only 1 variable, that is, the requirement for recognition, the highest was found in freshmen, and values, the creativity variable was highest in third-year students. Orientation to time, attitudes towards human nature, autonomy, spontaneity, self-understanding, autosympathy, sociability, contact flexibility have registered dynamic growth).
Creativity is a key factor in achieving success in various fields.
 One of the characteristics of creativity is the ability to be open to new ideas.
 The data of our research show that the dynamics of this variable is gradually decreasing.
After obtaining the average data of the 3 groups, we distributed them in separate groups. To find the absence, calculate the data with Spearman coefficient.
Inkniratsmanmakardake bnoroshoghpopokhakannereInknagnahatakanZhamanaki handepkoghmnoroshumMardu nature handephayatsknerChanachmanpahanjmunkSteghtsararutyunAghyusak 2. Bachelor 3rd year at the level of self-esteem and confidence that defines a few variables through Spirmanigortsaktsi connection between exposure (p <0.05 *) For the 3rd year Bachelor values, avtonomutyun, spontanutyun, self, autosimpatia, shpvoghakanutyun , variability variability և self-assessment according to K. They are normally distributed in S., so let's use the Pearson coefficient to identify and show the relationship between them.
Inkniratsmanmakardake bnoroshoghpopokhakannereInknagnahatakanArzheknerAvtonomutyunSpontanutyunInknahaskatsumAutosimpatiaShpvoghakanutyunShpman chkunutyunAghyusak 3. Bachelor 3rd year at the level of self-esteem and confidence define several variables of communication between the Pirsonigortsaktsi exposure (p <0.01 **) Table 2 through 3 lives and it is clear that self-esteem and orientation to time inknahaskatsman There is a positive correlation between the variables of autosympathy.
 This means that when individuals in a given group have inadequate self-esteem, the indicators of time-orientation, self-awareness, and self-sympathy variables will be either low or high.
 Submitting the data of the 1st year of the Master's program to K.S. During the distribution, it became clear that time orientation, sociability և communication flexibility are not normally distributed, so we used the Spearman coefficient to identify the relationship between their և self-esteem։.
Inkniratsmanmakardake bnoroshoghpopokhakannereZhamanaki handepkoghmnoroshumShpvoghakanutyunShpman chkunutyunInknagnahatakanAghyusak 4. Master's 1st year at the level of self-esteem and confidence define several variables of communication between the Spirmanigortsaktsi Since the discovery of values, attitudes toward human nature, demand recognition, creativity, avtonomutyun, spontanutyun, self, self-esteem and have a normal variables autosimpatia distribution, so we used the Pearson coefficient to find the relationship between them.
Ինքնիրացմանմակարդակը բնորոշողփոփոխականներըԻնքնագնահատականԱրժեքներՄարդու բնույթի հանդեպհայացքներՃանաչմանպահանջմունքՍտեղծարարությունԱվտոնոմությունՍպոնտանությունԻնքնահասկացումԱուտոսիմպատիաԱղյուսակ 5. Մագիստրատուրա 1-ին կուրսի մոտ ինքնիրացման մակարդակը բնորոշող միքանի փոփոխականների և ինքնագնահատականի միջև կապի բացահայտումը Պիրսոնիգործակցի միջոցովԱղյուսակ 5-ից պարզ է դառնում, որ մագիստրատուրայի 1-ին կուրսի ուսանողների մոտ գրանցվել է ինքնագնահատականի և ինքնիրացման միջև կապի բացակայություն,  այսինքն՝  ինքնագնահատականը  չի  կորելացվել  ինքնիրացման  և  ոչ  միփոփոխականի հետ։
Մինչև 40 տարեկան, 3 և ավել տարիներ հոգեբան աշխատողներից կազմվածխմբի մոտ  պատկերն այլ է։
 Տվյալները Կ.-Ս. բաշխմանը ենթարկելուց հետո պարզդարձավ, որ արժեքներ, ստեղծարարություն, շփվողականություն, շփման ճկունություն  և  ինքնագնահատական  փոփոխականները  նորմալ  բաշխված  չեն։
  Այդ  իսկպատճառով  ինքնիրացման  մակարդակը  որոշող  11  փոփոխականների  և  ինքնագնահատականի  միջև  կապը  բացահայտելու  համար  կիրառեցինք  Սպիրմանիգործակիցը։
Ինքնիրացմանմակարդակը բնորոշողփոփոխականներըԺամանակի հանդեպկողմնորոշումԱրժեքներՄարդու բնույթի հանդեպհայացքներՃանաչման պահանջմունքՍտեղծարարությունԱվտոնոմությունՍպոնտանությունԻնքնահասկացումԱուտոսիմպատիաՇփվողականությունՇփման ճկունությունԻնքնագնահատականԱղյուսակ 6. Մինչև 40 տարեկան, 3 և ավել տարիներ հոգեբան աշխատող խմբի մոտինքնիրացման մակարդակը բնորոշող փոփոխականների և ինքնագնահատականի միջևկապի բացահայտումը Սպիրմանի գործակցի միջոցով  (p<0.01**)Աղյուսակ  6-ի  տվյալները  ցույց  են  տալիս,  որ  հոգեբան  աշխատողների  մոտինքնագնահատականը հակադարձ կապի մեջ է գտնվում ճանաչման պահանջմունքիհետ։
 This means that the lower the self-esteem, the higher the level of satisfaction of the recognition requirement.
Thus, based on the results of the correlation analysis of the methodologies, the hypothesis that there is a connection between self-realization and self-esteem և the level of self-realization changes at different stages of the development of the psychologist, was partially confirmed.
LITERATURE [1] Papoyan V. R., Green E. A., Galstyan A. Ս. և Others, The Problem of Personal Self-Esteem, Auxiliary Manual (Editor: SS Amiryan), Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2011, 102 pages.
[2] Pajuhandeh E., Psychological factors determining the student's personal growth in the new learning environment (dissertation summary), Yerevan 2013, URL.
 http:
//councils.ysu.am/pdf_files/066/066-!bs2am.pdf.
reflections, сc. 6-9, URL.
http:
//psyjournals.ru/files/80122/Gorizonty_zrelosti_sbornik_tezisov.pdf (data sheet.
ψυχολογгического здоровья, URL.
  http:
//www.psyhodic.ru/arc.php?page=3910 (датаобращения.
 13.06.2017). [5] Леонтьев Д. A., Self-actualization as a driving force of personal development.
URL.
https:
//www.psychologos.ru/articles/view/samoaktualizaciya-kak-dvizhuschaya-silalichnostnogo-razvitiya-dvoe-zn--istoriko-kriticheskiy-analiz-da-leontev (date of publication).
Prime-Eurozone, 2002, 656 pages, URL.
https:
//www.e-reading.club/bookreader.php/113018/Kollektiv__Psihologiya_cheloveka_ot_rozhdeniya_do_smerti.html (data date.
 21.08.2017). self-actualizing personalities, SGU Report, volume 2, series.
  АкмеологияURL.
razvitiya-samoaktualiziruyuscheysya-lichnosti (date of address.
 16.09.2017) .http.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/akme-kak-vershina-lichnogo-i-professionalnogo Azizyan THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SELF-SELF-ASSESSMENT AND SELF-ASSESSMENT, SPIRITUALISM
