COVERAGE OF CEASEFIRE VIOLATION IN ARMENIAN NEWSPAPER 1994 On May 12, the Minister of Defense of the Republic of Armenia, the Commander of the NKR Defense Army and the Minister of Defense of the Republic of Azerbaijan signed a ceasefire agreement, by which the parties agreed on the following: "Ensure complete cessation of fire and hostilities since 1994. May 12, 00 hours 01 minutes.
 Until 1994. Relevant ceasefire orders will be issued on May 11 and will be communicated to the commanders of the military units responsible for their implementation.
  By 23:00 on 12 May, the Parties shall exchange the texts of their ceasefire orders with a view to their possible complementation and the subsequent harmonization of the main provisions of similar instruments.
Twenty years have passed since the signing of the ceasefire, and the first and most important clause of the agreement has remained unfulfilled.
With this work we present how the enemy becomes more active during the year, especially in certain regions, and how that activity is covered in the Armenian media field.
Examining the official data on the ceasefire violation for several years (of the RA Armed Forces և NKR Defense Army), the picture is as follows:  in 2010 - 7450 shots,  in 2011 - 12619 shots,  in 2012 - 15232 shots,  in 2013. 12739 shots 2.
What is the reason for the opponent's activity?
  According to the results of our monitoring, the enemy intensively violates the ceasefire during the year, especially on the designated days, for example,  January or Bloody January (address: Qara Yanvar, night of January 20, 1990. The Soviet army invaded Baku, killing hundreds). ) January 28, the day of the formation of the RA Armed Forces, 25 February 25-26, the events in Khojaly, which the Azerbaijani side is trying to present to the world as a "genocide", 27 February 27, the Sumgait massacre, 9 May 9 և 12, the liberation of Shushi արի ceasefire Approval agreement, 2 September 2 և 21: Artsakh և RA Independence Days, 1 See NKR official website: http.
//www.nkr.am/hy/ceasefire-agreement/147/.
2 See the infographic of "Yerkir Daily" website: http.
//www.yerkir.am/en/news/57632.htm.
 New Year, ժամանակահատված Spring Autumn Conscription-Demobilization Period in the Armed Forces of Armenia Twice a Year, շրջան Spring Engineering Work Period, և Meetings of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia ,  Visit of the President of the Republic of Armenia to the Border Regions, ներքին Domestic Policy of Azerbaijan, particularly 2013- Personnel changes in the defense system in 2014 (appointment of the Minister of Defense Zakir Hasanov և other subsequent changes).
Now we present how these events are interpreted in the Armenian press.
2014 On the night of January 19, 1920, there were simultaneous attempts by enemy subversive groups to penetrate in the north-eastern (Jraberd) and south-eastern (Korgan) directions of the Armenian-Azerbaijani line of contact in Artsakh.
 Junior sergeant Armen Loni Hovhannisyan died.
 After that, the tension along the border intensified, and some "experts" began to predict the resumption of large-scale hostilities.
 On January 20, the Armenian side announced that the January 19 diversion would not go unanswered.
  The next day, it was announced on Azerbaijani websites, including the official website of the Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan, that the Armenian side had attacked.
"The statement of the Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan that we allegedly attacked is another misinformation.
 The enemy units fired ten times more intensively last night, violating the ceasefire regime.
Yesterday we promised to respond to the January 19 diversion with an appropriate horse, being well aware of that, they were scared and shot all along the front line.
  "As a result of the retaliatory fire of our subdivisions, the enemy has remained silent, we have no casualties," said Artsrun Hovhannisyan, press secretary of the RA Ministry of Defense.
It should be added that according to the operative data of the Defense Army, in the period from January 12 to 18, the enemy violated the ceasefire 150 times, during which more than 800 firearms were fired at Armenian positions from different caliber firearms. shot 2.
Comparing these numbers only with the figures published on January 20, the following picture is obtained. More than 800 shots in one week, more than 2000 shots in one day3.
Thus, the enemy significantly intensifies during the "January", violates the ceasefire regime, as a result of which, unfortunately, the Armenian side has a combat victim (s).
  According to that, the January 19 Azerbaijani subversive operation is in fact behind the January 20 intensive fire along the entire length of the front line, moreover, the Azeri side will be attacked. 1 See the publication of "Razminfo" military news website: http.
//razm.info/29642.
2 See the publication of the Defense Army Press Service (hereinafter referred to as the Defense Army MP) at http: // www.
//nkrmil.am/main/am/newsMore650.html.
3 See the publication of the Defense Army MP: http.
//nkrmil.am/main/am/newsMore653.html.
in flu conditions.
  This circumstance once again proves that the appointment of a new Minister of Defense in Azerbaijan did not affect the general situation. Azerbaijan continues its policy towards Armenia, and the calls for a peaceful solution to the Artsakh conflict, often voiced by the President of Azerbaijan and high-ranking officials, are just another propaganda step.
Only one day later, when the situation on the border was still quite tense, the enemy started firing intensively in the direction of the border villages of the Armenian-Azerbaijani border, Tavush region.
A number of Armenian news sites, in particular news.am, start spreading news in the evening with the following headline: "Azerbaijani side fires in Aygepar և Nerkin Karmiraghbyur villages. to evacuate the residents. "
  The content is as follows. "The Azerbaijani side opened an advance for about an hour in the direction of Aygepar և Nerkin Karmiraghbyur villages of Tavush region. The villagers were evacuated from their homes, and now they are in special shelters.
 The residents of Aygepar informed NEWS.am about this, who were terrified by such a large number of shots. "
Giving some general assessment, the media outlet spreads misinformation.
 In case of ceasefire violations after the establishment of the ceasefire, the population has never been evacuated from any Armenian village, has not been moved to any "special shelter".
 What does it mean "the residents of Aygepar reported about this" when a number of other media outlets had to deny the irresponsible statement of one media outlet at midnight?
  It is interesting that the media, realizing very well that sooner or later the factual information will be revealed, changes the title of its article in an hour, making "the Azerbaijani side fires in the direction of Aygepar and Nerkin Karmiraghbyur villages."
  Moreover, the website edits the text of the material, removing the sections containing information.
"About an hour ago, the Azerbaijani side opened fire in the direction of Aygepar և Nerkin Karmiraghbyur border villages of Tavush region. The villagers were evacuated from their homes and are now in special shelters.
  The residents of Aygepar informed NEWS.am about this. "
  There is no other sentence in the edited section "who was terrified by so many shots".
 Maybe within an hour no one else scared them, that's why the website decided to edit.
It turns out that some Armenian news sites are spreading misinformation in the Armenian society, increasing the tension and fear that started on January 19.
  The Azerbaijani side calmly uses this fact and presents that "Armenians are leaving their homes, that their armed forces are not able to defend themselves, that Azerbaijan is very powerful," and so on.
It is known that people tend to believe more in the initial information than in the explanations given later.
 When accurate information is given that no one has been evacuated, the situation is controlled by the Armenian armed forces, the majority of the public thinks that it is done to weaken the tense atmosphere, as well as to divert attention.
 For this reason, such a style of work is a threat to our national security, because 1 See http.
//news.am/arm/news/190568.html.
If there is no guarantee in a crisis situation that the false information will not cause real harm, it will create panic by hitting first of all the soldier standing at the border, the resident of the border village.
Another example. The enemy violated the ceasefire regime again on January 28, due to which Karen Galstyan was killed by an enemy sniper bullet in the combat position of one of the military units located in the northern direction in Artsakh.
Let's talk about one important point, how in 2013 After Jdran, on October 22, the enemy decided to "give a gift" to the newly appointed Minister of Defense of Azerbaijan.
  By the decree of the President of Azerbaijan Ilham Ali, the Minister of Defense of the country Safar Abi was replaced by Zakir Asker oglu Hasanov.
 At the same time I. By Ali's decree, Z. Hasanov received the military rank of colonel-general1.
  On the same day, on October 22, between 13 and 14 o'clock, in the Paravakar section of the Berd-Ijan highway in the Tavush region of the Republic of Armenia, Garik Poghosyan, a conscript, was killed by a fire on a line of military vehicles transporting servicemen.
 Conscripts Artur Andranikyan, Arayik Zhamharyan and Martin Petrosyan received various gunshot wounds.
The RA Ministry of Defense announced that the criminal step of the enemy will not remain unanswered, once again the responsibility for the provocation will remain on the unleashed.
In conclusion, the signed ceasefire can be replaced by hostilities at any moment.
 The incidents should not be covered, because otherwise it has the tendency to put to sleep the illusion of peace, which is no less dangerous for the Armenian society than the psychological pressure.
  The military-analytical website "Razminfo" operating in the Armenian media field has an analytical material, where the violation of the ceasefire is considered a psychological action. "Frequent firing keeps our servicemen in a constant state of tension (plus the heavy duty regime on duty), which in turn increases the likelihood of various incidents, which can result in non-combat casualties."
The Azerbaijani side understands very well that the constant news about the shooting incidents in the positions in the Armenian media keep the Armenian audience under psychological pressure.
 Such a message becomes a source of anxiety, stress, and sometimes even panic for future conscripts, relatives of young conscripts.
  And in addition to the constant gunfire in the border villages, the residents are shaken by the baseless judgments and misinformation coming from the capital, as if they are leaving the villages or their homes.
 Having a well-prepared and literate media field for a warring country is not inferior to that of a warlord, as one of the possible guarantees of winning a real war is to win an information war.
1 See http.
//razm.info/23478.
2 See http.
//razm.info/23432.
3 See http.
//razm.info/5475.
Hasmik Meliksetyan WHEN DOES THE OPPONENT ACTIVATE? COVERAGE OF CEASEFIRE VIOLATION ARMENIAN NEWSPAPER Keywords: Armenia, Azerbaijan, ceasefire violation, Armenian-Azerbaijani border, frontline.
