THE CONFLICT OF THE SOUL AND THE BODY MOVING TO DEATH AND. B. The theme of "The Aging Man" in the poems of the late Yates period is a key role in the works of the late 20th century Irish playwright, poet William Butler Yates.
 Old age was a problem for the poet, from which at least his poetic self was constantly escaping.
 Scholars, however, consider the poetry of "old Yates" to be the culmination of his work.
 At the end of his life, the best plays and plays had already been written, the Nobel Prize was awarded, Yates's poetry reached its highest point, leading to the phenomenal end of the literary path.
  It is not for nothing that in this period Yates himself becomes the signifier of his favorite symbol, the tower.
 The first two poems of the "Ashtarak" collection are meditations on the problem of the "aging man".
  They follow each other, but look at the same issue from different angles.
Thus, the first poem of the series, "Navigation to Byzantium", begins with an announcement: "That is no country for old men" [1].
 Yates contrasts his aging body with young people who have also been born and raised, and then they too will die.
 Miba, however, according to Yates, does not die. The mind that does not grow old.
  The poetic ego, striving for immortality, sails to Holy Byzantium.
 Old age liberates man from the world of the earth, he enters the world of the soul.
  He urges the wise to "consume his heart, sick with desire և attached to a dying animal" ("Consume my heart away; sick with desire / And fastened to a dying animal") [1].
The poet sees the way out of the physical world or his body in getting rid of the heart, desires, emotions, passions.
 The horses in the eternal nature of God, և Yates, for the rebirth of his soul, chooses instead of the body a horse որով used by the Greek jewelers to create artificial trees for the emperor and singing birds.
 In this way he hints at the perpetuation of the soul in art.
 The heavenly, born և dying world of the young body is replaced in the last lines of the poem by the song of eternity about what "has passed, passes և will come" ("Or set upon agolden bough to sing /… / Of what is past, or passing, or to come ») [1].
 "Navigation", like the other poem of the same name about Byzantium, is closely connected with the attainment of the Unity of Existence through art.
  Curtis Bradford writes in this regard. "The hero reaches the temporary aspect of the Unity of Existence, leaving the country, dominated by the lust of the young, and sailing to Byzantium, which is a symbol of a caring life."
Already in "Ashtarak", this solution of the problem does not satisfy the poet.
  Yates begins the poem with a question. What should I do with this absurdity?
 In this absurd case, it was not the reality outside the poet's body, but his own body, old and weak, from which he had no other way out.
  This time, instead of becoming part of the eternity of navigation, he thinks of creating his own eternity.
  The emotions of the foreign heart of the previous poem become the muse of existence.
 Recalling the different characters, he calls everyone and asks if they are as angry with old age as he is.
 In the third part of the poem, leaving his will, Yates separates his two bases of problem-solving: pride and faith.
  Only condensed pride and unbridled faith can be a basis for courage to challenge the encroachments of old age.
 The desire to become a part of eternity in "Navigation" was an escape from the reality of an aging body, and in "Ashtarak" Yates already bravely opposes it.
 Reconciling with the Iranian, the poet reconciles with the aging body. "… Beingdead, we rise, / Dream and so create / Translunar Paradise" ("… dying, we ascend, / In a dream և thus creates / Translunar Paradise") [1].
Sean Pryor considers the "Paradise of the Moon" to be the "vision" paradise that Yates places beyond the spiral of spirals.
 "It is the realm of the visible world," writes David Ross, "where souls և are in the perfection of their bodies."
 John Anterker considers that paradise to be created by man, like works of art. it maintains its existence even after its creator, to be the people of the future. [5]
Memories and experiences become tools for the poet, symbolizing the victory that "would make people mad" ("Forif I triumph I must make men mad") [1].
  Hinting at the insane effect of art on man, Yates already sees the absurd victory of body aging in "Ashtarak" not in Byzantine eternity, but in his own art-paradise.
 The accumulated energy can be directed to the creation of a more imaginative "sublunary" art.
  "Yates," writes Virginia Pruitt, "returns the power of unbridled will to the highest place in her personal classification of beliefs."
  If in "Navigation" he entrusts his soul to the wise, here the poet decides to create it.
  In this way he lays his soul, which materializes in poetry, which in turn lays eggs for the people who come later.
The period of the supremacy of the soul ends with the poem "Dialogue of the Self", in which Yates continues the idea of ​​the duality of the essence, the world, this time giving preference to the Self, the symbol of life.
The first half of it calls the anti-dominant half to justice.
 And in the real world as well as in the poetic world, the opposite times were formulated in the esoteric work of Yates "Vision", therefore, I had to win.
  The soul calls Yesi "My Soul. I summon to the winding ancient stair" [1], the meaning of which is one thing. It is the tower and the stream, the bottom and the top, the one that connects the Spirit and the Self.
 Like the ladder of Jacob's dream, one end of which was in heaven and the other on earth, on which the angels of God ascended and descended, [8] the Spirit moves up this winding ladder, as if trying to find its place in the tower whose wall is being torn down.
  This is not only a real fact, because the tower of Balili was really with masonry, but also symbolizes the opposite tradition.
  It is dark on the winding degree. The soul can live in darkness, because the time of souls is night, as in the poem "All Souls'Night".
 In that darkness, in chaos, the Spirit is imprisoned, because it is neither on earth nor in heaven.
 It is not only he who wanders on the pulpit, but also the mind.
 The symbol above is the star, but it "shows the hidden pole" ("Upon the star that marks the hidden pole") [1], which is probably the house of the Spirit, the mind.
 In the darkness, like the world in the bars of the planet Earth, the Spirit wanders on the winding stage of the mind, in the darkness.
 If Hogusimvol is the winding stage, I, continuing the dialogue, draws Sato's sword as its symbol.
 In his letters, Yates told of a Japanese Sato who was a fan of his poetry, and during one of his regular lectures he presented the poet with a sword kept in their family for nearly half a century.
  In the poem, this sword becomes the symbol of the material, the carnal, the sexual, [4] և it's on the poet's knees ("The consecrated blade upon my knees / Is Sato's ancient blade, still as it was") [1] in "և" և the opposite of "above".
  It is the symbol of stability, which is evident in the repeated use of the word still, in this sense it is opposed to the chaos of the Spirit.
 But his answer is not late. "Why should thelove and war?" ("Why should a person's imagination, / its long flowering period, remember things that / symbolize love and war?") [1].
This is the first step for the aging body to accept. Ես The Spirit urges you to reflect on the sword, the life of which the flowering period has passed.
  Instead, he suggests thinking of a "tribal night" that "can free from the crime of death և birth" ("Think of ancestral night that can /… / Deliver from the crime ofdeath and birth") [1].
  The family night becomes the only way to get rid of the shackles to know the Truth.
 The soul knows that the living do not know the truth, it does not know, because the body in which it lives has not yet died.
  And the souls of the dead, as in the poem "The Night of All Souls" know,, the tribal night (Yates with the word "tribal" refers to the past in which the dead live, who know) wake up to tell the truth.
 The crime of death-birth alludes to the Nevada Samsara, the cycle of reincarnation, birth-death, from which liberation, Nirvana, in Yates's poem, is identified with the "world of liberated souls" or the paradise to which the Spirit aspires.
I continue to insist that he is ready to "commit the crime of death" once and for all.
 The sword becomes the symbol of day, life, contrasting with the tower, which "symbolizes the night" ("… and all these I set / For emblems of the dayagainst the tower / Emblematical of the night") [1].
  The soul knows that "only the dead can be forgiven."
 This symbolizes the Christian salvation of the Camvedian nirvana. … Man is stricken deaf and dumb and blind, / For intellect no («… man becomes deaf և dumb և blind, / Because intellect is no different տարբեր / Being from not being, or knowing the knower, / That is, Heaven ascends, / Only the dead can be forgiven, / But when I think about it, it is a language stone ”) [1].
 In the last line, Yates alludes to the inability of poetry to reach the truth or Paradise, thus contradicting his thesis "Navigation to Byzantium" and "Ashtarak".
  Interestingly, in this poem, Yates resolves the conflict between soul and body, or death and life, in favor of life.
  If the Spirit saw forgiveness in death, Esnire forgives, հայտնում expressing willingness to "live it all again" [1], thus re-establishing Samsara.
  He concludes that in youthful infirmity, corruptible body, suffering caused by his soulmate, pain and incompleteness, he 1 English word "ought" means "nothing, zero" as a spelling of the words aught, nought.
In any case, he is happy.
 A celebration and glorification of everything begins, begging for a dialogue with Whitman's poem "A Song About Me". "We must laughand we must sing, / We are blest by everything, / Everything we look upon is blest" ("We must laugh and we must sing, / We are blessed with everything, / Everything we see is blessed") [1 ].
This mood is also preserved in the fourth part of the poem "Yerem", where Yates describes how he looks at people walking down the street from the London store and suddenly feels great happiness: "It seemed, so great my happiness / That I was blessed and could bless. I was blessed և I could bless ") [1].
After all, Yates is neither from the Spirit nor from the Self outside of this poem.
He is the advocate of the consciousness that arises from their opposition.
In "Words for Music Maybe", crazy Jane meets a bishop who tries to persuade him to live "in a heavenly house, not in some foul sty" ("Live in a heavenly mansion, / Not in some foul sty"). which is the world of the body.
  Jane does not accept the contrast of the body և "heavenly house". "Fair and foul are near of kin, / And fair needs foul, I cried" ("The beautiful are bloodthirsty blood relatives / And the beautiful needs the disgusting - I cried") [1].
This is not so much the unity of body and soul, but the solution of a metaphysical problem in Yates poetry.
 The Unity of Existence, or the truth that arises from the unity of opposites, presupposes not only the "soul" of the body, but also the inner and upper, the opposite, the primary, death and life, the abominable and the beautiful, which "need each other."
If in the works of the early period Yates found the way out of the harmony of the "two extremes" through eternally beautiful, then in the late period, when Yates' metaphysical perceptions are already changing, the analysis becomes not the peaceful rose, but the breath of fire that "comes from destruction to day and night." («A brand, or flaming breath, / Comes to destroy / All those antimonies / Of day and night») [1].
 Yates once wrote to Olivia Shakespeare that "the swordsman eventually renounces the saint, but not without hesitation."
Knowing the symbols in the "dialogue of the Self։ Spirit", it is clear that the hunter is the person who chooses the body, and the saint is the soul.
 It turns out that crazy Jane's choice is not final in favor of the body. it cannot be without vibration.
Continuing this theme, in the poem "Yerem" Yates depicts a man between two extremes, from which he can not choose.
 He must always remain in their range,, right there, according to Yates, a new consciousness is born, և the poet asks. «But if these be right / What isjoy?» ("What is joy?") [1]
  The question arises from life and death, and the other contradictions that follow.
  In the next house, the contrasts are depicted as two halves of a tree.
  One half is green, the other is fire.
In dichotomy, however, each half is complete on its own.
  Yates hints that one extreme is able to fully absorb the reality of man, as in his case.
  The choice of Byzantium or soul begins a navigation that does not need the "other half". Byzantium is complete in itself.
 And just as "flames begotten offlame ('Byzantium')" [1], so both sides of this tree renew themselves and are reborn.
  Against these two opposites, Yates places a picture of Attis, one of the Phrygian gods.
 There are many legends about him, but the fact that Atis beheaded him during a demon-inspired rage is important to us.
 With the intervention of Zeus, the soul of Atis passes into the pine, near which the castration took place.
 The worship of Atis is connected with the very light around which the believers gathered in ancient times to perform a cult dance accompanied by drums.
 Referring to this image, Yates writes that the one who is in turmoil in front of the picture of Atis (in a state of ecstasy) "may not know what he knows but does not know grief" ("And hewhat he knows, but knows not grief").
 Thus the poet offers one of the definitions of joy - surrender to the gods, overcoming oppositions through their worship.
 Here you can also find a Christian response.
  Leave everything to God's will. "The father knows better."
  Atticism, in our view, is not accidental, since the amorphous God also seems to imply a lack of ingenuity, an androgenicity.
 And his picture is placed between the two opposite sides of the tree, showing their union, or at least the neutralization of the contradictions, which were sought during his worship as sacrifices by the excommunicating fanatics of Atis.
In the other house of poetry, Yates continues to reject life, women, children, և begins to prepare for death.
 He rejects "all works of intellect, of faith, of all things which his own hands have created" tomb [1], if they are not suitable for the man who should be proud and laugh at death.
 This joy of accepting death will be complemented by the sentence repeated in the sixth house. ("What's the meaning of all song? / Let all things pass away.") "Let everything pass" [1].
 The smell of grass cut into the fields of ancient China, the wars of Babylon and Nineveh, the sequence of night and day bring the realization of the transience of everything, և only after that it is possible to approach death with an "open eye".
The poet concentrates the problem of contradictions in the penultimate house, this time giving the two poles the names Spirit և Heart. Spirit. Strive for reality, let go of the seeming phenomena.
Heart. What if I am a born singer, do I lack a theme?
Spirit. Isaiah's spark, what more could a man want?
Heart. In the simplicity of the fire.
Spirit. Look at that fire, salvation is walking inside.
Heart. What was the theme of Homer, if not Adamic sin?
As in "Dialogue", the Spirit seeks a reality here that is beyond the seeming, that is, worldly, possessions.
  The heart that replaces Yesin here considers himself a singer by birth.
  Yates portrays the collective man as a poet who can not lack a theme or kill his vital musicality.
  The spirit, in response, points to Isaiah's spark, considering it the most desirable thing.
 [18]
 While the Savior sees in the purifying fire, the Heart, the man-poet, counts in it.
 He equates the theme of his song with the theme of Homer, one of the greatest poets, which was Adam's sin.
 In the great essay "Per Amica Silentia Lunae" Yates writes: "There are two realities: the earthly and the state of fire."
In the earthly state, according to Yates, all contradictions are met; only here is complete freedom possible.
  Everything is calm in the state of fire.
 That is why the Spirit sees salvation in the reality of fire or heavenly purification, and the Heart chooses the path of Homer, for whom there was no "salvation", whose only song was Adamic sin, or man's "way down" (Homer is also a symbol of opposite times).
  As in "Dialogue", Yates chooses "the filthy people of life", ասում good luck to the Catholic mystic Von Hugel.
  The latter used the experience of a sense of mysticism in his religious studies.
  The world of the Spirit becomes absolutely Christian in the last house of "Erekman".
  Yates, likening himself to Hugel, expresses his faith in the Christian miracle, remembers the myth of St. Teresa's body, according to which his body did not rot, and always emanates from it.
 Yates believes that one hand is responsible for these miracles, alluding to one divine essence. "Those self-same hands perchance / (" Perhaps those same hands / Immortalized the body of a modern-day saint that at the same time / Digged the mummy of Pharaoh ") [1].
These hands are not the hands of man, but the hands of God, or man, with godly guidance.
 After listing the miracles, Yates asks himself: "Have I become a Christian?"
 He could have chosen for himself the faith that is most suitable for the grave, but returning to the opposite, he considers his role in the world to be predetermined. «Did I-- play a predestined part. / Homer is my example and his unchristened heart "(" Homer is my example and his unbaptized heart ") [1].
  It seems that the poet resolves the և Self-'s relationship again in favor of the Self, but in the last line "Shaking" ends with shaking. "So get you gone, Von Hugel, though withblessings on your head" ("Well go, Von Hugel, but with blessing") [1].
  Yates says "good luck to the world of the soul", blesses and shows his humility to you.
 Melvin Williams sees in this ironic portrayal of the "blesser" and the "recipient of the blessing" the echo of the thought expressed in one of Yates' letters: "The arts, I believe, will carry the burdens that have fallen from the shoulders of the clergy."
Thus the poet gives the answer to the questions posed in the first house of the poem, which is not limited to the analyzed poems, but includes all his poetics.
  Man must live in the vicinity of vibration. առաջն with a primary inclination towards life and the world, և ակcontradictory rejection. I greet the superhuman. I call it death in life և life in death [1].
LITERATURE [2] Curtis B., Yeats's Byzantium Poems.
 A Study of Their Development. PMLA, vol. 75, no.1, p. 125, 1960, URL.
 www.jstor.org/stable/460433 - 03.03.18 (Accessed.
 19.03.2018). [4] Ross DA, Critical Companion to William Butler Yeats.
 A Literary Reference to His [6] Pruitt V., Return from Byzantium.
 WB Yeats and 'The Tower', ELH, volume 47, No. 1, p. 154, 1980, URL.
 www.jstor.org/stable/2872443 (Accessed.
 05.03.18). [8] Bible Book of Old and New Testaments, Etchmiadzin, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin և Bible Society of Armenia, 2001, Genesis 28.
10-13, Isaiah 6.
6-7.
[9] Pietrzak W., Myth, Language and Tradition.
 A Study of Yeats, Stevens, and Eliot in the [10] Ellmann R., Yeats.
 The Man and the Masks, New York, Norton, 1948, p. 276.76, URL.
  https:
//www.gutenberg.org/files/33338/33338-h/33338-h.htm(Accessed.
[12] Williams MG, Yeats and Christ, Renascence.
 vol 20, is 4, USA, Marquette University, Hamlet Arakelyan CONFLICT OF THE SOUL AND THE BODY MOVING DEATH AND. B. IN YATS LATE POETRY POEMS Keywords: soul, aging body, Irish English poetry, vibrations, two extremes, primacy և opposition.
