CURRENT ISSUES OF GENDER EQUALITY IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Nowadays, questions related to gender equality և gender policy are not adequately and uniformly understood.
It is first necessary to present the essence of the term "gender" և the context in which it is used in this article.
 As Richard Woodry points out. "Gender is the ratio of biological sex to behavior. "Gender theory reveals that relationship."
 The latter also points out that there are two main theories: biological and social [1].
 According to another definition, gender is the socially defined definition of women։ men.
  It is not gender (biological characteristics of women և men).
 Gender is defined as the concept of roles assigned to women and men in public and private life.
 Agreeing with these definitions, making some generalizations, we can state that in the international legal sociological literature, even in legal acts, the term "gender" is not synonymous with the term "gender", as it has a social component - related to the question of how a person perceives himself in the society.
  However, in view of the cultural context in Armenia in the context of gender, the timeliness of gender discrimination, and the current reluctance of society to accept that difference and the resulting consequences, we find it appropriate to present the term "gender" as close enough to the term "gender". a set of differences.
The solution of gender equality, as well as the equality of women and men, has been one of the main goals of both domestic and international law since the beginning of the process of reserving women's suffrage, especially since the end of the 19th century.
 Extensive work has been done in the field of gender equality since the 19th century, but even today in many developing countries, whose cultural systems have always been characterized by the male-dominated role in society or deviations due to patriarchal customs, there are many problems.
 Among such countries we can also include Armenia, where we consider it expedient to examine the existing issues in this regard in this article.
Referring to gender equality in the Republic of Armenia, first of all, we would like to emphasize the differences between the terms "gender equality" and "gender equality" in general, to find out how those terms are perceived in the national legislation.
 As noted by N. Shvedova. "... gender equality is the equal appreciation by society of differences, similarities between women and men, and the different social roles they play."
 Agreeing with this definition, we can say that the term "gender equality" is nothing but a reflection of public consciousness և reflection of public thought ․ that is, how society defines the nature of gender relations.
The formation of public consciousness և thought is largely linked to customs և culture, from European gender egalitarianism to Asian cultural systems in which women and men are excluded from being on the same social plane.
  Speaking about the Republic of Armenia, it should be noted that there is a positive shift in perceptions of the role of women and men in society, as well as in society, which is also due to the presence of a large number of females in state and local government.
  However, it should be emphasized that in our cultural context, there are a number of hardened notions about the place of women in society, due to which we can not talk about being on a close plane with European gender egalitarianism.
 As for the relationship between the terms "gender equality" and "gender equality", it should be noted that unlike the term "gender equality", the term "gender equality" can already be defined as a principle of gender building in society, defined by the state.
  In addition, the term "gender equality" is narrower in meaning than "gender equality".
Now we will present the legislative bases of the above-mentioned terms և their analysis.
 According to Article 3, Part 1, Clause 9 of the Law on Equal Opportunities for Equal Rights for Women and Men, the term "gender equality" means equal legal status for men, equal opportunities for the exercise of which are provided to persons: to use their abilities freely regardless of gender to participate in other spheres of political, economic, social, cultural and social life.
  The term "gender equality" in accordance with Article 3, Part 1, Clause 10 of the same law is the equality of women, men, rights, responsibilities and responsibilities before the law, taking into account the exceptions established by law.
There are no questions related to the legal definition of the term "gender equality", especially given the fact that the possibility of exceptions is defined by law, as objectively existing differences between men and women in some cases require different definitions of rights, freedoms, especially responsibilities.
 As for the legislative definition of the term "gender equality", there are certain problems.
  In fact, the legal definition of the concept in the context of the relationship between the terms "gender equality" and "gender equality" recognizes the term "gender equality" more widely only insofar as it includes the definition of equal opportunities for the exercise of freedoms.
We think that such a definition is too narrow, it is more in line with the concept of equal opportunities for women, men and men, but not the term "gender equality", which is very broad.
Let us also refer to the legislative bases of the term "gender discrimination" in the context of the need to qualify the provisions contained in a number of legal acts as gender discrimination.
 According to Article 3, Part 1, Clause 2 of the Law on Ensuring Equal Opportunities for Women and Men, gender discrimination is direct or indirect.
 It is defined as any restriction, exclusion or preference that restricts the rights and interests of persons of the opposite sex, aimed at or resulting in the restriction or elimination of the recognition, use or exercise of the equality of women and men in other spheres of political, economic, social, cultural and social life.
Let us make a comparison of this definition with some theoretical definitions enshrined in international law, as well as.
 First of all, let us mention the definition in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
 According to Article 1 1 1 of the Convention, for the purposes of the Convention, the term "discrimination against women" means any discrimination, exclusion or restriction on the grounds of sex, intended to limit or eliminate women in political, economic, social, cultural, civil or other spheres. Recognition of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of men ևwomen անկախwomen, regardless of marital status, on the basis of equality և the exercise or exercise of those rights and freedoms by women [4].
By making some comparisons between the above definitions, we can record their main difference ․ The RA Law on Ensuring Equal Rights for Women and Men defines discrimination only as a variant restricting rights and interests, exclusion or preference, while the Convention defines discrimination as any variation, exclusion or restriction.
  Alleged Gender Discrimination Terminological Interpretation, A. Maximov notes. "Discrimination in absolute terms has two main forms - formal and material.
  By formal discrimination we mean the restriction of the rights կամ (or) freedoms of a certain category of people by the state or society, which can be both enshrined in law and in the customs of a defined society.
 By material discrimination we mean specific actions aimed at restricting human rights in the absence of formal grounds for doing so. ”[5]
 If the second is an obvious offense չէ not so interesting for analysis and comparison, then in defining formal discrimination we must pay particular attention to the fact that the restriction can also be defined by the customs of the society.
Thus, we can state that the main difference between the national legislative definition and the definition of the Convention յալ from the above-mentioned theoretical interpretation is that the Convention և interpretation contains "discrimination".
  Therefore, the term "gender discrimination" is broader than national legislation.
  The latter, defining discrimination as rights, in any version restricting interests, exclusion or preference, shifts the issue exclusively to the legal sphere, while the elimination of gender discrimination can be no less, the fight against it also in those spheres of public life that are not fully regulated by law.
  There may also be a need to make changes in the public consciousness, which is more comprehensive than the existing regulations in the legal norms.
Taking into account the above, we consider it necessary to make an amendment to Article 3, Part 1, Clause 2 of the RA Law on Ensuring Equal Rights for Women and Men, defining the term "gender discrimination" as "any variation, exclusion or preference, which is aimed at restricting or eliminating the recognition, use or exercise of equality between women and men in other spheres of political, economic, social, cultural, cultural and social life, and not merely restricting interests or rights.
In this case, the steps and measures aimed at eliminating discrimination will be effective not only in the context of legal reforms, creating a strong legal basis for the regulation of this sphere, but also in the context of changes in public opinion and consciousness.
There is also an observation in connection with Article 6, Part 4, Clause 1 of the same law, according to which the definition of differences in the issues of normalization of relations between women and men is not discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, child care or breastfeeding.
 We think that the wording is not very successful, because according to the above definition, it turns out that the subject of a regulated relationship can be only a woman on the one hand, and a man on the other, while it is possible for two females to be the subject of a similar relationship. on the one hand, females and females with whom non-discriminatory differences will be established, on the other hand, females or females or representatives.
In view of the above, we consider it necessary to amend Article 6, Part 4, Clause 1 of the Law, rewording it as follows: "Defining differences in the regulation of relations between women and men due to pregnancy, childbirth, child care and breastfeeding."
Provisions related to gender issues are also contained in the main law of the Republic of Armenia - the Constitution.
  According to Article 30 of the RA Constitution, men and women are equal.
  Taking into account provisions in the national legislation, such as the first part of Article 19 of the Law on Military Service կարգ Status of Servicemen, which defines compulsory military service for males, Article 1081, Part 2, Clause 3 of the RA Civil Code, According to which, in case of death of a co-worker (breadwinner), the right to lifelong compensation arises from the age of 55, and for men - 60, as well as the existence of a number of norms that define unequal scope of rights or responsibilities for women and men. are,Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia should provide for the possibility of unequal distribution of responsibilities of women և men և responsibilities և exceptions in cases provided by law.
 We consider this necessary in the context of the impossibility or inexpediency of absolute equality between women and men.
  It is true that Article 3, Part 1, Clause 10 of the RA Law on Ensuring Equal Opportunities for Women and Men իրավունք defines the possibility of exceptions, but taking into account the fact that a provision stipulating different volumes of rights contains a normative of such importance. We consider it necessary to enshrine the possibility of defining exceptions in a legal act, such as the RA Civil Code, in the main law.
Article 30 of the Constitution, without the possibility of defining exceptions, is in some contradiction with Article 86 of the Constitution, according to which one of the main goals of the state policy in the economic, social and cultural spheres is to promote de facto equality between men and women.
 The term "de facto equality" semantically reflects the content of the term "social equality", not "equality".
  In this case, there is a contradiction between the terms "equality", "factual equality" and their content.
  In some cases, deviations from the principle of equality between women and men are necessary to ensure de facto equality between women and men.
  Take the Electoral Code as an example.
Pursuant to Article 83 of the Electoral Code of the Electoral Code, any party in the National Electoral List of the Party, Alliance of Parties և in the Alliance is in any of the three numbers (1-3, 1-6, 1-9). end) The number of representatives of each sex should not exceed 70%.
  Such a provision contradicts the principle of absolute legal equality between the sexes, but its existence is objectively necessary, because in the absence of such other provisions, the number of women in state and local self-government bodies would be strictly conditioned. .
 The above-mentioned circumstances once again confirm that Article 30 of the Constitution needs to be amended.
As an example of discrimination, let's refer to Article 1081 of the RA Civil Code (compensation for those who suffered damage as a result of the breadwinner's death).
 According to point 3 of part 2 of this article, the damage is compensated to women over 55 years of age, to men over 60 years of age.
  The question arises as to what objective circumstance can serve as a basis for defining such a provision.
 This could be the difference between the average life expectancy in Armenia between the sexes in favor of men, but in 2015 the life expectancy in the Republic of Armenia was 71.6 years for men and 77.7 years for women.
  It should be noted that according to Article 9 of the Law on State Pensions, the old-age pension is set for both women and men from the age of 63; there is no objective need due to different retirement ages.
  We think that the basis for fixing the above-mentioned provision was the working capacity of women համապատասխան men համապատասխան in the respective age group (65-75 years old) տնտես the ratio of economically active և inactive population by gender in this age group.
  In the context of the study of this factor, thus substantiating the substantiation of the content of Article 1081, Part 2, Clause 3 of the RA Civil Code, we consider it necessary to study the statistics [7].
 According to the RA National Statistical Service, in 2016, the economically active population in Armenia in the age group 65-75 was 26.6% for women and 45% for men.
 At first glance, it may seem that, taking into account this circumstance, the above-mentioned provision of the RA Civil Code is conditioned by objective grounds, but we would like to discuss the grounds for this gender gap in the mentioned age group, the justification of the above provision of the Code for the purposes of this article. By the term "absolute equality between women and men" we mean the norm contained in Article 30 of the RA Constitution, in the absence of a provision containing the possibility to establish exceptions.
It is not gender discrimination.
  Examining the data related to the economically inactive population with the same statistics, we notice that in the case of which 48% of the economically inactive population is a household.
 Considering the fact that women in the study age group mainly lack the necessary biological factors to be part of the economically inactive population (childbirth, breastfeeding, etc.), we can state that in the study age group women are mostly economically inactive. due to the stereotypes about the role of a woman in society անհրաժեշտ the need to run a household.
 We believe that discrimination on such grounds is discriminatory, as it is not conditioned by pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, reproductive health, any other biological feature, or on the basis of the Law on Equal Rights for Women and Men. .
  Taking into account the above-mentioned, we consider it necessary to make an amendment to the 2nd point of the 1081 article of the RA Civil Code, to set the same age for the origin of the right to compensation for death in case of death of the victim (breadwinner) for men and women.
We would also like to refer to Article 24 of the Law on Weapons (use of weapons by RA citizens).
 This article prohibits the use of firearms by women, minors and persons with obvious signs of disability, unless their age is clearly known to the firearm user, except in cases of armed assault or armed resistance, as in the case of large-scale arson attacks. persons.
  The question arises as to what is the objective basis for determining the need for a ban on the use of firearms against women.
 We can assume that the reason may be that in most cases women are physically weaker than men, but the gunsmith may be female, in this case there can be no question of the above circumstance.
 A question may also arise regarding women's reproductive health.
  It should be noted that firearms in the Republic of Armenia are mainly used by law enforcement officers on a legal basis, and in this case the problem is not related to reproductive production, but to insufficient training of police officers in Armenia բաց lack of regular practice, which can be implemented nowadays. in the context of technological developments.
  Taking into account the above, we think that Article 24 of the Law on Weapons should be amended to exclude the contained ban on the use of firearms against women.
Discussing the legislative issues related to gender equality, we would like to address the issue of control and monitoring.
  Studying the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia 2016 և 2017 ․ Annual reports on the activities of the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of Armenia, the state of protection of human rights and freedoms, we can notice that both programs contain absolutely the same statistical data related to stereotyped approaches to violence against women.
 In fact, no change was observed [8], which we consider unacceptable in case of the need to monitor the issue.
The above allows us to state that in the Republic of Armenia there are significant legislative, monitoring and control issues in the field of gender equality, the solution of which requires targeted and harmonious activities of both state and local self-government bodies and members of civil society.
LITERATURE [3] Шведова Н. А., Гендерное просвещение.
 simply about the compound, 2002, 212 p. [7] RA National Statistical Service, "Women, Men of Armenia 2017".
[8] Annual Report of the RA Human Rights Defender 2016 On the activities of the RA Human Rights Defender, the state of protection of human rights freedoms, Yerevan 2017, p. 247.
  Annual Report of the RA Human Rights Defender 2017 On the activities of the RA Human Rights Defender, the state of protection of human rights freedoms, Yerevan 2018, pp. 311-2.
Zaven Vartumyan CURRENT PROBLEMS OF GENDER EQUALITY IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Keywords: gender, gender equality, gender equality, gender discrimination, gender, woman, man.
