KOTAYK MARZ RECREATIONAL-TOURISM RESOURCES FEATURES AND PROBLEMS OF USE Tourism's tourism
 Armenia is a new country in the international tourism market.
 Our republic has a significant potential in this sphere due to its beauty, historical and cultural values ​​and preserved traditions.
 Tourism is one of the priority branches of the economy of the Republic of Armenia.
It has been under special attention since 1998, as a result of which leisure and tourism activities have been observed in the country in recent years.
 This activity is a direct result of the program reforms in the field, due to which the tourist visits to the Republic of Armenia are dynamically growing [8].
In recent years, the program activities within the framework of the marketing policy of the tourism sector have been mainly aimed at the continuous improvement of the image of Armenia in the world market as a favorable and attractive country for tourism.
 About 20,000 people in Armenia work in the tourism sector (1.7% of the total workforce).
  Currently, tourism provides about 4.7% of Armenia's GDP, and according to the "Tourism Development Concept" approved by the Armenian government on February 13, 2008, by 2030 it is planned to increase the figure to 12%.
 It is expected that by 2020 1․5 will visit Armenia, and by 2030 - up to 3 million tourists.
  As a result, tourism revenues will increase significantly.
 For the development of tourism in the country, the involvement of separate regions is used, as well as the level of infrastructure development, the availability of recreational-tourism resources, their correct assessment and use.
Recreational resources are indirect consumption resources that are used in the non-productive sector.
  They are natural-man-made objects, which have uniqueness, historical or artistic value, aesthetic attractiveness, health-invigorating significance, can be used for organizing recreation and tourism.
There are four types of recreational resources: recreational-therapeutic, recreational-invigorating, recreational-sports և recreational-cognitive.
The first two types are called recovery resources.
The Kotayk region stands out with the variety of recreational-tourism resources in the Republic of Armenia, which due to its central position փոքր due to its small distance from Yerevan, has favorable preconditions for the development of tourism in the region.
The aim of this work is to emphasize the great diversity of the natural conditions of the region, to present the existing recreational-tourism resources, which are a real precondition for the development of tourism.
  The issues related to the use of those resources were also discussed in the paper.
In Kotayk region there are relatively high peaks and deep gorges, wide valleys and gently sloping plateaus.
 There are examples of all four types of recreational resources in the region.
From reproductive resources in the region there are mineral water springs, which are used և´ for treatment, և´ as table water.
 They are the water that is absorbed in the volcanic rocks that make up the Geghama Mountains, which come out in the form of springs at the foot of the mountains, as well as in the gorge of Hrazdan and Azat rivers.
  The springs of Karasunakni, Arzni and Garni have been declared, the cold waters of which reach the population of Yerevan through special pipes.
Tsakhkadzor is a recreational-sports resource, which is gradually becoming a tourist center of international significance, where it is planned to hold international competitions in alpine skiing and other sports [9].
The region is one of the ancient territories of Armenia ․ It was inhabited thousands of years ago.
 Due to that, the territory of the region is rich in recreational cognitive resources.
 There are historical and cultural structures belonging to different eras.
  More than 2024 historical and cultural values ​​and monuments are registered in the region [12].
  It is a unique gem of Armenian Hellenistic architecture in honor of the god Mihr I c. The temple of Garni was built.
  Ayrivank-Geghard is a monument of Armenian stone-carved architecture.
  The region is rich in beautiful basilicas and late Christian temples.
  The cyclopean fortress of Abovyan (Elar) is located in the region, the fortress Գ temple of Garni god Mihr (I d), Garni Mashtots chapel, Voghjaberd domed church (V c), Arzni church (VI c), Geghard monastery (XII-XIII c.) (VII century), Bjni Astvatsatsinivank (XI century), Makravank (XIII century), Kecharis monastic complex (XI-XIII centuries), where the Kotayk Diocese, Yeghvard Astvatsatsin Church (V century), Arzakan Strait Astvatsatsin Church (VIII century) are located ), Teghenyats Monastery of Buzhakan, Solak Mayravank (VII c.) Եւ etc. [2].
Figure 1. Map-guide of historical monuments of Kotayk region. In general, recreational resources are divided into two major groups: natural and man-made.
  There are various natural and man-made recreational-tourism resources, which are of great interest.
In the territory of Kotayk region we separate the following natural resources: 1 ․ The magnificent view of Mount Ararat from any point of the Kotayk plateau, 2 ․ Hrazdan river gorge with beautiful natural basalt columns, 3 ․ The wonderful forests of Tsakhkadzor, Hankavan, Aghveran, 4 ․ "Arzni", "Hankavan" mineral water sources.
The most famous of the man-made resources are: 1 ․ The oldest historical and architectural monuments: the church complexes of Kecharis, Bjni, Geghard, 2 ․ The forested city of Tsakhkadzor with resort, recreation, sports complexes, unique ropeways, which can be climbed to the top of Teghenisler, 3 ․ forested Hankavan resort, recreation complexes, 4 ․ The forested Aghveran recreation complexes.
By studying and analyzing the recreational-tourism resources of Kotayk region, we can single out four recreational zones in the territory of the region, which stand out with their originality and attractiveness.
       Figure 2. Symbols 1. Hankavan-Marmarik recreational zone 2. Tsakhkadzor recreational zone 3. Bjni-Arzakan-Aghveran recreational zone 4. Arzni recreational zone Hankavan-Marmarik recreational zone. Hankavan-Marmarik zone is the most ecologically clean zone of the Republic of Armenia, located 70-85 km north of Yerevan.
It spreads in the Marmarik River valley at the heights of 1750-1960 m, includes the southern peaks of Pambak, the northeastern peaks of the Tsaghkunyats Mountains, stretching from north-west to south-east.
The highland resort region of Hankavan includes the picturesque landscape of the narrow narrow section of the Marmarikigetahovt, up to 1957 altitude.
 There are natural outlets of mineral springs in the river gorge.
Hankavan is surrounded by 3000-3100 m high mountain ranges, which are covered with alpine meadows, forests and bushes.
 The landscape is uneven, mountainous, with fragmented gorges and rivers, which have a permanent or temporary flow.
 The recreation area is 68 km away from Yerevan, the connection with the capital is established by a highway.
This highland area is of health importance due to the favorable climatic conditions, oxygen-rich clean air, dense forest, as well as hot mineral waters.
The climate of the highland forest zone is typical for the territory of Hankavan resort center. Wet summer և Extremely cold winter.
 In summer, when the weather is hot in the Ararat Valley, including Yerevan, Hankavan has quite comfortable weather conditions for rest and treatment.
 That is the reason why the number of short-term vacationers in the Hankavan-Marmarik recreation zone is quite large in that period.
 There are many recreation and sanatorium camps.
Arzni recreation area. It is located in the beautiful gorge of Hrazdan river, 1262 m above the sea.
 It is surrounded by Tsaghkunyats mountains, Aragatsilernavhan և Geghama mountains.
 This zone is a large hilly area, the relief is divided by deep canyons.
  The middle course of the Hrazdan River divides the left-bank and left-bank parts.
 On the left bank is the resort town with sanatoriums, boarding houses, resort polyclinics.
  Arzni sanatorium is located 24 km north of Yerevan.
 A transport connection with Yerevan is established through the Yerevan-San highway.
There are important preconditions for health here: favorable climatic conditions - carbonated, chloride-hydrocarbonate, sodium, low-temperature mineral water.
  The climate is characterized by cold, sometimes severe, windless winters, hot and dry summers.
 Climatotherapy is quite developed here.
  In winter, in January-February, all types of winter climate can be used for 25 days without restriction.
  In winter, due to certain natural conditions, you can go skiing here.
They are also involved in climatotherapy in the summer (May to October).
Bjni-Arzakan-Aghveran recreational zone. The zone forms the medium current basin of Hrazdanget.
 Here is the beautiful gorge of the Dalar River.
It is located at an altitude of 1500-1700 m above sea level.
 Mountain-steppe և mountain-forest landscape zones are spread here.
It is located 40 km away from Yerevan, it connects to the capital by highway.
 Tsaghkunyats mountains are covered with deciduous vegetation, they are rich with forest berries and mushrooms.
Good conditions for health are considered to be mild, pleasant climate, rich forest cover, numerous natural-mineral springs with different physicochemical, microelement and gas compositions.
 The climate is mild in winter and slightly humid in summer.
In the area of ​​this zone is the village of Bjni, on the right bank of the Hrazdan River, at an altitude of 14701700 m.
  If near Hrazdan Hrazdan rises into a large river, here it is like a small calm stream, from the shores of which a cold spring flows.
 They are cold ozonlar coal springs, which have healing properties.
 North-east of Bjni village, on a high hill, is the old 11th century fortress.
 Preserved in Bjni - 1618 cc. Many khachkars, which are a real masterpiece, are of interest to tourists.
In Arzakan ար Karashamb villages of Bjni-Aghveran-Arzakan recreation zone, there are chloride, hydrocarbonate, sodium and calcium mineral waters.
 Favorable climatic conditions նած Snow cover creates an opportunity for winter climatotherapy.
It is possible to organize winter walks, sports competitions, playful air conditions.
 Here you can plan և´ short-term, և´ long-term vacation [10].
Tsakhkadzor recreation area. This zone is mainly spread on the eastern slope of Teghenisler.
 It is considered one of the leading tourism regions of the republic.
 The distance from the capital Yerevan is 50 km.
Tsakhkadzor is a city with well-maintained squares, streets, luxurious night lighting, modern hotels, rest houses. It is attractive both in summer and in winter.
  An integral part of the city is the ropeway, the five stations of which were built in 2004-2007. by the Austro-Italian "Lightner" company.
  These five stations meet the current international standards with their technical equipment and service level.
 The comfortable ropeway reaches the height of Teghenis in just 40 minutes.
  Slopes of different complexity are developed from the height of Teghenis.
  The total length of the slides is more than 30 km.
 You can constantly slide about 6800 m.
 During the winter months, both the residents of the republic and thousands of winter sports fans from other countries spend their holidays here.
  There are modern hotels and rest houses providing high quality service in the city.
  The hotels are of any taste, have experience in organizing international level receptions, are ready to receive guests in all seasons.
The religious and cultural center of Tsakhkadzor is the Kecharis monastic complex, which was completely renovated in 2001.
 It is not only one of the favorite places of the population of the republic, but also of the tourists who visited the republic.
The Kotayk Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Church is located here.
The house-museum of the talented children of the Armenian people, the Orbeli Brothers, is located in the city, where large exhibits related to their activities have been transferred from Yerevan, Moscow and St. Petersburg.
Tsakhkadzor is the most famous recreation area outside the borders of the most beloved state of Armenia.
  The city is unique because it attracts e-tourists all year round. in winter with the dazzling whiteness of the slopes, in the rest of the seasons with the colorful and fragrant nature.
  The feature makes the city attractive and memorable.
The following routes are suggested for traveling to regions rich in natural-man-made recreational-tourism resources of Kotayk region: • Yerevan-Garni, Geghard, • Yerevan-Charentsavan-Hrazdan-Tsakhkadzor, • Yerevan-Charentsavan-Hrazdan-Hankavan.
The region has a sufficient road network, fully covers both the communities of the region and the historical and cultural centers.
 At the same time, the condition of the national roads ության service mainly meet international standards, and the condition of regional and community highways is gradually improving [6].
Having significant potential զարգացման opportunities for development of different types of tourism, there are a number of factors hindering the development of tourism in the region, which can be distinguished: 1) disproportionate location of tourism infrastructure, 2) lack of tourism development concept, 3) the region as a separate architectural structure - Lack of information booklets, lack of institute of regional guides, 4) deplorable condition of separate historical and cultural monuments, 5) still unsatisfactory condition of community roads, 6) non-competitiveness of tourism services in the international market, 7) Armenia universally favorable for tourism, universally attractive. the fact of not representing a country,8) Insufficient level of investment programs in the field of tourism [3].
For more intensive use of recreational-tourism resources in Kotayk region համար for the development of tourism I suggest to be guided by the following strategy ․ 1) The priority condition for the development of tourism is the balanced development of infrastructure - the renovation of hotel complexes, resorts, reconstruction, as well as the repair of roads leading to historical and cultural monuments.
 Therefore, measures should be taken to coordinate the development of infrastructure in the region.
2) To turn Hankavan gorge into an alternative recreation center, which together with Tsakhkadzor will complete the prospect of creating an international recreation, resort and tourism center, as the Marmarik reservoir built there in recent years has created additional favorable conditions for beach recreation.
3) It is necessary to implement a program that will combine the opportunities of Aghveran, Arzakan, Araler areas.
4) The development of ecotourism should be promoted in the territory of the region, the basis of which may be the "symphonies" of Garni stone.
5) In the near future, in parallel with the construction of Yeghvard Reservoir, to develop a special program "to bring it to life" with the aim of turning the structure into a tourist center, in particular, to build public service, leisure and entertainment centers in the area of ​​the reservoir.
  In contrast to the two-month rest period, these water bodies will have the opportunity to use at least four months, գտնվելու The fact that it is closer to Yerevan will attract the attention of more vacationers.
6) A comprehensive tourism development plan should be developed in Kotayk region, which will include a complete study of the existing potential, assessment of the situation և development directions.
7) It is necessary to create a tourist website of Kotayk region.
8) The development of agro-tourism or rural tourism in the region should be promoted, as on the one hand there are all the prerequisites for this branch development, on the other hand, this type of tourism is quite affordable and very expensive [11].
  In this respect, it is very possible to create a joint concept of rural tourism development.
 Similar attempts were made in the villages of Solak, Qaghsi, Arzni, and Karashamb.
In conclusion, we can say that Kotayk region, due to its recreational-tourism resources, has wonderful preconditions for the development of tourism on the spot, and in order to create conditions in accordance with international standards, it is necessary to study the problems in each recreational zone and be guided by the above-mentioned solutions.
LITERATURE [1] Grigoryan V., Voskanyan A., Economic Geography of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2016, p. 292.
[2] Kotayk region of RA. Map of historical monuments guide, Yerevan, 2015.
[3] 2015-2018 Socio-Economic Development Program of Kotayk Marz of the Republic of Armenia, Hrazdan, 2014, p. 41.
[4] Manasyan M., Introduction to Geography, Yerevan, 2012, p. 381.
[5] Manasyan M., Methods of socio-geographical research, Yerevan, 2008.
[6] Manasyan M., Sayadyan H., Geography of Armenia, Yerevan, 2016, p. 330.
[8] Socio-economic development program of Kotayk region of the Republic of Armenia for 2015-2018, Hrazadan, 2014, page 39, URL.
https:
//www.e-gov.am/u_files/file/decrees/kar/2015/01/15_0040.pdf (link made: 13-11-2018).
[9] URL.
 http:
//www.findarmenia.com/arm/armenia/kotayk (link made: 13-11-2018).
[10] Official Website of the Spa Research Institute և Physical Medicine Research Institute ՀՀ Information for patients և specialists, URL.
  http:
//fizecomed.com/en/page.php?id=56 (link made: 12-10-2018).
[11] URL.
 http:
//kotayk.gamk.am/?p=1508 (link made: 14․111․2018).
[12] Official Website of Kotayk Marzpetaran ․ General information, URL.
  http:
//kotayk.mtad.am/general-information/ (link made: 17-11-2018).
[13] URL.
 http:
//www.mineconomy.am/uploades/Caxkadzor_cragir.pdf (link made: 20-09-2018).
Muradyan NELIKOTAYK MARZ RECREATIONAL-TOURISM RESOURCES FEATURES AND PROBLEMS OF USE Salts:
