THE INFLUENCE OF THE THIRD SECTION IN THE PROCESSES OF STATE POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION The public sector, in general, has a significant role in the development and progress of the state.
 The state system is overloaded, the budget allocations are not enough to solve all the problems.
 In addition, the government often fails to pursue policies that are inefficient, non-participatory, and, on the other hand, vulnerable groups, disrupting the normal course of public and political processes.
  The state, as a subject of social policy, uses all its levers to support the process of settlement of public issues.
 But, thus, the state alone cannot և´ act effectively, իրական implement regulations at the same time աջակց the support of the private և third sector is needed.
At present, the impact of the third sector is so great that the problems are increasing day by day, many of them are being transformed, we are experiencing technological progress, external and internal conflicts are intensifying, states face various challenges, the solution of which requires more citizens, especially groups suffering from negative impact. great participation.
The presence of the above-mentioned factors is conditioned by the involvement and activity of the public sector in supporting and cooperating in the policy development, implementation, evaluation and reform processes.
The third section ensures the active involvement of civil society in the governance and development of the country.
 These segments, the significance և the influence depends on the society և the political regime of the given society.
Civil society is "a human society formed and developing in democracies, which is a network of non-state structures (associations, organizations, associations, unions, centers, clubs, foundations) formed voluntarily in all spheres of society" [1].
Even under totalitarian, monarchical regimes, there may be prerequisites for the formation of a civil society.
 However, the lack of conditions that ensure the independence of these elements from the state power, the right to self-organization and self-activity, deprives the society of the opportunity to be a citizen.
  Here, the fact is that each person knows exactly to what extent he is protected from outside interference, in which cases the state can influence the implementation of its programs.
  Since both totalitarianism and ".. ․ monarchy are absolutely incompatible with civil society, therefore, it can not be a form of civil government" [2].
International experience shows that the active involvement of the public sector in policy-making, implementation, control, and review is the key to building a democratic society.
 Society, like the state, cannot develop when the private, state and public sectors do not cooperate and complement each other, both in terms of resource use and the formation of ideological and conceptual bases of policy.
 Effective governance is based on the cooperation and complementarity of social and political entities. In order to best present the third section, we must pay attention to the types of features typical of the organizations in this section.
ևMulti-sectoral interaction.
The need for third-party organizations stems from the following: • In some cases, they act as a tool for market failures: monopoly, imperfect information, neutralization.
• Compensate for the incomplete activity of the state in solving social problems.
• On the one hand, being flexible and innovative, on the other hand, using the work of volunteers, they can provide better and more efficient social services than the state.
• They can solve social problems, the solution of which, due to political constraints, the state is not able to take on. [3]
Moreover, the preconditions for the formation of a civil society include certain elements of the establishment of a legal-social state.
Here it is appropriate to emphasize B. Zambrovsky's idea that society not only develops mechanisms to control the activities of the state, but also "defines the principles on the basis of which the state can and must act."
The term "third sector organizations" is mainly used to represent organizations that are not in the private sector but in the state sector.
 This section includes voluntary և community organizations (charities և such as associations, self-help groups և community groups), social enterprises [5].
Characteristic features of the third sector organizations: 1. They are independent of the government.
2. ECOs are value-oriented, ie motivated to achieve social goals (for example, to improve public welfare, the environment or economic well-being, rather than to make a profit) [5].
The organizations of the third sector can be divided into three types: 1. Advocacy organizations that assist stakeholders at the state or international level in raising their issues with citizens while conducting a mediation mission.
2. Operational organizations that provide services to vulnerable, at-risk citizens and beneficiaries with appropriate resources and services.
3. Organizations that combine և perform the functions of the previous two types.
 These NGOs are designed to address sectoral specific issues (human rights, healthcare, nature conservation, etc.) [6].
The third section is a set of non-profit organizations that aim to serve the public interest by focusing advocacy և operational efforts on social, political and economic goals in areas such as justice, education, health, the environment։ human rights.
Let us now turn to the manifestations of the implementation of state policy development processes and international experience.
 Precise definition of public policy և Formation is a key component of policy implementation.
Formulation of public policy is a key element of policy development, which includes the priorities, costs, benefits and external factors of the policy objectives.
  It includes a number of policy alternatives և public policy tools [7].
  However, it is necessary to motivate and promote the participation of other actors in the policy-making process.
 Involvement of the private sector - members of civil society, entrepreneurs, employees, citizens, community groups - NGOs in the public policy design process is crucial as it enables the governments of developing countries to improve the transparency and quality of governance processes while increasing efficiency.
Many non-profit organizations try to inform, influence social and economic policy, as well as international issues.
  Policy development processes include research, monitoring, evaluation, strategic development programs, projects (submitted by non-partisan bodies).
  Some groups try to influence the executive, others the legislature.
  Brain centers և universities conduct research, evaluation, making information available to policy makers through publications, media, forums, and individual discussions.
Advocacy organizations try to educate the public, encourage individuals to contact their representatives directly, collect signatures, or submit petitions in an effort to address issues.
 Some non-profit organizations try to influence public policy through rallies, sit-ins, parades and boycotts.
  Grant funds այլ Other non-profit organizations try to influence public policy by demonstrating the effectiveness of alternative approaches to public affairs.
  They can carry out pilot projects and evaluate the results by reporting them to government agencies.
Various politicians and policymakers believe that the direct participation of citizens in decision-making can contribute to the development of democracy and rationalism.
  However, we cannot consider the involvement of many actors, being guided only by the number.
The OSCE's regulatory capacity is growing, contributing to the comprehensive formulation and implementation of the policy.
A number of economic and civil society actors contribute to the collection of information and the expansion of research.
  Transparency և accountability mechanisms can be implemented when we bring stakeholders to the same level by creating new institutional platforms for discussing policy changes [9].
The third section, consisting of civil society associations, foundations, volunteers, and non-governmental organizations, offers renewable and sustainable resources to address social and economic problems in Europe.
Socio-economic disasters and a number of other problems, for the solution of which huge resources are spent, directly hit the state budget.
  The solution to this situation համագործակց The alternative is to cooperate with the OSCE in the settlement of issues for the sake of an active European civil society and economic development [10].
Organizations (for example, Oxfam, Greenpeace, etc.) serve the public nationally and internationally.
 Originally called voluntary or civil society organizations, now non-governmental organizations.
 In the United Nations system, the term "NGO" is used as a distinguishing feature from other public authorities.
  Charitable NGOs are widespread, but non-governmental organizations are a relatively modern phenomenon.
  In Europe անում During the period of strengthening civil rights in America, in the 18th-19th centuries, many organizations were established to promote the interests of citizens, to protect the rights of the people of the communities, to develop the communities, to promote new policies.
 Political scientists view the OSCE as pressure or lobbying groups, but these concepts do not reflect their broad social impact.
In the 1980s, "civil society" was a fad, but it was too broad and amorphous.
 That is why, at the interdisciplinary level, in the 1990s, attention was focused on its role in the OSCE ։society.
 Scholars believe that the OSCE may have a higher level of legitimacy than national or state bodies.
  For example, according to a German poll, people trust the OSCE more than the German government.
Third sector organizations and volunteers perform community-based functions such as service delivery, advocacy, community building or development.
 The main goal of the third section is to create knowledge that will allow valuable investments to be made by contributing to the socio-economic development of Europe.
The OSCE has official powers in international decision-making.
  We can analyze the actions of the OSCE at different levels, at the level of micro-macro-policy.
Governments and international organizations sometimes cause inconvenience to the OSCE, even threatening their interests.
However, experience shows that statesmen mainly take into account the innovative ideas of the OSCE և relevant information [13].
Today, world policy-making has developed unprecedentedly, as civil society organizations are involved in the decision-making process.
 Especially in developing countries, the negotiation process involves civil society, the private and public sectors.
No system dominates the world level.
  Some civil society organizations also exist in the global political system.
 We are talking about caring organizations, numerous non-governmental organizations and a number of social movements.
Social movement is a type of collective action aimed at the clear solution of political or social problems.
 The "social movement" is the collective effort that promotes or hinders this or that social change.
  However, the presence of civil society is weak as influence and authority are limited and the permanent presence is debatable.
Najam puts forward a model of government-NGO relationship, based on the concept of strategic institutional interests.
  The author singles out four possible relationships, depending on the coincidence of the goals and means of the policies preferred by these two actors: • cooperation - such goals, such means, • confrontation - different goals, different means, • complementarity - such goals, different means; • co-optation - different purposes և such means.
Such an approach seems more effective, as it does not simply focus on the nature of government (democratic or authoritarian), the economic context (liberal market or controlled economy), but also the interests of the two parties.
  As an analysis scheme, it allows to look anew at the third sector, the problem of opportunities ազդ means to influence policies, the possible development and strengthening of the sector.
The role of the OSCE in politics is especially valued in approaches where politics is seen not merely as legal decrees developed by knowledgeable officials, but as a process of achieving a goal or arguing or persuading by one community or another.
 It is difficult to typify the situation in Armenia based on any of these four models, but all four are present in different sectors and sectors of the NGO sector, and in different proportions.
According to a Transparency International study entitled "NGO Development Opportunities and Risks" (2011), some NGOs try to cooperate with the RA National Assembly, however, there is no attempt to involve NGOs in the decision-making process.
  Only a few discussions took place in the RA National Assembly, to which the PAPs were invited.
 This was in fact the result of pressure from the opposition faction.
Volunteer work is not regulated by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia, therefore, due to legal omissions, the legality of volunteering becomes a subject of various interpretations.
By highlighting the diverse views and perspectives on the development of the NGO sector, we can identify a number of challenges related to the external environment.
 This is the legal framework, which, in all probability, can become a material for the protection of the interests of the relevant reform.
 It has also identified a number of weaknesses of NGOs that affect their work և recognition.
Recently, the Internet has become a major basis for the development of the third sector in the Armenian reality, serving as a virtual platform for solving various problems of public importance.
 Today, almost all more or less well-known non-governmental organizations, statesmen and agencies have their own websites, social networks, through which they try to operate.
 In addition, an e-government system is being introduced in Armenia.
 Thus, the newly established online platform for the publication of draft legal acts is a newly created online platform for cooperation between state and non-state governmental bodies.
  In fact, the state-civil society relationship is not mediated, but interactive ․ This is a strong pillar of democracy.
Here it is appropriate to refer to the RA CSO stability index.
 In Armenia, according to the CSO Stability Index, CSO stability has improved in some areas.
  2016 In December, the parliament adopted the new Law on Non-Governmental Organizations, which was developed with the active participation of civil society and has been on the agenda of civil society and government for many years.
 Amendments have also been made to the law on foundations.
  Civic activity has increased. Informal groups have implemented local advocacy initiatives, and registered CSOs and networks have participated in public policy processes through institutional platforms.
  Many CSOs are looking for new sources of funding. They use new crowdfunding technologies to make money, solicit donations from commercial companies, and set up various social enterprises.
 According to the RA Ministry of Justice, in 2016 As of October 2013, 4573 non-governmental organizations, 1042 foundations and 312 unions of legal entities were registered in Armenia. These indicators have slightly increased compared to 2015.
 Experts estimate that only about 20% of registered organizations are active.
The research conducted during the work provides sufficient grounds to conclude that: • NGOs compensate for the incomplete activity of the state in solving social problems, • do not pursue profit, operate at local, national and international levels.
• Mainly assess the needs of vulnerable groups by providing support և advising; • lobbying for advocacy policies; • educating members of the public, raising awareness, promoting non-formal education; Transparency and quality of work to the government by increasing the efficiency factor in the policy-making and implementation process; Government-CSO cooperation.
Thus, the influence of the public sector on the development and implementation of state policy, as well as on monitoring and evaluation, is obvious.
  Representatives of state bodies show a positive attitude towards CSOs, highly appreciating the support of CSOs in solving social problems.
  Despite all this, CSOs still face organizational difficulties, normative obstacles, and moreover, sometimes restrictions imposed by the state.
 Recently, however, the picture has changed significantly.
We can state that the perception of CSOs as potential actors by state bodies is improving, which is reflected in the growth of CSO government dialogue platforms, joint initiatives at the level of individual ministries and departments.
  Local authorities are increasingly emphasizing CSOs through their community work.
LITERATURE URL:
 https:
//www.nao.org.uk/successful-commissioning/introduction/what-are-civilsociety-organisations-and-their-benefits-for-commissioners/ (Accessed.
 03.01.2017). [6] OSCE Report on the Impact of Public Policy NGOs on Attracting Private Investment, 2008, pp. 3-4, URL.
 http:
//www.oecd.org/investment/globalforum/40400836.pdf- (14.02.2017).
[8] Elizabeth T. Boris, Nonprofit organizations in a democracy.
  varied roles andresponsibilities, URL.
 http:
//socio.ch/movpar/boris.htm// (Accessed.
 10.03.2017) .URL.
 http:
//archives.ippapublicpolicy.org/IMG/pdf/panel_11_s1_hai_phu_do.pdf (Accessed.
 07.03.2017) .Europe 'article, 2016, p. 1, URL.
 http:
//nonprofit.xarxanet.org/interviews/bernardenjolras-third-sector-has-third-largest-workforce-any-industry-europe- (Accessed.
URL.
 http:
//emes.net/research-projects/third-sector/tsi-project/ (Accessed.
 17.03.2017) .URL.
  https:
//www.globalpolicy.org/component/content/article/177/31621.html (Accessed.
[15] Transparency International, NGO Development Opportunities Risks Survey, 2011, p. 19, URL.
 https:
//transparency.am/files/publications/NED_publication_arm_3.pdf (link made on 10.11.2017).
[16] Official website of the Republic of Armenia e-government, URL.
 https:
//www.e-gov.am/ (link made on 12.10.2017).
[17] Unified website for publishing draft legal acts, URL.
 https:
//www.e-draft.am/ (the link was made on 04.11.2017).
[18] 2016 CSO Sustainability Index, pp. 2-3, URL.
https:
//www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1866/CSOSI_Report_7-28-17.pdf(Accessed.
 18.09.2018) .Effect of Serobyan Siranush THIRD SECTION IN THE PROCESSS OF STATE POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION Keywords: Third part, state policy, civil society, civil society organizations, influence, non-governmental organizations, influence.
