WATER-DIMETHYSULFOXIDE-ETHYLENE VOLUME FEATURES OF THE GLYCOLERCOMPONENT SYSTEM STUDY Introduction The aim of the study was to study the volume of water-dimethylsulfate (d)
 The work was done by the method of density.
 EG և DMSO are widely used in various fields of chemistry, both of which are known as ice protectors.
  Generate hydrogen connections through the spatial network.
 The physicochemical study of the system is used because each of the components is prone to self-association, so both homo- and hetero-associations can be assumed.
The additional molar volume indicates the nature of the interactions taking place in the solution.
  It is the difference between the sum of the total volume of the system և the volume of the individual components [1], where Vi
0 և xi is the molar volume of component i i is the molar fraction.
V is the volume of the solution where xi, Mi, I is the molar fraction of the i-th component, the molar mass is տ the densities,  is the density of the solution
The dependence of the additional molar volume on the molar fraction is represented by the Redlich-Kister equation.
 In the case of a two-component system, it looks like this: For a two-component system, it looks like this:
                     (3).
 (4) 0iiEVxVViiiiEmMxMxV .... 2212121xxCxxBAxxVE 22 ... 22112322331132112321231312123xxCxxBxxBxxBAxxxVVVVEEEE (4) It follows that before studying the interactions in a three-component system, it is necessary to first consider the volumetric properties of all two two-component systems of these three components.
  Therefore, we first studied the two-component water-DMSO, water-EG-DMSO-EG systems.
Experimental part Double-distilled water with a specific conductivity of less than 2C / cm at 25 0C was used in the work, DMSO - 99.9% Alfa Aesar, chemically pure EG.
The measurements were made with the help of Anton Paar DMA 4500 oscillating resonance concentrator, the accuracy of which is 510-5 g / cm3, the reproducibility is 110-5 g / cm3.
 The measurements were made at a temperature of 20 0C.
Results և Discussion The volumetric properties of the water-DMSO-EG three-component system were studied at a temperature of 200C.
  As already mentioned, before studying the interactions that take place in a three-component system, it is first necessary to consider the volumetric properties of all possible ecomponent systems.
 For this purpose, we will study the two-component water-DMSO, water-EG-DMSO-EG systems.
 For the study, we used our previous experiments տվյալ data in the literature on DMSO-water [2] և DMSO-EG [3] two-component systems.
 Based on these data, we have presented the dependencies of the additional molar volume on one of the molar fractions of one of the components: Figure This is due to the fact that the structures of pure components take place և in a more efficient envelope, thanks to hydrogen bonds.
  The extra molar volume is the largest in absolute value in the DMSO-water system and the smallest in the DMSO-EG system.
  The results show that the strongest interactions take place in the DMSO-water system, and the weakest in the DMSO-EG system.
 This is probably due to the polarity of individual components and their ability to form hydrogen bonds, as well as to the self-associations and spatial structure of individual molecules.
Let us now turn to the volumetric properties of the three-component system.
  The table shows the additional molar volume values ​​of the density of the water-DMSO-EG system, depending on the molar fractions of the components.
 Table 1 ․ The values ​​of the density և additional molar volume ության of the density of the water-DMSO-EG system 20 20 0Cx (water) x (DMSO) x (EG) ρ, g / cm3 VE, cm3 / mol.
  As can be seen from the tables, the additional molar volume of the water-DMSO-EG system assumes a negative value in the whole concentration range.
  The processing of the obtained data through the "Origin" computer program allowed us to determine the quantitative components corresponding to the strongest interactions in the system.
Figure 2. Dependence of the additional molar volume of the water-DMSO-EG three-component system on the composition.
Since the volume of the extra mole assumes a negative value in the whole concentration range, then the extreme corresponds to the minimum, ie the strongest interactions in the system.
Moreover, the processing of the obtained data allowed to determine the quantitative components corresponding to the strongest interactions in the system (values ​​are given in molar sections): x (EC) = 0.001  0.14, x (water) = 0.45  0.61, x (DMSO) = 0.38  0.52.
0.000.250.500.751.000.000.250.500.751.000.000.250.500.751.00x (¾¶) x (H2O) x (¸Øêú) As we can see, the strongest interactions occur in DMSO բարձր high water content փոքր small EC in the case of contents.
  From the data obtained for the two-component system, it could be assumed that when adding ECG to the DMSO-water system, an additional molar volume will increase.
 It can be seen from Figure 2 that the most effective compressions occur in the case of DMSO-water composition.
LiteratureMarietta BadalyanWATER-DIMETHYSULFOXIDE-ETHYLENE VOLUME PROPERTIES OF THE VOLUME SYSTEM EXAMINATION in Keywords: volumetric, additional molilf.
