CROSS-BORDER RIVERS AS A GEO-POLITICAL FACTOR (EXAMPLE OF ARMENIA AND AZERBAIJAN) According to the RA Water Code, transboundary water resources fall on the Republic of Armenia.
2001 The UN Secretary General noted. "If we are not careful, in the future wars will be fought over water, not oil."
 The deterioration of water quality or the reduction of water in the transboundary water basin now tends to become a threat to regional stability, especially when the atmosphere is already tense.
 The following reasons are often the basis for water disputes: 1. Consideration of water as a military-political value or goal (for example, the Jordan River Basin for Syria, Jordan պետ for the states of Israel); Consideration of water as a lever for the settlement of disputes (for example, the Euphrates River for Turkey, Syria for Iraq), 3. the amount of water inflow անհրաժեշտ the need for redistribution, 4. Consideration of water ային water systems as a target for conflict (for example, the destruction of Kuwait's water desalination plant by Iraq in the late 20th century).
At the end of the last century, the geopolitical situation related to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict worsened in the South Caucasus as well.
  The rivers that once connected Armenia and Azerbaijan became the subject of mutual accusations and threats as a result of the unleashed war.
  Today, Azerbaijan and Armenia accuse each other of deliberate water pollution. If the environmental problems between Azerbaijan and Georgia, Azerbaijan and Iran, Georgia and Armenia, Armenia and Iran find the optimal solution in a short time, then the Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan is diplomatic. The lack of relations does not allow to solve the problems in this field.
 The Azerbaijani authorities have repeatedly stated that water pollution in the Kur-Araks rivers is unacceptably high, especially with copper compounds և phenol (phenols containing a hydroxyl group are aromatic hydrocarbons in which the hydroxyl group is directly attached to the hydroxyl group.
 Phenol is a colorless, odorless crystalline substance).
 The Azerbaijani side sees Armenia as the main culprit and responsible for the pollution.
 The density of phenol in most countries, particularly in the EU, is not subject to digital normalization.
 In European rivers, odor-sensory norms are established for the normalization of phenol, in other words, the density of phenol is considered high when the river water clearly smells of phenol or has a phenolic taste.
  However, it should be noted that the presence of phenols in surface waters is due to large-scale organic chemical industry, oil refining, forestry, especially large-scale production of timber, large-scale livestock waste.
 It is clear that all the mentioned factors are absent in our Republic, the times when Armenia was called the "Great Chemistry Republic" [5] and the Nairit Chemical Research and Production Combine, which previously produced about 100-150 thousand tons of various chemicals, are over. 50-75 thousand tons of chloroprene rubber, thousands of tons of nitrogen fertilizers, polyvinyl acetate, chemicals, including liquid chlorine, chloroprene պր synthetic rubber, stopped on the eve of the collapse of the USSR.
  And already after the re-launch, in 2001-2005. According to the data, only 4.0-7.7 thousand tons of synthetic rubber were produced here [6].
 During the Soviet years, the Alaverdi Copper Smelter operated a copper refining plant, producing sulfuric acid, the copper-molybdenum plant produced 40,000 tons of copper, and currently that number fluctuates between only 7-9,000 tons.
 The numbers are more than telling, they prove that Armenia simply does not have enough opportunities to "poison" Azerbaijan with phenol.
  The issue is different in the case of copper, heavy metals and other pollutants.
  In order to find out how justified the numerous accusations made by the Azerbaijani authorities in the post-war years, and how legitimate the Armenian counter-arguments were, it was necessary to study the official analyzes of the two countries on the pollution of the Kur-Araks river basin.
 As a result, it turned out that water quality samples in Armenia are taken from 50 rivers, 6 lakes and reservoirs.
  The total number of sampling points is 131, of which 107 points are located on rivers.
 The sampling frequency varies from 7 to 12 times a year և In most observation points the sampling is carried out every month.
 About 95% of the sampling, transfer, pre-processing and testing procedures are carried out in accordance with ISO and other international standards.
 In the Republic of Azerbaijan, which exceeds the territory of Armenia more than four times, the surface water monitoring program is implemented from 50 sampling points, of which only 27 are located on rivers.
Water samples are tested for selected water quality parameters.
  The sampling frequency varies from 6 to 12 times per year, depending on the location of the sampling point, and in most sampling points the sampling is performed 12 times a year.
Here, sampling procedures ք further chemical testing is performed in accordance with other ISO [international standards [7].
 It should be noted that almost the same parameters of water quality monitoring are defined in both countries. Thermal conditions: water temperature, oxygen regime: O2, oxygen saturation, TCP 5, TCP Cr., nutrients: P total, PO4, NO3, N total, NH4, NO2, precipitation: Cl-, carbonates, hydrocarbons, total soluble particles), hardness , conductivity, acidity: pH, other parameters: floating particles, color, total suspended particles, silicate, Li, Na, K, Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, B, Se, F, Al, chlorinated pesticide (lindane, heptachlor, hexachlorocyclohexane, DDD, DDE, DDT), petroleum products, gasoline, heavy metals: As, Cd, Pb, Mo, Ni, Cu, Zn Fe, Mn, Sb, Mo, V, Ti, Cr, Co, Bi, Sn , Ag, bacteriological parameters: total coliform bacteria, intestinal enterococci, Escherichia coli [7].
As it was mentioned, water monitoring in these two countries is carried out with the same parameters, but the analysis of the maps of the observation points monitoring the two countries shows that there are observation points near the Armenian-Azerbaijani border only in the Republic of Armenia, and in Azerbaijan the observation points are mainly located in the interior. at a great distance from the border.
Map 1. Surface water in ArmeniaMap 2. Location of surface water sampling observation points in Azerbaijan Quality location of quality sampling observation points This circumstance would not be of great importance only if the rivers of the Kur-Araks basin were plain or thousands of kilometers kept the same hydrological pattern.
 But in this case the picture is different. Changes in the hydrological parameters of rivers are visible only for a few kilometers.
  In addition to the above, below is the large change in the amount of copper, aluminum and manganese in the Aghst River, in the Dilijan-Ijan section, at the respective observation points. 1. Large change in the amount of copper, aluminum and manganese in the Aghst River in the Dilijan-Ijjan section (mg / l) It should be noted that in the Republic of Armenia steps are constantly taken to improve the monitoring of water basins, in particular in 2011. Following the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia on January 27, 2012, "Depending on the peculiarities of the terrain, on setting water quality norms for each basin management area", 5 surface water quality classes are applied in Armenia. I (excellent), II (good), III (average), IV (unsatisfactory) և V (bad).
 For the classification of surface water quality in Azerbaijan, the National Monitoring Department still uses the method of the former Soviet era.
 This classification system is based on annual measurements of 6 water quality parameters (dissolved oxygen, TPC, phenol, Cu, petroleum products, NH4).
  As a result, the "Pollution Index" (NA) is calculated. Pollution Index = iCi / MAC i where: n is the number of measured parameters (usually 6), Ci is the measured value of a specific parameter, MAC i is the maximum allowable concentration of a specific parameter.
Then the NA is compared with the classification table (Table 1), in which there are 7 categories of condition: very clean, clean, lightly polluted, moderately polluted, significantly or heavily polluted, extremely high-level polluted (dangerously polluted) [7].
Index from 0.3 to less than 10.0 Category
  These monthly bulletins provide a brief analysis of the given month's water quality by individual river basins.
  These monthly newsletters are published, submitted to the Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia, and the electronic version of the monthly newsletter is uploaded to the IARN (www.armmonitoring.am) ում on the official website of the Ministry of Nature Protection (www.mnp.am) and made available to the public.
  Analyzing the data provided by Armecommonitoring, diagrams have been drawn up, which show its exceedance of copper content (multiple) at the four points of the Aghst River near the Armenian-Azerbaijani border, and its movement over six years.
Figure 2. Change (exceeding) the allowable amount (multiple) of copper in the Aghst River in the Dilijan-Ijjan section, at the respective observation points [9] Figure 3. Changing the excess (multiple) amount of copper in the Getik River estuary [9] If monitoring data are available in Armenia In the case of Azerbaijan, most of the data և information պահ is stored in the state archives չեն are not in electronic format, and for users, including the general public, are difficult to access or not available at all.
Finally, let us add that in 2005 With the joint efforts of Armenia and Iran, samples are taken from the surface waters every month in the border area and checked in the laboratory.
  As a result, both the Iranian and Armenian sides state that the pollution of the border waters does not exceed the permissible norms.
  The Republic of Armenia is ready to conduct similar monitoring with Azerbaijan for all border waters, but the Azerbaijani side accusing Armenia of ecological blackmail, led by President Ilham Ali, officially stated at the Davos International Economic Forum that environmental cooperation between Armenia and Azerbaijan is not possible. Azerbaijani lands are still occupied by Armenia.
 In fact, the US Co-Chair of the OSCE Minsk Group James Warlick was not mistaken in stating that the role of cross-border waters in the military-political conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan is great. If the two countries could agree on joint use of water resources, it would be a serious historical step. for solution.
Literature 1. RA Water Code, RA Official Bulletin. No. 24. (199 / 10.0702012).
the 97th Annual Meeting of the AAG.
3. Abrahamyan H. և Others, Perspectives on the Use of Water Resources in the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2012, p. 180.
4. Baghdasaryan A. և Others, Armenia, Yerevan, 1963, p. 163.
5. Melkumyan S., Socio-economic geography of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2005, p. 173.
6. ENPI | 2011 | 281-959 Phase III of transboundary river management.
7. On the results of the ecological monitoring of the RA environment in 2007.
8. On the results of the ecological monitoring of the RA environment: 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 Reports.
Ani Hakobyan CROSS-BORDER RIVERS AS A GEOPOLITICAL FACTOR (EXAMPLE OF ARMENIA AND AZERBAIJAN) Keywords: transboundary rivers, observation points, water sampling, phenols.
