HATSIN 1920 SELF-DEFENSE Hadjin was one of the famous centers of Cilicia.
  Before World War I, it had a population of 30-35 thousand1, who were exclusively Armenians.
 The latter were exiled to the Syrian deserts during the Great Genocide, where most of them died.
1918 After the October 30 ceasefire, believing in the promises of the allies, the survivors of the Genocide returned to their homeland.
  Their first caravan, about 550 people, was returned to Hadj in 1919. March 22, 1919, and 1919. last, E. According to Bremonite data, 8,000 Armenians were resettled in Hadjin3.
  However, according to Socrates Terzeian, the total population of Hadjin reached 6,000 4, so Bremon's references to the population may also be exaggerated.
The surviving people of Hadjin raised the burned city in a short time, but their enthusiastic work did not last long.
  1920 Encouraged by the success of Marash, the Kemalists moved their frantic activities to Hadj in February.
  In order to escape the impending danger, on Karapet Chalyan's initiative, the Supreme Council of Self-Defense was organized, the chairman of which was the caretaker leader of Hadjin Petros Sarachyan
 Commander Andranik Ozanyan's comrade-in-arms, officer Sargis Chepechyan was appointed commander of the defense, Aram Terzyan was appointed deputy commander.
 It was decided to conscript all men aged 16-50.
 The Armed Forces were divided into 4 divisions, vanguard-reserve groups were formed, which were to be trained regularly, the food business was regulated, and the situation was deepened.
2 Tatulian G., The Unspoken Secrets, Beirut, 1967, p. 222.
3 E. Bre! Mond, La Cilicie en 1919-1920, Paris 1921, p. 11.
4 Terzyan S., The Eight-Month Heroic Battle of Hadjin, Buenos Aires, 1956, p. 698.
fingers 5.
  Here we consider it necessary to mention that despite the preparatory actions, the lack of weapons was obvious. Only 300 out of 800 fighters were given weapons6.
1920 At the end of February, Hadjin's situation worsened.
 The General Command of the Armed Forces convened a meeting on February 22.
  Sargis Chepechyan said that a possible attack by the Turks would take place after the snow melts in March, so we had to be very vigilant.
  They decided to send a three-member delegation to Adana, Colonel E. To present the condition of Hadjin to Bremon, to ask for help դեպքում if possible, to allow volunteer groups to be organized here.
 The people of Hadjin hoped to get help from the French soldiers.
 The delegation consisted of Archbishop Petros Sarachyan, Harutyun Khachatryan and National School Director Shmavon Postoyan7.
The same day, the delegation, accompanied by seven police officers, headed to Sis, where they met with the French governor of the city, Captain Tayarda, and informed him of the purpose of his mission.
 On March 5, the delegation arrived in Adana.
  Two days later, the delegation headed by Mihran Tamatyan introduced itself to the Governor-General of Cilicia, Colonel Bremon.
 The latter promised to send weapons and food to volunteer groups in Hadj.
On March 9, 200 young Armenians expressed their readiness to leave for Hadj, but, contrary to Bremon's promise, the French military authorities refused to give up their weapons, arguing that the volunteers should reach Sis և and take up arms there.
 On March 10, the members of the delegation visited Bremon again.
  It turned out that the promised weapons and ammunition had completely fallen into the hands of Turkish Chechens8.
Tayard had instructed 80 young men from Ssetsi and Hadjin to transport a large quantity of guns, bullets and explosives to Hadjin over Yaghbasan, where Turkish villages were predominant.
 For safety, the volunteers decided to go in the opposite direction: to the mountains 5 Terzyan S., note, work, pp. 212-213, Sahakyan R., note, work, pages 168-169, Aram Aspet, Episodes of the heroic battle of Hachnoy և the hero's odyssey, Beirut , 1961, pp. 75-78.
6 HAA, f. 408, c. 1, c. 142, թ. 13.
7 Matenadaran after Mashtots, Archive of Arshak Alpoyajyan, paper. 14, document 29, vol.2.
8 Matenadaran after Mashtots, Archive of Arshak Alpoyajyan, paper. 14, document 29, year 12.
through.
 Upon learning of their intention, Tayda strictly forbade it.
 Knowing that, the Kemalists surrounded the Armenians.
 Only 18-20 people were saved.
 40 carts of ammunition fell into the hands of the Turks 9.
Diaspora Armenian author M. left fascinating testimonies about those events. Sepuh.
 The latter mentioned. "The only person responsible for the siege of the detachment transporting a large quantity of ammunition to Hadj was the monstrous traitor called Semizyan from Everek, who, having accidentally found out about the departure of the ammunition detachment, immediately informed the telegram to the representative."
This is how the help of the French military authorities to Hadjin came to an end.
In a telegram addressed to Mihran Tamatyan on March 14, Bremon did not consider it unnecessary to remind once again that, against their will, they can still do nothing to help the Armenians.
 In his memoirs, Bremon pointed out that Armenian leaders և Hadjin residents repeatedly appealed to the French military authorities to send a detachment of the Armenian Legion to Hadjin, but they did not process those requests11.
The people of Hadjin remained in a desperate situation.
 All that remained was to retreat to Sis in an organized manner until the city was completely occupied by the Turks, or to stay and accept the unequal battle.
On March 14, the head of the Hadjin delegation, Bishop Petros Sarajyan, issued a telegram advising to withdraw immediately.
  The members of the National Council of Cilicia headed by Mihran Tamatyan showed the opposite approach to the defense of Hadjin.
 The latter thought that in no case should he give up, choosing the way of retreat. It can be disgraceful for Armenians.
1920 March 14, M. Tamatyan sent a letter to Hadj with the false signature of his Bishop Petros Sarachyan, which said: "Emigration is against national dignity, you are worthy of an Armenian 9 Matenadaran after 9 brave Mashtots in Hadjin, Arshak Alpoyajyan archive, paper. 14, document 29, 12-13, HAA, f. 408, c. 1, c. 124, թ. 1-2.
10 Sepuh M., The tragedy of Hadjin, authentic information, Aleppo, 1960, page 52.
11 E. Bremond, op. Cit., P. 45.
"Continue the battle, and in a few days you will have an auxiliary force of 1,200 men."
It can be concluded from this telegram that in any case there was hope for help, that maybe the French government would change its policy towards the Armenians.
On March 15, M. A joint inter-party meeting of the National Union was convened under the chairmanship of Tamatyan to discuss the Hadjin issue.
 In the meeting M. Tamatyan informed that Bremon had sent a telegram to Hadj through the French governor of Sis, Captain Tayarda, ordering a partial retreat.
 Only women, children and infants were to retreat.
  However, in response to Bremon's decision, the men of Hadjin refused to stay and defend only the ruins of Hadjin13.
  For that reason, they decided that no one would retreat, they would stay in the city.
 Mihran Tamatyan sent a letter to Hadj with his personal responsibility, which said: "Do not retreat, resist սպաս wait for help" 14.
Knowing about the decision made at the meeting, P. Sarachyan spoke out against it, declaring that they were making a fatal mistake.
He instructed the member of the delegation Sh. To send a telegram to Postoyan about his immediate retreat, which, unfortunately for the people of Hadjin, did not reach him.
As we noticed, there were disagreements and contradictory views in the Armenian National Union, which further complicated the situation.
1920 Hadjin had been completely besieged since March 15, and the telegraph connection between the outside world had been severed.
 Kemal's army commander Kozan oglu Dogan initially tried to succeed through deception and cunning.
 On March 17, he applied to the Hadjin Self-Defense Committee with a proposal to start negotiations.
The negotiations lasted 12 days.
 The Turkish side demanded to hand over the weapons, declaring that their only goal was to expel the French.
 The threatening letter of the latter reached Hadj on March 28, 15.
Receiving a negative response, on April 10, the Turkish army attacked a district called Gopush, and two days later, in the direction of St. Hakob Monastery in Kilikia district.
 The troops managed to capture the monastery.
 Matenadaran after Mashtots, Arshak Alpoyajyan archive, paper. 14, ratification 29, 16.
13 In the same place, 16-17.
14 In the same place, 19.
15 Terzyan S., op. Cit., Pp. 267-268.
The people continued to defend themselves heroically in complete blockade16.
 Unsuccessful, Dogan resorted to another trick, indirect negotiations.
 On April 16, they sent Hadj to a representative of the British Relief Society, Mr. Ipi, and Mrs. Colt, the director of the Gretet American Orphanage, who brought with them Dogan's conditions. 1. find out Turkish flag, 2. to hand over the weapons and ammunition provided by the French government, 3. To establish a Turkish national government in Hadjin17.
The demands were rejected.
  The people of Hadjin refused to hand over the weapons, reasoning that they were only for self-defense.
The Turkish government concentrated new forces around the city, and on April 30 they attacked and bombed the whole city.
  Hadjin appeared in a difficult situation. ammunition was consumed.
The two messengers who arrived in Adana from Hadjin on May 30 reported that they had only 15 bullets for each rifle and that they were in a desperate condition18.
  The heaviest blow to the people of Hadjin was in 1920. It was the Franco-Kemalist ceasefire signed on May 30, 1945, according to which the French troops left Sis, retreated to Adana, taking with them the Armenian population, greatly complicating the efforts of the Armenian volunteers rushing to help Hadjin19.
Thus, the French finally refused to provide any assistance to the people of Hadjin.
1920 June 14, M. Tamatyan invited the members of the Hadjin Patriotic Union to him, told some Hadjin residents that the only way to save the physical existence of the besieged Hadjin people was to reconcile with the Turks, so he offered to send a letter to the Hadjin people through the American missionary Tat 20.
It should be noted that none of the eyewitnesses and participants of the events mentions why, nevertheless, the mentioned letter was not delivered to Hadj.
 After all, besides the plane, there were many other means. It could have been sent by one of the messengers of Hadjin (who, as at that time, 16 Ibid.
17 Ibid., Pp. 307-308.
18 Ibid., P.
19 E. Charents Museum of Literature and Art, Zapel Yesayan Foundation, vol. 289, թ. 29.
20 Nor Hachn, 1966, No. 11, page 30.
They also reported on Hadjin's condition later, through Dr. Tati or another American missionary.
From the facts given, it can be assumed that the main reason for not sending the letter to Hadjin was the dissatisfaction of 40 Hadjin residents living in Adana.
 This is evidenced by the multi-thousand rally held in the yard of Abgaryan College in Adana on June 27, the main purpose of which, as K. mentions in his memoirs. Izmirlian said, "protesting against the written letter was inviting the people to register voluntarily to release Hadjin."
 The participants of the mentioned demonstration came to the conclusion that "hero Hadjin should not ask for peace, kiss the hand of the Turk.
 The nation is his backbone, he is ready to go… "211920. In July, the "Hadjin Emergency Expedition Committee" was formed, with the aim of forming a volunteer group to send Hadjin.
 In July-August we managed to recruit 300 volunteers to concentrate in Akharcha.
 On August 5, about 200 volunteers led by Kaydsak Aram (Terzyan) approached the Turkish positions unnoticed, destroyed an entire platoon, inflicted heavy losses on the enemy with a counterattack, and on September 20 captured the city of Rumlu22.
 However, the fate of Hadjin was already predetermined. The small detachment of Armenian volunteers formed with great difficulty did not manage to leave for Hadj.
  On September 22, when the volunteer group was going to leave for Hadj, the French troops surrounded Akharchan, disarmed the Armenian volunteers and deported them from Cilicia23.
It can be said that this was the last attempt to help the people of Hadjin, which։ ended in failure.
  The main culprit was the French authorities.
 The latter, coming to an agreement with the Turks, in every way hindered the formation of volunteer groups.
On October 15, the Kemalist troops attacked in all directions, shattering the defensive lines, invading the city, setting it on fire, and brutally destroying the entire Armenian population of the city.
 Only a detachment of 380 people managed to break the siege, reach "Jihan, and then" Adana24.
21 K. Izmirlian, A Quick Analysis of the Hachnoy Genocide "Nor Hachn".
 1966, No. 10, page 270.
22 Terzyan S., note, work, page 370.
23 HAA, f. 408, c. 1, c. 142, թ. 15-16.
24 In the same place, 16.
Thus ended Hadjin's heroic self-defense.
  Anzoh went to the double-faced French policy.
 Unfortunately, the people of Hadjin did not manage to escape from the massacres, nevertheless, Hadjin self-defense is one of the bright pages of our history, which reflects the unbreakable will and strong spirit of the Armenian people.
Marine BezhanyanHAGHNI 1920 SELF-DEFENSE Keywords: Hadjin, Cilicia, France, volunteers, Armenian Legion, self-defense.
Summary.
