THE PEOPLE'S PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE AS AN INDEPENDENT BODY OF STATE AUTHORITY To understand the role of the Prosecutor's Office in the system of the People's Republic of China
The People's Republic of China is one of the socialist states in East Asia.
 It is the largest country in the region in East Asia, the fourth in the world after Russia, Canada and the USA.
  The state is led by the Communist Party.
In recent years, China's economy has become the largest in the world, and China has been described as a superpower.
The Constitution has a guiding role in the life of any country, as well as the People's Republic of China.
  The Fourth Constitution of the People's Republic of China was drafted by a special commission and adopted at the fifth session of the National People's Assembly in 1982. on December 4.
 The new Constitution reflected the path of "social modernization" pursued by Dan Xiaoping, the aim of which was to build a socialist market economy1.
The Constitution defines the PRC as a "socialist state of democratic dictatorship of the people" 2.
  The Constitution enshrines the leading role of the Communist Party, the fundamental significance of the ideas of Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong and Dan Xiaoping.
 The Constitution consists of an introduction and 138 articles united in 4 chapters3.
1 See "Constitution of the People's Republic of China": https.
//ru.wikipedia.org/wiki.2 See "Constitution of the People's Republic of China", p. 1, https.
//ru.wikipedia.org/wiki.3 See "Constitution of the People's Republic of China": https.
//ru.wikipedia.org/wiki. In the current conditions, the legal system development of the People's Republic of China is inconceivable without the strengthening of lawlessness and the establishment of a dictatorship of law.
 Based on this, the Constitution obliges the state government to recognize, enshrine, protect, protect the legitimate interests, rights and freedoms of its citizens, ensure the integrity of the legal system, protect it, and prevent any encroachment on the sovereignty of the People's Republic of China.
Giving the Constitution the highest legal force և its operation in the whole territory of the PRC guarantees the integrity of the legal system of the country, equality before the law և all, as well as the system of law.
  Adopted laws և illegal acts should not contradict the Constitution of the PRC.
 State authorities, local self-government bodies, officials, citizens և their unions must directly refer to the Constitution և implement the laws (Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 129).
The possibility of legality requires the creation of serious guarantees for its establishment.
  One of these guarantees is the function of control over legality, which is traditionally performed by the People's Prosecutor of China.
  The status and powers of the Prosecutor's Office are enshrined in Chapter 3 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China (People's Court և People's Prosecutor's Office) 4.
The relevant articles of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China describe the People's Prosecutor's Office as a state body that exercises control over the observance of the rule of law.
 He carries out that control independently in the manner prescribed by law, without the intervention of administrative bodies, non-governmental organizations and individuals.
  The Prosecutor's Office bears separate responsibility for its actions during criminal proceedings.
  The Prosecutor's Office coordinates its work with the People's Court և National Security Service in order to ensure the effective implementation of the laws (Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Articles 129,131,135).
According to the Constitution, state power in China is exercised on the basis of the principle of separation of powers: 4 See www.oxfordbibliographies.com Judiciary, Legislature, Executive.
However, the People's Prosecutor's Office of the People's Republic of China is not part of any branch of government.
 It can be said that the above-mentioned coordination, the coordination of actions with the People's Court, the National Security Service, often creates a misconception among many lawyers that the People's Prosecutor's Office in China is an integral part of the judiciary or the executive.
Let's try to analyze the provisions of the Constitution dedicated to the status of the People's Prosecutor's Office of the People's Republic of China, to understand the place of the Chinese Prosecutor's Office in the system of branches of government.
The People's Prosecutor's Office has no powers of the judiciary.
  The Prosecutor's Office is not a component of the judicial system of the People's Republic of China.
 The People's Prosecutor's Office of the People's Republic of China promotes the administration of justice, but does not administer justice.
According to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the implementation of such state activities is reserved exclusively for the courts5.
The prosecutor's office can also be attributed to the executive branch, as it is not part of the structure of the Chinese government.
 Besides, the Prime Minister of the People's Republic of China does not appoint or dismiss the Prosecutor General.
 Thus, the People's Prosecutor's Office is not included in the system of governing the executive power.
The Prosecutor's Office cannot be considered a part of the legislature, as, according to the Constitution, it is not endowed with legislative powers, just as it is not responsible for "Yuango Zhendaarj" 6.
The Prosecutor's Office is also not part of the administrative system of the President of the People's Republic of China.
  Some authors believe that, according to the Constitution, the President of the People's Republic of China acts as an arbiter, ensuring the necessary unity of state power - the cooperation of the legislative, executive and judicial branches.
  The Prosecutor's Office oversees the implementation of the law 5 The Constitution states that the People's Court is the judicial body of the state in the People's Republic of China.
 The People's Court, in the manner and in the cases prescribed by law, administers justice independently, without the interference of administrative bodies, organizations or individuals (see PRC, "Constitution", Articles 123,126).
6 "Zhuango Zhenda" is the name of the legislature of the People's Republic of China.
by the President of the People's Republic of China, then on behalf of the President of the People's Republic of China, that is, in the manner prescribed by law, exercises the powers of the head of state.
  The prosecutor's office is called to be the tool of the presidential power to maintain public order.
Some constitutional regulations create preconditions for such a conclusion.
 According to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the President of the People's Republic of China nominates the candidate for the post of Prosecutor General, nominates the candidate to the National People's Assembly to elect the post of Prosecutor of the People's Republic of China.
 The termination of the powers of the Prosecutor General is within the powers of the President of the People's Republic of China.
  However, it would be wrong to say that the People's Prosecutor's Office of the People's Republic of China is part of the presidential system for the following reasons: If we consider the legal status of the President of the People's Republic of China as a whole, we can come to the conclusion that any state body (not only the Prosecutor's Office) is an instrument for exercising presidential powers.
 For example, the courts, other law enforcement agencies, the legislature are accountable to the administration of the President of the People's Republic of China. "
 Despite the fact that the candidate for the post of Prosecutor General is nominated by the President of the People's Republic of China, the power to appoint him as well as to dismiss him is vested in the National Assembly of People's Representatives7.
All the above facts allow us to come to the following conclusion. In China, the prosecutor's office does not belong to any branch of state power.
 The activity of the Prosecutor's Office in the People's Republic of China is an independent direction of the implementation of the functions of the state, to maintain the unity of the legal system, to restore the rule of law by all subjects of law, to protect the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of individuals.
  The Prosecutor's Office can exercise its powers to the full extent of "solving" the tasks set before it, only if it is a structure, the organization and activities of which do not depend on separate public bodies and various public unions and political organizations.
7 See Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Art. 130, 131.
CHINA NATIONAL PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE AS A STATE AUTHORITY Karolina Harutyunyan INSPIRATE BODY Keywords: People's Prosecutor's Office of China, PRC Constitution,
Administration of the President of the People's Republic of China, Government of the People's Republic of China, Zhuango Zhenda, President of the People's Republic of China, National Assembly of People's Representatives.
