COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE COOPERATION OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY IN THE CONTEXT OF BILATERAL RELATIONSHIPS Throughout the development of human thought, the theoretical abstractions have evolved over the course of direct experimentation and observation.
 Even in time immemorial, the burning of matter and the emergence of fire as a human experience would not have been regarded as a phenomenon conditioned by external existence and originally alien if the act of fire had not been given as a direct pre-human experience in the manifestation of this or that natural phenomenon.
 Nothing fundamental has changed, even today.
  In ancient Greece, in parallel with the theoretical-rational philosophical thought, the ways of obtaining the experience of acquiring knowledge based on experimental and direct observations were developed [1].
  Experimental observations typical of that period of time allowed us to make a number of discoveries in the field of astronomy, the movement of extraterrestrial bodies, medicine, experimental and other basic knowledge systems.
 At the heart of all this, however, lies an implicit assumption that has been among the cornerstones of similar debates since time immemorial.
 We are talking about a "certain relationship between theoretical thought and experimental knowledge systems", where in order to make the further discussions more understandable, the concepts "theoretical", "experimental knowledge systems" will be replaced by "philosophy" և "science", respectively.
 They accurately reflect the human և experiment 1 The concept of "science" (Latin: "scienta") is more broadly defined as a continuous process of practical and active study of the physical and natural world, during which time it has not lost its above-mentioned basic meaning. With the concepts of "natural science".
  (See Oxfordadvanced learner's dictionary, seventh edition, Oxford, 2005).
The tendencies of their more systematization and content clarification in the later stages of the development of the national experience.
In general, the possible manifestations of such a relationship are various, զուգ with the development of philosophy and experimental science, their quantitative and qualitative characteristics have changed due to the emergence of this or that philosophical school, direction or discipline.
 The ontological starting points of the series of currents underlying modern philosophical-scientific thought date from the roots of ancient Greek philosophy to the period of the formation of separate disciplines, where each moment of domination has established its rules on the possible development of the relationship between philosophy and science.
 Therefore, in order to reveal the contents of interest to us in the context of this whole period of the history of human thought, it is expedient to ask two main and contradictory questions, the choice of possible answers to which will allow the visible spectrum of the relationship between the two edges to reflect the above-mentioned developments.
Can science exist without philosophy? 
Can Science Exist Without Philosophy? Can Philosophy Exist Without Science?
 An adequate-positive response to these questions will lead to the view that philosophy and science do not cooperate or are in a state of complete absence of cooperation.
  The veracity of this view is inversely proportional to the qualitative description of the adequate-negative answer to the questions, as a result of which it is in principle possible to move from the falsification of one of the parties to the verification of the other - the opposite.
  The nature of this view presupposes that the veracity of the latter will not be called into question as long as there is not at least one case contradicting the consensus.
  Therefore, due to the nature of this point of view, in further discussions it will be expedient to refer to the points of view that are fundamentally different from the point of view under discussion, the truth of which directly determines the value of the truth of the point of view discussed above.
If philosophy can exist without science and ignorance does not, then we are dealing with speculative philosophy, which, by rejecting empirical experience, uses the purely rational basis of reason to ensure the truth of its truths and general propositions.
 Such a polarized approach to human knowledge, where empirical experience and human experience in general are generally considered to be the source of less true, often false, knowledge, reflects only a theoretical picture of the world, spiced with subjectivism, the author's personal worldview, and worldviews.
  The best description for such philosophies and currents may be the well-known allegory, in which speculative philosophers are presented as spiders who weave themselves into a web of entanglement in the whole of what they have created.
If philosophy cannot exist without science, ignorance can, then positivist knowledge emerges, which is formed on an experimental basis, verifiable, and has a purely practical significance.
  Rejecting metaphysics ը the scholastic apparatus of achieving truth through abstraction and abstraction, positivism generally refuses to study the basis of the foundations, and the Aristotelian formulation of the "science of science" poses a number of "general questions are not natural. [4]
Both of the opposing views discussed above reflect the polarized approaches to the possible relationship between philosophy and science, where one of the two ends necessarily negates, radically rejects the other, keeping the cornerstone assumptions and the conceptual apparatus fundamentally different from its opposing point of view.
 It is obvious that such an extreme convergence of the relationship no longer allows us to speak of an abyss reminiscent of such an abyss between the two ends, which has already been defined as a possible form of relationship by the notion of "complete lack of cooperation", where science and philosophy generally lack cooperation.
 However, the discussion of the next two extreme approaches to the relationship gives the self-expression and simplicity that is necessary to understand the impossibility of non-cooperation.
 Interesting for us, a number of other approaches outside of it have undeniably been the reflections of the theoretical-experimental nature of human nature in this or that system of knowledge during the whole period.
 Depending on the set of internal and external determinants, they have received milder or more severe (extreme) qualitative characteristics.
 But as in the case of old-fashioned speculative philosophy, such approaches, even in the case of strictly negative initials, are not merely self-sufficient, highly independent systems, as in the case of reciprocity they elaborate their presuppositions, enriching them in opposition to their normatively different views. և which reflects the set of views of the opposite "camp", opposite to their own. After all, an object is beautiful to us in comparison with another object or a preconceived notion of money, և in the form of a non-independent assessment, which has no basis ընդհանուր any common term of comparison (in this case, cooperation) or calculation system.
  Consequently, such loading, in turn, implies a televised-mediated relationship, which has become the basis for the emergence of various and contradictory theories and systems throughout the history of human thought.
Based on the whole of the views discussed on the relationship between philosophy and science, we will try to talk on an empirical basis about cooperation, the existence of which at least presupposes the existence of the parties, regardless of the fact that the derived possibilities are derived from them.
 However, the transitions between such knowledge systems, which reflect the theoretical-empirical fields, have not always been highly balanced, as they have often changed over time, especially due to the degree of interest in theoretical-experimental cognition հաճախ their reliability, as dominant in the scientific world. , as well as the spheres of influence left on each other.
Speaking of the influence of philosophical systems, theories, ական theoretical thought in general, empirical, experimental experience on separate disciplines and in a broad sense, it is necessary to start the search from the period of ancient Greek philosophy, which had its cornerstone on the whole course of human thought.
 The observations of Thales, the first representative of ancient Greek philosophy, the founder of the Miletus School, focused on the world, the beginning of its existence, and other ontological problems, on the basis of which Thales accepted water as the primordial substance of the world.
 With this step, Thales laid the groundwork for the three main philosophical ideas, which later found their expression in the problems of the "scientific picture of the world" method.
 First of all, it includes the question of the material cause of all things, as it reflects the idea of ​​the material basis of the world, which was the beginning of the materialistic teachings of antiquity.
  The Thalesian proposition presupposes that the question must be answered rationally, without reference to myth or mythical wars.
 And finally, it can be assumed that, nevertheless, everything should be possible to understand based on the monotonous principle of the world.
Such logical-rational approaches to the world prevailed in almost the entire period of Greek philosophy.
The idea of ​​"fire" is of key importance in the philosophy of Heraclitus of Ephesus, which is a "material" and "precise" beginning for the order of the world and things.
 As the German physicist Heisenberg rightly remarked. "Modern physics here approaches the teaching of Heraclitus in a certain sense.
  If we replace the word "fire" with the word "energy", the statements of Heraclitus can be seen as an expression of our modern understanding.
 "Energy is really the raw material of all the elementary particles, all the atoms, it does not change its quantity and can act as the cause of all the interactions in the world."
The greatest step towards modern physics, in fact, took place after the development of the atomic theory, when Lycopus and Democritus put forward the idea of ​​a single indivisible element (Greek: ἄτομον), which had an indelible theoretical significance , in particular, to advance a number of new questions in classical mechanics ության quantum theory, as well as in philosophical և interdisciplinary questions հասկ to understand them.
 With the advent of the notion of "atom", the notions of the former "existent" and "non-existent" were reinterpreted with the ideas of "fullness" and "emptiness".
 In reality, there are only atoms that are inseparable, infinite, have finite dimensions.
 It is the end of size that allows us to speak of the possibility of movement, which can take place only by the existence of emptiness.
  Consequently, the conceptual apparatus and the notions of reality that were formed within the framework of the already atomic theories allowed to see the image of rational reality, which is fundamentally perceptible on a common basis, alongside the pluralistic and multifaceted world.
The process of shaping the scientific mosaic of the time, the emergence of separate disciplines in it, brought with it not only the problem of clarifying the specifics's domains specific to the emerging disciplines, but also the issue of replacing the previously prevailing methodological principles of creating a new methodological toolkit.
 In response, the French philosopher René Descartes presented his "principle of radical skepticism" on the stage of human thought.
 Human knowledge is full of truth-like falsehoods that limit the human mind's search for possible truths in the eternal world.
  Therefore, in order to clear the field of knowledge, it is necessary to doubt our knowledge until we have discovered something that is in itself doubtful. [9]
 As a result of such an approach, the statement "I doubt" becomes self-evident and unquestionable truth for Descartes, from which, based on the same methodological principle, "I think", "I think, then I exist" - a number of other fundamental truths, which became the basis of the Cartesian system. , as well as other theories aimed at the scientific imagery of the world համար as a possible methodological guide for systems.
In such a version of cooperation, the bearer of influence յուր the assimilator of the scientific and cultural heritage at the theoretical and empirical level, first of all, the separate disciplines and science in general, which have been in the scientific image of the world since the 16th century.
 However, the source of the impact of this process and the bearer of it have not always been in the same part of the opposite load.
 Immediately after the development of the new period of scientific thought and a number of systems of knowledge as a separate scientific philosophy, the process of searching for and strengthening their own ontological foundations began, for which the rich theoretical and empirical heritage created by philosophy had a fundamental significance.
The "Cosmogonic Hypothesis" of the German classical philosophy of Immanuel Kant has a special place in the history of modern cosmology and cosmogony, [10] where Kant's cosmological hypothesis is remarkably close to modern theories and models of the formation of the solar system.
 Kant views the formation of the universe as the internal interaction of a vast cloud of primary active material particles, in which cosmic bodies are formed by the interaction of repulsive and gravitational forces of particles.
 Such a hypothesis allows us to speak of the universe as a material beginning with a material origin, for the explanation of which it is not necessary to introduce the idea of ​​God.
 Here, a number of principles of classical mechanics are perfectly localized, which allow us to talk about the path of development of science based on the logical "previous truths", which provided an opportunity for further studies of the universe and the world in general.
 This is the logic of the 20th century French philosopher Henri Bergson, who based his philosophy on the creation of Jdra's core theory of Evolution, which is considered to be widely accepted in science.
 Inspired by Darwinian theory, Bergson embraces the natural, evolutionary movement as a creative force underpinning the development of the world, which he defines as the Կենlan vital outburst.
It is due to such a natural force that there is a constant development in nature, a continuous process of emergence of more complex eggs than simpler eggs.
Bergson's philosophy is not the only one that has a structure based on a certain scientific theory or discipline.
  In the 20th century, along with classical "classical physics", a gradually evolving quantum mechanics opened up a fundamentally new "unprecedented field of study for mankind."
 Here, classical notions and laws of the world may often fail to work as described in Newtonian mechanics or in the general theory of relativity.
Quantum mechanics first of all strikes at the traditional notions of determinism, since, as a number of scientific experiments on quantum mechanics have shown over time, the behavior of particles at the quantum level cannot be determined from a strict deterministic point of view.
 As a result of such an unprecedented turn in philosophy, alongside "strict determinism", "indeterminism", "dualistic determinism", the view of "probable determinism" emerged, which now has a well-founded basis in the form of quantum theory.
As we have assured in the above discussion, during the centuries-old history of the cooperation of science and philosophy, the "influencing" and "influencing" aspects of such a relationship have often changed.
 However, due to the achievement of a certain independence of science since the 1718s, the success of modern scientific and technical progress, in terms of exerting greater influence in the context of the relationship between the parties, today the bearer of dominance as such is science.
  Regardless of the picture of the relationship between science and philosophy, the process of elaborating theories of modern philosophical concepts still has its course in parallel with the new achievements of science, but the manifestation of pure philosophical thought. hinder the process of independent and complete realization of philosophical thought.
  First of all, we are talking about the application of old concepts in modern philosophical theories and concepts, which does not allow us to talk about the newly discovered realities of the modern world without the previous meanings, without the pursuit of the past.
 In parallel with theoretical thought, there is a range of empirical sciences, where due to modern scientific and technical achievements, there are a number of innovations aimed at the objective description of the world, provided by empirical data and experimental raw materials are often ignored by proponents of theoretical thought.
 As a result, philosophical thought can turn into speculative thinking, which has been vividly expressed both in a number of relativistic directions influenced by the general theory of relativity in the 20th century and in other currents that misinterpreted empirical data in that period.
A less vivid and objective reflection of the problems raised in philosophy և, in general, on the theoretical side of the human worldview, may become a brief reflection of the modern approach to the "matter" ratio of the "matter" that constitutes the universe.
 According to Planck Telescope observations, the "ordinary matter" that makes up stars, galaxies, and any other material object is only 4 to 9 percent of the universe's "matter."
 The rest of the universe is made up of so-called "dark matter" և "dark energy", respectively, 26․8% և 68.3%.
 Therefore, when we talk about the matter that makes up our reality and the universe in general today, by applying the meanings of the concept that have prevailed throughout material history and since then in philosophy, we will at least break the "rule of identity" of Aristotelian logic [16]. As a result of erroneous or inadequate interpretation, modern philosophical thought can deviate considerably from both the general dimension of adequate cooperation with science and the reflection of an objective picture of reality from the realms of possible responsibility.
Thus, in general, it should be noted that the centuries-old cooperation of philosophy and science is a self-evident fact conditioning the existence of two poles, which, depending on the internal tendencies of philosophy and the independent development of science, has received different manifestations, as a result of which philosophy is more influential in the context of cooperation. than science.
 Hence the problems facing the philosophy of the modern period, for the solution of which it is necessary to reinterpret and breathe new life into the classical "old concepts", to clear the field from possible false knowledge, on an equal footing with modernity and the empirical heritage given by it.
