LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE The circumstance of recognizing it as a fact by different states and organizations has a special place in the collection of facts about the Armenian Genocide.
 From this point of view, it is possible to understand the essence of the process of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide, to try to study its significance and legal significance.
First of all, let's understand what the international recognition of the genocide is.
 It presupposes the recognition of the fact of genocide by the relevant bodies of the highest state bodies - legislative, executive, judicial, համապատասխան recognition of the fact of genocide by various international structures։.
Thus far, the Armenian Genocide has been recognized by 23 states, a number of international intergovernmental non-governmental organizations, state self-government bodies, and city councils.
Until today, the issue of recognizing the Armenian Genocide is on the path of parliamentary recognition by different states.
  From a legal point of view, it is especially important whether these recognitions have the force of law, create obligations for the genocidal state, and to what extent their application is obligatory.
At present, the Armenian Genocide has been recognized by the states mainly through a special resolution of the legislature.
 Such recognition sometimes causes serious disagreements between the legislative "executive forces" of the country.
 For example, the Swedish Parliament in 2010 It adopted a resolution on the genocide of Armenians and Assyrians in the Ottoman Empire against the Greeks of Pontus.
 In response, the Swedish Prime Minister and Foreign Minister issued a statement apologizing for the resolution passed by the legislature.
 Moreover, the Swedish Foreign Minister advised the Swedish Turkish community to make great efforts to thwart this decision2.
The situation was almost the same in Germany, when the legislature passed a resolution recognizing the Armenian Genocide, and the Foreign Ministry, not wanting to comment on this decision, stated on behalf of the Federal Government that the issue is in the field of Armenian-Turkish bilateral relations.
There have been similar situations in international intergovernmental organizations.
For example, the European Parliament in 1987 has called on Turkey to recognize the Armenian Genocide3, considering it a possible precondition for EU membership; the European Commission, the EU 's executive body, has never accepted these legislative demands; has not used the Armenian Genocide recognition as a precondition for Turkish membership4.
1 Kocharyan V., The Armenian Genocide in International Legal Documents, Yerevan, 2014, p. 47.
2 Hofmann T., Cold Cases of Genocide.
 The Meaning and Limits of Genocide Recognition by Legislative Bodies, pp. 73-74.4 See The Crime of Genocide.
 Prevention, Condemnation and Elimination of Consequences, Proceedings of International Conference, So far only three states have enshrined the fact of recognizing the Armenian Genocide.
 They are: France / 2001/1, Uruguay / 2004/2, Argentina / 2006/3.
 In this regard, it is necessary to clearly distinguish between resolutions and laws, as the laws adopted by the state legislature are mandatory for implementation, and parliamentary resolutions are merely advisory in nature, ie have no binding force.
Switzerland, Slovakia և Greece have adopted laws criminalizing the denial of the Armenian Genocide, including the Armenian Genocide.
  In Belgium, in Sweden, there is criminal liability for genocide denial (a fine of 45,000 euros, up to one year in prison).
 France 2006 և 2011 The Senate passed bills criminalizing the denial of the Armenian Genocide, and in 2012 it became a law, but the Constitutional Court declared that law unconstitutional4.
Examining the process of state recognition of the Armenian Genocide by the states, especially from the legal point of view, the points related to Turkey's responsibility, its legal succession, compensation and other key issues are possible.
It should be noted that there are almost no such points in the state recognition resolutions - the Armenian Genocide is mainly recorded, there is talk of the number of victims, April 24 is declared as Genocide Remembrance Day5.
 Such decisions are not legally sufficient, they do not imply a legal obligation for Turkey.
In contrast to the restraint of the states on the decisions of the parliamentary recognition of the Armenian Genocide, the decisions of the international organizations more clearly contain a number of concrete formulations.
First of all, it should be noted that these decisions, in addition to stating the number of victims, the period of implementation և other facts, contain clear statements about the legal succession Թուրքիայի of Turkey6.
Considering the Republic of Turkey the legal successor of the Ottoman Empire is an important step, as the Turkish authorities still deny not only the fact of the Armenian Genocide, but also the fact that they are the legal successors of the Ottoman Empire, claiming that they can not be held responsible for the genocide in the Ottoman Empire.
Next is the question of the responsibility of the Republic of Turkey.
  Here, in contrast to the decisions on state recognition, the issue of Turkey's responsibility is very clearly raised in the decisions of international organizations.
 In addition, the issue of material and moral compensation is discussed7.
However, if the laws adopted by the states on the recognition of the Armenian Genocide are at least mandatory for implementation in the territory of that country, then the decisions adopted by international organizations are of an advisory nature only.
Finally, we would like to touch upon the examination of the case of Perincek v. Switzerland by the European Court of Human Rights8.
  It is very important because it can be said that the further fate of the process of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide depends on the course of this case.
1 Barseghyan L., France is the first country in the world to recognize the Armenian Genocide by law, Yerevan, 2002, pp. 179-244.
2 See Kocharyan V., page 35.
3 See ibid., P. 45.
4 Sassounian H., Greece.
  Third Country to Criminalize Denial of the Armenian Genocide, 16.09.2014, available at http.
//asbarez.com/127003/greece-third-country-to-criminalize-denial-of-the-armenian-genocide.
5 See Barseghyan L., The Armenian Genocide. The world powers, the national parliaments, the international organizations condemn and recognize.
6 Barseghyan L., The International Community Condemns the Armenian Genocide, Yerevan, 1998, Condemnation of the Armenian Genocide by International Organizations, Yerevan, 1999.
7 See Kocharyan V., The Armenian Genocide in International Legal Documents, Barseghyan L., The Armenian Genocide. world powers, national parliaments և international organizations condemn ումrecognition.
8 European Court of Human Rights, CASE OF PERİNÇEK v. SWITZERLAND, available at http: // www.
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001139724#{"itemid ".
["001-139724"]}.
First of all, it should be mentioned that Dogu Perincek is the chairman of the Turkish Workers' Party.
2005 ․ On May 7, 1922, և September 18, respectively, in Lausanne, Opficon, and Koniz, he participated in various conferences, during which he publicly denied the 1915 ․ գոյ The existence of any fact of genocide against the Armenian people in the Ottoman Empire in the following years.
  He called the idea of ​​the Armenian Genocide an "international lie" 1.
  That is why the Lausanne District Court in 2007 He was found guilty of racial discrimination under Article 261 4 4 (4) of the Swiss Penal Code and sentenced to a fine of 100 Swiss francs per day for a period of 90 days.
 After that, Dogu Perincek appealed the court decision in higher instances, exhausting all domestic means. filed a lawsuit against Switzerland on 10 July 2006, alleging that Swiss courts had violated Article 10 (freedom of expression), Article 7 (punishment based solely on law) of the European Convention on Human Rights, as well as its guarantee under a number of other articles. rights.
 He challenged, in particular, Part 4 of Article 261 of the Swiss Criminal Code, assessing it as insufficiently predictable, and the verdict as illegal2.
The ECHR in 2013 The judgment in Perincek v. Switzerland, dated 17 December 1915, upheld Perincek's claim that Switzerland had violated Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, stating in its decision that Perincek's criminal conviction of 1915. "After that, it was not justified to deny the atrocities committed against the Armenian people."
 According to the ECHR, Article 261 of the Swiss Criminal Code contains restrictive elements of freedom of expression.
Here we should pay attention to the fact that the Court in its decision referred to the states that recognized the fact of the Armenian Genocide, on the other hand cited the states where the law punishing the denial of the existence of genocides was considered unconstitutional4.
  With this, the court tried to emphasize the ambiguous attitude of the state authorities to the issue of the Armenian Genocide.
Fortunately, in 2014 On March 17, 2014, the Swiss authorities appealed against the above-mentioned decision of the European Court of Human Rights. On June 2, the ECHR decided to accept the case.
 The court session took place in 2015. January 28, in which, as we know, Armenia was involved as a third party5.
  In our opinion, a lot depends on this verdict, because the verdict made in Perincek will seriously undermine the process of criminalizing the denial of the Armenian Genocide.
Lilit Hayrapetyan LEGAL ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE Keywords: Armenian Genocide, recognition, legal significance, European Court of Human Rights.
