Sci. Head: Doctor of Technical Sciences, Prof. Ս. Avetisyan, PhD, Assoc. A. Voskanyan: Global climate change is a complex issue, which with its negative consequences has a significant impact on the well-being of the population and economic development.
  It should be noted that in recent years, climate change adaptation measures have significantly intensified at the international, national and regional levels.
The Republic of Armenia ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change in 1993, acting as a non-Annex I country.
 Although the share of greenhouse gas emissions in Armenia in global emissions is only 0.017%, the latter, on a voluntary basis, implements measures to reduce emissions, in general, climate change mitigation1.
We have repeatedly stressed that in the conditions of projected climate change, the situation will worsen, especially in the field of agriculture, as the country is among the extremely risky countries in terms of agriculture.
  The increase of temperature due to climate change, the decrease of precipitation, the increase of dangerous և unfavorable hydrometeorological risks will have a negative impact on the sustainable development of the sector.
1 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, http: // www.
//www.nature-ic.am/res/pdfs/conventions/UNFCCC_arm.pdf. The negative effects of climate change on agriculture are: նվազ Decreased soil fertility, նվազ Decreased water resources, ի Decreased crop yields, տարած Propagation of plant diseases, մեծ Increased animal disease, հաճախ Frequency of hydrothermal hazards1.
Hailstorms, frosts, strong winds, snowstorms, floods, torrential rains are especially dangerous for agriculture, the total number of cases of which we have presented in Figure 1.
 Line 1. In the Republic of Armenia in 2005-2014. The total number of major natural disasters occurred during 2014. During the period under review, the maximum of total natural disasters was observed in 2014 - 241 cases, and the minimum in 2006 - 83 cases.
Analyzes have shown that the number of frostbite cases has increased significantly, which is due to the average annual increase in temperature in the Ararat Valley, which is most noticeable in March, due to which vegetation starts early, so a sharp drop in temperature in April leads to an increase in frostbite cases.
 The number of days with heavy precipitation and hail has increased, which is conditioned by the frequency of penetration of high cyclones causing heavy hail.
It should be noted that any shock in the field of agriculture has negative social and financial consequences on both the living standards of the population and the macroeconomic indicators of the country.
  Of course, to mitigate the damage caused by natural risks 1 Avetisyan S., "Urgent food security issues of the Republic of Armenia", Yerevan.
 Economist, 2014.
2 The diagram was made և the calculations were made on the basis of the data of the Ministry of Territorial Administration of the Republic of Armenia ինչպես as well as the NSSRA of the Republic of Armenia.
3 Third National Climate Change Message.
  Yerevan, Lusabats Publishing House, 2015, 64 pages.
For this purpose, the state tries to provide some assistance to the villagers affected by natural disasters, but the opportunities of the RA state budget are very limited և, as a rule, the losses are not fully compensated.
 In many cases, the villagers have to work abroad in order to be able to provide the minimum financial expenses of the family as much as possible, and in the case of agricultural loans, to calculate the principal amount of the loan - interest.
  Some businesses refuse to engage in agricultural activities, contributing to the already increasing number of uncultivated lands.
As a measure to increase agriculture 's resilience to climate change, we suggest using the potential of a mutual insurance system.
Risk management tools in the field of agriculture are divided into two groups: measures implemented at the level of farmers և risk transfer measures.
The second group includes state post-disaster aid, insurance և mutual insurance 1.
  No insurance company currently operating in the Republic of Armenia concludes agricultural insurance contracts, the reasons for which are different (high level of risk in the sector, lack of state support, imperfection of the legislative field, etc.).
  Establishment of a state insurance company և The best way to adapt to climate change can be: We have referred to this in one of our previous articles2.
  Mutual insurance is one of the tried and tested risk management tools used in the 17th century.
The first mutual fire insurance company in the United States was founded in 1752, and the first mutual life insurance company in Great Britain in 1762.3.
  The essence of mutual insurance is that the insurers act at the same time as the founders of the company.
It should be noted that an attempt was made to implement mutual insurance in the Republic of Armenia in 2005 in the Tolors Agricultural Cooperative of Syunik region, where a "Fund for Compensation of Agricultural Animals Damages" was organized.
  A questionnaire was developed for agricultural animal risk management monitoring.
 Through the calculations made 2 Voskanyan G., The policy of introducing the insurance system in the RA agriculture.
 // Agroscience, 3-4, 2015. pp. 87-91.
3 http:
//dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/ruwiki/839715. The following tariffs were set for agricultural animals: cows - 3.5-4.5%, heifers - 6.5-7.5%, sheep, goats - 5.5-6.5%.
 Due to the work done, a pilot mutual insurance fund was organized in the Tolors Cooperative, through which: 1. 22 out of 45 members of the cooperative insured a part of their farm animals.2. 122 agricultural animals were insured.
The results of the program implementation would be significantly higher if in 2006 Due to the drought, the members of the Tolors Cooperative did not suffer much.
Studies show that mutual insurance is easier to organize in agricultural cooperatives, as members have a common interest in this case.
 The RA Law on Agricultural Cooperatives, which was adopted in 2015 after many years of discussions, will definitely contribute to this process. on December 21.
  However, in order to organize mutual insurance at the community level, it is necessary to develop and implement the RA Law on Mutual Insurance.
 It should be noted that a similar law operates in a number of countries, such as the Russian Federation2.
  The RA Law on Mutual Insurance will include the following main provisions: - Mutual insurance procedure, - Mutual insurance objects, - Mutual insurance union charter, - Mutual insurance union members' rights and obligations, - Termination of mutual insurance union membership, - Mutual insurance body և the supervisory body, - the director of the mutual insurance union, - the property of the union, - the insurance premiums, - the insurance reserves, etc.
Mutual insurance will be carried out voluntarily on the basis of the union charter or insurance contract.
  The union will be obliged to compensate the losses of its member in case of an insurance accident.
  The Mutual Insurance Union can provide 1 Kirakosyan K., The organization of mutual insurance of agricultural animals, Advice to the farmer, Yerevan, 2007, 43 pages.
Risk the risk to the insurer who has a license in that category.
 The object of insurance can be the property interests of a member of the union only.
  The charter of the mutual insurance union is a founding document, which will be approved by the general meeting of the union.
The general meeting, the board լինելու the executive director to be the governing bodies of the mutual insurance union.
  In order to fulfill its obligations, the union is obliged to create insurance reserves, at the expense of which it can carry out investment activities in the directions and limits set by the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia.
 We propose to create a state structure, which will provide relevant advice and technical assistance to those cooperatives or rural communities that wish to implement mutual insurance.
  The issue of reinsurance protection is also used here, as the systematic risk is high in the case of mutual insurance.
Gohar Voskanyan, Tsaghkanush Mirzoyan WAYS OF INTRODUCING MUTUAL INSURANCE IN CLIMATE CHANGE CONDITIONS IN RA Keywords: climate change, natural disasters, adaptation, mutual adaptation.
