CRITICISM OF ARMENIAN CINEMA AND THEATER IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS. GENERAL SITUATION Criticism is one of the important factors that can become a driving force in the development of any field.
 For the same reason, this criticism in journalism should have had a special place, especially when it comes to art, art criticism.
Many theorists view criticism as "evaluation" and others as "ability to evaluate".
  But criticism is not just about evaluating work.
  Rather, it is a cognitive-orienting activity, which not only evaluates the work, but also develops an evaluative attitude towards different cultural phenomena in the society.
 As the critic N. Shelgunov, "the power of critical thinking lies not in the fact that it analyzes the phenomenon, but in the fact that it makes you think."
According to the French philosopher Roland Barthes, criticism consists of 5 aspects, even the absence of one of which can greatly affect the quality of criticism2.
 These aspects are as follows: 1. Truthfulness.
  The word of the critic should inspire confidence, և the reader should not even doubt that the critic is right.
2. Objectivity.
  The critic should not be biased.
  In that case, the criticism will turn into a comment.
3. Taste.
 The critic must be able to distinguish art from mass culture.
4. Clarity.
  The language of the critic should be as clear and understandable as possible so that his criticism is accessible to everyone.
5. Assimilation.
 The critic must be able to understand the signs և use them.
Criticism, as a special creative type of journalism, performs not only informational, but also educational, cognitive functions.
 Its function is not limited to emphasizing the disadvantages and advantages of films and performances.
  In other words, the direction of criticism should not be only towards cinema and theater, but also towards the society.
 Criticism has a very important problem: to influence the society, the ideas and values ​​of art.
Turning to the past, it can be said that criticism was one of the most important parts of journalism in Soviet society.
 Although at that time criticism was a key part of the propaganda machine, it has always been an integral part of any periodical, a sign of its cultural values.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, criticism in post-Soviet countries declined somewhat.
  Theorists attribute the decline in the field of cinema and theater to the decline in the quality of criticism.
  There was a so-called mutation of artistic criticism.
  The principles, methods, thematic field, genre structure of criticism have completely changed.
 The use of analytical, literary and artistic genres in the print media was minimized.
  As there was a tendency to integrate journalism into mass culture, a lack of authors became apparent.
  Author journalism was started by individuals who added their own opinion to the materials they prepared.
 That is why the need for critics, film and theater specialists in the editorial offices decreased.
 The terms "theatrical criticism" և "film criticism" were replaced by the terms "theatrical journalism" և "film journalism".
  This is 2 See Bart R., Criticism and Truth, Moscow, 1987.
Over time (late 1990s սկզբ early 2000s) the need for criticism re-emerged.
  It was at this time that the term "art journalism" began to be promoted instead of "art criticism", which is a broader concept than criticism.
 It includes "criticism", "analysis", "literary-artistic style".
Thus, after certain transformations, today there is a new field of criticism, in which new problems are set.
 Consequently, the more complicated system of criticism presupposes a greater influence on the sphere of cinema and theater, as well as on the public perception of it and the value system.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Armenia, like other post-Soviet countries, also suffered heavy losses in the field of criticism.
 Of course, there has been some progress over time, but considering the situation in 2010-2015, it can be stated that the Armenian critical thinking still needs to be improved.
One of the biggest gaps, in my opinion, is that there are no relevant specialists.
 There are few journalists specializing in the field of culture, especially cinema and theater, that is why their criticisms are not only of poor quality, but are not able to have any impact.
 The criticisms of iscinologists and theatrical experts often lack the language of journalism.
 They are very professional, that is why they are not widely available.
 For example, playwright Leon Mutafyan often published criticisms in various newspapers and websites, which were mainly written in complex professional language, and were too extensive.
 A vivid example is his critique of Tigran Gasparyan's performance "King John" 1.
 This extensive critique touches on such details and stage nuances that may be incomprehensible to the reader.
The younger generation follows the same path of criticism, for example, the review of Tigran Martirosyan, a student of the Yerevan State Pedagogical University, "I only came to call", which was published in "Azg" periodical2.
 The young playwright tried to incorporate the professional knowledge he had learned during his studies, not taking into account that most of the readers have other professions, they need more accessible information.
On the other hand, a serious shortcoming in the materials is that criticism is often based on personal ambitions towards the criticized figure.
 This is a very common phenomenon, which can be seen in the criticisms of both film critics and playwrights and journalists.
  In the above-mentioned example, Levon Mutafyan's negative attitude towards the creative staff of "King John" is also noticeable, and in the review of Vahan Badalyan's "Macbeth", Levon Mutafyan's positive attitude is clearly seen3.
 The circumstance of expressing personal ambitions is much more visible in "Aravot".
  Daily journalist Gohar Hakobyan does not try to hide her personal attitude by criticizing the figure.
  For example, he often refers to Mikael Poghosyan's activities և, omitting the fact that the latter has a great contribution to the development of modern Armenian cinema, constantly tries to emphasize his ties with the government, presenting it as a negative phenomenon.
  Thus, in the review of Mikael Poghosyan's "If All" 4 film, Gohar Hakobyan does not try to hide her negative attitude towards the artist, calling him "an artist who always enjoys the fruits of the president's patronage."
Of course, such bias in the field of criticism is inadmissible.
One of the problems facing Armenian criticism is the "aging" of the theater.
  I think not enough attention is paid to the young people entering the theater.
  One of the main reasons is that critics rarely refer to the work of young people.
 Criticisms are mainly written about already experienced theatrical figures (which cannot be said about cinema, where the work of many young figures 1 See Mutafyan L., "King John in the Turn of Content", "Azg" daily, "Culture" supplement, " Theater "title, Yerevan, 25.08.2012.
2 See T. Martirosyan, "Paradise և hell dilemma", "Azg" daily, "Culture" supplement, "Theater" headline, Yerevan, 21.09.2012.
3 See Mutafyan L., "" Macbeth "with" paradoxical "transformations", "Azg" daily, "Culture" headline, Yerevan, July 22, 2010.
4 "If All" won a number of awards, including at prestigious foreign festivals, as well as being nominated for an Oscar.
5 See Hakobyan G., "Mikael Poghosyan sincerely supports the President", "Aravot" daily, Yerevan, January 26, 2012.
the old man, ascending the big screen, is immediately stoned by the critics).
 Despite that, sometimes there are criticisms that refer to young creators.
 In particular, "Aravot" daily in 2010 published a review of H. On the performance staged by the students of YSMI at the State Theater of Musical Comedy after Paronyan.
  On the occasion of Ghazaros Aghayan's 170th birthday, the young people staged his "Aregnazan" և Thanks to "Aravot" 's positive assessment of the play և The positive opinion of Yervand Ghazanchyan, who provided the stage to the young people, the play had a long life.
It is also a common practice in our reality to write reviews about works that have caused a great deal of controversy.
 Such works are never ignored by critics.
  For example, in 2012, Ara Yernjakyan's film "Jubilee Customer" caused a stir, as a result of which criticism appeared in almost all periodicals and websites.
  One of them is Armen Shakhkyan's review 1, in which the author assures that the film is nothing but a TV theater, as the events take place in only one apartment.
 Referring to the scandal surrounding the film, Armen Shakhkyan writes that the film is not flawed, the problem is the Armenian mentality, the audience's perception of the film.
Today, the Internet also plays a major role in criticism around the world.
  Through it, the criticism of the cinema-theater got a new quality, a new approach.
 Thus, "internet criticism" has become very important as a critical genre.
 Criticisms of movies and performances have become widespread on the Internet.
  These are divided into two types: amateur (written by ordinary visitors) and professional (written by film critics, playwrights or journalists).
  According to those reviews, the rating of the film or performance is determined, due to which a list of the best is created.
This culture of criticism allows us to differentiate between high-quality, low-quality films.
  This method implements the IMDb International Film Archive (InternationalMovie Database), which makes it the most rated website in the world of cinema.
 In the Russian market, this method is actively used by Kinopoisk website.
  For example, in 2015 Steven Spielberg's "Spy Bridge" was considered one of the best films of the year, thanks to which the film gained a lot of attention in the Russian market.
 The critiques of Igor Timoshkin 2, Pavel Yatsinovich 3, Ekaterina Efrimichova 4, Yuri Kustish 5 stand out here.
 These are written in plain language, understandable to the public, but professionally reveal the positive and negative sides of the film.
This internet direction is not developed in the Armenian reality yet.
  There are online films ումներ presentations, but the opinion about them is mostly expressed by the viewers, not by the experts, և those opinions are mainly in the form of comments, not reviews.
  The "Cinema World" website of the National Cinema Center of Armenia operates in our market, where mainly Siranush Galstyan, Ruzan Bagratunyan, Nana Petrosyan, Naira Paytyan, Anahit Harutyunyan, and representatives of the younger generation, Armen Ohanyan, Maria Tokmajyan and others, publish reviews.
 However, "Kinoashkhar" is not intended for the general public, but for people in the field of cinema in particular, which somewhat reduces its impact.
  Thus, although quite high-quality reviews are published in "Kinoashkhar", it is not an influential factor in Armenian cinematography.
Thus, as a result of research, it can be stated that the Armenian criticism does not correspond to the international standards yet, բան a lot needs to be corrected.
  Meanwhile, raising the quality of criticism is an important step not only for the development of journalism, but also for the development of cinema and theater, as they are interconnected phenomena.
It is very possible to make criticism a tool of journalism in general, using it in different genres (both criticism and review, interview, news, etc.).
1 See Shakhkyan A., "The effect of interrupted sex", "Azg" daily, "Culture" supplement, Yerevan, June 2, 2012.
2 Timoshkin I., "Stoic man's cold war" (available at www.kinopoisk.ru/film/840884/).
3 Яцинович П., "Типичный Спилберг" (available at www.kinopoisk.ru/film/840884/).
4 Ефремычева Е., «Ценность характера. The importance of strong spirit "(available at www.kinopoisk.ru/film/840884/).
5 Kustyshev G., "Your procedures are important" (available at www.kinopoisk.ru/film/840884/).
Rafael Zarbabyan CRITICISM OF ARMENIAN CINEMA AND THEATER IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS. GENERAL SITUATION Keywords: cinema, cinematography, theater, film science, theater studies, journalism, criticism, critique, newspapers, magazines, internet, quality improvement of criticism, cinema world.
