CSTO FORMATION AND MEANS OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY 1991 The collapse of the USSR put the former Soviet republics in serious socio-economic and military-political difficulties. The number of local conflicts increased not only between states, but also within them.
  To the old hotbeds of enmity were added the new, more dangerous ones, born of ethnic, clan, religious intolerance and aggressive nationalism.
 In addition, the problems of international terrorism, drug trafficking, and weapons of mass destruction have intensified, which are deepening due to the growing threat of international terrorism and globalization.
 All this put the post-Soviet republics in front of a serious security problem. [1]
 To get out of this situation, the post-Soviet republics set about creating a new regional international organization, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
1991 On December 21, 1991, eleven sovereign states signed a protocol to the agreement on the establishment of the CIS.
Thus, within the already formed CIS, military cooperation developed in three directions: • multilateral military, military-political և military-technical cooperation through the Council of Defense Ministers of the CIS member states, • military, military-political and military-technical multilateral cooperation within the CSTO, • bilateral military cooperation based on bilateral on contracts և agreements [2].
The NCP was the most promising of these.
 1992 The Collective Security Treaty was signed on May 15, 2006.
  It was signed by Armenia, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The agreement entered into force in 1994. on April 20.
  The Collective Security Treaty (CSTO) is sometimes referred to as the Tashkent Pact, the Tashkent Treaty, and a regional international organization whose stated goals are to establish international regional peace, security, stability, collective defense, territorial integrity, and autonomy.
  According to the treaty, the participating states work together to eliminate and, if necessary, eliminate the military threat to their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
 The basic provisions of the contract were defined by Articles 2 և 4.
  According to Article 2, the Member States were to hold consultations on all important matters relating to international security which would in some way affect their interests by agreeing on their positions on those matters.
  In the event of a threat to the security, stability, territorial integrity or autonomy of one or more Member States, Member States shall immediately engage in joint consultations to coordinate their efforts, develop and implement member actions to assist the State, and eliminate the threat (completed 10 December 2010). in).
  Article 4: If any Member State is subjected to aggression (armed attack, security threat, stability, territorial security, autonomy), it may be considered a threat to all Member States of the Organization.
 In the event of aggression against any Member State, all other Member States shall, to the best of their ability, provide assistance with the means at their disposal in accordance with the procedure for the exercise of the right of collective defense in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
  The state must immediately inform the UN Security Council about the situation.
  In the case of NATO (Article 5 of the Washington Agreement, the Contracting Parties agree that an armed attack on one or more Member States in Europe or North America will be considered an attack on them personally.
 Member States shall provide joint voluntary assistance to the partner State which has been attacked.
 This assistance was provided without taking into account the will of the member state, then in the case of the CSTO it was decided to intervene militarily only at the request of that country (2010 edition), as it would be considered as interference in the internal affairs of the state.
  For example, the poppy revolution in Kyrgyzstan in 2005, when the President of Kyrgyzstan refused CSTO military assistance, considering it a domestic issue, but turned to Russia for help as a friendly state.
The cooperation of the states in the field of international security in the post-Soviet space has undergone many changes since its establishment in 1992. From May 15 to 2002, the transformation of the CSTO into the CSTO.
One of the official reasons for the transformation of the NPT was to increase cooperation within the framework of collective security.
 However, according to some experts, this was done because very often military-political relations hindered the development of the CIS.
 It was this status that led to the transformation of the CSTO into the CSTO, which in turn necessitated the creation of a number of new centers of power.
 The CSTO Coalition Forces (Operational Response, Peacekeeping, Collective Aviation), CSTO Support Forces (Coordinating Competent Authorities for Combating Illicit Drug Trafficking, Coordinating Competent Authorities for Combating Illegal Migration) the commission).
  The situation in the Caucasus region in the early 2000s formed a new political field.
 The basis for the formation of a regional collective security system was the use of "multilateral forces".
 The decision on the withdrawal of funds of the CSTO regional forces was approved in 2000. During the meeting of the Collective Security Council held on May 24 in Minsk.
It was decided to form the regional forces in three directions.
 Maritime zones were conditionally attached to each of them: • Caucasus (Black Sea) - it was planned to be organized through Armenian-Russian cooperation.
 This cooperation enabled Armenia to play a serious role in ensuring security in the region.
  Russia, on the other hand, was able to maintain a military presence in a region that was important to it by reducing its external negative effects on conflicts near its southern borders.
• Eastern European (Baltic) - In the Eastern European direction it was organized, strengthened by the treaty signed between Russia and Belarus.
 After the collapse of the USSR, Russia lost its anti-aircraft system, leaving only two separate anti-aircraft forces with four corps (11th in Belarus, 28th, 49th և 60th in Ukraine).
 That is why, when Ukraine did not join the CSTO, the only option was the Republic of Belarus in Eastern Europe.
 The agreement on joint protection of the external borders and the establishment of a joint regional air defense system between Russia and the Republic of Belarus was signed in 2009.
 It was ratified by Russia in 2009 and the Republic of Belarus in 2012. [8]
• Central Asian (Caspian) - Central Asian forces were formed through Russian-Kazakh cooperation.
 There is Russian-Uzbek cooperation in this region.
  Despite the fact that in 1995 Uzbekistan withdrew from the CSTO, however, continued cooperation in the field of air defense.
  Of course, the key was the Russian-Kazakh.
 Establishment of a joint air defense system in Central Asia was organized in 2014. The agreement was signed on May 13, 2006 by the Russian Federation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
 The main purpose of the Russian-Kazakh air defense system was to protect the airspace of the powers, as well as the territorial integrity and independence.
 The commanders of the air defense forces will be appointed by the Presidents of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Kazakhstan upon the recommendation of the Ministers of Defense.
Thus, taking into account the geographical boundaries of the CSTO area of ​​responsibility and the differences of interests of the states involved in it, the CSTO was divided into sub-regions to ensure collective security.
 A regional security system was established for the effective solution of regional problems.
  The division had an impact on the integrity of the security system, however, it makes it possible to increase the efficiency of the management of the security system, as a number of issues can be resolved at a bilateral level by avoiding bureaucratic hassles.
  Based on this expediency, it is possible to increase the independence of the management of the regional forces.
 As for the management of coalition forces, it is often necessary to hold political consultations, which will allow clarifying the military-political approaches of the member states on security issues.
 It is successfully used, for example, within NATO.
 We think that the efficiency of the use of CSTO political resources is low, especially in solving regional problems.
The biggest problem for Armenia, unfortunately, is that Armenia has no direct borders with any of the member states.
The membership of the Republic of Armenia in this structure is very often criticized. It is questioned whether the Republic of Armenia needs to join the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
 It is true that there are a number of gaps, but we should not forget about the positive aspects: • Armenia buys ammunition at relatively lower prices than the market, • It is a restraining tool for Turkey and Azerbaijan.
• In the NKR issue, it excludes the support of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan to Azerbaijan.
  It is true that there are no serious allied relations between Armenia and Kazakhstan, as "Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan are members of the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States", that is why in many issues, particularly in the NKR issue, they have also adopted the policy of political neutrality is a member of this organization.
 In the case of Belarus, relations are much more constructive, judging by the recent statements of the President of the Republic of Belarus that they are ready, if necessary, to support their strategic partner, Armenia.
Relations with Russia are another issue, as the fact that Russia sells weapons to Azerbaijan is widely criticized.
  And indeed, Russia, being the strategic partner of the Republic of Armenia, has no moral right to take such a step.
In conclusion, we can say that the CSTO, as an international regional organization, still has quite open sides, which are especially connected with the non-allied relations between the member states.
 We think that first of all it is necessary to try to solve that problem, which will make the system stronger, will allow to use the existing forces and means effectively.
LITERATURE [1] Keryan G., The Evolution of the Practice of the Idea of ​​Collective Security միջազգային in International Relations, Banber Yerjan University, International Relations, Political Science, 2015 № 3 (18), pp. 48-49.
[3] Collective Safety Agreement, URL.
 http:
//www.odkbcsto.org/documents/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=126 (date of application.
 21.01.2017). [4] International treaty organization, URL.
 http:
//www.mfa.am/en/international-organisations/CSTO/ (Accessed.
 21.04.2017).
[5] North Atlantic Treaty, URL.
  http:
//www.nato.int/cps/ru/SID-A07EC0F6FEA104B4/natolive/official_texts_17120.htm.
 28.04.2017). Collective Security Organizations, [7] Manukyan J. S., The processes of collective security formation within the CIS և Armenia 1995-2001, Armenian Army, Yerevan, 2006, p. 78.
2, URL.
 http:
//tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/2245486http.
//tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/2245486 (датаобращения.
 28.04.2017). URL.
 http:
//www.ntv.ru/novosti/810756/ (date of application.
 28.04.2017.
