ITEN JULY'S "AMERICAN DREAM" IN JOHN STEINBECK'S NOVEL "THE WINTER OF MOURNING" "The winter of our worries is in the past ..." "The winter of our worries" is a novel about the "lost generation"
 The gift-talisman of Aunt Ethan's Deborah occupies a prominent place in the novel.
  "The talisman is yours, the image means what you expect from it," says Aunt Deborah.
 The talisman is also for the smiling moon with eyes closed by Elen, Eten's daughter, who hugs the talisman every night.
 The year gives a new day, and the day a new dawn. With these words, Ethan begins his day at Easter, the only day when Christ is dead.
  The thought of getting rich, of dying morally, of being resurrected, of being reborn in the waves of water is paralleled by the image of some destroyed person trying to create something else, thereby restoring balance within.
 Etienne goes out of her comfort zone every day, repeating in her mind the phrase "My God, why did you leave me?" And returning to reality.
  He constantly escapes from reality, returns to the past, going to the Old Port, where, as he mentions, he goes only during possible changes.
He went there to go to the army, to marry Mary և on Ellen's birthday.
 In the novel, the hero is most "helped" by the witch Marge, who, predicting her future, is the only person who knows what is happening with Itenihet.
 His words are remarkable: "You are like a bull that, after working as a matador, tries to kill what no longer exists in front of it" [1].
 Everything has already been decided.
 This time, even the old skipper does not help Iten. "Decide for yourself.
  What is useful to one is harmful to others, and it is impossible to predict in advance. "[1]
At the heart of Steinbeck's novel is the "Lost Generation" - people who went through the horrors of World War II.
 It is the inner world of the lost generation, infected with an invisible but certain disease.
  War teaches to kill a person, removes the boundaries of the value system, kills the meaning of life.
Steinbeck believes that "the whole war is a symptom of the failure of man as a rationalist."
 In his novel, there are two heroes who survived the war, Denny և Iten, who both seem to be dead, leaving a part of themselves in the past.
 They have lost the meaning and interest of life.
  And how to return to life after the war, if the war absorbs the strongest feelings of a person that he is able to live?
 Danny Taylor says to Ethan. "You are as disabled as I am, except that we are mutilated in different ways."
 After the war, Etten started a family because Orkin faithfully waited for his return, had children, worked in a kiosk, neither loved his job, nor hated it. He lived his life mechanically, day by day.
 This is probably how Etienne's life would have continued until the end of the time allotted to him, if the peace of his life had not been disturbed by the environment and society, forcing him to step out of his "comfort zone" and do more than he wanted or needed.
 During this period, the hero faces the re-evaluation of his moral values, the choice between their destruction or transformation, the focus of the clash between Iranian indifference and the persistence of the environment.
It is no coincidence that the title of the novel, "The winter of our discontent", is taken from Shakespeare's play "Richard III", where the hero strives to have more, eliminating all human, non-human obstacles that meet on the way, falling morally.
  Steinbeck presents the reality surrounding his hero, his mental state, the reasons that led to it, the reality in which his essence does not participate, the search for rest of his soul.
This environment dictates laws, imposes stereotypes, երեք Three main circumstances related to Iten compel him to act, sacrificing his precious indifference, to wake up once again after the war the demon that is specific to "Man".
  This, however, is only perceived by Itenne as a devil, because everyone else has come to terms with the "new laws".
  There is a struggle between the old and the new in Iten. "
  The three tormentors have been circling around Iten since Friday, orienting their thoughts.
 The memory of being rich once, of occupying a public position torments Iten.
 The symbol of this concept is the beautiful "Adler", the ship that once belonged to her father, but burned in an unknown way, "Iten suspects that it was done for some insidious reason.
  The Old Port is associated with the "Adler" ship symbol, where Iten goes to separate himself with his thoughts.
  That wreck marks the defeat of Iten's father.
  In addition to the senseless wars in which a person participates without purpose and desire, just to "do his duty", there are personal wars.
 If you wage a war that is not yours, where you have no intention of defending your home, your family, your homeland (and Iten was involved in just such a war), you are defeated by any outcome.
 However, the defeat of the father in a personal war leaves its mark on his son and future generations.
In the novel, the story of "Beautiful Adler" became a myth in the family, which is a symbol of death, because what does not exist becomes a myth!
 This story will still be told and remembered from generation to generation, as the world continues to remember the world wars.
The desire of family members to live better also drives certain changes in Iten.
  And Iten's wife, Mary, and children, Ellen and Allen, express their desire for betterment in various conversations.
  When expressing her wishes, Mary mentions two meanings - "buy new curtains", in which case money is a necessity to live a dignified life, պահել "keep your head up", which shows the feature of money - to create prestige.
 Steinbeck writes about this. "The reputation of a person with money is valued as highly as the dram itself." [5]
  We see another circumstance in this desire to live better. Mary and her children are striving for a better life because they are not members of the "lost generation."
 Like Ethan, they have not left a part of themselves in the past.
  If you live in the present, you accept the philosophy of the present way, then you must gradually become infected with the "American dream", moreover, with the kind of "American dream" that requires to get rich as soon as possible, to succeed, to find your place in society.
  However, people who are obsessed with the "American dream" often forget that money does not cure diseases, it only changes the syndrome.
The expectations of the society from the hero are of great importance for Iteniha.
  Everyone thinks that Iten is smart, hardworking, finally a good man, և has all the rights to live better.
 Different people just come up with suggestions, believing that he "was created not to be a common salesman."
 And Ethan himself, after taking decisive steps, notices that Mr. Biggers, Baker and others begin to treat him with respect, even knowing that he is Marullo's traitor, Denny's killer.
  They are respected because Iten enters the field as a player who is well versed in the laws of business, able to use those laws to his advantage.
 To these circumstances, in the case of Iten, adds the card prediction of Marji Young-Hart, a close friend of the woman, that she is going to succeed.
  This divination appears as a symbol of a skin-changing snake.
 On this occasion, Iten says: "I do not know who is behind whom: divination to truth or truth to divination?" [5]
  It symbolizes both Iten and the world, the paradox that Iten is struggling in a paradoxical world.
  Moreover, it can be said that every person is և´ old, և´ new, as reflected through the house (cid.
0) New Beitown - "ancient city".
Danny stays true to himself, while Ethan finds himself in a paradox again, left alone in life.
 Ethan becomes the monster he saw in his dream, tearing his brother to pieces, and here awakens the monster that woke him up on the battlefield.
 Here, Etten proves Steinbeck's theory that "the whole war is a symptom of the failure of man as an intelligent creature."
  One of the only two surviving members of the "lost generation" eventually dies, the other integrates into the new life and the new laws.
 One stays true to his "skin", the other changes it, it is difficult to say who won. The loser was Ethan, because if he is ascribed a victory by the new social and moral law, then the old law condemns him, and he believed in the old, but Danny, in any case, was defeated, because the deceased is no longer able to do anything, while Ethan is still can be "changed".
  Ellen and Allen are on both poles.
 Ellen is more connected to the sensual world, she wears her mejism, she lives in her world detached from reality, the best proof of which is that she is sleepy.
 Being epileptic, a part of Ellen's essence, like Ethan, is in another place, in another world, in which the immorality of the moral has not yet been mixed, where the laws are different, where Ellen smiles with her eyes closed.
 Allen, on the other hand, is a typical American of his time who can trick the editorial staff into succeeding, who is prone to a sting of conscience, a step that is considered insidious for Ellen.
  He does not want to work with his father in a kiosk, he wants to get rich and be recognized at once, without much effort.
  "Everyone does that," says Allen. he has already made his decision.
 Noticing all this in her children, Ethan feels that it is Ellen who needs her protection, who is out of this society and time.
Biblical symbols occupy a large place in the novel.
 Thus, the day when Etienne had the idea of ​​getting rich was Easter, the only day that, according to Aunt Deborah, "Christ is dead."
  Aunt Deborah had passed on to Etienne the belief that the resurrection of Christ did not take place two thousand years ago, but today in everyone.
 This was the day that Ethan was to die and be reborn, he died morally, but he was reborn, jumping into the water at the end of the novel, from which he had to come out clean to deliver to Ellen what he's for his daughter. The stone-talisman was the symbol of hope and faith.
  While talking to Morphy, he is in Itenas. "I hear those words and there is such a feeling of loneliness in them!" Lama sabach thani "(My God, why did you leave me?).
  These lines are repeated many times in the modernist literature of the 20th century.
  Why does the hero see loneliness in those words?
  Perhaps it is because he felt that he had been abandoned by the divine.
The issue of being called "American" is central in the novel.
  For Danny, the court is the basement, where he lived as a child, for Etienne, the ancient port, where the remains of "Beautiful Adler" are, Marginal on an island in Beitown, Marullo misses Italy, և only Mary does not face this issue.
  He is the only one who does not care about the asylum issue. He slept every night with a smile on his face, feeling calm in his house.
  Etienne comments on the woman's concern as follows: "In my opinion, the secret is the following. My Mary is convinced that she will live forever, or that she will move from one life to another just as easily and calmly as she does from day to night.
He believes in it just as much as he breathes, naturally, without thinking.
 And that is why he has nowhere to hurry. one can "sleep," rest, "temporarily disconnect from existence" [1].
In the novel, everyone is in a hurry, everyone wants to achieve something, to achieve more, that run is endless, because the universe is endless, our desires and dreams are endless.
  Steinbeck's novel shows the decline of the "American dream", the change that this perception undergoes over time.
  If in the past equal opportunities were everyone's dream to create their own lives, to achieve their desires through their own work, then that perception changed, turning into a raging desire to win the race, where the freedoms of others are not possible, there is only the "I" that overwhelms the other to satisfy desires. .
 This spirit of greed and laziness, however, has been and is present at all times, of which Steinbeck writes: "Ah, the days of piracy are over, but the spirit, as it seems, still lives today.
"What spirit?"
- Free earnings without doing anything.
 Getting rich without effort ”[1].
This is what Ethan says to his son, Allen, who wants to win an essay contest on "I Love America" ​​and uses improper means to win (cid).
0) copies sentences from speeches and words of famous people.
  The author presents the transience of this victory with the defeat of Allen, who, however, does not back down from the path he has chosen, saying: "A great thing.
  Everyone does that.
  One is lucky, the other is not. ”[1]
The theme of the essay, "I love America," is satirical, as the participants want the monetary reward, the advantage of having a TV appearance, and these desires that motivate them to write, not their love for America.
Isn't handing over the kiosk to Marullo և Denny making his friend's land his own is not what "everyone does", as Etienne's son Allen says?
 Iten thought about everything before taking these steps.
 He made this plan when one of the customers of his kiosk told him about the next steps of robbing a bank.
  After all, Danny's land would be the one who would make the same or roughly the same offer to him to buy a drink, և if Danny could find the strength to heal the money owed by Etienne, then Ethan would be happy for it, otherwise if he did not get the land, he would get one The other one, moreover, Danny would be more pleased if it were him.
 As for Marullo, he came to America illegally, already committing a violation.
 In fact, Eten was not mean to anyone.
  However, the "society" or the person who wanted the land to be his, who before the steps taken by Iten urged him to follow the new laws of business, does not hesitate to rebuke, reminding of morality when Iten uses those laws against him.
  As long as Mr. Baker needed Etten to be in a lower position than him, Baker would not consider such steps immoral, while when the situation turns out that Ethan should have received 51% of the shares, Baker tries to influence his conscience.
The American dream was not intended to sow rivalry and deceit in man against man.
 On the contrary, it pursued the establishment of the idea of ​​freedom, of equality for all.
 The idea, passing through the prism of human nature, ceased to be just an idea, so that man could use it, "became human", including all human desires, dark and dark desires.
  Now the American dream has two faces, real and perfect, false and human, which are just a reflection of the real on the rock wall.
 Idea and the embodiment of reality will continue to oppose each other, as the essences of man and God oppose each other, until humanity absorbs with all purity and simplicity how the idea absorbed the human in order to exist in the real world.
From the moment Ethan thought he would like his name written in gold letters, as the war victims wrote, he began to live half-dead.
  And at the moment when he refused to commit suicide, he decided to continue this game of old and new. He sacrificed himself, the talisman, the hope, to pass on his daughter to the new generation.
 When Christ died and left the human body, there remained the soul of Jesus, the man who was deprived of the divine.
  However, Christ was resurrected, and to this day his life keeps alive the hope of Paradise, righteousness, and redemption.
If we believe this theory, every person, including the Son of God, Adam, must go through all the stages intended for man in order to be transformed into the divine essence, Christ. heaven, snake, woman, apple, sin… Iten is offered to taste the apple և he tastes it.
 He commits sin, but in the end he becomes Christ, the one who, forgetting about his "self", his lack of desire to live, brings hope to the next generation.
Iten does not think of martyrdom, but of the terrible loneliness of the crucified.
  In the novel, everyone wanted to live like Miss Elgar, out of time, in the endless present, which never becomes the past.
 The examination of the novel can end with one of Iten's reflections. "The world has its attic, where many ancient" wonderful things "are accumulated, which we do not want to have in front of our eyes, but" we do not dare to throw ".
 Sensing that her father might not return, Ellen asks to be taken away, but Etienne returns on an eternal basis.
 Not a goodbye, but a mnasbar.
 The farewell sounds with mild sadness and hope.
 Goodbye is strictly non-refundable.
  Iten does not say goodbye to life.
  "The world is full of dark fragments of collapse.
 Each of us has his own fire, his own, single fire. "[1]
 Iten does not commit suicide, he decides to go out and hand over the amulet to his new mistress, "so that he does not put out a fire."
LITERATURE [1] Steinbeck J., The winter of our worries, Yerevan, 1978, pp. 274, 356, 131, 368, 372.URL.
 https:
//www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/war (Accessed.
 20.03.2018). [3] Williams K., Jesus Christ as the Reincarnation of Adam, URL.
  http:
//www.neardeath.com/reincarnation/jesus/adam.html, (Accessed.
 19.03.2018) .URL.
 http:
//www.loc.gov/teachers/classroommaterials/lessons/american-dream/students/thedream.html (Accessed.
 19.03.2018) .URL.
 http:
//chrestomathy.cofc.edu/documents/vol1/patton.pdf (Accessed.
 18.03.2018). Soghomonyan Amalia ITEN JULY'S "AMERICAN DREAM" JOHN STEINBECK'S NOVEL "WINTER OF MOURNING" Keywords: war, lost generation, American dream, biblical symbols, paradise-snake-snake.
