STATE AND GENOCIDE (EXAMPLE OF THE OTTOMAN STATE) The unfavorable arrangement of the events of the 18th-19th centuries for the Ottoman Empire, especially the events of the 20th century, on the domestic and international platforms, led to serious opposition to the division by the empire.
 In the "retreat" of the empire, when the theological foundations did not even save the sultans from revenge, Sultan Mustafa III mentioned in one of his poems that the Ottoman Empire was the future ruler of the world.
World War I is an opportunity for the Turks not only to eliminate all possible threats to the preservation of the empire, but also to expand it.
  The choice of the Troika from the two military groups of the Turkish state was based not so much on a sincere desire, but on Britain and France being dangerous to its existence, cooperating with Russia on these two, and contrary to the policy of these states, Germany was a more subtle penetrating empire.
 Moreover, like the sultans in danger of beheading, who dreamed of a powerful state, the Turks committed genocide not only out of ethnic tolerance, but also out of a desire to preserve the integrity of the state that gave rise to it.
 Thus, the ultimate goal of the Turks and their political leadership was to preserve the integrity of the Ottoman (or Turkish) state.
In this way, one can explain the spread of successive ideologies like an epidemic.
 If we look at each of them separately, we will see in particular that Ottomanism led to the adoption of the Constitution, the granting of rights to ethnic minorities, only the general Ottoman citizenship was accepted, although this was negatively accepted by the Turkish-Muslim element as equal to Ryan (disenfranchised) Muslims.
  Then pan-Islamism was put forward, the primary role of which was to preserve the eastern states of the empire, and then, due to the ineffectiveness of that ideology, Pan-Turkism was born.
 All this was undoubtedly connected with the rapid manifestations of nationalism that emerged in the 19th century1.
  In this period we will work with the second stage of nationalism, when it changes from a state-building perception (the first stage: nationalism was perceived as patriotism at this stage) to an approach to ruling and colonizing others.
The idea is the real level of social consciousness, and the social-group psychology is sensual, emotional2.
  Of course, it should be taken into account that "without the satisfaction of basic needs it is impossible to ensure the existence of both biological and social organism" 3.
  It is only necessary to take into account the level of realism of the ideology of the national interest of the state, which is its practical stage.
  In order to achieve this, it is necessary to consider the exercise of the national interests of the state in the context of the international balance of power4.
  In other words, 1 Turks read about Turks in the collection from the notes of Cemal Pasha. "It must be admitted here that the nationalist aspirations that were observed in Europe in the middle of the 19th century were immediately rejected by the fact that the Armenian youth, who went to Europe or America for trade or study, had the old idea that their nation needed to strive to achieve independent life. "
 However, it is mentioned only about Armenians, forgetting to mention themselves, especially about the last of the ideologies they profess.
 See the link http.
//www.armin.am/en/Books-Historiography-Turqery-turqeri-masin/view_book/2.
3 Ghondyan A., The issue of national interests in the primary environment of ensuring the security of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2011, p. 36.
4 Ghondyan A., page 59.
to take into account the possible countermeasures, which, at least during the war, were not shown, gave the opportunity to apply the national interest in practice.
 The so-called Ottoman social society was a biological phenomenon, if we mean the Turkish element, which before the collapse of the empire needed to be armed with national selfishness so that others would not have to emigrate.
  The Ottoman state in the first stage of its existence acted as a Ghazni state1.
 In other words, religious and social unification was stronger.
  In this respect, A. is interesting. Jondyan's conclusion. "The geopolitical weight of the state is, in fact, the ideas of that country about its place in the world."
  However, this is only in the beginning, because "the slogans of the actor in the creation of nations" 2, the most important is the state interest.
These two complemented each other.
  Through religious unification and social uniqueness, the Turkish element led to the creation of an empire whose borders and existence could not fail to cooperate with its neighbors, something that at first did not exist indirectly in the empire's approaches, but later manifested itself many times3.
The Armenian Genocide, which differs from the massacre (in this case there is no intention), could not be the result of local ethnic clashes with its inclusion and pre-compiled lists.
 Before the transition to hostilities, both the Russian and Turkish sides took steps to check the position of the Armenians, the whole of the Caucasus was filled with Turkish spies, and propaganda was carried out among the Caucasian Tatars.
  In fact, before the genocide began outside of Armenian phobia, a favorable anti-Armenian atmosphere was created on this side of Turkish rule.
  The explanation given in Turkish historiography that the deportation of the Tehas was due to the necessity of war does not stand up to serious study, as it is true that such an explanation has a supporting circumstance: the hostilities took place within Western Armenia, but the fact The need to massacre the Armenians4 gave a clear state direction to the so-called "deportation".
  The point is that the "Law of Deportation" (Tehcir kanunu), after the adoption of which deportation was to begin, was adopted when in 1915 On May 24, 1945, the three Entente powers, Russia and Great Britain and France, issued a joint Declaration 5 strongly condemning the massacres of Armenians and emphasizing that members of the Ottoman government would be held individually responsible for the crime.
 The law was passed not to start deportation, but to protect the genocidal state and its leaders in the future, because "deportations" and massacres had already started before the adoption of the law.
1915 At the beginning K. Elsewhere in Constantinople, the killings and dismissals of high-ranking Armenians had begun, and before the adoption of this law, the whole of Zeytun had been emptied of Armenians.
 There are a number of intentions in the full name of the law, as the law was adopted not to protect people's lives, but "for those who oppose the actions of the government" provided for the use of "measures to be taken from a military point of view."
  It is difficult to imagine the ability of women, children and the elderly to oppose the government, when most of them were not even urban dwellers6, and 200,000 Armenian conscripts were massacred on the front.
 The answer to these contradictions can be found in the Primate of the Diocese of Trabzon, Archbishop Hovhannes. From Nazyan's memoirs, the organ of the "Union և Progress" party was distrusted by the distrust of the ideas propagated by the "Hilal Ahmed" daily propagated by the false science, the meaning of one of which was presented as follows: 1 Safrastyan R., Ottoman Empire. The Origins of the Genocide Program (1876-1920), Yerevan, 2009, p. 103.
2 Natali Sh., The Turks and We, Yerevan, 2011, p. 44.
3 Diplomats from European countries, when they came to Istanbul, did not listen to them, treated them with respect, gave them as aid, clothes, etc.
 The Ottoman sultan knew no ruler other than himself.
4 Izzet Pasha, responsible for the policy of violence against Armenians, believed that the Armenian question could be ended by eliminating the Armenians.
 See Safrastyan R., Ottoman Empire. The Origins of the Genocide Plan (1876-1920), Yerevan, 2009, p. 167.
5 Safrastyan R., The State Program of the Armenian Genocide, VEM Pan-Armenian Journal, No. 1 (26), Yerevan, 2009, pp. 48-62.
6 Only 10% of the population of Western Armenia lived in cities.
 See H. Simonyan (ed.), Armenian History, Yerevan, 2012, p. 436.
"According to the laws of nature, the inferior races must be the food of the superior races."
 This was the existence of views typical of "social Darwinism" in the Pan-Turkic ideology.
  It Ch. He applied the laws of Darwin's "struggle for existence" and "natural selection" to human society.
Such ideologies և ideologies in general could not have mass coverage without state support2.
Prior to the implementation of the Armenian Genocide program, reform programs were put forward in Western Armenia, which were mediated first by Britain and then by Germany.
 In this way, the Russian side fulfilled its conditions, one of which was the inclusion of the province of Trabzon in the reform program - the inclusion of half of the employees in the gendarmerie, police and all public services with Armenian elements, especially in regions where they made up only 10-30% of the population3.
 Before the war, such a step by the Russians was a hidden appeal to the Armenians against the Turks.
 It is clear that the acquisition of the third party by the reform program endangered the whole empire for the Armenians, because such privileges would cut off the empire from the Arab vilayets, and in that case the Ottoman state would find itself in the last period of the Byzantine Empire.
 Thus, it is worth mentioning the role of the battle of Sarighamish, when according to various estimates, the Turkish side claimed 80,000-90,000 casualties.
  And in such a case, Germany could not help but worry about the defeat of its ally.
  The conquest of the Balkans would pave the way to the Middle East, but the emergence of Russia on the Turkish side would not allow Germany to live up to its expectations of war.
  However, there is no need to expand the circle of culprits. The Ottoman Empire did not shine with the tendency to obey, especially when its participation played a decisive role in the inclusion of German plans, and the transition from war to action, during which no state could concede its own interests and security. Universal values ​​are limited by national interests.
  During the history that this people appeared next to us, with all the contacts and directions of recognition, our biggest մեր fatal omission was the ignorance of the Turkish-state relations.
Thus, when we talk about the Armenian Genocide, we should not look at it sometimes in the context of economic, sometimes nationalistic, sometimes in the aspirations to create Turan, etc.
 The Armenian Genocide was a birth of its time.
 In essence, there are no genocidal nations, but it does not mean that it is impossible to motivate such steps, even for a whole large mass, in this case, an entire nation.
  When the public consciousness, the mental "capacity" is equated to the lower level of the mass moods, at the same time, in parallel with years of hatred, the genocide is not considered a crime for the given society.
 Today, many genocides are happening right before our eyes, just like the Yezidis.
 This is not a result of the Yezidis expressing the priorities of the genocidal party on the basis of responding to the ongoing conflicts, the quest for statehood, but the response to the conflicts in the world.
  In the same way, the genocide of the Assyrians, who lived in Mush, Bitlis, Van.
Their massacres took place together with the Armenian massacres, the picture was almost the same. The fact that he was a Christian, the fact that it was used by the great powers, the occupation of border settlements "classified the Assyrians as Armenians" became the basis for their massacre.
The massacres took place in the northern territories of Iran, which declared neutrality, as Ottoman Turkey had ambitions for these territories.
 If we try to look at the genocide from such a perspective, we may later find a model of world coexistence that will prevent most nations from becoming genocidal.
1 See the link http.
//www.noravank.am/upload/pdf/80_am.pdf.
2 Near Zarand we read: "In a city with a position in Istanbul, it is difficult for even the most convinced followers of the 'idea' to take action."
  See Zarzand, United Independent Turania, Yerevan, 1993, p. 41.
3 Messages of Austro-Hungarian Diplomats on the Armenian Genocide (1915-1918), Yerevan, 2004, p. 15.
Lena Tashchyan STATE AND GENOCIDE (EXAMPLE OF THE OTTOMAN STATE) Keywords: Ottomanism, Pan-Islamism, Pan-Turkism, nationalism, idea, massacre, genocide.
