AESTHETIC ASSESSMENTS OF MOUNTAIN LANDSCAPES The study of landscape aesthetics is one of the perspective directions of modern geography.
  Landscape aesthetics studies the beauty and aesthetics of natural, anthropogenic landscapes, as well as the peculiarities of aesthetic perception and evaluation [5].
The realization and perception of the fact that the landscape has not only material but also caring value, leading to the need to discover and preserve the most beautiful areas, to assess the aesthetic property of the landscape.
Attempts to assess the aesthetic qualities of nature have a long history.
  The first ideas about the possibility of mathematical analysis of natural beauty appeared in the works of Pythagoras.
 Still A. Humboldt, A. Hettner, W. P. In Semyonov-Tian-Shansky works, the necessity and perspective of studying the visual properties of the landscape were mentioned.
  However, its special study in geography began in the 1960s, when two approaches to landscape aesthetic assessment were formed: "objective" and "subjective" [3, 4].
The subjective approach studies the peculiarities of the motile landscape preferences of different groups of people.
In this case, the researcher relies on the subjective opinion of people, on the impressions of this aesthetic landscape.
  Within the framework of this approach, it distinguishes two directions: expert assessment and social survey [2, 5].
In the first case, the beauty of the landscape is assessed by specialists whose profession is more or less related to the study and use of natural resources (geologists, biologists, painters, etc.) [2, 3, 5].
 Based on the expert evaluation methodK. D. Fiennes landscape-aesthetic research.
  He selected color photographs of landscapes of different natural zones, the aesthetic appeal of which was assessed by a panel of experts on a scale.
  However, experts are people with their own tastes, views, preferences, who do not always coincide with most people.
 That is why the second direction of the subjective approach is singled out - the social survey, the purpose of which is to reveal the landscape preferences of the main users of aesthetic resources.
  Usually 50-60 people of different sex, age, education, ethnocultural background are selected for the survey [2].
An example of the application of this method is the Wei (Great Britain) valley realized E. Ս. Penning-Roussell studies [12], assessment of the aesthetic values ​​of the central Alps in Italy [13].
 The most common և questionnaire of the social survey method is M. It belongs to Y. Frolova.
  The questions of his questionnaire are composed in the form of evaluable matrices, which include 7 columns according to each criterion.
 Thus, the first column means "extremely negative impression", the seventh - "quite positive", the fourth - "neutral", and the rest occupy an intermediate position.
  Thus, during the survey, the impressions of the individual components of the landscape (air, water, relief, vegetation, lands, animals) և of the complete landscape (uniform-diverse, disharmonious-harmonious, ordinary-exotic, ugly-beautiful, etc.) were assessed by the respondents. emotions (fear-joy, depression-admiration, etc.).
 An integrated group aesthetic assessment was then performed for each landscape [6: 5].
The integral use of these two directions is more expedient.
  This is the method presented in Prelovsky's work, which is a synthesis of social survey and expert evaluation methods.
The objective approach presupposes the discovery of objective criteria of aesthetic attractiveness, physical characteristics of the landscape.
  The main advantages are the logical structure of the methodology, the measurability of the evaluated indicators, the possibility of extrapolation of the data of the main key areas in a large space [3].
The objective approach, in turn, is divided into two directions of evaluation.
In one case, each "significant factor" of the landscape (for example, the features of the terrain, the vegetation) is assessed separately, usually on a scale.
  Then, during the comparison of the specific assessments obtained from each indicator, an integral assessment of the natural complex is performed.
  In the other case, the analysis of the aesthetic features of the landscape is performed according to several factors, the peculiarities of the combination of criteria.
  These are the general indicators, such as the color scheme, the depth of the scene, the dominance.
 But in almost all works these two directions appear together.
One of the classic works within the framework of the objective approach is D. Linton.
  In his work the relief is primary, then the forests, swamps, fields, settlements, industrial objects Gylen.
It is a similar work և 1971 ․ The Coventry-Solihal-Wariklir interregional planning carried out by the scientific group, the ecological-aesthetic assessment of the Lithuanian landscapes of Eringis and Budrunas.
The authors grouped the separate criteria of aesthetics into three groups.
 Group I consists of natural objects in the landscape (for example, lakes, parks, etc.), which are subjected to arithmetic.
 Group II, which is considered the main one, describes the "basic features of the landscape" (for example, multiplicity, zoning, seasonal aspect, perspective diversity and depth).
  Group III includes various objects of human activity, the presence of which can have both positive and negative meanings for aesthetic attractions in the landscape [3, 9].
Perform an objective aesthetic assessment of landscapes in the territory of the Republic of Armenia. Մ. Martirosyan.
 The landscapes of the Lake Sanaa basin have been assessed.
  The assessment was based on the following components: relief, vegetation, water, as well as man-made component.
 These indicators were assessed by a four-point system [1].
Despite different opinions, the two directions of aesthetic evaluation do not contradict each other ․ they differ in scale, depth և level.
  If the assessment has the problem of identifying the leisure preferences of different categories of tourists, then in our opinion it is more expedient to use a subjective approach.
  And in case of revealing the most attractive areas, rational planning of the organization of environmental, agricultural, rural activities, evaluation for the purpose of settling, an objective evaluation is effective.
 Subjective assessment methods in this case are of a complementary nature.
Recently, it is more expedient to use a complex methodology, which includes the mentioned two approaches [3, 4, 5].
  The objective-subjective evaluation results in such works are very little different from each other.
There are many evaluation attempts in lowland countries.
  Aesthetic assessment of mountain landscapes is difficult because the assessment factors and their comparison features increase.
  As the methodology of subjective assessment is almost the same in all works (due to the peculiarities of the area there are differences in objective assessment experiments), we tried to develop a classification of objective factors և indicators և of mountain landscapes առանձն separation ՝ by the example of Syunik region.
Taking into account the peculiarities of the natural conditions of Syunik region, D. The methodologies of objective evaluation used in the works of Dirini, Eringis, and Budrunas, as well as the rules of harmony accepted in aesthetics, were singled out, classified as the factors of objective evaluation of the aesthetic property of the landscape, giving their evaluation scale (Table 1).
ReliefEvaluation factors
Absolute Height Horizontal Fracture Vertical FractureSurfacePlanageUp to 1000m
1000-1700m:
1700-2400m:
2400-3200m
3200 եի more
Up to 0․5
3․5 և more
up to 200
800 և more
up to 10:
45 և more
Cherry Price:
OrientationVegetation TypeVegetation DegreeNorth
hs-arl, hs-arm
armtyan, arelyanyanv-arl, hv-arm
South:
Phryganoid
steppe
Xerophil sparse forest, meadow-steppe Low alpine
Forest, alpine gorgermanch և 15
85 և more
Aquatic objects
PollutedContaminatedPure VegetationPresence of Natural Special Objects FaucetMountaineering ObjectsApropence of Anthropogenic ObjectsPositively Impacted ObjectsՋNew
Snow spots
Mountain peak
Karst caveVolcanic cone
Rock exposureEarth pile
Object-reservoir of historical-cultural-aesthetic significance
contaminated, clean, contaminated canal
Mining
Industry items Negatively impacted objectsIndustrial
Waste-water power plant Residential village
CityTableTable 1. Factors of aesthetic assessment of mountain landscapes անդscale Relief is the primary component that determines the overall appearance of the landscape միջ is considered the core of the composition [5].
 During the aesthetic assessment of the relief, indicators such as the absolute height of the place, the position of the slopes, the slope, the horizontal և vertical division were used.
  From an aesthetic point of view, deeper և three-dimensional views open up, giving rise to the linear appearance of the structural components of the landscape.
  Slope positioning enhances lighting dynamics.
 The southern, south-eastern, south-western slopes are considered to be the brightest and warmest in Syunik region.
  The northern, northeastern and northwestern slopes are cold and shady.
 The slope of the surface determines the magnitude of the horizontal աձ vertical angle of perception of the landscape.
  Vertical horizontal division increases the attractiveness of the surface.
Horizontal fragmentation expresses the spatial rhythm of the place.
Vegetation is considered to be the main component of creating an aesthetic-psychological image.
 As evaluation indicators we suggest the type of vegetation և the degree of vegetation.
  Forest landscapes are highly valued.
  The optimal amount of forest cover is 30-60%, because in this case panoramas are formed.
 The landscape becomes uniform.
 Nalpyangorgs are taken as an attractive type of vegetation, as the flowers have a symmetrical and nuclear structure in accordance with the rules of harmony.
In the group of separate factors we have included the presence of natural special objects և quality.
 These are: • Availability of water facilities և quality ․ The presence of lakes, waterfalls and large rivers, snow spots is assessed.
 Water bodies not only enrich the landscape, saturate the color palette, create additional recreational opportunities, increasing the attractiveness of the landscapes.
  Polluted water bodies reduce the aesthetic value of the area, affecting human psychology.
• Existence of mountaineering objects (mountain peaks, volcanic cones, caves, rock exposures).
  The mountain peaks and volcanic cones have a centrifugal structure մեծ a large circular horizon ոն horizon.
Aesthetically valuable landscapes, first of all, must be distinguished by a high degree of natural state, with a low saturation of secondary elements.
  Therefore, we propose to assess the presence of anthropogenic objects, which are divided into two parts: • Objects with positive impact: objects of historical, cultural and aesthetic significance, clean reservoirs and canals.
  By this is understood the harmonious and balanced interaction of human nature, where human nature comes into contact with each other through a variety of cultural and ecological means of activity.
 The cultural-landscape always meets the high aesthetic requirements.
• Objects with negative impact: mining points, industrial waste, hydropower nodes, rural-urban areas.
In most of the studied works, the evaluation was done on a scale of 0-3 points, but taking into account the great diversity of natural conditions in Syunik region, it is recommended to do it on a scale of 0-5 points.
In addition to the point assessment, a value assessment was also carried out through the selection of expert weighting coefficients.
 As a result of the integration of private assessments, the following formula is obtained to determine the degree of landscape aesthetics (LAN), where n are the observed factors in points, n is the number of factors, and n is the corresponding weight coefficients.
The spatial modeling and mapping tools available in the ArcGIS software environment make it possible to obtain an aesthetic spatial image of the landscapes of Syunik region using the integrated formula of the LGU.
Thus, it is obvious that for each region, along with the general approaches, specific assessment methods must be developed, as the properties of the landscapes in different natural complexes դրանց their value in terms of population are very different.
 And this system of evaluation we offer can fully reflect the degree of aesthetic attractiveness of Syunik region.
LITERATURE [1] Martirosyan L., Aesthetic evaluation of the landscapes of the Lake Sanaa basin ագր mapping for recreational development, Yerevan, 2014, YSU Scientific Bulletin, pp. 41-6.
shaft.
 methodological review, Report on the Altaic State University [5] Nikolaev V. A Landscaping.
 Aesthetics and design.
 Learning. пособие, Москва, ланшафтов эго Дальнего Востока, Владивосток.
 Dalyanuka, 1995, p. 140. [10] Fines K., Landscape Evaluation.
 a Research Project in East-Sassux, Regional Studies, of Mountain Regions.
 Modeling the aesthetic value, Journal of Ecological Indicators 2016, Yeghiazaryan Armenuhi AESTHETIC ASSESSMENTS OF MOUNTAIN LANDSCAPES Keywords: landscape aesthetics, objective approach, subjective approach, methodology, methodology.
