EVALUATION OF BETAIN ANTI-MUTENGIC PROPERTIES IN KCL-22 CELLS DNA-COMET METHOD Introduction.
  Environmental pollution is a serious problem due to various mutagenic factors.
 Both artificial and natural chemical compounds are known, which exhibit carcinogenic and mutagenic properties and are potentially dangerous to human health (Belogolovskaya, 2002).
 One of the main approaches to reduce the harmful effects of mutagens is the use of compounds with antitumor properties.
  In addition, compounds lacking their own mutagenicity are selected as potential antigens.
Although antimutagenic properties have been described for many compounds, their application in practice is still limited.
  From a safety point of view, the use of natural antimutagens is more appropriate.
  The latter is classified as the basic one.
  Betaine is the trimethyl derivative of glycine, trimethylglycine or trimethylaminoacetic acid.
 Beta is the natural metabolite of choline, a biochemical component of the methionine-homocysteine ​​cycle (Biggers et al., 1993).
  Beta sources of food are spinach, cereals, seafood, wine, beets, etc.
  Beta is used in medicine as a hepatoprotector-cardioprotector.
Betaine is a donor of methyl groups [Becker et al., 2005].
 DNA methylation is a means of epigenetic regulation of the genome.
  Violation of DNA methylation can lead to genetic instability, aging, as well as cancer.
  The importance of beta for DNA methylation is not ruled out.
Studies on the antimutagenic properties of beta are limited.
 Betaine has been shown to have a pronounced in vitro և in vivo ability to reduce the clastogenic effects of protoxidants (free radical generators) և alkylating mutagens.
 In vitro (in human blood lymphocytes) և in vivo (in the blood cells of mice), betaine in non-alcoholic beer has been shown to reduce the level of chromosomal abnormalities induced by γ-expression (Monobeet et al., 2005).
The DNA comet method is widely used to evaluate antimutagenic compounds, which is a fast-sensitive method for assessing DNA damage in single cells (Olive and Banáth, 2006).
  The method allows the detection of single-stranded or double-stranded DNA fragments, loci sensitive to the environment, DNA sutures, as well as cleavages in the intermediate stages of repair in individual cells.
 In a number of studies, the antimutagenic properties of various compounds have been evaluated by DNA comet method (Panayiotidis and Collins, 1997; Undeger et al., 2004).
In the evaluation of antimutagenic compounds, standard mutagens are used, the mechanisms of action of which are known, in particular, mitomycin C.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the antimutagenic potential of beta in mitomycin C-treated KCL-22 cells by DNA comet method.
Materials և methods.
  Tested compounds.
  The KCL-22 cell line, which is a culture of human lymphoblasts for chronic myeloid leukemia, was initially developed with three concentrations of beta: 0.01, 0.1 և 1 mg / ml for 24 hours, and then with mitomycin C for 2 hours (1 μg). .
DNA comet method.
 The method-based version of DNA comets was used in the work (Singh et al., 1988).
 150 cells were analyzed in each version.
  The images of the DNA comets (Figure 1) were recorded with a camera (Variocam, PCO, Germany), the data were processed and analyzed with the help of Comet Assay IV (Version 4.3) software.
The statistical analysis of the obtained results was performed with the help of "STATGRAPHICS Plus 5.1" program using "Mann-Whitney" (U test) test.
 The difference was considered significant at p <0.05.
Results և discussion.
  The level of DNA damage was assessed according to 3 indicators: comet tail length, comet tail DNA content և tail moment.
  The results of the research are presented in Table 1 և Figure 1.
Betaine at a concentration of 0.01 mg / ml, according to all the parameters of the comets, reliably reduced the level of DNA damage compared to the controller (p <0.05).
 Betaine at a concentration of 0.1 mg / ml significantly reduced the level of DNA damage compared to the comet tail length parameter compared to the controller (p <0.05).
  Betaine at 1 mg / ml did not alter DNA damage compared to the control level.
Mitomycin C significantly increased the level of DNA damage compared to the controller by two parameters: comet tail DNA content տոկոս tail moment (p <0.05).
Betaine (0.01 և 1 mg / ml) significantly reduced the level of mitomycin C-labeled DNA damage by all parameters (p <0.05).
Betaine (0.1 mg / ml) reduced mitomycin C-labeled DNA damage by only two parameters (percentage of DNA in the comet tail և tail moment; p <0.05).
Figure 1. Images of DNA comets ․ 1. Control (KCL-22 cells), 2. Mitochondrial C-treated KCL-22 cells, 3. Betaine (0.01 mg / ml) և Mitomycin C-treated KCL-22 cells.
Levels of DNA damage in beta և mitomycin C (MMC) -induced KCL-22 cells Table 1. Processing Options Comet tail length DNA% tailComplet tail momentMid ± st. WrongMedia իջ MedianSt. WrongMedium ± St. ErrorMedianControlBeta (0.01 mg / ml) Beta (0.1 mg / ml) Beta (1 mg / ml) MMC (1 μg / ml) Beta (0.01 mg / ml) + MMC (1 μg / ml) Beta (0.1 mg / ml) + MMC (1 μg / ml) Beta (1 mg / ml) + MMC (1 μg / ml) a - p <0.05 compared with controller * - p <0.05 compared with variants treated with mitomycin C Thus, the data obtained indicate that beta is effective in KCL-22 cells from the genotoxic effect of mitomycin C.
  In vitro data on the antitumor properties of beta are consistent with in vitro (in vivo data (Durnev et al., 2009; Monobe et al., 2005) են allow beta to be considered as a promising human protection against environmental mutagens.
Literature Chemical Mutagenesis. In.
  “Genotoxicity.
  Evaluation, Testing and Prediction », Editors.
5. Olive P., Banáth J. The comet assay.
 a method to measure DNA damage in individual cells. Angela Sargsyan, Anna Simonyan, Galina Hovhannisyan.
