Agrarian advisory services provide knowledge և information to those engaged in agricultural activities on issues related to the organization and management of agricultural production, as well as the introduction of new technologies.
 Moreover, these services come in different organizational and legal forms (state, private, cooperative-non-governmental organizations) 1.
Due to the economic reforms implemented in the agricultural sector in recent years, the need for consulting has increased.
  As a result, measures taken with the support of the state and donor organizations contributed to the establishment of relations between various consulting services, including those engaged in a large number of agricultural activities, and, consequently, to the marketing of consulting.
In this article we have set a task to study the consulting marketers, in particular, the results of the activities of the consulting services, the factors hindering the establishment of the consulting market ավորել to substantiate the development opportunities.
At present, in addition to state consulting services, a number of private non-governmental organizations have been formed in the Republic of Armenia, which are presented in the table according to their functions, organizational and legal status.
lev et al.
 In order. V.M. Kosheleva. M.
 Published by KolosS, 2007, 271 p. Table 1. The main organizations providing advisory services to support regional centers 1 Company anvanumeKazmakerpairavakankargavichakeGortsaruytnereGyughatntesutyan (10 regions, each) of kentronAgrobiznesi yevgyughi support the development of agriculture, particularly marzayingyughatntesutyan service kentronnerHrashk aygiAroghj aygiArtagroAgroinputKanach arahetShenbaregortsakanPBEPBEHimnadram, himnadramimasnachyugherSPESPESPESPEHKHK- basic needs reveals
  The main reason for this is that the latter provide other services besides providing consulting services.
  Thus, the Agribusiness և Rural Development Center, depending on the specialization of the region, provides veterinary և veterinary services, sells inputs և equipment.
 Thus, by carrying out artificial insemination, it also provides the necessary advice in that area.
  It is noteworthy that such services are provided on a paid basis.
In addition to public և private services, consulting in the field is provided by individuals և NGOs.
  NGOs mainly operate through grant programs.
Research shows that the market for consulting services is gradually developing in Armenia, and competition is emerging between the established structures, which in itself will lead to the improvement of the quality of consulting.
 However, there is another problem here, which negatively affects the quality of counseling.
  There is no law regulating the sphere, according to which the natural and legal person who will have the relevant permit will provide advice.
  In many cases, NGOs provide low-quality advice through grant programs, the negative result of which leads to a decrease in trust in the board, such as a downgrade of the overall consulting services.
Our research shows that public-private organizations are in an unequal competitive field.
  The public services mainly provide free consultations, performing state-funded budget financing, while the private services provide paid consultations.
  In fact, in the case of the same functions, they are in unequal competitive conditions.
  In order to solve the problem in this regard, it is necessary to develop mechanisms for state support of consulting services in the near future.
 The experience of leading countries, where the method of public procurement tenders is used, can be a basis for making sound decisions.
  A tender is announced արդյունքում as a result of the tender the money is provided to the structure that can implement that program more effectively1.
 At the same time, it is necessary to set up a monitoring group, which will conduct systematic monitoring from time to time, will reveal deviations, so that such shortcomings are not allowed in the future.
At present, the consulting information system of the Republic of Armenia is in the stage of reforms.
 Moreover, trainings will be organized not only for state, but also for consultants and specialists of private non-governmental organizations2.
 We are convinced that such measures should be implemented regularly, in a systematic way, which will strengthen the capacity of private consulting services.
  At the same time, it should be regulated by the state և be in the center of state attention, as some of those engaged in agriculture use the advice provided by these organizations.
For this purpose, the studies conducted by local and international experts within the framework of the mentioned program have led to the conclusion that the development of consulting and information provision through information technologies will provide great demand and accessibility in the market of consulting services.
  In EU countries, telephone and internet consultations and information are the means of responding quickly to climate change.
  In this regard, the creation of powerful information and consulting databases is very important, which will allow providing fast information to a large number of economic entities.
In general, studying the market of consulting services, it was found that the development of the market is hindered by the following main factors: անկ Imperfection of the legal field բաց Lack of evaluation system ցածր Low level of competition in the sector ցածր Low level of income of farmers ցածր Low level of information use through information technologies.
In this regard, based on the results of studies, we propose: 1. Develop և adopt the RA Law on Regulation of Agricultural Advisory Services, which will allow regulating all relations - organizational, financial, functional, etc.
 According to this law, advice will be provided by a natural or legal person who has a relevant permit. Organize a public procurement tender, as studies show that a number of private organizations are more efficient than some MASCs. When organizing consultants' training courses, select topics related to market research or business management, which will enable the provision of paid services in the future, 4. Provide mass consultations with the development of information technology tools.
 Mass methods will be especially effective when responding quickly to weather changes.
Ira Panosyan A FEW QUESTIONS FOR THE MARKET DEVELOPMENT OF AGRICULTURAL CONSULTING SERVICES Keywords: consulting services, market, those engaged in agricultural activities, competition.
