SCIENTIFIC-EDUCATIONAL ISSUES IN GAREGIN HOVSEPYANJI REPAIR PROGRAMS. Hovsepyants in his articles, in his sermons, and rather sharply criticized the activities of the schools of the time, the seminary, but like Karapet Ter-Mkrtchyan, only S. Etchmiadzin was in charge of the renovation of the Armenian people և church revival.
Considering the school one of the main veins of the nation, G. Hovsepyants paid special attention to the issues of the Mother See Congregation, in general, the education of the caring class.
  The pastors and high-ranking clergymen of the church are leaving the Congregation, the knowledgeable preachers of the church, theologians and scholars must leave here. "To reorganize this Congregation with educated, knowledgeable, capable people according to the requirements of the time, to turn the seminary of the Mother See into a high school, to train special teachers, spiritual and secular, who have the knowledge to develop national and ecclesiastical sciences, to make the center of progress with the Mother See" 1 .
Գ. Hovsepyants, describing in detail the deplorable state of the Congregation, the reckless behavior of high-ranking clergymen, the lack of awareness of one's calling, noted that people who held positions of authority should have the appropriate training, skills and mental capacity.
 He called on the Congregation to restore its former moral authority in order to play an influential role.
  He connects that authority with the superiority of reason and science. High titles and positions are not enough to be the leader of the people's progress and salvation, but it is necessary to combine moral worth, science, education with the position, if we do not want instead of love 1 Hovsepyan G., Armenian Patriarchal See, "Ararat", January, Etchmiadzin, 1908, p. 33.
to reap contempt ”2.
 He points out the fruitless activity of the seminary, which could not meet the demands of the time. "They are hindered by the completely liberal, irresponsible situation of young student deacons, the separation from Etchmiadzin over the years, the absolute indifference of the careful government, the wrong opinion of the society and the mood towards the news.
  Various strange ideas, clothed in a revolutionary cloak, stirred up turbulent currents in some of the young devotees, and renounced the monasticism of ready forces, "whose presence and cooperation would certainly give a different form to the Congregation."
Referring to the ancient ecclesiastical special class, he noted that the talent and conviction of the preacher alone are not enough to provide a moral description for the masses and hundreds. The preacher must be well acquainted with the phenomena and demands of social and civilized life.
  The Mother See must have a scientific authority.
  It is not about the higher or at least the seminary science that the vardapet receives, but about the specialist of science.
  The Congregation should be devoted only to the cultivation of science, education in foreign universities; that work should be respected, valued, and considered as high as the high positions of the Church.
The authority of the church demands that it have a class of its specialized theologians, Armenologists and archeologists.
  It is no longer possible to preach Christianity in the traditional way. In this way it is not audible to the people, especially to the developed class, which plays an influential role in the church.
Each time has its own language and concepts that relate to religious truths.
  And that language can give us science, for which it becomes imperative to form groups of theologians and Armenologists in the church, who will always have the title of devoting themselves to science, will critically study the sources of our faith: Old and New Testaments, 2 Hovsepyants G., Etchmiadzin Congregation, "Arar" , Etchmiadzin, 1908, page 142.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ghazaryan Kh., Reform Initiatives in the Armenian Apostolic Church in the last quarter of the 19th century դ In the first half of the 20th century, S. Etchmiadzin, 1999, pp. 53-55.
General և The history of our church, the religion.
When it comes to the priesthood, his critical attitude goes to extremes, calling them ignorant of their own teaching material.
 He insists that they should be the diligent military of the church, whose weapon would be the diligence and faith that the priests of his time lacked.
 In this regard, he notes that "how can the church serve a sublime title in the hands of such ministers? In such a difficult historical period, it is difficult to make improvements at once, but it is not impossible, it is necessary to work consistently; the church's resignation, the church falls, the people drown." In the sea of ​​religious indifference, all kinds of immorality, which is more dangerous for the future of the nation than hunger and sword ”5.
Գ. Hovsepyants did not intend to attribute responsibility to certain individuals for the reforms that had not yet taken place.
  According to him, it would be necessary as a result of the domestic process6.
The idea of ​​a pure, reborn living national church, according to G. Hovsepyants, refined, crystallized և can give a deep residue in our soul և consciousness when we study the past.
 This unshakable rock can establish our caring independence և ensure existence in eternity.
  He sees the existence and preservation of the Armenian's continuity only in the church, which must follow the imperative of time, giving a special place to the worthy education of the clergy.
Գ. Hovsepyan had a special attitude towards school pedagogy.
 In his opinion, the school is the vestibule of the church.
 This expression, which gained the power of the word of God, was the subject of his constant concern.
  He insisted that no matter how much the ways and methods of the educational system change, the idea is still inseparable from the church. "We owe most of the good that we have inherited to the monastic schools, vardapetaran and vardapets."
Speaking about education և schools, G. Hovsepyants was a supporter 5 Hovsepyan G., The method of electing priests, "Ararat", February, Etchmiadzin, 1900, page 143.
6 Ghazaryan Kh., Note work., page 79.
7 Hovsepyan G., Towards light և life, Antelias, 1986, page 108.
The reforms, the implementation of which had become imperative for the Armenian Church.
 In his articles on schools, he presented the disturbances of the current educational processes.
 Denouncing the role of schools in the preservation and development of the church, the people, he sadly stated that in that period they had turned into a Babylonian mess, dominated by arbitrariness, student tyranny, party struggles, fundamentally disrupted the normal course of educational processes, every step was directed against the church.
 He called his "Armenian Church 1906" The article painfully records the ununited, indifferent and cold attitude of the people towards the church.
  When the Russian government imposed temporary rules on the Armenian Church, the only achievement was the opening of closed schools that needed improvement.
  However, there were political strikes in schools, artificial movements were formed, and perversions of the generation took place.
 This chaotic situation prevailed not only in the diocesan schools but also in the seminary.
 The Catholicos' conclave, which was aimed at developing programs regulating the teaching process of diocesan schools and seminaries, was not implemented.
 In this respect, the example of Hovnanyan school is very descriptive, where the requirements of the kondak were not fulfilled.
  In Sukhumi, the final exams of the academic year were abolished, as well as the church and imperial holidays. Only one day off per week was set.
  A similar phenomenon was observed in the schools of Akhaltsikhe, Alexandropol and Shushi.
  By the way, the riots had reached the classrooms of the lyceum.
  "Should we allow the church to reach the same condition?"
  If not, then the ecclesiastical schools should be in a position to be able to serve their true purpose, because not only do the schools contribute to the spread of religious-moral ideas among the people, but they are also a source for the growing development and life of the church.
"Schools must prepare the ground for the development of national ecclesiastical sciences, for the study and mastery of high Christian knowledge."
  At the heart of such a situation he saw the impact of the Russian Revolution, the party struggle, as well as the lack of care of the administration, the practice of remaining silent and inappropriate, and in some cases, such a mess. 130-131.
incitement.
 According to G. Hovsepyants has "rules կրթ education օրենք upbringing laws և rules, which is based on psychology.
 The youths, who were solving serious political and pedagogical problems in an instant, considering themselves their perfect master-principal, allowed them to commit all kinds of unforgivable crimes, and finally it must be found out whether the elementary school should be used in our schools to fight against revolutionary political parties. it is not. ”9
He puts the task of restoring and regulating schools on the shoulders of the supreme authority, which should be the director and supervisor of schools with the law and the obligation of historical life.
  He likens the careless attitude towards this case to betrayal, proposes the creation of a new central body, which would be an assistant to the Patriarch, dealing with the regulation of schools and educational processes.
Thus, referring to the problems of education, G. Hovsepyants called for: - to have appropriate humility and ecclesialism. To ensure an adequate level of education; - not to create educational systems by ignorant imitations of foreigners; Concentrate all scientific forces in the Mother See.
To this day, quite G. On. The words with Hovsepyants. "We have a war not against weapons or persecution, but against a terrible enemy of another kind, called the spirit of indifference to national heritage, the stubborn spirit of dichotomy, which seeks to distinguish the secondary from the strong, the wrong and the true."
9 Ibid., Pp. 132-133.
SCIENTIFIC AND EDUCATIONAL ISSUES GAREGIN HOVSEPYANTS REFORM ANNA Marmarian PROGRAMS Keywords: reform, educational system, vardapetaranes, education և upbringing, pedagogy, methodologySummary.
