PHENOTYPTIC FEATURES OF GREEN TOED IN RA FOREST EUROPEAN GREENS
  There are some sources in the literature on the prevalence, morphology and karyology of the green toad in Armenia (Martirosyan, Stepanyan, 2003; Yeghiazaria, 2008; Arakelyan, 2011; Stepanyan, others 2011).
  However, no comprehensive inter-species-intra-species study has been conducted in Armenia.
The aim of the work is to study the changes in the colors of the body colors of green toads, as well as sexual dimorphism in Armenia.
Working material և methods.
The study was conducted on 52 individuals of green toads, which were caught in 2014-2015 from the forested areas of the Republic of Armenia (near Teghut village, Northern Armenia near the Davit-Bek Reservoir, Southern Armenia), mountain-steppe area (near Alapars village, Central Armenia).
  The coloring of the back of the green toad և the belly spots վել was studied.
  According to our Mu "Murat Tosunglu" studies, green toads are grouped according to the variety of spots on the back գուն 6 morphotypes: "Maculata" (M) has large spots on the body, "Punctata" (P) - similar spots on the body, "Striata »(S) - there is a longitudinal line in the back, on the body M + P there are large-small spots on the body at the same time, S + M + P - along with small-large spots on the body there is a longitudinal line on the back, S + M - on the body At the same time there are large spots և longitudinal line.
The results of the study.
Studies have shown that sexual dimorphism of male females in green toads is manifested by a variety of spots on the back.
  Four phenotypes were found in females: brown, grayish-white, reddish-gray և reddish-brown.
  In females, in the forest areas, a high percentage of eczema (M + P) is complex morphine, and in the foothills (M) morphine (Table 1, Figure 1).
  In one of the forest zones, Teghut, the brown-ash-whitish form is high, and the Davit-Bekum red-gray-red-brown phenotypes.
  In the foothills, all morphs are evenly distributed (Table 1, Figure 1).
Among the males, 4 phenotypes were found: dark green, gray-green, ash-green և yellow-green.
  Dark green makes up a high percentage in forest areas, and yellow-green phenotype in mountain-steppe zone.
 In all populations of males studied, the high percentage of complex morphine (M + P) is high, while striata is high in the northern forest zone and low in the central and southern zones.
The presence of spots on the abdomen was found near the toads.
 The presence of spots in forest areas is high, and the absence of spots in the mountain-steppe zone.
  Abdominal coloring has a dark gray color in forest areas, and light body color in mountain-steppe.
Brown (female) Gray-white reddish-gray reddish-brown Dark green (male) Gray green Green Ash Yellow Throat + Abdominal Abdominal 1/2 Spots Table 1. Presence of all morphs of the green toad in percentage, per annum.
TeghutAlaparsDavid-Bek Figure 1. Presence of all morphs of green toad in 3 studied populations (forest և mountain-steppe zones).
Conclusion.
In the populations of the northern (Teghut) և southern (Davit-Bek) forest zones of Armenia, the green toad is more dark in color, in the central mountain-steppe zone (Alapars) - more light in color.
In the studied populations are found mainly the toads of the green toad "Punctata", "Maculata" և "Striata".
 M + P morphine is found in all populations in high percentage, and S + M + P is found in high percentage only in forest zones (Teghut, Davit-Bek), and is absent in the foothills (Alapars).
In the forest zones (Teghut, Davit-Bek) the variety of color images of the belly և spots make up a high percentage among males, while females have a weak expression of traces բաց light body color.
  In the foothills (Alapars), the male's light-colored traces գուն weakly expressed traces make up the highest percentage.
In the forest zones (Teghut, Davit-Bek) the highest percentage of eczema is the presence of spots on the abdomen and throat, and the lowest percentage is the absence of spots.
  In the foothills (Alapars) 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% TeghutAlaparsDavid-Bek MaculataPunctataStriataS + M + P Brown (female) Gray-white-red-gray-red-brown-green-green-green-dark green-green (dark-green) There are two types of images: only the abdomen 1/ 1/2 of the abdomen.
Sexual dimorphism of males and females was found near the green toad, which is expressed by the color of the back and the variety of spots.
 Literature 1769 (Anura.
  Bufonidae) .// Material of the International Scientific Conference, 26-29NKR ”// Materials of the IV Republican Youth Sci. Conf. XXI Century.
  Ecological Science in5. Murat Tosunglu, 1999. Bufo viridis (Anura.
 Bufonidae) Populasyonlar ›ÜzerindeMorfolojik, Astghik GorgyanGEN PHENOTYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF GREEN DODOSH IN THE RA FOREST AND MOUNTAIN-GRAZE ZONES: in Armenia, keywords d.
