THE ARTISTIC REPRESENTATION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE IN FRANZ WERFELI'S NOVEL "THE FORTY DAYS OF MOUNTAIN MOUNTAIN"
About the massacres of Armenians F. Werfel had read in the newspapers while working in the Austro-Hungarian press office in Vienna, and the idea of ​​creating the novel, as he writes in the book's preface, came to him in 1929, when he was in Damascus, seeing the misery and tragic situation of Armenian refugee children.
The text of the book was published in 1932. from July to 1933 March.
 For more than three years, Werfel devoted himself to the study of the material, got acquainted with the history and culture of the Armenian people, the documents of the First World War, talked to the people who survived the massacres.
  But he did not resort to the description of exile and massacre, but found the heroic in the Genocide to interpret the "incomprehensible fate of the Armenian people" and to create its morally caring image1.
His intention to write the novel was further strengthened by the National Socialists, who preached anti-Semitism in Germany, coming to power in Austria.
  With this book, Franz Werfel wanted to protest against racial-Jewish discrimination.
  He saw similarities between the destinies of Jews and Armenians and thought that growing anti-Semitism would make them worthy of the destiny of Armenians.
 To prevent that danger, F. Werfel wanted to show the Germans the way of the suffering of the Armenians.
Famous lyricist, internationally recognized novelist F. Werfel was born in Prague in 1890 to a Jewish merchant family.
  He received his higher education at the universities of Leipzig and Hamburg.
 Since the 1910s. From the second half, Werfel published essays and verse pages.
  1920s He traveled to the East, visited Egypt, Syria, interacted with Armenian deportees who miraculously survived the Armenian Genocide, participated in the movement in favor of Haydat in Europe, and delivered lectures.
 1938 After the occupation of Austria he moved to France, in 1940 to the USA (California).
 He entered the literary arena as a poet, publishing the poems "Friend of the World" (1911), "We Are" (1913), "For a Friend" (1915), "Judgment Day" (1919) collections depicting the horrors of war.
Franz Werfel has been studying Armenian literature, history, mythology and art for weeks in the archives of the Library of the Mekhitarist Congregation in Vienna.
During the writing of the novel, Werfel used eyewitness testimonies, news materials, where the history, religion and culture of the Armenian people were studied.
  The novel "The Forty Days of Musa" was first published in 1933. Recently, it has been translated into many languages, republished many times, screened, and has served as a basis for staging and music.
 Translated into Armenian twice, in 1935. (E. Andreasyan) և 1964 (P. Mikayelyan).
The novel "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh" occupies a special place in Werfel's works.
  It is based on accurate facts and events.
  In the novel, Werfel gave a documentary picture of the situation of the Armenians during the siege of Musa Dagh and the struggle against the Turkish troops.
  The basis for the work was 1915. The heroic struggle of the Armenians of the Cilician Sweden region.
 When the local Turkish authorities tried to exist 1 Werfel F., The Forty Days of Musa Dagh, Yerevan, 1964, p. 5.
After the deportation of the Armenians, the Armenians decided to resist, climbed Mount Musa, where they organized self-defense, successfully repelling the Turkish troops.
  The rural communities under the leadership of the clergy knew that their forced exile to the desert meant death by starvation and thirst.
  The decision to resist the inaccessible mountain was the last resort.
  Franz Werfel was able to depict the fate of these people artistically.
The key hero of the novel "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh" is Gabriel Bagratyan.
 He is the collective image of the Armenian people.
  Gabriel Bagratyan was from the village of Yogonoluk in the Swedish region, the son of a large family.
  He went to Paris with his parents, studied at a French school, then graduated from the Sorbonne University, became an archaeologist, art theorist and philosopher.
  Bagratyan had married a French woman, being a self-contained person, he avoided everything that did not concern his family life.
  With his scientific work, Bagratyan is gradually being cut off from the Armenian reality, from the worries of Armenian life.
  After a twenty-three-year absence, Bagratyan returns to his native village with his wife and son, Stepan, to take care of his father's inheritance after his brother's death and to spend his summer vacation.
 The war begins, բոլոր all the ways to return to Paris are closed.
 Bagratyan did not want to take part in the war, to fight against France, with which he was connected with his conscious life.
  He thought of living in his native village until the end of the war.
  Bagratyan's French wife, Juliet, felt well in her garden of a beautiful mansion; she had no desire to leave, and her son, Stepan, was begging to stay in the homeland.
  Stepan gladly went to an Armenian school, wore a national costume, surprising his mother.
  The diversity of human characters is remarkable: peasants, craftsmen, intellectuals, all of them people of peaceful work, who were forced to take up arms only by the threat of mass destruction.
The most important sources of the novel were the reports of Johannes Lepsius.
  Lepsiusna և is presented in the novel, the hero of the two epic scenes, which Werfel called in the first-second books "The Gods' Mid-Game".
 This title seems romantic. "The heroes of Homer were fighting around the Scythian Gate, each of them was saying that the reason for the victory or defeat was his weapon.
 Meanwhile, the wrestling of the heroes was only a reflection of the struggle that the gods called for help were pushing over their heads to decide the fate of the people.
  But the gods did not even know that their clash was only a reflection under the breast of the Most High, a war that had already ended long ago, whether peace or disaster came from the heart of the Lord.
Such an interpretation of the events անձ events presented in Chapter 5 in advance is a brilliant comparison.
 The reader already anticipates that the intervention of the great German-Armenian pro-Armenian Johannes Lepsius will not achieve his goal, that his efforts will be in vain to prevent the massacre of the Armenian people.
 In this scene, the author gives a picture of Enver և Talaat's secret plots.
  Lepsius, president of the German Eastern Congregation, forces these two leaders to betray their intentions. "Mr. Lepsius, we will carry out the policy based on our interests to the end.
 Only one power that is above all interests can block our way.
  If you accidentally find such power in the diplomatic calendar, you can come to the ministry once again ”2.
Lepsius is a truly heroic figure, if the hero is the individual who always dares to resist the unjust, excellent power under the threat of threatening his own person.
  Nadim is Enver. "Empower me to organize the caravans of exiles.
  God bless me, and no one has my experience.
  I will get all the necessary funds myself.
  All German-American aid companies are behind me.
 I once did a great job with benefits.
 I managed to establish many orphanages and hospitals.
 Despite the war, I will do the same և even more ”3.
Enver Pasha is a representative of the state to Werfel, who pursues the principle that even the supposed danger is enough to destroy a stateless nation 1 Werfel F., p. 128.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P.
minority.
 The image of Enver Pasha presented by Werfel is like a ruthless, ruthless and indifferent leader.
  The author expresses his negative attitude towards Enver Pasha while describing his image. "With such a small and ugly, two-row shiny medals hanging from his chest, he left the impression of a light-minded young man, a man of courage.
 "The gypsy baron," Lepsius thought.
 Lepsius և Enver Pasha's debate can be perceived as a debate between "nationalism", the belief in the equality of all human beings.
Franz Werfel's attitude towards the Turks is clearly seen in the episode when the main character of the novel, Gabriel Bagratyan, leaves for Antioch to demand the "theses" (passports).
 From this point of view, the description of the Turkish court is remarkable. "There was a low-ranking official sitting in front of an empty desk, who was whispering in his mouth, looking forward with a careless look.
 An entire legion of flies gave its wild, terrifying concert unhindered.
  There were low benches along the walls.
  They were waiting for two souls, a Turk and an Arab villager.
 One of them, without paying attention to the disgust surrounding him, spread a wide arch on the floor and sat folded. It seemed that he could avoid pollution.
 The room was filled with the unpleasant smell of sweat, raw cigarettes, the misery of sin.
  Gabriel knew that the governments of different nations had their own smell.
 But this expression of fear and obedience is common, because small people accept the power of state power as a natural disaster ”2.
In the history of the Musa Dagh struggle, there are historical figures created by the author.
 Andreasyan is the real prototype of Aram Tovmasyan.
 His sister Iskuhi and her family are literary figures.
 On the broad basis of popular life, Franz Werfel created living and true national characters, such as Gabriel Bagratyan, Ter-Haykazun, Aram Tovmasyan, Nourhan and others.
 The life of each of them reflects the unique nature of the history of the Armenian people, the diligence, endurance and care of the people.
  The general description of the organization of the resistance corresponds to the historical reality պատմ the story of being miraculously saved.
The world is at war, but in this war another war is being waged against a minority stigmatized, persecuted, oppressed by a great state, deportations, deportations, endless humiliations, crimes and massacres, aiming to exterminate the Armenian people.
In the novel "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh" the author exposed the anti-Armenian policy of the mob of the Turkish ruling regions, the criminal acts against humanity, and praised the heroic, resistance force of the Armenian people.
The Armenians of Musa Dagh seem to live out of time.
  Victories և defeats, hopes և disappointments, anger և reconciliations, all pass quickly.
  One day - years, one night - eternity.
  It is clear that the reference is hinted at in this way.
  The besieged Armenians were not afraid of death, but of oblivion.
  Should their self-sacrifice be wasted?
  This is an alarming question that haunts their new generation.
  The Turks should have understood the greed and anger of the Armenians, whom even the right to mention is denied.
 In the tragic novel the destruction of the hero is presented quite mysteriously.
 Werfel transformed the resistance into forty days.
  It rained for forty days during the global flood, until the dove proclaimed salvation.
 For forty days the Jewish people migrated on the desert in Ararat, fasting for forty days Moses, Elijah, Christ.
  In Bagratyan's image, Werfel sees a Movsis figure on Mount Musa, and in the fate of Turkish-Armenians, he seems to hopelessly predict the revelatory fate of the Jewish minority in Germany and Eastern Europe.
In this memoir novel there is a force of inspiration and a wounded conscience that upsets the essence of every Armenian reader.
  The Armenian rural community presented here, suffering from the shocks of history beyond its means, is very close to every Armenian.
  Persecuted by death, he demands his freedom.
  Instead of a ruthless enemy company, he chooses armed resistance to liberate his man 1 Werfel F., p. 138.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Walter H., Franz Werfel's The Forty Days of Musa Dagh, Cologne, p. 111.
the honor of being.
 Being a powerful invitation to remembrance, the work is accompanied by a feeling of grief.
  From this point of view, Franz Werfel's novel "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh" is very important for all mankind.
Ruzanna Yolchyan THE ARTICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE ARMENIAN GENOCIDE FRENZ VERFELI'S NOVEL "THE FORTY DAYS OF MUSE MOUNTAIN" Keywords: massacre, self-defense, resistance, struggle, testimony, Armenian
