SOME PROBLEMS IN THE INSTITUTE OF THE RIGHT TO USE OTHER PROPERTY (UZUFRUCT) IN 2014 On November 21, 2012, the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia published the Concept of the RA Civil Code (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Code) on the introduction of provisions regulating the right to use another's property (usufruct) 1, which proposes to envisage the usufruct as a right of a person not considered an owner. In part 1 of Article 170 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, ներդր to implement the introduction of the given institute by writing articles with completely new content, thus Civil. day. introducing a completely new institute.
 Therefore, the discussion of some issues of the given institute can be discussed.
Uzufruit as a type of personal servitude was still known in Roman law.
  The person receiving the usufruct by force of usufruct, the user of the usufructuarius (usufructuarius), gained the right to use the property of another for free, including the fruits, products, income of that property, and after its termination was obliged to return the property to the owner.
  The usufructuary was given some rights of the owner to own, use, possess, use and dispose of the property, and the owner (proprietarius) retained the title and the right to dispose of the property, becoming, so to speak, "naked owner" (nuda propetas) (nuda propri).
In order to understand the essence of usufruct correctly, it is necessary to make a clear distinction between the "leasing institutions" of usufruct.
 Both, in fact, are related to the possession, use and possession of property and have many similarities.
 However, their differences are as follows: The usufruct is a property right, the lease is obligatory. With lease, a purely obligatory relationship arises between the landlord (tenant (in fact, the owner և user) և.
  The lessee is not endowed with property rights over the property, he acquires the right of net claim.
 And in the case of usufruct, the owner of the usufruct is endowed with property rights over the property, there are no contractual relations between them, but there are relations defined by law4.
  In addition, usufruct can arise both by law and under a contract, and the lease can be made only on the basis of a lease agreement.
 These are the peculiarities of the essential differences of the mentioned institutions.
Usufruct, as mentioned, is the use of property owned by another person by another person, including the use of its fruits, products, income.
  Moreover, the number one duty of the usufructuary is to preserve the property, to hand it over to the owner in the same preserved condition, without changing or damaging the property, to use it in good faith, as its owner would do.
 Therefore, he also has the right to use the property as its owner.
 It is noteworthy that under Swiss civil law, usufruct presupposes the full use of property, unless otherwise provided (Article 745), and the German Civil Code states that certain restrictions on the use of property may be imposed (Article 1030).
 We think that such a regulation does not fully express the essence of the usufruct. In Roman law, the usufructuary had the right to use all the fruits of the property in full 1 Concept on the introduction of regulatory provisions (usufruct) in the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, available at http:
//moj.am/legal/view/article/728.
2 See Puhan I., Polenak-Akimovskaya M., Roman Law (Persian with Macedonian), Moscow, 2000, p. 183.
3 See Dozhdev D., Roman Partial Law, Moscow, 1996, p. 415.
4 See de la Morandjer I., Civil Law France. Volume 2. (Persian: EA Fleitz), Moscow, 1960, page 95.
Thus, և this is the significance of the usufruct as a property right to enable a person to use the property as its owner.
  Therefore, this very principle should be considered in the basis of the institute to be introduced.
  This is enshrined, in particular, in Article 578 of the French Civil Code, which states that usufruct is the right of a person to use property belonging to another person, to receive its fruits in the same way as its owner, but with the obligation to preserve that property.
 When using the property considered to be the object of usufruct, the user must not change the property ությունը the original meaning երի show conscientious care (boni viri arbitratu) 1.
  This means that when the property is returned, it must be suitable for further use.
  This principle, known in Roman law, is one of the cornerstones of usufruct, which must be enshrined in law.
  On the other hand, there may be the issue of property maintenance costs.
  In Roman law, all costs related to the property are borne by the user for the entire period of use2. He was to carry out all the primary actions related to the protection of the property.
  As for the current situation, the Civil Code of Moldova (Article 400) ևThe French Civil Code (Article 608) states that the usufructuary is obliged to make mandatory state payments (taxes, duties), and the German Civil Code (Article 1047) speaks publicly. on the obligation to pay publiccharges.
  That is, in any case, the user is obliged to pay all the mandatory payments to the local և community budget related to the property.
 On the other hand, the concept of property costs includes insurance payments, which is mentioned, for example, in the Moldovan Civil Code. the latter states that if the property is insured, it pays all insurance payments to the usufructuary during the existence of the usufruct (Article 414).
  Moreover, under Dutch law, the usufructuary is obliged to insure the property for the benefit of the owner, and if the property is insured by the owner, to reimburse all related costs (Article 209).
 That is, if the property is not insured, the usufructuary is obliged to do so, and if it is insured, to make the payments.
  This regulation seems more acceptable, because throughout the life of the usufruct the property owns և uses the usufructuary, the owner has almost no relation to his property, therefore it is reasonable to place the obligation to insure the property on the usufructuary ինչպես from the latter's own interest.
Speaking about the property considered to be the subject of usufruct, let us mention that they can be non-consumable items. This is the essence of usufruct, to use the property, to use it while preserving its original meaning, to return it to the owner in the same condition.
And in case of using the consumed items, they, as a material value, as a material, disappear and are consumed.
  In Roman law, in the beginning, only non-consumable items could be the subject of usufruct.
  However, a decision of the Senate later stipulated that res consumptibiles could be the subject of the fruit product3.
 But it was done with reservations, because it could not be considered a usufruct in itself, it was a kind of usufruct-like use, it was considered a quasi-usufruct.
 It is noteworthy that items consumed under the German Civil Code (Article 1067) can also be subject to usufruct.
  The Code states that in that case the usufructuary becomes the owner of the property, and after the usufruct ceases he is obliged to reimburse the initial value of the property that existed at the time of the usufruct.
  We think that the definition of usufruct with regard to consumables should be considered inexpedient, not in line with the essence of the institute, because in Roman law it was considered a quasi-"so-called" usufruct.
  The content of usufruct can not be compared with consumables at all, because such items are not used, they are simply consumed, it is impossible to reap benefits from them regularly, fruits4.
 In the case of consumables, the so-called usufructuary becomes the temporary owner of the property, which 1 See Baron J., System of Roman Civil Rights, St. Petersburg, 2005, p. 418.
2 See Novitsky I., Peretersky I., Roman Partial Law, Moscow, 1996, p. 208.
3 See Puhan I., Polenak-Akimovska-M., p. 183.
4 See Baron J., p. 420.
must be returned (proprietas reditura).
  In this case, the usufruct is interpreted as a "temporary property right", which is unacceptable for this institution1.
  On the other hand, if we compare usufruct and property lease, we will notice that only the property that does not lose its natural features (non-consumable property) can be leased.
 And usufruct և rent are similar in their content.
  This also suggests that only non-consumable property can be viewed as an object of use, a use that involves reaping the benefits of it over time and returning it to its original state.
 In addition, the use of consumer goods as an object of usufruct makes this institution an institution of obligatory law, as in that respect it is identified with interest-free borrowing, the subject of which is property determined by type, or with sale with deferred payment.
As for movable and immovable property as a usufruct subject, this exception is made only by Polish legislation, which only uses real estate as a usufruct subject.
  In the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, the concept on the introduction of the institution of usufruct also considers only real estate as a usufruct object2.
  Such an offer is made in the RA city According to the concept on the introduction of usufruct in the Republic of Armenia, on the grounds that "taking into account the fact that the institution of usufruct will be newly introduced, it is unknown for the RA legal system, it is proposed at the initial stage to limit only the usufruct of real estate" 3.
  We think that the introduction of a new institute does not prevent us from viewing the object of usufruct as movable, especially taking into account the fact that usufruct is more socially oriented, and movable items are more in civil circulation.
Speaking about the usufructuary, let us mention that the analysis of the legislation of foreign countries shows that both individuals and legal entities act as such.
 In the case of individuals, the usufruct is defined, as a rule, ց terminates with the death of a person (because this is, in fact, a personal servitude), and in the case of a legal entity, it has a limited term. 30 years in Moldova, 30 years in Italy, 100 years in Switzerland.
  And before the expiration of that term, the usufruct stops in case of liquidation of the legal entity.
The issue of the status of the owner of the property that is the subject of the usufruct is also a subject of discussion.
  First of all, the owner of the property, in case of usufruct with the property, loses the right of ownership over its property, use, և its fruits.
  The owner reserves all other rights to the property. he may alienate or pledge the property, establish servitudes, but in such a way as to infringe on the rights of the usufructuary4.
 That is, in any case, the actions performed by the owner, encumbering the property with other rights should not contradict the usufructuarial interests, should not hinder his use or exploitation of the property.
 In this respect, the Moldovan Civil Code has the following regulation: The owner of the property is obliged to refrain from any action that would prevent the usufructuary from exercising his right freely, to compensate the damage caused to the usufructuary as a result of his actions resulting in a decrease in the value of the usufruct (Article 417).
 By reducing the value of the usufruct, one can understand the situation when, as a result of the owner's actions, the user is no longer able to receive the fruits, products and income in the previous volume.
The question of the inadmissibility of usufruct may also be present.
 In Roman law, the usufruct was a kind of personal servitude;
 It was not subject to inheritance. In the event of the death of the usufructuary, the usufruct ceased, and the heirs were obliged to return the property to the owner5.
  However, uzufructuarin 1 See Dozhdev D., p. 417.
2 See Lorenz D., The right to personal enjoyment (usufruct).
 Perspectives in Russia and other foreign countries ''. Вестник Южно: http.
//cyberleninka.ru/journal/n/vestnik-yuzhno-uralskogo-gosudarstvennogo-universiteta-seriya-pravo.
3 See Concept on the introduction of regulatory provisions in the RA Civil Code on the right to use another's property (usufruct).
4 See Baron J., p. 417.
5 See Puhan I., Polenak-Akimovska-M., p. 209.
the university. Series.
  Pravo, № 2 p.
 In that case, those persons acted merely as representatives of the usufructuary in their relations with third parties1.
  In any case, there could be no question of alienation of usufruct.
 Specifying the principle of usufruct inviolability, the Moldovan Civil Code states that usufruct may not be transferred by transaction or by inheritance.
 It is noteworthy that the codes of "France" and "Germany" provide for the possibility of alienation of usufruct2, which, we think, is not so acceptable.
  Usufruct is in its essence a personal servitude; it is defined towards a specific person; if that right no longer belongs to that person, it must cease.
  This is evidenced by the fact that "in Roman law," according to the modern legislation of foreign countries, the usufruct ends with the death of a person.
 In fact, the assertion that the surrender of the usufruct to another person (in iure cessio) has no legal force or leads to the termination of the usufruct is justified3.
  In this respect, we think that the example of Moldova is more acceptable, the legislation of which has preserved the principle of usufruct and enforceability established in Roman law, and at the same time allows the usufructuary to lease the usufruct property to other persons on a lease basis.
 This is a really important provision, as it allows the usufructuary to benefit more from the property entrusted to him.
Thus, in the case of the introduction of the institute of fruit and vegetables in the modern codes that began in Roman law, the issues discussed in particular must be solved first and foremost.
  In any case, the existence նորմ application նորմ of usufruct norms in the above-mentioned countries testifies to its importance,, because, unlike the use of another's property in a debt relationship, usufruct, as a property right, provides a more guaranteed, secure opportunity to use, regardless of the property owner. sometimes even against the will of the latter, thus protecting the interests of the user.
 In particular, in cases when the owner of real estate built on a plot of land belonging to another person uses that plot of land.
  In addition, its social orientation is aimed at protecting the interests of spouses, the disabled and other persons.
  The usufruct gives the opportunity to transfer the property to another person for use and possession through inheritance, donation, to endow him with his property rights, at the same time depriving the owner of his property right.
  However, on the other hand, there may be doubts about its effectiveness, the urgency of the usufruct, the existence of other similar institutions (rent, gratuitous use of property), the introduction of the ancient Roman institute in the context of developing public relations, which is, of course, the subject of separate studies.
SOMETHING PROBLEMS OF INTRODUCTION OF THE RIGHT TO USE THE INSTITUTE OF THE RIGHT TO USE THE PROPERTY (UZUFRUCT) Keywords: personal servitudes, usufruct, non-usufruct
