SPECTROSCOPIC EXAMINATION OF HIGH-RANGE ALBUMINUM ALUMINUM ALUMINUM EXPERIENCE IN THE PRESENCE OF LITHIUM PERCLORATE.
  When most proteins are dissolved in aqueous solutions, the hydrophobic bonds that support the tertiary structure of the protein are rapidly transformed into hydrophobic, ionic interactions at high temperatures [1].
  Thermal transformation of these biomolecules is a serious problem not only for their preservation, distribution, but also for the production of drugs and food.
 Stabilizers (such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), which increase the structural stability of water, are often used to minimize heat transfer.
 Inorganic salts, sugars, amino acids - the presence of water-soluble organic solvents leads to changes in the physicochemical properties of protein solutions.
 As shown in [3], the presence of such additives selectively affects ionization (the cation is greater than that of anions), which in turn affects the stability of the protein.
In this work, we present a spectroscopic study of high-temperature bovine serum albumin (LSA) in the presence of LiClO4.
 Albumin is the most common protein in blood serum.
  They can bind և transport substances of different nature, small molecules ions.
  One of these proteins is RNA, which consists of 583 amino acid residues and forms one polypeptide chain.
 The's structure (88%) is similar to that of human serum albumin (IA) է consists of 3 domains (I-III), which in turn are 2 subdomains (A և B).
  It contains 2 tryptophan residues (Trp-134 և Trp-213), of which Trp-134 is located on the ույ spiral surface and Trp-213 is located in the hydrophobic pocket [45].
Materials used և methods.
 Used SGma ('Sigma Chamical'Co. (USA), fatty acid content <0.005%), DMSO (' Sigma '> 99.5% (USA)) և LiClO4 (REAHIM ք sq. M.' Brand).
 The concentration of DMSO remained constant at 25% (v / v).
 The concentration of LCA was 4 mg / ml, and LiClO4 - 0.9%.
  Electron absorption spectra were recorded in the range of 200-500 nm using a SPECORD50PC spectrophotometer (Germany).
 The temperature was raised to 1 ° C / min at 36-83 ° C.
  The temperature in the Kuwait department was regulated with the help of a 'Lauda 100' thermostat.
  EC spectra were recorded using a NICOLET Fourier transform IC (ATR attachment) spectrophotometer.
Results և discussion.
  The electron absorption spectra of the ACM were recorded in the 200-500 nm wavelength range.
 Fig. Figure 1 shows the electron absorption spectra of DC at temperatures of 36, 70 և 830 C.
 The electronic absorption spectrum is characterized by two absorption maxima: 230 nm և 280 nm.
 Absorption at a wavelength of 230 nm produces the CO and NH groups of all-amino acid residues, and the observed absorption at a wavelength of 280 nm is due to the aromatic groups of the amino acid tryptophan, tyrosine (Pyr) and phenylalanine (Phe).
 To study the structural changes in the AC, we followed the change in the intensity of the absorption signal at a wavelength of 280 nm.
 As you can see. From 1, as the temperature rises, an increase in the intensity of the absorption signal is observed, which is due to the fact that the protein-chromophore groups become more accessible to the light beam.
  Based on the change in the values ​​of the intensity of the absorption signal depending on the temperature, the normalized transformation (melting) curve of the DCM was constructed, which is shown in Fig. In 2.
Fig. 1. Electronic clan spectra of WFD. 1. 360 C, 2. 700 C, 3. 830 C.
Fig. 2. The melting curve of the DCM. C (LCA) = 0.4 mg / ml, C (DMSO) = 25%, C (LiClO4) = 0.9%.
The melting curve of the AC is characterized by a single sigmoidal flight, which indicates that the process is in one phase և has a cooperative nature.
 The irreversible transformation temperature of the MW was determined by the midpoint of the sigmoid flight: mT = 69.2 ° C.
We used the MIC spectroscopic method to study changes in the secondary structure of the protein as a result of high temperature transformation.
  The peptide group, which is a repeating structural unit of the protein, gives 9 characteristic layers in the EC spectra, the so-called amides A, B, I, II… VII, of which amide I (1600-1700 cm -1) is the most intensive absorption.
 It is related to C = O valence fluctuation (7085%) և is directly related to the main chain conformational changes, and amide II is related to NH deformation fluctuation (40-60%) և C-N valence fluctuation (18-40%) [6]
  As a result of spectral dissolution of amide I of unchanged WFD, 5 layers are observed (see Fig. 3 (a)).
The first absorption (1686 cm-1) is attributed to the parallel β-structure, the second component is observed at 1651 cm-1, which corresponds to the α-spiral, the third (1627 cm-1) random coil, the fourth (1604 cm-1) β- structure և last fifth (1551 cm -1) aromatic rings.
Fig. 3. Fourier transform spectra of the Fourier transform of the amide I absorption layer of CCA: C (CCA) = 0.4 mg / ml, C (LiClO4) = 0.9%, C (DMSO) = 25%, a-25, b-65, c -85o C:
During the transformation, at 65o C, 6 dissolved spectra appear in the dissolved spectrum of the AC, and at 85o C, which are shown in Figs. In 3 (b) և fig. In 3 (c).
 The absorption at 1670 cm-1 may be due to the α-β transition in the protein structure [7].
 The results of quantitative analysis of some types of secondary protein structure (α-spiral, β structure) based on the surfaces of these spectra are given in the table.
Amide I clan layer Unmodified GHM Modified GHM Modified GHSm-1 Content,% cm -1 Content,% cm-1 Content,% structure α-spiral Fourier transform analysis of IC spectra.
  In aqueous solution of dimethyl sulfoxide in the presence of lithium perchlorate, the electron absorption spectroscopy of the Fourier transform's high-temperature transformation of the AC revealed that the protein is transformed in a single phase (structure α to α μ կառուց structures) quantitatively measurable change.
LITERATURE [1] Reginald GH, Grisham CM, Biochemistry (3rd ed.), Belmont, Calif.
 Brooks-ColeDiego, CA.
 Academic Press, 1996, p. 432. Serum Albumin in Solution.
 a Combined Phosphorescence Depolarization - Hydrodynamic Yeganyan TigranTSULI serum albumin BARDZRJERMASTICHANAYINBNAPOKHMAN Spectroscopic Study bovine serum albumin Keywords: LITIUMIPERKLORATI PRESENCE, bnapokhum, electronic klanmanspektroskopia, infrared spectroscopy Fourier transformation.
