CONCLUSIONS CONCERNED WITH PRE-TRIAL TIMES IN RA CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Reasonable definition of deadlines, their strict observance is one of the guarantees of the fairness and efficiency of the criminal proceedings.
  The imperative of the case within a reasonable time was reflected in the European Convention on Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), in the case law of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR), in the RA Constitution, in the RA Constitutional Court (hereinafter referred to as the CC) , as in the latter, in the new draft in circulation (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) in the precedent decisions of the RA Court of Cassation.
  Pre-investigation deadlines are included in the case investigation deadlines ունեն play a key role.
 Speaking about the terms of the preliminary investigation, we must first find out when the flow of that term begins.
  According to Article 197 of the Code, it starts from the date of the decision to initiate a criminal case, while the authors of the Draft refused to initiate the case; in this case, the time flow of examining the case of the body conducting the proceedings within the time limit begins after initiating public prosecution (Article 192). .
 Such an approach seems justified, as there is often a time lag between initiating a criminal case, "involving a person as a suspect or accused", and, in fact, the pre-trial period runs not in defense of the accused, but against the body conducting the proceedings.
 On the other hand, in the case of a criminal case, when the person who committed the crime is not known, whose rights are not violated or restricted, then it becomes inexpedient to limit the term of the body conducting the proceedings.
  The approach from the point of view of protection of individual rights also follows from the legal practice adopted by the ECHR.
  In particular, the court in the case of "Eclaine v. Germany" stated that the "reasonable time" in the criminal case starts to be calculated from the moment when the accusation is made.
  As for the moment of completion of the preliminary investigation, whether the end of the preliminary investigation under the Draft has undergone a substantive change, but the principle of determining the moment of completion in terms of time has undergone a significant change. it is considered completed in one case from the date of drawing up the relevant final act, in the other case from the moment of drawing up that act.
 Thus, according to the Code, the preliminary investigation ends on the day of sending the case to court or deciding on the termination of the proceedings in the case, and according to the Draft, making an indictment, indictment, final act or decision to terminate the proceedings.
Currently, the investigation period is included in the calculation of the investigation period.
 Taking into account that the concept and essence of the investigation have been completely changed within the framework of the Draft, we can state that such an institution is not envisaged here in the sense of the Code, therefore the maximum ten-day investigation period included in the preliminary investigation "excludes" the general calculation.
The key difference between the proposed "rules" on the timing of the investigation concerns the possibility of extending their duration.
 The Code stipulates that the preliminary investigation of a criminal case must be completed no later than within two months.
  The term of the preliminary investigation is extended by the supervising prosecutor based on the reasoned motion of the investigator, making a decision on satisfying the motion in full or in part.
 Thus, the law, which does not differentiate between types of crime, sets a total period of two months, which can not be considered the maximum, as it is possible to extend that period continuously.
As "deterrents" to the abuse of power to extend the pre-trial period, one can consider the possibilities of the prosecutor rejecting the motion and partially satisfying it.
 It is obvious that these "restraints" can be used only in the case of appropriate legislative fixation and definition of mechanisms of action, while the existing regulations, we think, are incomplete.
 The problem is that Article 197 does not address the possibility of the prosecutor rejecting the motion, and the partial satisfaction clauses give rise to differing interpretations.
  The possibility of leaving the mediation without exception is not ruled out, but, taking into account that this institution is completely absent from the Code, as well as based on the principle of legal certainty, we think that leaving the mediation without impediment is unacceptable.
In practice, a situation arose when the investigator violated the deadline for submitting the motion, ը the prosecutor returned the motion based on the fact that the terms of the preliminary investigation had expired, և the criminal case, in fact, appeared in a deadlock.
 In this context, the RA Constitutional Court, referring to the issue of constitutionality of Article 197 of the Code (2015 edition) 1, noted the following legislative gaps: - The Code does not provide a clear deadline for the prosecutor to approve the investigator's decision to extend the preliminary investigation. The legal consequences of rejecting the investigator's decision to initiate a motion are not explicitly regulated by the Code.
Although the rejection of the motion is of a discretionary nature for the prosecutor, nevertheless it is not absolute, in order to understand the legislative gap more clearly, it is necessary to find out the possible cases of rejection of the motion.
  Under the current legal framework, a motion to extend a pre-trial period may be rejected in cases where: • the case is subject to termination, • the indictment is actually ready, իչը the investigator "requests time" to amend it, 1 See CC 28 July 2015 Based on the application of the Court of General Jurisdiction of Malatia-Sebastia Administrative District of the city of Yerevan, the decision on determining the issue of compliance of the RA Constitution with Article 197, Parts 5 և 6 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
The procedural procedure for submitting a mediation has not been observed (the term has been violated, the mediation has not been signed, it is not clear for what term the mediation is extended, etc.).
In cases 1 և 2, it is obvious that the prosecutor rejects the motion միջ terminates the proceedings accordingly or submits the indictment while giving an instruction.
  Cases 3 և 4 may be more problematic, in the situation when the time remaining at the end of the preliminary investigation, defined by law, allows the investigator to correct the mistakes made in case the motion is rejected.
 In fact, the deadlock situation mentioned by the CC may arise not only in case of violation of the 4-day deadline for submission of mediation by the investigator, but also in case of unreasoned or incomplete reasoning of the motion, as in case of violation of other procedural procedures.
 Moreover, this situation may arise as a result of "the prosecutor's rejection of the motion" leaving him missing.
With regard to the institute of partial satisfaction of mediation, the Code stipulates that in case of partial satisfaction of the investigator's motion in case of prolongation of the preliminary investigation, the supervising prosecutor has the right to instruct the investigator to suspend the criminal case or send the criminal case to court. up to 15 days, and in case of instruction to draw up an indictment, the investigator may be given up to two months.
In such conditions a question may arise. If the investigator requests that the pre-trial period be extended by 10 days, but the prosecutor decides to provide a 15-day period և instructs to suspend the proceedings, can this be considered partial satisfaction?
Or, considering that each extension can be no more than 2 months, how is it possible to partially satisfy the mediation by providing a 2-month period?
  It is clear that the legislator, by defining the authority of the prosecutor to give a relevant instruction, aims to restrict the investigator from submitting another motion of the same content in the future, but, we think, this is not outside the partial satisfaction of the motion.
 Moreover, the alleged prohibition on re-filing has not been explicitly addressed in this article.
 It is also not clear from the wording of the norm whether the investigator has the right to take other procedural actions in the presence of one of the above-mentioned instructions of the prosecutor than those mentioned in the instruction.
In the case of a draft, Article 192 stipulates: 1. In the pre-trial proceedings, from the moment of initiating the public criminal prosecution, it may not exceed: 1) two months in the case of a minor crime; 2) four months in the case of a minor crime; 3) eight months in the case of a serious crime; 4) ten months with proceedings on a particularly serious crime.
2. In exceptional cases, when it is in the interest of justice, through the mediation of the supervising prosecutor, the term of public prosecution for a minor or medium-gravity crime is extended by a maximum of one month, and for a serious or particularly serious crime by a maximum of two months.
As we can see, the main differences compared to the Code regarding the terms of the preliminary investigation are: • classification of terms according to the severity of the crime • definition of the maximum term.
Differentiation of crimes, according to the severity, is a more progressive approach than the Code, due first of all to the fact that each crime is unique,, showing a differentiated approach is an objective necessity.
 In addition, it can be concluded that acts of higher public danger are subject to a more thorough investigation, proceeding not only from the public interest, but also from the accused.
This is an attempt to clarify the moment of completion of the preliminary investigation of each case, to eliminate the overburdening of the investigator to apply to the prosecutor every time, the above-mentioned problematic situations.
  However, such an approach has its vulnerabilities.
1. Severity և Complexity Under Article 6։ 1 of the Convention, the ECtHR assesses the reasonableness of the domestic proceedings in each case in the light of the particular circumstances of the case under consideration.
 Nevertheless, as a result of the examination of a number of cases related to the challenge of a reasonable time, the court has developed certain criteria, which are applied to all cases when assessing the reasonableness of the trial.
  In particular, the court takes into account the complexity of the case, the behavior of both the applicant and the relevant authorities, which affected the length of the trial, the importance of the value to which the trial relates.
 In relation to a reasonable time, - the court proceeds from the following criteria: - the complexity of the case, - the consequences of non-observance of a reasonable time for the applicant (taking into account in particular the detention of the accused - "Abdello v. The Netherlands 2"), - the efficiency of the relevant bodies (takes into account the fact that the bodies were overburdened - "Milas v. Italy" 3) - the applicant 's own conduct (referring to the evidence that the defendant deliberately delayed the case - "IA v. France 4", as well as the case when the accused escaped from the examination: " Vayich v. Turkey ”5).
In determining the complexity of the case, the European Court considers a number of criteria as the starting point, noting that the complexity can be related to both fact and legal points of view.
 The court attaches great importance to the following factors: the nature of the sub-evidence, the number of defendants կան witnesses, international factors, the involvement of new persons in the trial, calculations, the need for experts, etc.
  In determining the complexity of the case, the European Court takes into account "the distance in time և between the cases or facts under investigation 'in the course of the proceedings".
Given that the European Court of Human Rights examines the facts of the case post factum, in determining the starting points for a reasonable timeframe for the investigation, it is necessary to select from the criteria set by the ECHR those that may be applicable in criminal proceedings against a person.
 Examination of such a case 2 See CASE OF ABDOELLA v. THE NETHERLANDS, Complaint No. 12728/87, November 25, 1992.
3 See CASE OF MILASI v. ITALY 14/1986/112/160.
4 See CASE OF IA v. FRANCE (1/1998/904/1116), September 23, 1998.
5 See CASE OF VAYİÇ v. TURKEY (Complaint No. 18078/02), June 20, 2006.
Only at this stage can there be an idea of ​​the complexity of the case based on the available facts.
  There may be situations when the circumstances of the investigation of a medium-gravity crime are more complicated than the gravity of the crime, so it can be argued that the gravity of the crime does not determine the complexity of its investigation.
2. Risk of exaggerated qualification Such a classification of pre-investigation terms contains the risk of exaggerated qualification of crimes.
  Given that often the gravity of the crime is extremely limited, it is very easy to give the act a quality that would correspond to the factual circumstances of the case at the time of prosecution, but would not clearly correspond to the person being investigated or prosecuted.
  The fact that in case of more serious crimes, the law will allow the investigator to be less limited in time, to examine the current case more "calmly" can contribute to the continuation of this already existing vicious practice.
3. Uncertain situation in case of change of accusation The draft does not refer to the case of determining the term of the preliminary investigation, when the accusation is changed during the preliminary investigation, which is a significant omission.
 Thus, if in the 7th month of the preliminary investigation of a serious crime the accusation is changed to a milder crime, when should the preliminary investigation end?
 In order to avoid these and a number of other problems, we suggest that when making the decision to initiate public criminal prosecution, the prosecutor, based on the circumstances determining the complexity of the case, also decides on the term of public criminal prosecution within 1-12 months.
  It follows from the envisaged legal regulation that these terms are the maximum, therefore they are an independent basis for the completion of the preliminary investigation.
 Terms may be extended only once by the supervising prosecutor, for a maximum of 1 or 2 months, depending on the gravity of the crime.
 As a basis, the exceptional case is mentioned, when it is required by the interest of justice, that is, the law enforcer is obliged to substantiate the exceptional circumstance in each case, which in its turn may give rise to misinterpretations.
  In all other cases, extension of the pre-trial period in another way is excluded.
 However, it should be noted that we can consider the changes in the institution of suspending criminal prosecution as a "counterbalance" to this problematic restriction.
 In particular, Article 194 of the Draft stipulates that the decision to suspend a criminal prosecution is made after all necessary proceedings have been taken in the absence of the accused, but does not restrict the conduct of other proceedings during the preliminary investigation if necessary after the suspension of the prosecution.
 Of course, the issue of the legality of this norm has been assessed outside the scope of this topic, but we think that a compromise option has been chosen from the point of view of balancing public-private interests within the framework of maintaining a "reasonable term".
 Based on the above, we believe that in case of extension of the term of public criminal prosecution ևthis extension should be conditioned by the complexity of the case և a maximum term of up to 3 months should be set.
Tatjik Soghoyan SOME ISSUES RELATED TO THE PRE-EXAMINATION DEADLINES IN THE RA CRIMINAL TRIAL
