COMPARISON OF COMPETITIVE STRATEGIES OF THE HOST INDUSTRY ENTERPRISES The hospitality creates an idea of ​​the customer's attitude towards different types of enterprises ծառայությունների the services they provide։.
  According to Webster's Explanatory Dictionary, "the hospitality industry is a business sector consisting of forms of hospitality based on hospitality, hospitality, and hospitality."
  Therefore, the hospitality industry can be seen as a variety of business-oriented business services that specialize in the services market.
An enterprise is an organizational unit that carries out business activities with the property owned by it or provided by the owner (founder), acquires property-personal non-property rights and responsibilities ան on the basis of a power of attorney է is responsible for fulfilling the undertaken obligations.
 Entrepreneurial activity is any economic activity carried out by entrepreneurs not prohibited by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia [1].
Competition is a struggle between legal entities - sole proprietors - striving for the same goal, who are interested in securing the maximum level of income by gaining consumer preferences.
  In order to create a competitive enterprise, it is necessary not only to modernize the production և management, but also to know exactly why it is done և and what goal should be achieved.
 Moreover, it is necessary not only to decide, but also to effectively use the advantages in the competitive struggle.
  All production և management efforts should be directed to the development of the enterprise or the products produced that set it apart from other potential or actual competitors.
Strategic marketing planning is a process of developing unique strategies, which contributes to the realization of the goals of the enterprise, in their inter-strategic, marketing sphere, the coordination of potential opportunities.
The meaning of strategic marketing planning և feature is that it promotes future-oriented thinking և behavior, coordinates marketing decisions և actions, contributes to the increase of current income for the solution of long-term problems, orients for future changes taking place at the moment և etc.
 Within the framework of strategic marketing planning, the following levels are distinguished: situational analysis, planning of enterprise goals, development of alternative strategies, choice of strategy - evaluation, development of marketing plan [3].
Thus, strategic planning is the process of managing and maintaining the company's goals, creating strategic alignment between its potential "marketing opportunities".
 It is based on a well-formulated program announcement by the company, presentation of auxiliary goals, problems, growth of the health-economic portfolio.
Before considering the strategies of Armenia Marriott Հայ Hyatt Place hotels, let us refer to the history of their establishment.
The story of the J-W Marriott hotel brand dates back to 1927, when Jay Williard Marriott and his wife, Alice, founded the 9-seater A&W beer house.
  Then they added hot dishes to their offer, which gave rise to restaurants adapted for cars called "Hot Shops".
 In 1937, the Hoover Airlines in Washington began delivering food in the form of box-lunches.
  These developments refer to the early days of the Marriott's history, 1927-1956, which is described as the "Marriott is preparing for flight."
  The second stage, the years of growth, covers the years 1957-1985, defined as the "World of Hospitality".
 1957 The Marriott is making a historic change in its hotel business in Arlington, Virginia, opening the world's first 365-room Twin Bridges Marriott, the world's largest in-car hotel.
  Then, in 1969, the Marriott opened its first international hotel in Mexico, in Acapulco.
  The next stage of development covers the years 1986-2011 - modern years, which gets the definition of "Bed for every traveler".
  The innovative Marriott model from the 1980s is based on the principle of "One organization, many brands".
 During its activity, it aspired to become the number one hosting company in the world.
  2012 year. To this day, success is defined as "Success is never the end."
 Marriott's mission is to outline the future of technology innovation travel.
 There are more than four thousand hotels in the world, in seventy-two countries, eighteen different brands, three hundred thousand employees.
 Moreover, what is the target group of customers for the given brand? The important thing is that they receive a high level of service.
 They are included in the portfolio of Marriott brand. Luxury brands: Bulgari Hotels & Resorts, The Ritz-Carlton, JW Marriott®Hotels brands, Lifestyle collection: EDITIONsmHotels, Autograph Collection, Renaissance®Hotels, AC Hotelsby Marriott brands, Signature Marriott®Hotels brand, Selective service: Courtyard by SpringHar Suites by Marriott®, Fairfield Inn & Suites by Marriott®, Residence Inn®, Towneplace Suites®, Marriott Executive Apartments®, Gaylord Hotels®, Marriott Vacation Club®.
The Signature Marriott Hotels brand operates in Armenia (as a managed hotel, that is, it is not a franchisee, they want to be known by this brand, although there is a brand bearing its full name).
  The building was privatized in 1998 with the support of a group of Diaspora Armenian benefactors, and started operating as an Armenia Marriott in 2004. since June.
 The appearance of the building is not subject to change, as it is part of the architectural complex of the Republic Square, as it is in the UNESCO Preservation Fund, which does not allow any changes to the facade.
 Meanwhile, the interior, the staff psychology անձն the quality of service is constantly changing։ are being improved.
The building has 9 floors, 259 rooms, 14 deluxe rooms, 8 event halls with a total area of ​​1693 square meters, 1 concierge floor, 5 food outlets with various delicious dishes.
 The halls are provided with natural light.
  Armenia Marriott Hotel has 3 buildings: Ararat, Armenia և New building.
 Those who love a quiet environment can be hosted in the Ararat building, and those who prefer a more dynamic environment - in the Armenia building.
  The new living rooms of the hotel are located in the new building.
 Armenia Marriott Hotel is the first internationally managed hotel brand in Armenia, located right in the Republic Square, in the business and cultural center.
 Armenia Marriott Hotel has 259 spacious living rooms, including 14 deluxe rooms, 2 floors of high-class rooms, a high-quality hall with excellent services and a beautiful view of the city.
Աղյուսակ 2. «Արմենիա Մարիոթ» հյուրանոցի SWAT վերլուծությունՈՒԺԵՂ ԿՈՂՄԵՐԹՈՒՅԼ ԿՈՂՄԵՐԿադրերի հոսունությունՎերանորոգման անհրաժեշտությունՄիջազգային բրենդԲարձր մակարդակի սպասարկումՏեղադիրքՆորարարություններԱնձնակազմՊարգևատրումՍոցիալական-կորպորատիվպատասխանատվությունՄիջոցառումների սրահներՈւսանողներին աջակցությանպատրաստակամությունՀՆԱՐԱՎՈՐՈՒԹՅՈՒՆՆԵՐՍՊԱՌՆԱԼԻՔՆԵՐՍենյակների ավելացումԵրկրի ներկայացումՀամագործակցությունՄրցակիցներՃգնաժամՀարակից կառուցապատումՍեզոնայնությունՀյուրանոցի  նպատակը  շուկայում  իր  սպասարկմամբ  ճանաչելի  լինելն  է  ամբողջ  աշխարհում՝Երևանում,  Թբիլիսիում,  Մոսկվայում  և  այլուր։
  Իր  հյուրերին  հյուրանոցն  առաջարկում  է  Marriott  Rewards ծրագիրը, որը հնարավորություն է տալիս կուտակել միավորներ և դրանք փոխարինել կամ օրերով,  կամ  հատուկ  նվերներով։
  That is, when leaving, the guest must be satisfied, remember the quality service, approach, additional special services.
  All this provides a whole set of service skills: a smile, a professional approach, body language, the right words.
 Throughout the history of the Marriott, the human factor, especially job satisfaction, has always been valued.
  It is also expressed in the following principle: "Take care of your staff".
  They cared for the employee, the guest, the community.
Their service is free from any discrimination, be it racial, religious, gender or age.
  One of the strong ideas is the development of employees ումը training.
  For example, employees must complete a training course of at least 20 hours per year: training through classroom or electronic resources, training abroad, and trainers invited from abroad.
The vision of Armenia Marriott Hotel is to be a leader in the field of hospitality, staff, hospitality level.
  As such, it has no competitors, but it does not have to be a competitor of a large brand hotel. They can be small hotels that offer standardization, which are increasing year by year, inviting their employees to work with more attractive offers; in one way or another they can be a competitor.
The strategy of the hotel, depending on the situation in the market, changes, also at the beginning of each year, possibly during it.
  It may be related, for example, to 2008. The global economic crisis, which began when many famous brands closed, but the Marriott continued to grow.
  2000 It was chosen as a strategy to have 2,000 hotels, and in 2014. That number has doubled, in 2017 that number should reach 6,000.
  The strategy in our region is as follows: until 2016. The number of rooms should reach 80,000, which in 2014 It was 40,000.
 Thus, in 2014 The strategy includes the following 5 factors: to be known by the portfolio of brands, some of which were created by Marriott, and the rest were added and joined.
 As a result, the portfolio increases: on the one hand, they have a level of recognition; it also adds to the recognition of Marriott, on the other hand, they must ensure the quality standards of Marriott, brand policy.
  The second is to focus on customers, the third is to excel at the operational level, ie to excel in hospitality, the fourth is to focus on talent development, and the fifth is to continue to develop hotels.
 These, in turn, are divided into subgroups, which guide the staff դիմ application of specific steps.
  This has been chosen as a strategy for the Europe region և, based on these five factors, each country, depending on the specifics of the market, can focus on one factor.
The network, of course, cooperates with Russian, European and Indian markets.
The main goal is to cooperate with new markets, to attract new countries, because here two possible factors arise: to present the brand և the country to the guests.
 For example, they can recognize Armenia by Marriott, that is, although it is an international brand, the guest must receive local hospitality.
  This is an internal strategic factor - brand և localization.
Due to the overcrowding of the hotel, it is possible to accommodate guests in a nearby hotel, within the same price range, close to the brand standards.
 From this point of view, Marriott cooperates with "Golden Tulip", "Congress" and other hotels.
In terms of the target group of customers, the Marriott has been considered a business hotel for many years, the guests were called 24/7, that is, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, they were winners.
  2013 There was a rebranding, that is, hospitality was called the art of hospitality, that is, a new breath was given to hospitality, it began to be considered as an art.
 The training methods were reviewed.
  On the other hand, the target group is the 2000s. The generation - the young people who like to combine rest and work.
 From this point of view, changes can be made, strategy and technical facilities can be reviewed.
  A vivid example of this is the principle of the hotel lobby, where all the conditions are created for the organization of their free time. Different facilities should be available here: wireless printer, internet, sockets, bar, etc.
  Such guests become, so to speak, "masters of combining." people who combine leisure և work.
 Thus, most of the target group of guests are actual business guests, although, for example, in September-October, a large number of Diaspora Armenians make up.
The idea of ​​the Marriott's activity also includes corporate responsibility, that is, the community's capacity, which is not only financial assistance, but also environmental activities for the community.
 These include cooperation with the Fuller Housing Company, participation in the construction of houses, work with vulnerable groups (with SOS Children's Villages, Orran Charity, and Astghik, an organization that supports children with mobility problems) , as events are organized, for example, there is a month of "Orran" when money is raised.
  From an environmental point of view, the Marriott has invested six million dollars, for example, in the cleaning of rivers, the recycling of pens, which has increased from 40% to 74% over time, as they hand over waste paper, used lamps, glass.
 Red Coat Direct, the hotel's international experience in innovation, designed for equipment և allows you to change the organizers of meetings, increase their preferences with one click.
Hyatt was founded by Jay Pritzker in 1957 when he bought the Hyatt Housemotel near Los Angeles International Airport.
 In the next decade J. Pritzker և his brother Donald Pritzker, working with the Pritzker family's other business interests, turned the company into a North American management և hotel-owned company, which in 1962. became a public company.
 1968 Hayat International Company was formed and became a separate public company.
  Hayat Corporation և Hayat International Corporation, as a private company, passed the business interests of Pritzker Company from 1979 to 1982.
 2004 On December 31, the two corporations merged to become the Hyatt Hotel Corporation.
  The corporation's brands are Park Hyatt, Andaz, Grand Hyatt, Hyatt Hotels, Hyatt Regency, Hyatt Place, Hyatt House, Hyatt Zilara, Hyatt Ziva, Hyatt Residence Club.
The mission of "Hayat" company is to change people's lives, to show care in everything they do.
 He realizes that the more they expand their activities, the greater the responsibility to operate as an environmentally responsible, socially responsible company.
  For that purpose, a corporate responsibility platform, "Hyatt Fly", has been created, which is rooted in their business beliefs.
 That is, people, communities պայք the planet Earth are struggling.
 Thus, corporate responsibility is focused on: 1. environmental sustainability, reducing emissions; 2. education և career assistance assistance, helping employees հաս reach their full potential, 3. economic development և investing, stimulating local growth, creating career և opportunities; 4. Health և investing in programs that help their co-workers, guests, neighbors adopt a healthy lifestyle.
 The company has adopted a strategy to ensure environmental sustainability, which includes 1. wise use of resources, 2. reasonable construction, 3. innovate և inspire.
 "Hayat" in 2013-2014 During the year, he donated $ 9.6 million to various communities around the world, more than .000 100,000 volunteer hours, $ 270,000 to support typhoon damage in the Philippines, literacy skills to 30,000 students, and $ 750,000 to career advancement in Brazil.
2013 The 10-storey Hyatt Place Yerevan hotel was opened on December 4, 2010.
 Hotel management is carried out by "Hyatt Place" company.
  The hotel has 95 rooms, four of which are suites, the rest are standard.
 One of the main ideas of the hotel is to receive the guest at home.
  The advantages of "Hyatt Place Yerevan" hotel are the location, the new design, belonging to an international brand, being a select-service hotel, the availability of spacious rooms, the availability of internet in the rooms.
 The hotel has a select-service system, ie the receptionist acts as an employee performing many functions.
 When a guest addresses a receptionist with a question that does not fall within his or her responsibilities, the latter may, for example, act as a waiter.
  Much attention is paid to staff training, which includes participation in international training programs.
  The attitude of the employees is mainly used ապետ knowledge of foreign languages.
The hotel also has a developed strategy, which left its positive impact in 2013. supported the expansion of the hotel.
  The hotel's strategy is flexible to the market situation, which is why it has been able to survive for the past year to this day.
The high level of hotel occupancy is observed in March-June, September-October.
 Some activity is observed in August, which is considered the month of weddings.
  In case of overcrowding in the hotel, they cooperate with similar conditions և hotels offering price, paying for the guest.
 The visitors of the target group of the hotel are different.
  For some time, business visitors are active, in another period, tourists prefer leisure, active leisure.
  Hotel guests have the opportunity to accumulate points in the Hyatt Gold Passport® software փոխարին replace them with various prizes.
 Offers a hot, complimentary breakfast including a 24/7 Geller menu Բ Coffee at the Cocktail Bar.
Table 3. "Hyatt Place Yerevan" hotel SWAT verlutsutyunUZHEGH KOGHMERTUYL KOGHMERKayanateghiNorabatsMijazgayin brendTeghadirkNor dizaynSelekt-servisEndardzak senyaknerSenyaknerum hamatsantsihnaravorutyunPordzaru andznakazmPargevatrumKhmbayin measures patetnerSotsialakan-korporativpataskhanatvutyunHNARAVORUTYUNNERSPARNALIKNERHamagortsaktsutyunChanacheliutyan endlaynumOlorti zargatsumMrtsakitsnerChgnazhamHarakits karutsapatumSezonaynutyunAmpopelov work, make some conclusions. Strategy development, strategic planning is an integral part of any business.
 The realization of the goal of the enterprise, the maintenance of market positions in the competitive struggle depends on it.
 It determines the future steps to achieve the goal.
  Allows you to control the process of achieving the goal և to correct the deviations that occur.
 The development of strategies is also important for the enterprises of the hospitality industry, as the service market in general is considered free, less monopolized. As a result, new enterprises are regularly opened and competition arises.
  A flexible strategy is needed to win the competition or maintain a position in the market.
  The developed strategies are not frozen.
  Depending on the market situation, it is partially changed.
 Strategies usually change at the beginning of each year.
Based on the time of being in the market, the enterprises are developing a strategy.
In other words, in the case of the first hotel studied above, which has been operating in Armenia for a long time, the strategy is aimed at expanding the recognition, modernization of services, service, design, while in the case of the second hotel, which operates for a year, the strategy is to establish itself in the market. .
Belonging to an international brand is an advantage for these hotels. On the one hand, it provides recognition in case of choosing a given hotel, on the other hand, it ensures high quality of service, standards and control.
Thus, for companies operating in the hospitality sector in the Republic of Armenia, this is an example of providing high service, controlling processes, and, of course, developing a strategy.
 Therefore, it is appropriate to quote the following words with Michel Le Beauf: "Satisfied customer is the best strategy".
Literature 1. "RA Law on Enterprises և Entrepreneurship", Yerevan, 1992.
4. Official website of "Marriott" hotel chain, http.
//www.marriott.com/marriott/aboutmarriott.mi5. The official website of "Armenia Marriott" hotel, http.
//marriottarmenia.am/ .6. The official website of the Hyatt Hotel, https.
//www.hyatt.com/. 7. The official website of "Hyatt Thrive" hotel, http.
//thrive.hyatt.com/en/thrive.html. 8. Official website of "Hyatt Place Yerevan" hotel, http.
//www.yerevan.place.hyatt.com/en/hotel/home.html. Hayarpi Shahinyan COMPARISON OF THE COMPETITIVENESS STRATEGY OF THE HOST INDUSTRY ENTERPRISES Keywords: hospitality industry, enterprise, competition,
strategy, competitive strategy, hotel, strategic
Planning: Armenia Marriott Hotel, Hyatt Place Yerevan Hotel
.
