SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE AS A PROBLEM OF MODERN PSYCHOLOGY The end of the 20th century սկ The beginning of the 21st century is marked by rapid technological advances that could not bypass the sphere of human relations.
 In this age of information, a person's ability to communicate effectively with other people, to receive information objectively, to respond to all changes in the world around him is increasing.
  The modern actively developing society presents high demands on the person. it needs citizens who promote innovation.
  In addition, the socio-economic changes taking place around us directly exacerbate the problem of deprivation of a person during the interaction with the social environment.
  The solution to this problem depends on the development of active socio-cultural adaptation capacity.
 That is why the growing interest of scientists in the problem of social intellect is quite understandable.
 There are theoretical and research data on this issue by foreign authors (E. Thorndike, H. Eisenk, J. Guilford, G. Allport, R. Sternberg, J. N. Emalyanov, A. Labunskaya, ES Mikhailova, A. L. Yuzhaninova և others).
The concept of "social intellect" was introduced into psychology in 1920. By Thorndike.
  The initial understanding of social intellect was related to giving quick, almost automated judgments about people, giving opinions, including being able to predict the behavioral manifestations of people in different situations.
According to E. Thorndike: There are three types of intellect.1. abstract intellect, due to which a person is able to understand abstract verbal-mathematical signs and do any action with them, 2. a specific intellect by which man is able to comprehend and relate to the objects of the material world 3. objects; 3. social intellect, by means of which man is able to understand others և to interact with them1.
R. Sternberg conducted a study in 1981, which aimed to find out the opinion of ordinary people about social intelligence.
 As a result of his research, it turned out that people, by saying social intellect, understand the following.1. When a person can successfully find a solution to a practical problem. Causal logic and common sense are characteristic of a person, due to which a person will consider all the aspects related to the given problem when making a decision.
2. Verbal skills. A person is able to formulate thoughts clearly, pronouncing words, explaining the idea of ​​what he has read, has a rich vocabulary.
3. Social awareness. man is able to accept the environment as it is. He arrives at the agreed place in time, offers expedient solutions to the problem և thoughts, understands է approaches the needs and desires of the people with compassion.
  He is endowed with endurance, a wide range of interests.
2 According to G. Allport (1937): Social intellect is a ability that allows a person to give accurate descriptions and predictions about other people's behavior3.
In 1967 J. Guilford changed the direction of social intellect to some extent.
  According to him, social intellect should be understood as a system of intellectual abilities, which primarily depend not on the general intellectual factor, but on the recognition of information on behavior4.
A. L. Yuzhaninova (1984) considers social intellect as a unique mental ability that determines an effective relationship.
  The researches performed by A. L. Yuzhaninova և Other scientists have shown that social intellect is weakened by the general intellect assessments, the MMPI test scale of intellectual efficiency (Gauer, 1957), R. With Kettel test data.
  All these data speak about the fact that 2 Sternberg Robert J., Intellect succeeded, (Translated.
 Sergey I. Ananin) Popurri, M.
 2015, c.3 Allport G., Residence of personalities.
 Selected works / [Per. с англ. Л. В. Трубицыной и Д. А. Social intellect is a proportionally separate, independent measure of a person's overall cognitive abilities5.
Յ. Ն. Emelyanov, like other researchers, connects social intellect with situational adaptation.
  Social intellect presupposes the free possession of verbal-non-verbal means of social behavior.
 The author complements the communicative competence with elements that relate to the awareness of the activities of the environment (social-physical), interacting with the people around to achieve their own goal.
 How important is the way of development of social-psychological imagination, which allows to see the whole world from the point of view of other people6.
V. A. Labunskaya (1986) considered that social intellect is related to an adequate perception of non-verbal behavior7.
  E. Ս. Mikhailova (1991) understands the concept of "social intellect" as a cognitive aspect of non-communicative abilities, which stimulates the cognitive processes associated with the reflection of social objects8.
H. Model of Eisenhower's intellect structure. Hans Jürgen Eisenk, a psychotherapist at the Royal Bethlehem Hospital in London, says that there are three relatively different concepts of intellect today.
 At the same time, he does not bring them face to face, but unites them under one roof.
  Such a union is shown schematically (Figure 1) .6 Емельянов, Ю. N., Active social-psychological training L.
 LGU, 1985, C. 7-27. Figure 1. Interdependence of different types of intellect according to H. Eisenhower Biological intellect is the ability to analyze information born to a person, which is related to the structure and functions of the cerebral cortex.
  It is the genetic, physiological, neurological, biochemical-hormonal basis of cognitive behavior.
Psychometric intellect, in turn, is the link between social intellect and "biological intellect".
  These are the phenomena that come to the surface and become visible to the researcher. E. Spearman called it common sense.
Social intellect is the intellect of an individual, which is formed during his socialization under certain conditions of influence of the social environment9.
Ջ. Guilford model of intellect structure. Another scientist in the 60s, J. Guilford put forward the first reliable test for measuring social intelligence.
  He viewed social intelligence as a system of intellectual abilities that, independent of general intelligence factors, was primarily concerned with recognizing behavioral information.
 The possibility of measuring social intelligence comes from J. From the structure of the general model of Guilford intellect.
Ջ. The purpose of the 20-year research analysis conducted by Guilford և associates was to develop general competency test software.
  As a result of detailed research, a cubic model of the structure of intellect was created.
 This model allows to distinguish 120 factors of intellect.
  They can be classified accordingly 9 Айзенк Г. J., Intellect.
 new view, Questions of Psychology, 1995, №1, p. 111-131. with three independent variables, which in turn are described by the information analysis process.
These variables are as follows: 1. Content of the presented information (motivating material), 2. information analysis operation, 3. information processing results.
In this way J. The Guilford cube classification scheme describes 120 intellectual factors (abilities) 5 * 4 * 6 = 120 (Figure 2).
  Each intellectual ability corresponds to a small cube, which is formed according to three coordinate axes: content, operations, results 10.
Figure 2. The model of the structure of intellect according to J. Guilford (1967).
 The social intelligence block (behavioral recognition skills) is highlighted in gray.
Let us now distinguish the four main stages of the study of social intellect.
1. The first stage (1920–1924) - for the first time in 1920 E. The concept of "social intellect" was introduced by L. Thorndike in the scientific vocabulary of psychology.
2. The second stage (1925-1938) - the study of social intellect from a psychometric point of view.
  Social intellect was studied in accordance with the psychometric approach.
  As a condition, the researchers took abstract descriptions of the social intelligence of various authors and tried to turn them into standardized measuring instruments that could be used in the laboratory.
 Most often used F. Descriptions of social intellect proposed by Veron (1933).
  These were: having good relationships with other people, a complete mastery of social methods that enable a person to be free when dealing with other people independently, knowing social issues և questions, being sensitive to influences coming from members of other social groups, understanding other people, getting into their situation. being able to understand the mood of strangers և etc.
3. Third stage (late 1930s - 1965) - social intellect disappears from the subject field of psychology.
  Further work in this area was considered hopeless.
  All examinations were stopped.
  During this period, the concept of "social intellect" went beyond the realm of psychology.
  And L. Thurstone (1938) և Ch. Social intelligence was absent in the models of intellect developed by Spearman (1927).
  In this period, a number of social intelligence researchers, such as A. Anastasin, D. Wexler և Others considered the further study of social intellect to be meaningless.
  The examinations were prevented by almost everyone, except J. From Guilford.
4. The fourth stage (1965–1969) - social intellect took place. In the structural model of intellect proposed by Guilford.
  In the 1920s J. Guilford studied human facial expressions.
  His work on social intellect is so far the first in its volume, comprehensiveness and thoroughness11.
Due to the presence of social intellect, a person is able to understand other people, to predict their behavior in different situations, as well as to recognize their feelings, intentions and emotions through verbal or non-verbal expressions.
 Therefore, the success of a person in interpersonal interaction is conditioned by the degree of development of social intellect, which is the cognitive basis of social competence.
 It should be noted that social intellect is the most important professional quality for those professions in which there are human-to-human relationships.
SOCIAL INTELLECTION AS MODERN PSYCHOLOGY
