EXPANSION OF THE RIGHTS OF THE DEFENDER IN THE PROCESS OF PROCEEDING One of the most discussed issues during the elaboration of the draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia was the extension of the rights of the Defender in the pre-trial proceedings.
  The need to expand the rights of the defense counsel in pre-trial proceedings is especially emphasized for the simple reason that at this stage the principle of competition is most limited, including the rights of the suspect or the accused by the public participants in the proceedings.
Based on the priority of the settlement of this issue, in this work an attempt is made to identify the "contradictory settlements" regulated by the criminal procedure legislation on the procedures for exercising the rights of the Defender և to offer possible solutions to them.
Thus, in the current legal practice, the principle of competition has a limited application due to the unequal procedural rights of the accusation and the defense parties in the process of proof.
 The right to participate in the evidence is most obviously exercised by the defense attorney taking an active part in the investigation.
  In particular, according to Article 73, Part 1, Clause 3 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the Defender participates in the investigative actions mediated by or with the participation of his / her client with the permission of the criminal prosecution body or at the request of his / her client, and other criminal proceedings may participate in other investigative proceedings. on offer.
1 See the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code, available at http: // www.
//www.parliament.am/draft_docs5/K-084.pdf.
Domestic law practice shows that the granting of a discretionary power to an investigator does not, in essence, serve the legitimate purposes of protecting the rights of private participants.
  In particular, in the pre-trial proceedings, emphasizing the priority of resolving this issue, the RA Court of Cassation in its case law referred to the abuses committed as a result of exceeding the discretionary power of the investigator.
  In particular, in A. Sargsyan's case, the Court of Cassation noted that the preliminary investigation body ignored the defendant's desire to have a lawyer.
The Human Rights Defender appealed to the Constitutional Court to declare this legislative provision unconstitutional, arguing that by providing such discretion to the criminal prosecution body, in practice, the latter may allow unlawful tax restrictions due to unreasonable restrictions on the ombudsman's participation in other investigative and judicial actions.
 In addition, unnecessary regulations provided by law, on the basis of which the criminal prosecution body may not allow the defense counsel to participate in the investigation.
  And if there are no objective grounds to exclude the participation of the Defender clearly defined by law, the latter's participation should be ensured, and other possible restrictions, according to the respondent, may relate to investigative actions related to the constitutional rights of the person and therefore marginal, such as examination. Personal search և examination.
  The Constitutional Court noted that the RA Criminal Procedure Code lacks the grounds, in case of which the body conducting the criminal proceedings has the right not to allow the Defender to participate in other investigative-judicial actions mediated by him.
 Based on the analysis of the legal regulations provided by the legislation of individual countries, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia has registered that the law is investigative or judicial 2 See RA Court of Cassation 2009 Decision No. EKRD / 0295/01/08 of September 16.
The participation of the Defender in other legal actions is not conditioned by the expression of the will of the body conducting the proceedings, does not envisage any time limit for the participation of the Defender in the criminal proceedings, allowing the Defender to enjoy the rights of his / her client.
  Therefore, such regulations pose a disproportionate limitation of rights, do not pursue any legitimate aim.
  However, the Constitutional Court did not properly consider the provision of the disputed article, which refers to conditioning the Defender's participation in other investigative actions at the investigator's suggestion, noting that
Based on the possibility of settling a number of issues existing in the conditions of operation of the Criminal Procedure Code, the unconstitutionality of this norm, as a result of the judicial reforms implemented in the Republic of Armenia, some attempt was made to change the essence of the ombudsman's participation in pre-trial proceedings.
 Based on the position expressed by the Constitutional Court, new legal regulations have been envisaged to ensure the implementation of the rights and powers of the Defender in the above-mentioned actions.
 In particular, the Defender is empowered to participate freely in the investigative activities with the mediation of his / her client without the permission of the criminal prosecution body or at the request of a party.
  Granting the Defender the right to participate in the investigative activities with the participation of the suspect or the accused was a significant step towards ensuring competition, which in their theoretical substantiation can be said to be the result of the evolutionary development of the Defender's Institute.
 However, the draft left unresolved issues that are controversial in nature, hindering the effective implementation of the defense function in pre-trial proceedings.
 In particular, according to the draft, unlike the current Code, investigative-procedural 3 See RA Constitutional Court 2013 Decision No. SDO-1119 of October 8.
The investigator's proposal is a precondition for the ombudsman's participation in other actions.
  Of course, such a regulation limits the ability of the criminal prosecution body to restrict or not allow the defense attorney to participate in the investigation, but here it can be seen that the latter's participation depends entirely on the investigator's discretion, and in such a case it is difficult to judge the defense attorney.
 In addition to such authority of the body conducting the proceedings, in fact, adequate judicial tools should be provided to the Defender to counterbalance the latter's discretion.
  In particular, ensuring the presence of the arrested defendant's lawyer during the search of the apartment will be an active precondition for the creation of an objective judicial counterbalance to such discretionary power.
 The need to envisage such a settlement is first of all conditioned by the lack of guarantees ensuring the legal process of the given investigative action և judicial means.
From this point of view, it is first necessary to find out whether the legal guarantees provided to ensure the legal course of the investigative action work effectively, ինչ what rights the ombudsman has at the trial stage to determine the admissibility of the evidence obtained as a result of the investigative action.
Thus, Cr. trial day. According to Article 227, the person in whose apartment the search will be carried out or an adult member of his / her family has the right to be present at the search, and if that is not possible, a representative of the housing organization or local self-government body is invited.
  Despite the need to prioritize the issues underlying the draft, this issue has not been substantively changed in the draft.
 Some changes related to the right of the defense attorney to be present during the search were envisaged by the draft, according to Article 263, Part 4, if the accused's lawyer found out about the search of the accused's apartment or building, building or premises under his control. , then access և presence can not be hindered.
 And according to part 2 of Article 264, before conducting a search, the investigator is obliged to acquaint the person with whom the search is carried out with the decision, to hand him a copy of the decision.
 These regulations in the draft can be said to be to some extent aimed at expanding the rights of the Defender, but at the same time they are not clear, they are again controversial.
  This regulation, considering in more in-depth comparative analysis with the powers of the investigator, turns out that at the legislative level in one case there is an opportunity to participate freely in the investigation, and in the other case the investigator's permission or offer to participate in the investigation.
  In addition, assigning the authority to invite public servants to the investigative body can be problematic, as they are all employees of the same executive branch as the police and investigators, which may cast doubt on their de facto independence and impartiality.
  In practice, the decision to conduct a search is made to the person who is actually present during the search, in this case, the representatives of the condominium, which in legal practice may cause certain problems with the presence of a lawyer.
  Thus, taking into account the fact that the persons summoned to the search are representatives of the executive power, it would not be very realistic for them to inform the ombudsman about the search, if the investigator has not recently suggested it or expressed a desire to involve the ombudsman.
 In case of impossibility to ensure the presence of an adult living in the apartment or his / her family member, the legislator should have prioritized the rights of the suspect or accused ներգր involving in the investigation not the executive branch, but a person whose presence would counteract possible illegal actions of the investigation.
  In addition, the results of investigative actions during criminal proceedings are recorded in documents that can later be used in court proceedings to prove the guilt or innocence of the accused.
  It is therefore very important that these documents accurately reflect the results of the investigative actions; if they are not altered in any way, it is important to provide safeguards in the interests of the suspect or the accused.
 Thus, the comparative analysis of the two codes shows that the legislator has left the search of the detainee's apartment unresolved. և, in fact, they make it meaningless.
  Therefore, in order to avoid legal uncertainties in legal practice, it is more expedient at the legislative level to directly inform the ombudsman to inform the defense counsel about the search of the apartment, especially in cases when the accused is detained, նրա it is impossible to ensure the presence of his family members.
In some countries, despite the fact that the pre-trial body involves the executive branch in the search of the apartment, the defense is provided with legal remedies at the trial stage to determine the admissibility of the evidence obtained4.
  In particular, all persons who have carried out an investigative action during the trial are summoned to the courtroom to participate in the cross-examination by the Defender.
  Unlike international legal regulations, the RA legislator did not take into account the fact that there is no effective guarantee or means under the current legislation, with the help of which it would be possible to ensure the objectivity of the investigative action.
 As a result, in addition to the incomplete and questionable legal regulations enshrined at the legislative level, there is no effective procedure for reviewing them at the trial stage, which would make it possible to alleviate the existing inequality to some extent.
  Of course, the picture would have been different if the defense attorney had been able to uncover through cross-examination the circumstances relevant to the case, which could have been falsified during the search of the defendant's apartment by the investigators.
 As they are not summoned to court to testify during the investigative action, it becomes fundamental to ensure the presence of a lawyer during the investigative action.
  Of course, the introduction of the institute of cross-examination in our legal system would contribute to the solution of many problems, but at the same time it requires significant organizational, material and procedural changes, which currently 4 according to the Spanish Criminal Procedure Code, police are required to testify in court.
It is not so desirable.
 Taking into account the peculiarities of our legislative system և the difference with the legislations of European countries, it will be possible to alleviate the current situation only by making certain procedural changes.
The role of the case law of the European Court is essential for the extension of the rights of the Defender.
 Thus, in the case of Lisica v. Croatia (complaint no. 20100/06, 25 February 2010), it was clarified that the right to have a lawyer during the interrogation exists in connection with searches, at least when the person is detained և has a lawyer who is able to be present during the search. .
  In the Lisica case, the court stressed that the credibility of the police testimony on the manner of the search is questionable due to the absence of the suspect or the defendant's lawyer.
Salduz (Salduz v. Turkey, Complaint No. 36391/02, 27 November 2008) առաջ Prior to the Lisica case, Spanish courts recognized the right of a detained defendant to be present with a lawyer during a search of an apartment or car.
The best protection against tampering with the results of a search of an apartment, including the placement or alteration of evidence, is when not only the presence of a suspect or interested person is required, but also the presence of the suspect or defendant's defense counsel, at least in cases where .
  The right of the Defender to be present in these proceedings is also guaranteed in Article 75 of the Bulgarian Criminal Procedure Code7.
  In any case, ensuring the presence of an ombudsman's presence is in line with international best practice, which is, in fact, a precondition for such legislation in our legislation.
5 See European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) the case on Lisica vs. Croatia, decision of 25February 2010 app. No. 20100/06, §§55-60, Available at.
  http:
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=00197213.
6 See Spanish Supreme Court 1992 October 30 decision, RJ 1992, No.8553, 11247.
 See also 1992 Judgment of the Spanish Supreme Court of 14 November, RJ1992, no. 9661, 12662, at 12664, are the sources of English excerpts from two decisions: Stephen C. Thaman, Comparative Criminal Procedure.
 A Casebook Approach.
See European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) the case on Salduz vs Turkey, decision of 27 November 2008, app. No. 36391/02, Available at.
 http:
//hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-89893.
7 See Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Bulgaria; Rights of the defense counsel Article 75; Available at:
https:
//www.unodc.org/cld/document/bgr/2006/criminal_procedure_code_of_the_republic_of_bulgaria.html If such a settlement is envisaged in the pre-trial proceedings, a number of issues in law enforcement practice will be resolved.
  First of all, it is conditioned by the fact that while participating in the investigative actions, the Defender is interested, first of all, to point out "objective circumstances confirming their probative significance, he" ensures the legality of the investigative action.
 The main purpose of the ombudsman's legal activity is to find out whether the investigator has complied with the law during the investigation, as the investigator, who has the responsibility of conducting a comprehensive and fair trial, unlike the ombudsman, in many cases can not conduct direct investigations in parallel. to form objective, at the same time opposing positions, thus ensuring a fair examination of the case in court.
  That is, in the case when the functions of "defense" of the accusation are mostly concentrated in the hands of one subject, one of them influences the psychology of the investigator and becomes the reason for the one-sidedness of the instrumentalism.
 And if the probability of abusing the investigative actions is high, it is simply inadmissible that the issue of the defense's participation in other investigative-judicial actions, which is the main means of gathering evidence, depends on the proposal of its judicial opponent, the criminal prosecution body8.
  Due to this regulation, it can be said that, first of all, the probability of abuses allowed by the criminal prosecution body in the investigative actions with the participation of the defendant will be significantly reduced.
In addition, when an ombudsman is not given absolute but sufficient rights to participate in an investigation, the restrictions on the ombudsman's rights that are used to gather evidence and impede competition are supplemented.
 For example, the ombudsman has the right to draw the attention of a person conducting an investigative or other judicial action to a violation of a law permitted by him, as to object to the actions of a criminal prosecution body, to demand that his objections be entered in the record of another investigative or judicial action.
  In the case when the Defender is deprived of an investigative case 8 See Ghukasyan H., The Defender's Judicial Status at the Preliminary Examination Stage, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2001.
he could not actually exercise the above-mentioned rights due to the lack of necessary facts.
 Pursuant to Part 2 of Article 106 of the current Code, if all the requirements of this Code have been complied with during the acquisition of evidence, the party disputing its admissibility shall be responsible for substantiating the inadmissibility of evidence.
  Legal practice, on the other hand, shows that at the pre-trial stage, the defense's activity is largely limited to gathering facts about violations of the law permitted by the investigator.
 In this case, it turns out that in case of creating false evidence as a result of the search of the detained defendant's apartment, after getting acquainted with the protocol of the given investigative action, the defense attorney does not have a factual opportunity to complain about the inaccuracies in it or find out its authenticity.
  As a result, the defense cannot be effective during the examination of the case if the scope of the defense's rights is limited by objecting to the inaccuracies in the protocols, appealing the decisions of the body conducting the proceedings or attempting to deny certain facts underlying the accusation.
Thus, the defense attorney's participation in the evidence should not be seen as an unnecessary extension of his rights, but as a means of effectively exercising his judicial function.
 The solution of the mentioned problems in the pre-trial proceedings is aimed at increasing the quality of the preliminary examination by expanding the participation of the defense counsel, which will be impossible if the current legislative regulations are not changed.
 In particular, by enshrining such authority at the legislative level, it will be possible to substantially get rid of a number of regulations in the current post-Soviet legal system, which, as practice shows, have a negative impact on the objectivity of pre-trial proceedings.
EXPANSION OF DEFENDER'S RIGHTS IN THE PROOF PROCESS Keywords: proof, apartment search, extension of ombudsman rights, detained defendant, competition, presence of ombudsman, right of Meliana Ghazaryan.
