THE ARMENIAN COMMUNITY OF STAVROPOL IN THE POST-SOVIET YEARS The Armenian Diaspora factor is essential in the history of the modern Armenian period.
  Today, in many countries of the world, in addition to the indigenous, majority population, there live at different times, foreigners who immigrated from their homeland for various reasons - national minorities.
  Armenians abroad establish schools, churches, non-governmental organizations, through which they try to preserve their identity.
 However, the main guarantee for the survival of the Diaspora is the existence of a connection with the homeland, the Republic of Armenia1.
The socio-political changes that took place in the Homeland, the establishment of the national statehood of the independent Republic of Armenia, eliminated the ideological obstacles that existed in the sphere of Homeland-Diaspora relations during the existence of the Soviet Union.
At the current stage of Armenia-Diaspora relations, the effective use of the intellectual potential of Armenians abroad can bring significant benefits to both Armenia and the Diaspora.
 Armenians abroad are better informed about the political situation in their countries, domestic and foreign political processes, their tendencies.
If during the existence of the Soviet Union, saying Diaspora Armenians meant Armenians living in the Americas, Europe, Middle East, Africa, Australia, then after the collapse of the USSR, the term "Diaspora" is gradually applied to the Armenians of Russia and the CIS.
  Armenians living in different republics of the Soviet Union, as well as other national minorities in the country, were deprived of the opportunity to carry out organized community activities for about 70 years.
  Only after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Armenian communities were formed in newly independent states, and various national organizations were established.
1992 The "Union of Armenians of Russia" was established on October 18, 2010 in Krasnodar with the participation of about 100 delegates from the Armenian communities of Russia. The Union of Armenians of Russia was established, which included 33 communities.
  The union included the Armenian formations of Krasnodar, Stavropol, Ryazan, Krasnoyarsk, Moscow, Chita and other regions and cities.
  Introducing the Armenians living in Russia, the union made political statements and measures to defend the Armenian Cause.
 1999 After the first Armenia-Diaspora Pan-Armenian Conference held in September 2010, the process of unification of Armenian organizations in Moscow was accelerated.
 At that time, there were 28 urban-rural communities in Stavropol2.
Erebuni Armenian Cultural and Enlightenment Company played a significant role in the revival of national culture in the region.
 The main goal of this company was to unite the local Armenians, to arouse in them the interest in the mother tongue, the Armenian culture, to establish relations with the homeland3.
  Speaking about the preservation of the identity of Diaspora Armenians, it is necessary to single out the role of the Armenian Apostolic Church, which continues to play its role of substitute for the state, it is considered a gathering place of the people.
Even those Diaspora Armenians who are critical of the church view it as a traditional value.
 2009 On November 22, 42 years later, St. was rebuilt in Stavropol. St. Gregory the Illuminator Armenian Church, which was demolished in 1967.
  Teghi 1 Sardaryan S., On the current issues of the Armenian Diaspora, 21st century, Noravank, № 1 (53), 2014, pp. 111-117.
2 Petrosyan K., Homeland-Diaspora relations in 1988-2001, Yerevan, 2011, p. 51.
3 In the same place.
He had the ceremony of lighting the cross and bells of the church dome, which was presided over by the Bishop of the Armenian Apostolic Church of Southern Russia Movses Movsisyan1.
The Armenian community in Stavropol was formed in the 11th-14th centuries.
 But the main part of the Armenians of Stavropol are the descendants of the Armenian population who migrated from Nagorno Karabakh, who moved to the region during the 18-19th centuries.
  There are a large number of Armenians in the city of Pyatigorsk.
 Through the efforts of Loris Melikov, the city of Pyatigorsk became an administrative center, just as the Spassky Church was built with his help.
  Today, 40,000 Armenians live in the city, which is 20% of the total population.
 St. Sargis Church operates in Pyatigorsk.
 There is also one Armenian school2.
The next city where Armenians make up a large number is the Holy Cross, now Budyonnovsk, which was founded by Armenians deported from Karabakh in 1799.
 1910 As of today, 15 thousand people lived in the city, 10 thousand of whom were Russians and Ukrainians, and the number of Armenians reached 5 thousand.
 Today, out of 60 thousand population, more than 12 thousand (more than 20%) are Armenians3.
 There are 2 Armenian churches in the city (previously there were three Armenian churches): Surb Harutyun, Surb Khach, Armenian school, cultural center 4.
The Armenian village of Edissia (Edesia) is located in the Kursk region of the region, on the banks of the Kura River.
Today there are 6000 Armenian inhabitants in the village.
  The village was founded in 1797. By the order of Paul I5.
  Initially, the village was named after the river Jura.
  It was also known as Derbent, Armenian Village, Kasa-Yama.
 On the initiative of the first settlers in 1802. A church is being built in the village.
 Later, due to relocations, instead of the old church in 1830. A new one is being built, which, however, does not withstand the tests of time for a long time. The villagers start the construction of a new church, the opening of which takes place in 1914.
  Most of the Armenians who emigrated due to the 1988 Spitak earthquake and the blockade of Armenia took refuge in the Krasnodar-Stavropol territories, in the Rostov region, in Moscow.
A significant number of Armenians emigrated to Russia from Azerbaijan and Abkhazia.
  The main part of the Armenian Diaspora in Russia lives in the south of the country.
  1989 According to the data, out of 532.4 thousand Armenians living in Russia, 183 thousand lived in the Krasnodar Territory, 73 thousand in the Stavropol Territory, and 63 thousand in the Rostov region7.
 2005 ․ According to official data, about 1.1 million Armenians live in Russia, according to other sources - 2-2.5 million8.
 Stavropol Territory, 2002 As a result of the census, the total population reached 2 million 735 thousand.
  The ethnic composition is as follows. Russians: 2․231․759 people, Armenians: 149․249 people, Dargins: 40․218 people, Greeks: 34․078 people.
  2010 As a result of the census conducted in Stavropol, the number of Armenians living in the region has increased, reaching 161,324 people9.
Today, there are a number of problems in the Armenian communities of the post-Soviet region, which are very worrying.
1. There is a serious danger to Armenian education.
 Sunday schools, which used to play a role in the past, have lost their appeal today, and young people prefer to attend foreign language courses.
 In the case when the assimilation processes proceed at a fast pace, the mother tongue loses its former, historical preservation function of the Armenian identity.
 One of the main reasons for the "retreat" of the mother tongue is that the level of teaching the Armenian language and Armenian history is not always high, as there are no relevant teachers or textbooks.
1 St. was rebuilt in Stavropol. St. Gregory the Illuminator Church, PanArmenia, 27.11.2009, http.
//www.panarmenian.net/arm/news/39803/.
2 Pythagorean Architecture, KMV Line, http.
//kmvline.ru/arch/b_91.php.http.
//miasin.ru/news/com/item512.html.http.
//kavkasia.net/Armenia/2010/1278093590.php.5 Таты-армяне, иран11зычные армяне, 7.11.2007, http.
//forum.vardanank.org/index.php?showtopic=161&st=0&start=0.6 Hakobyan A., Edesia. zealous for national identity, Noravank, 03.04.2005, http.
//www.noravank.am/upload/pdf/arsen_hakobyan.pdf7 Dolbakyan. ,., Россия и армяне.
 тысячелетие сотворчества, http:
//www.sarinfo.org/armw/?c=armenians&a=armrus_dolbakyan.8 RA Government 2011 Protocol Decision N 37 of the September 22 sitting, page 2, https.
//www.egov.am/u_files/file/decrees/arc_voroshum/09/qax37-15_1%5B1%5D.pdf.
9 Stavropol region regional department SAR, Union of Armenians of Russia, http.
//sarinfo.org/regional/?r=stavropol. 2. Armenians continue to be the main rival in the perceptions of locals.
 According to the locals, their main competitor is the Armenians, especially in terms of distribution of resources, gaining positions in the domestic labor market.
  The atmosphere of intolerance around the Armenians is, of course, one of the current urgent issues.
3. The Armenian communities existing in the territory of the Russian Federation are multi-layered, as their formation took place in stages.
 There are dividing factors between the two segments of the Armenians who came here in the pre-Soviet-Soviet period վող due to the last strong wave of emigration, which are sub-ethnic.
  At the same time, the new wave is not homogeneous: people from Karabakh, Yerevan, Kirovabad, Baku and others.
  That is, in Armenian communities, islanding and internal divisions take place not only on a temporal basis, but also spatially-geographically.
Thus, due to the recent wave of emigration, the Armenian communities of Russia lost their unity 1.
Karine Yeranosyan THE ARMENIAN COMMUNITY OF STAVROPOL IN THE POST-SOVIET YEARS Keywords: Armenian community, Armenian identity, Pyatigorsk, Budyonnovsk, Edissia.
