DEVELOPMENT OF GEORGIA-NATO RELATIONS IN 2008 AFTER THE AUGUST WAR in Georgia in 2008 The August war was a turning point for the Caucasus region.
 The country became a stage for the military-political interests of the two superpowers, the United States and Russia.
  It is of some interest what foreign policy line Վրաստ Georgia chose after the Russian-Georgian war - what security bloc it chose.
 The urgency of the topic is connected with the development of Georgia-NATO relations, how this cooperation can affect the stability of the region.
The "Rose Revolution" in Georgia.
  In Georgia in 2003 In November, the then-opposition Mikheil Saakashvili and his supporters were fighting for the resignation of incumbent President Eduard Shevardnadze.
  2003 Shevardnadze was declared the winner in the November 2 parliamentary elections, but the elections were not considered legal by international organizations.
  Saakashvili demanded new elections, called on people to take to the streets and support him.
 As early as mid-November, there were mass demonstrations in Tbilisi, which spread to other cities and regions of Georgia.
On November 22, when the parliament was holding its first session after the elections, protesters led by Saakashvili entered the parliament with roses in their hands.
  He declared a state of emergency in Shevardnadze and called on the police and armed forces for help.
  But even the elite units refused to support him.
  On November 23, Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov persuaded Shevardnadze to leave Georgia to avoid bloodshed.
  2004 New elections were held on January 4, 1945, առաջնորդ The leader of the Rose Revolution, Mikheil Saakashvili, won.
2004 Saakashvili stated that Georgia's policy will be pro-American, pro-European.
 Foreign policy directions began to be developed in the country.
 Thus, in 2005, Georgia published its new National Security Concept1, which states that the United States is its military ally և they will work towards NATO and EU membership.
In his article "Georgia after the Rose Revolution", James Verch, director of the McDonnell Academy of International Studies, discusses why Georgia is particularly interested in the West.
 The professor singles out 2 points for American interest.2 1. Georgia's role in the geopolitics of oil and gas.
2. Georgia's potential as a model of a country's beginning of democracy and becoming a civil society.
"The key to understanding Georgia's role in today's world is the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline, which was initiated in the 1990s, at the time of Shevardnadze's appearance."
The author of the article singles out several important factors for the success of the "Rose Revolution": 1. Georgian society, 2. Free press.
1 See the text of Georgia's national security strategy on the official website of the country's parliament: http.
//www.parliament.ge/files/292_880_927746_concept_en.pdf.
2 James V., Georgia after the Rose Revolution, Caucasus and Globalization, Volume 1, 2006, p. 62, http.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/gruziya James Verch notes that there were many non-governmental organizations in Georgia, but they were active only then and contributed to the revolution.
 The other possible factor, according to the author, was the free press.
Before the war և after.
 After the collapse of the USSR, a cycle of ethnic clashes began in the South Caucasus: on the one hand, the Armenian-Azerbaijani, on the other hand, the Georgian-Abkhazian, Georgian-Ossetian wars.
  As a result, three new unrecognized or partially recognized states appeared on the political map of the South Caucasus.
 However, the South Caucasus also became a platform for geopolitical conflicts, where the United States is trying to satisfy its particular interests.
  "The first blow aimed at weakening Russia's influence in Georgia in 2003. It was the "Rose Revolution" in November, when pro-American forces led by Mikheil Saakashvili came to power in the country.
 The new government began to increase the country's military potential.
  According to experts from the Stockholm Institute for War and Peace Studies, 2004-2008 Georgia's arms imports almost four times higher than in 1999-2004 indicators »1.
One of the main problems in Georgia was the Russian military bases located in that country, the issue of whose withdrawal dates became one of the most important topics of discussion at the international level.
 Both the United States and the European Union were interested in the immediate withdrawal of these military bases for several main reasons.
 Withdrawal of military bases would first weaken Russia's political and strategic position not only in the South Caucasus, but would also cast doubt on the continued maintenance of Russian influence in the CIS in general.
  Withdrawal of military bases would further strengthen the Western, in particular, American positions in both the South Caucasus and Central Asia.
 The region was used to secure the supply of Caspian oil resources to foreign markets2.
2003 After the change of power, the Georgian-American military relations in Georgia became significantly more active.
 2005 NATO already had a representative in Georgia.
The West was stepping up pressure on official Moscow over the withdrawal of military bases in Georgia.
  The Russian side envisaged 9-11 years for the withdrawal of military bases, the Georgian side offered 3 years.
However, in 2005 In March-April 2005, as a result of the de facto concessional position of the Russian side, the Foreign Ministers of Russia and Georgia According to a joint statement issued on May 30, 2007, the withdrawal of the Russian military base in Akhalkalaki was to be carried out by 2007. The final withdrawal of the Batumi military base was scheduled for October 1, 2008. during.
As stated above, the United States and NATO tried to secure their sovereignty in Georgia by all possible means, thus pushing Russia off the stage.
Georgia itself saw the United States in all possible support.
2007 NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer was in Georgia on October 3-4.
 In Tbilisi, he stated that a third country could not have a decisive voice in NATO-Georgia relations, alluding to Russia.
 This hint is still valid.
2008 ․ August 8 - Five-day war.
  In 2008, the Georgian-Ossetian, in other words, the Georgian-Russian war, also known as the "August War", began.
  It lasted 5 days and ended with the military defeat of the Georgian side, the recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia by Russia from several other countries, as well as the strengthening of the Russian military presence in those republics4.
  Georgia justified the attack on South Ossetia by the need to establish control over its territory and restore constitutional order there.
http:
//books.sipri.org/files/FS/SIPRIFS0904.pdf.2 The five-day Russian-Georgian war և its geopolitical implications for the South Caucasus, Fact Fact, http.
//fact.am/archives/4925.
3 NATO Secretary General supported Georgia politically in relation to Russia, 4.10.2007, http.
//newsru.com/world/04oct2007/cheffer.html.4 On August 8, 2008 the Russian-Georgian war started, Razm.info, 08.08.2013, http.
//razm.info/17366.
The war began on the night of August 7-8, when Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili ordered the shelling of the South Ossetian capital, Tskhinvali, after which Georgian troops launched a ground offensive.
  The barracks of the Russian peacekeepers located in the territory of South Ossetia were also shelled.
 On the afternoon of August 8, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev issued an order to launch military operations by "forcing peace."
  In a few days the Russian army entered Poti, Gori, Senaki and Zugdidi, approaching the capital Tbilisi.
 Unable to stop the enemy's advance, the Georgian army retreated, suffering losses.
  After all this, official Tbilisi had to think about a ceasefire.
  The hostilities lasted until August 12, after which the project of a peaceful settlement of the conflict was signed between the representatives of the "Russian presidents" of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
As a result of the war, the process of international recognition of the previously unrecognized Abkhazia and South Ossetia began.
  Abkhazia and South Ossetia were the first to recognize Russia as an independent state, followed by Venezuela, Vanuatu, Nicaragua, Nauru and Tuvalu.
On September 2, Georgia announced the severance of diplomatic relations with Russia, accusing it of occupying its territories.
Politics after the war.
  2008 The Chairman of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Joseph Biden, expressed his opinion on August 12. "Russia can become the side that will suffer the most if the war continues."
 This clearly emphasizes the total nature of the conflict, that is, the United States was showing a negative position in every way.
On the same day, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili announced that Georgia was leaving the CIS, and on August 14 the Georgian government approved the decision.
  Although the CIS was not a structure with great political potential, but first of all it was an advisory platform for the former USSR countries, and in this case Georgia closed the possibility of negotiating with Russia on such a scale or reaching some agreements.
Already on August 20, Russian Foreign Minister S. Lavrov made an important statement in the "Wall Street Journal" periodical. "The United States has to choose between a virtual Georgian project or a more comprehensive partnership with Russia."
NATO's concrete interest was also dictated in Georgia.
  Still in 2008 On August 17, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, while in Tbilisi, announced: "If Georgia wishes, the decision of the NATO Bucharest Summit will not be changed. NATO doors will be opened for Georgia."
  On September 4, the official representative of the White House announced that Ukraine and Georgia were fulfilling the necessary requirements for NATO membership, and the decision to join will be made in December.
On September 15-16, a NATO conference was held in Tbilisi, which was opened by the President of Georgia M. Saakashvili։ NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer.
During the conference, the Secretary General stated that the events of the last month could deter Georgia from joining NATO, however, the doors of the Alliance are still open for Georgia, that no other country has the right to veto this issue.
2008 ․ On September 19, 1945, US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that Russia would receive a forceful response from the United States if it attacked Georgia after joining NATO.
The Georgian dream and the still unattainable NATO!
  2008 The process of preparing Georgia for membership began at the NATO summit in Bucharest.
 After that, the Georgia-NATO cooperation expanded even more.
  Georgia meets NATO standards 1 Russia has the most to lose in this costly conflict, Financial Times, 12.08.2008, https.
//next.ft.com/content/8eb68046-6898-11dd http:
//www.wsj.com/articles/SB121919150258855111.3 Merkel in Tbilisi.
 NATO troops re-open to Georgia, 17.08.2008. http:
//www.newsru.com/world/17aug2008/merkel.html. In order to achieve that, he had to make reforms in the defense system.
 The process of NATO membership is taken very seriously in Georgia.
  During these years, especially in 2012. After the change of power (Saakashvili was ousted by Bidzina Ivanishvili, the founder of the "Georgian Dream" party), reaching NATO standards became one of the main directions of foreign policy.
2014 NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said at the opening of the NATO summit in Brussels on June 25, that Georgia was being offered a new NATO-based cooperation package, which would allow it to move closer to NATO.
According to him, due to the open door policy, NATO principles have remained the same, no country can stop that process.
  "I want to emphasize once again the policy of openness, because it will benefit not only the countries wishing to join NATO, but also the Alliance itself.
 Our basic principles are unchanged.
 In this regard, it is worth mentioning Georgia, to which we have offered a new basic package of cooperation with the alliance.
 It will help Georgia get closer to NATO. "
 Recently, it has been widely discussed whether Georgia will join NATO at the upcoming summit in Wales or not.
  It is supposed that the reason for such talks has been the recent active policy of Georgia, in particular, the announcement that from 2015 Georgia will become part of the NATO Rapid Reaction Force, and the US will be a sponsor.
In response to Georgia's moves to join the Alliance at the NATO Summit in Wales on September 4-5, the latter was offered a new package of cooperation.
  It presupposed the establishment of an educational base in Georgia, the opening of a military school logistics center.
  About this in 2014 Georgian Defense Minister Irakli Alasania told reporters on October 9. "The Georgia-NATO cooperation package envisages not only a joint training base, but also the establishment of a military school, where servicemen from different countries will be trained.
  Special specialists will work on the implementation of the points of the NATO package, who will work in the General Staff of the Georgian Armed Forces ”2.
 According to Alasania, the Defense Ministry has already sent its considerations to NATO on what the training base should be, and is waiting for the response of the Alliance member states.
Irakli Alasania also referred to the statement of the Russian Foreign Ministry on October 8 that "such processes (creation of NATO infrastructure in Georgia) may become a threat to the balance of power in the Caucasus region."
  Alasania countered, noting that the "biggest threat" to the region is Russia, that a strong Georgia would mean a strong supporter of maintaining balance in the region4.
On October 9, in his turn, the Georgian Prime Minister's Special Representative for Relations with Russia Zurab Abashvidze stated. "Cooperation with NATO does not pose any threat to the region, its security violates unresolved issues."
  He added that he was going to discuss this issue in Prague with his Russian counterpart5.
In Russia, however, they have a different opinion.
 The Caucasian correspondent of "Liberty" radio station talked to the Russian military expert, reservist colonel Victor Baranets, according to whom, according to Russia, the response steps will not take long. "I do not rule out that our or, if you want, our joint group of border guards will be strengthened at the border.
  I do not rule out the possibility that anti-aircraft missile systems, anti-tank means, artillery may appear there.
  We think that in Abkhazia ավային South Ossetia 1 NATO has offered Georgia a new basic package of cooperation, Razm.info, 26.06.2014, http.
//razm.info/47171.
2 Irakli Alasania.
 threat for the religion is aggression of Russia, but not location of NATO infrastructure in Georgia, GHN News Agency, 09.10.2014, http.
//eng.ghn.ge/news-8980.html.3 МИД РФ.
 NATO infrastructure in Georgia creates great stability, RIA Novosti, October 8, 2014, http.
//ria.ru/world/20141008/1027487037.html. http:
//www.apsny.ge/2014/mil/1412887864.php.http.
//www.apsny.ge/2014/pol/1412878585.php. "Our military bases in the United States can be strengthened in the same way that NATO is doing in Europe."
  Russian political scientist Nikolay Sila states that there are several levels of relations in this issue. "There are Russian-NATO, Russian-American, Russian-Georgian, Georgian-South Ossetian or Georgian-Abkhazian relations. There is one big problem in this context - the Georgian communities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
 The steps of Sukhumi or Tskhinvali in general may "have nothing to do with what is happening between Russia և NATO or Moscow և Tbilisi 2" 2.
On October 10, the head of the NATO Office in Georgia, William Lahue, denied media reports that NATO would establish a training base in Georgia, saying: "The issue under discussion is related to the new training base of the Georgian Ministry of Defense. NATO will have its support in that matter.
  Our consulting specialists will also help. ”3
The head of the office said that Georgia has a similar training base, where mountain shooters are trained from NATO partner countries.
 For this reason, the new base can not be considered a NATO base or a NATO training center.
It was later confirmed that in any case NATO will have infrastructure in Georgia in the form of a training center.
 It will be joint, as NATO will send its specialists to Georgia to participate in the work.
  However, the content of the new package of cooperation given to Georgia during the NATO summit in Wales was not available to the public.
  According to Moscow, the package threatens to upset the balance in the region, in response to which the Georgian Defense Minister spoke about the details of the package.
Supposedly, NATO decided to publish the introductory part of the package in order to bring some clarity to this debate.
  According to the spread message, in the introduction of the package, the goals of the package are announced, as well as the status of Georgia as a candidate country for membership in the North Atlantic Alliance.
  The main goal of the package is to prepare Georgia for NATO membership.1. The foreign ministers of the alliance countries in 2014 On June 25, they agreed to develop a new package of cooperation for Georgia.
  The purpose of the package is to increase Georgia's defense capabilities, which will help that country join.
2. The mentioned package was developed and implemented within the framework of the Georgia-NATO Commission.
It plays a central role in overseeing the process of preparing Georgia for membership after the Bucharest Summit (this is part of the 2008 Summit).
Georgia as a candidate country will present the parts of that package in its annual programs.
3. Alliance countries are encouraged to take into account the provisions of the package in case of bilateral cooperation with Georgia4.
"Georgia will definitely become a member of NATO when it meets all the criteria set by the Alliance."
 These are the words of the new NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg. "Georgia has come quite close to NATO in recent years.
 We continue to move forward with the 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest. According to the decision adopted at the summit, which stated that Georgia will become a member of NATO when it meets all the criteria.
  We will support you in that direction. "
 In his words, Georgia is one of the most loyal partners to the North Atlantic Alliance and plays a major role in peacekeeping missions.
 That is why they will continue to help Georgia for further reforms5.
1 What should Moscow say ?, Echo of the Caucasus, 09.10.2014, http.
//www.ekhokavkaza.com/a/26629632.html.2 Nikolai Silaev, Andrei Sushencov.
 Georgia after the elections and perspectives of Russian-Georgian relations, Regnum Information Agency, http.
//regnum.ru/news/1620583.html.3 NATO checked the construction of construction bases in Georgia, Tape, 10.10.2014, https.
//lenta.ru/news/2014/10/10/base/.4 NATO has announced the introduction of a new package of cooperation given to Georgia, Razm.info, 31.10.2014, http.
//razm.info/55637.
5 Stoltenberg.
 Georgia - one of the only loyal partners NATO, Sputnik, 18.11.2014, http.
// sputnik Georgia has been striving for membership for years, but NATO is not ready for that yet.
 Georgia is a very good card for the United States and NATO to oppose Russia.
 It is difficult to say for sure how Georgia-NATO, Georgia-US-Georgia-Russia relations will develop, but it is obvious that this cold conflict is a tension for the Caucasus region.
We think that the created situation benefits all parties.
 The great powers pursue their own interests.
  Frequent conflicts of interest exacerbate the problem of balance in the region, sometimes through mutual threats, sometimes through practical steps (such as the opening of a training center in Georgia), and Georgia has convinced its public that it is a European-compliant country that will one day join NATO.
 This is evidenced by the data of a sociological survey conducted by the International Republican Institute (IRI), where 79% of Georgian respondents support the country 's NATO membership process.
Hasmik Meliksetyan DEVELOPMENT OF GEORGIA-NATO RELATIONS 2008 AFTER THE AUGUST WAR Keywords: Georgia, Russia, USA, August War, Caucasus.
