THE NEED FOR INTRODUCING THE EXPERIENCE OF EXPERIENCED COUNTRIES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES The modern world is a stage of rapid development, where every state is trying to survive.
  In this sense, it is necessary to understand what are the guarantees of a strong statehood and a stable society.
 Education should be one of the spheres that has indicators of rapid development և changes depending on many circumstances.
  Given the vivid examples of Japan and Singapore այլ այլ, այլ ներդր այլ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
Education, being a historical concept, is still a modern and necessary field for the society.
  Education transfers knowledge, skills and experience from generation to generation, creating conditions for growth and development.
  At the same time, as a result of social, political, economic, social-psychological, democratic and other processes, education, its quality and significance change from place to place.
"Education is the most powerful weapon you can use to change the world."
  This is how one of the most prominent leaders of all time, Nelson Mandela, described and valued education.
  But the question arises, what is education?
 According to the classical definition, education is the process of receiving or providing systematic education, which is carried out in schools, universities and other educational institutions [1].
 Of course, this definition is quite incomplete in today's conditions, because now education has a much broader and more comprehensive interpretation than it does.
  This is evidenced by the existing diversity of views, opinions, approaches to education, and very often disagreements.
Today, education is perceived as the main basis for the formation and development of a person.
  Through this, man begins to know the world and the patterns that exist in it.
  In this sense, it can be said that from the day a person is born he goes through an endless educational process, as a result of which his worldview, worldview, knowledge, way of thinking, etc.
  There is a misconception that education is a learning process արդյունքում the qualification obtained as a result.
  This approach corresponds to the classical definition of education.
  However, the above is only a definite function of education.
  At the same time, it should be noted that one of the main components of education is change (mostly positive), while in most cases the teaching process or qualifications are implemented without any significant change.
In general, the human educational process first of all proceeds with the mastery of cultural forms and manners, in other words, with the knowledge of customs and traditions.
  This process is carried out through the direct influence of human perception և environment.
  Later this process passes to the field of formalization, where the person already receives what he is directed to master (teachers, teachers, etc.).
 After this stage, a person tends to be more self-educated.
 It is this interpretation that allows us to distinguish between formal and informal forms of education.
Above is a brief and very brief description of education.
 But there is one question! What is the education system?
  A system in general is a set of interconnected components, each component of which affects the others while at the same time bearing the influence of the others.
Back in prehistoric times, when people were mainly engaged in hunting and gathering, people passed on their knowledge skills from generation to generation.
 This was, in fact, the primary version of education.
  Later, with the advent of agriculture, the need arose to acquire new knowledge related to the cultivation of the land and the care of each pet.
  With the emergence of civilizations, as with the formation of state systems, there were deeper and more substantial demands on education than the previous ones.
  When the knowledge and skills of mankind were expanded and accumulated, the formal institutions of formal education emerged.
  Prototypes of schools were formed in Ancient Egypt.
 The students were learning to write, read, count, sports and painting lessons were planned.
  Only wealthy boys used such services in those days.
  Schools and even academies were formed in ancient Greece.
  In this way the coordination of education began.
 The formed separate educational components began to complement each other in different aspects, creating a complete system.
Today education has its unique place in the social, economic and political life of each country.
  And it is not at all at what stage of development the state is. Education retains its potential with some cytokine differences.
  Nowadays, more than ever, more attention, resources, efforts are being made to study the issues of education, organization, and efficiency; this is not accidental at all.
  Having a complex and systemic structure, education implies a number of other complexities of planning, implementation, management.
Turning from the essence of education to the main forms, let us mention that as their perception is quite diverse, so are the types.
Education can be classified according to characteristics: organization, inclusion, specialization, etc.
 According to the organization, education can be formal, informal or non-state.
All countries are divided into two main groups by the United Nations (UN). developed և developing countries [4].
The classification of countries is based on economic indicators such as gross domestic product (GDP, GDP per capita), industry, living standards, etc.
  Developed countries are defined as "sovereign" countries whose economies have registered and continue to record high rates, they, unlike other countries, have strong technological infrastructure.
  Industrial և countries with low human development are called developing countries [5].
Developed countries provide a free, healthy և environment for living, which is more or less lacking in developing countries.
Developed countries are the countries that have high economic indicators, especially in terms of industry.
  These are known as "progressive" or "First World countries" because they are "independent" countries.
  Countries with low levels of industrial development have a low per capita income, known as developing countries.
  These countries are considered "third world countries".
 Developed countries are Canada, Germany, Australia, Sweden, Norway, France, Italy, etc.
  Developing countries are China, Turkey, Kenya, Pakistan, Thailand, Colombia, Armenia, etc.
Being a country with a developed education system and being a developed country are not the same at all.
  To better understand the introduction of systems, consider the example of higher education institutions.
Higher education institutions, like any educational institution, have their own set of goals, which may differ somewhat depending on the nature of the direction of different higher education institutions, but, nevertheless, have common features։ overlaps.
  Higher education institutions are different in nature.
  Their definition and legal-organizational elements, as well as the directions of their activities and powers are defined by the relevant legislative acts of the given country.
On April 14, 1999, the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia adopted the "Law on Education", which defines the issues set in the field of education, the organizational and legal aspects of educational institutions, etc. [6].
    According to that law, the higher education institutions operating in Armenia are universities, institutes, academies and conservatories.
University is a higher educational institution, the activity of which is aimed at organizing higher education, natural sciences, technology, culture, higher education, postgraduate education, basic scientific research (basic scientific research) (Article 3, point 10).
Institute - a higher educational institution, which implements professional and postgraduate educational programs in a number of directions of science, economy, culture, scientific studies (point 11).
Academy (educational) - a higher educational institution, the activity of which is aimed at the development of education, science, technology, culture in a certain field, carries out the training of highly qualified specialists in a certain branch (field), retraining, postgraduate educational programs (point 12).
Conservatory - a higher educational institution, the activity of which is aimed at training specialists in the field of music, raising their qualification, implementation of postgraduate educational programs (point 13).
The main goal of universities is to search for basic knowledge in all intellectual discourses, to ensure their transmission and understanding from generation to generation.
  Universities, for those with a secondary school education, however, aim to develop the ability of their preferred students to reach a relatively narrow age group, ie 17-24 years old.
Universities's intellectual abilities, creative thinking, critical approaches, professional communication, promoting freedom of thought and understanding [7].
 The important thing is that the universities provide a basic knowledge base, which in turn allows them to identify possible problems in the chosen field.
 In this sense, it becomes clear how organic the connection between the state and "university education" is.
  Many universities, regardless of their location in developed or developing countries, divide the implementation of their educational services into several phases.
  As a rule, these stages are two: basic education of basic nature և professional-research education.
  The main purpose of this is to train qualified specialists only after socially responsible persons.
  The list of subjects chosen during the first stage in such universities is based on the mastery of the provisions of the social-civic field.
 Problems solved in this way, maximizing the knowledge and skills of the professional field to solve them.
  The University of Novosibirsk is guided by this example.
There are certain features, criteria, and qualitative provisions that are offered to people who have passed the university threshold, graduated from that educational institution (and received a certain professional qualification).
  These circles also have special manifestations depending on the socio-cultural situation of the region.
  However, they lead to diligence, desire to learn, understanding, will, foresight, responsibility, professional literacy.
  It is very possible that everyone who has graduated from the university will recognize the potential that they have acquired due to the knowledge and skills developed.
  This is the guarantee of self-confidence, by which positive changes can be achieved in the society.
At the same time, there are countries in the world with a high level of development and unprecedented high economic indicators, whose educational services have the highest quality ratings, but this has not happened at all in parallel with or at least after industrialization.
The effect of the multiplier has already worked here.
  In other words, these countries, the role and importance of educational services in the field of economy, with great understanding of the investments of the qualified, directed to the field, and after a short time the qualified professionals in their turn introduced the knowledge base and skills in certain spheres, which led to general economic growth.
 Among such countries are Japan, Singapore, etc.
Many of the services that lead to the transfer of knowledge or the development of certain skills are "late" in universities.
  That is, the creation of information, market relations, scientific discoveries take place outside the university walls.
  They go through a phase of refinement, are formed և strengthened as reliable և accurate information, միայն only then enter universities.
  In this sense, the development of individuals' creative thinking and foresight is very important.
In developed countries, the provision of university services has long turned into a multifunctional activity.
  In other words, the universities not only solve the problem of providing professional staff with responsible citizens, but also take on the responsibility of settling a number of other social, moral, scientific, cultural and other issues.
  In many countries, universities are also large economic associations whose annual turnover can exceed several million US dollars.
The picture is different in developing countries and regions.
  The services offered by the universities here are mostly of low quality. It is almost the opposite picture compared to the developed ones.
The above applies to universities in general.
Let us now turn to their services.
We propose to classify university services into two main groups: main supporter.
  The main university services are all the services that are more or less related to the organization of the educational process itself (admission system, classroom services, qualified teaching staff, libraries, etc.), and among the auxiliary services we can single out the services that improve the provision of basic services ( cleaning, security, entertainment և other services).
Thus, in developed countries, the provision of the above-mentioned basic auxiliary services is most in line with the quality threshold, but in fairness, it should be noted that this is not unambiguous for all developed countries or universities.
Let's discuss in more detail what main services universities offer, what are the ways of organizing them.
 First of all, it should be noted that special departments are allocated in universities for the organization of one service or similar services, which are supplemented by appropriate administrative regulations.
  The first main service concerns the organization of the admission process.
  Although each state defines the functional scope of universities by law, universities still have their own charters that are in line with the law, but are mostly focused on internal organizational issues.
  Thus, depending on the internal legislation of the university, reception services can be provided in different ways.
 They can be once or twice a year (in case of distance or distance learning), the administrative staff can be formed from the university circles.
  This service includes the process of admitting applicants to the departments offered by the university, "providing clear information about the specializations".
Period-number: short The next main service is the compilation of the class schedule.
  This is done in a hierarchical manner, mostly from top to bottom.
  This service is directly combined with the provision of relevant staff, ie the teaching staff.
The provision of library services is included in the list of compulsory students among the University services.
  Of course, any university is obliged to provide literature for professional (as well as general) development.
 This gives an opportunity to add in-depth professional knowledge to the information and knowledge received in the classroom.
  Library services have undergone significant changes recently.
  In particular, the existence of automation տրոն electronic literature is already a reality in many universities.
 Through this, each student can have the necessary book at hand, which, of course, is a necessary service.
At the same time, the sections providing printed literature have a special place.
  Adjacent to the library services, there are also reading rooms, which can be equipped with modern equipment, appropriate lighting devices, necessary furniture.
Compulsory financial services of universities.
  These provide all the conditions by solving the financial issues among the "Students" of the university.
  How can they provide other financial services in parallel?
The list of basic services includes quality assurance centers, the purpose of which is to ensure continuous qualitative progress in terms of professional qualification compliance with modern requirements.
Services provided by the Department of International Cooperation or Liaison at Higher Education Institutions.
 These are provided by universities in conjunction with other universities in the country or abroad, educational and research centers, and other education bodies.
  They aim to establish bilateral cooperation, implement joint programs, exchange experience, etc.
  For well-known universities, these departments are of unprecedented importance, as the coordination services are provided through these departments.
International Admission of Students և As a rule, there are research centers, laboratories, institutes, etc. attached to universities.
  The scope of their activities leads to the provision of various services.
In particular, the implementation of scientific research works promotes sectoral development and the provision of scientific research services.
  In the fields where research or studies are carried out, serious successes can be registered, which, of course, lead to positive changes, serving the progress of the country's society.
  At the same time, the active use of these centers creates an opportunity to involve students in science and practical activities.
  This is a platform where future professionals can apply the knowledge they have gained by receiving the first fruits.
Additional services, as we have already mentioned, are supportive in nature, aimed at improving the provision of basic services.
  However, in most cases these are not in direct contact with the main services և are more independent in nature.
  In other words, additional services to provide access to certain activities at the university level internally and externally.
Additional services include accommodation services for university students (students, teachers, administrative staff, etc.).
The corresponding buildings, which belong to the universities, offer a certain number of people.
Such buildings can also accommodate international guests, invited lecturers, etc.
  Because universities are magnetic, people from all walks of life go on to pursue a career, and services of this kind only make the process easier.
Cultural and entertaining services have a special place in the list of additional services of universities.
  These are mainly aimed at ensuring the cultural activity of university students, ie film screenings, theatrical performances, concerts, discussions on certain components of art or culture, etc.
  These can be more active, that is, they can operate dance, song, painting, musical instruments, theatrical and other groups, which offer relevant services, and therefore "entertainment" at the university.
 In this regard, various competitions are organized.
 The role of sports is especially big in the department.
 The sports associations affiliated with the universities enable the organization of a healthy lifestyle of the university students, offering a variety of sports services.
  The organization of these services presupposes the availability of relevant specialists, as well as modern equipment.
 Moreover, there may be working groups in the sports department.
Additional services can be organized through various non-educational associations, which can be formed for short-term or long-term activities within the universities.
  The main point of such activity is the improvement of the learning process, which is the end point of joint discussions.
Achieving discoveries and offers is one of the non-compulsory services of universities.
  There may also be permanent or temporary structures for them, depending on the human-financial resources of the university.
 Adjacent to or right inside the universities may be halls for seminars, conferences, meetings and discussions, equipped with all the necessary resources for their purpose.
There are many basic, additional services, which are considered mandatory, not mandatory, depending on the internal external factors of the university.
The above descriptions and brief comments presented the main provisions proposed to the universities, as well as the main additional services that are available or can be provided in the organization of university education.
Conclusion.
  As a result of the research, it became clear how important the quality educational services are in creating a healthy statehood and a sustainable society.
  Therefore, it is necessary to realize the need to use modern methods and conditions of education, because in this way the best educational services can be provided, building a developed, competitive country on their basis.
  In short, it is necessary to introduce the experience of educational services of developed countries in developing countries as well.
LITERATURE [1] www.oxforddictionaries.com (Accessed.
 28.03.2019). [2] www.psychologytoday.com (Accessed.
 11.04.2019). [3] www.ancientpages.com (Accessed.
 14.04.2019). [4] www.un.org (Accessed.
 14.04.2019). [5] www.keydifferences.com (Accessed.
 19.04.2019). [6] RA Law on Education, adopted by the National Assembly on April 14, 1999, Article 3, items 10-13, URL.
  https:
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docID=68299 (link made: 12-05-2019).
[7] www.studfiles.net (Accessed.
 21.04.2019) .Davayan MEDICAL EDUCATION DEVELOPED COUNTRIES IN THE COUNTRIES THAT CREATE THE EXPERIENCE OF EXPERIENCE EXPERIENCE Keywords: education, education system, education, development, developing countries, service
