ON THE ISSUE OF CLARIFICATION OF THE CONTENT OF THE WORD "STATE OF WELFARE" Today in the framework of scientific literature there is no clear interpretation of the content of the term "welfare state".
 From this point of view, the discussion of the following questions is very important, which have not been fully answered so far. To what extent is it expedient to use the term "welfare state", what are the characteristics that distinguish the welfare state from other states, to what extent is it expedient to attach the word "welfare" to the word "state", if in fact all modern developed countries are like that? .
This substantive issue is related, first of all, to the English concept of "welfare state", which is widely used all over the world.
  When we say "welfare state", we mean the states where the government provides the necessary level of welfare.
  Since all modern developed countries directly or indirectly provide a certain minimum level of welfare for a certain segment of their citizens, the term "welfare state" seems to completely lose its explanatory and distinctive function.
 Instead of the above-mentioned term, we can use any other term describing the modern developed state.
This term is used by Gosta Esping Andersen to describe a welfare state.
  The latter, in his famous work "The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism", answers the question of what welfare is. "The lack of real interest in the welfare state is typical of scientific literature.
 Researchers guided by other theoretical interests do not raise the conceptual question of in what cases a state can actually be considered a welfare state ”2.
  Strange as it may seem, Andersennaya does not answer the question of what a welfare state is.
  "There is no universal definition of a welfare state.
  The general definition of the welfare state in the textbooks implies that the latter is responsible for ensuring a certain level of welfare for its citizens ”3.
 However, in the case of the above definition, the following questions remain unanswered. And for whom, the poor or the rich, should that welfare be provided? What level of welfare is in question, how to distinguish between welfare states and non-welfare states?
Critically analyzing Esping Andersen's study, Deborah Mitchell 4 raises the possible question of how expedient it is to typify welfare states if they pursue the same social policy.
According to Mitchell, all modern states are states of prosperity.
  The latter bases its view on the data of the Luxemburg Income Survey (LIS) methodology, ie the statistical measurement of the personal income inequality of the population.
  However, the LIS methodology does not allow to reveal the real picture of poverty.
 But this 1 See Esping-Andersen G., The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge.
 Polity Press, 1990.
2 See ibid., P.
3 See ibid.
4 See Mitchell D., Welfare States and Welfare Outcomes in the 1980s // Social Security.
 50 years after Beveridge (Proceedings of an International Conference), University of York, pp. 47-67.
The researcher addresses the following important question: Who acts as a subject of the welfare state, the state or the government?
Another researcher, Joan Higgins, tries to answer the question posed by Mitchell.
  According to the latter, "the direction of the social policy of the same country can change dramatically in a very short period of time" 1.
 A vivid example is New Zealand, which transformed from a mature welfare state into a polygon of neoliberal politics in 1990. after the change of government.
One of the theorists of social policy Richard Titmus in his "Welfare State. In the article "Characters և Reality" he mentions that "1951. This term has been interpreted differently since then. ”
  The latter considered the content of this notion so problematic that he thought that this notion should be applied in quotation marks.
  Titmus considered that the classification of welfare states according to the types of social programs (social policy means) is not expedient, as they are not a distinctive feature of the welfare state.
  At present, the implementation of social programs in many developed countries of the West is considered one of the most important obligations of the state2.
  However, the goals of the welfare state policy can be quite different, from social inclusion to raising the level of personal income of a certain segment of the population (not necessarily the entire population).
 Since all modern developed countries pursue one or more of the above goals, researchers consider all such countries to be welfare states.
It should be noted that in other languages ​​terms equivalent to the English term "welfare state" were used earlier.
 Analyzing the history of the term "welfare state", Lowe noted that in Germany և in the United States this term had a negative connotation before the latter was given a positive meaning as a result of post-war reforms of social legislation in Great Britain.
  The term "Woblfabrtsstaat" used during the Weimar Republic was criticized for its semantic uncertainty.
  Later, in Germany, the principled, at the same time realistic obligations to increase the welfare of the state were preferred to be defined by the term "Sozialstaat" 3.
  In France, the debate over the term "l'etat providence" took place within a completely different discourse.
  Therefore, the content of this term does not completely coincide with the content of the term "welfare state" used in English4.
  The term "welfare state" gained great recognition in Great Britain thanks to Archbishop William Temple, who in 1941 He tried to distinguish between the activities of promoting the welfare of the people and the activities of the infamous "power state" (powerstate) or as some prefer to call it "warfare state".
Nearly twenty years after the English term "welfare state" became well-known, sociologist Dorothy Weberbern linked Labor to power in 1964. He wrote his article "The Facts and Theories of the State of Prosperity", in which he described the debates over the origin of the term "welfare state".
 Analyzing the work of researchers in English on the state of well-being, Wederberne came to the conclusion that the content of this term is interpreted differently.
  However, the latter notes that "there is a certain agreement on the key issue. The welfare state seeks to soften the game of market forces: 1 See Higgins J. States of Welfare.
 Comparative Analysis in Social Policy. Oxford.
 Blackwell, 1981, pp. 44-45.
2 See Titmuss R., The Welfare State.
 Images and Realities // Social Service Review. 1963. Vol. 37, page 6.
3 See Low R. Introduction.
  the Road from 1945 // Welfare Policy in Britain.
  The Road from 1945 / H. Fawcett, R. Low (eds.)., Macmillan, 1999, p. 3.
4 Just as according to the English tradition, poverty implies an insufficient level of income, and within the French tradition, more often social isolation, without taking into account the level of income.
providing everyone with a minimum level of real income ”1.
  However, in this case, the following controversial question arises. Which activities of the government should be considered as activities aimed at ensuring a minimum level of revenue?
  Ensuring the minimum level of real income of the population can be viewed in a narrow sense as the operation of the institutions that approve the amount of wages, tax benefits, provide social assistance.
 However, it is advisable to expand the scope of this concept to include measures to boost economic growth, the environment, healthcare, education infrastructure, the housing sector, as well as employment programs, ie anything that hinders the decline in welfare, promotes personal income. raising the level.
  Thus, one of the characteristics of a welfare state is a policy aimed at preventing poverty, as well as providing assistance to the poor.
1961 Historian Eisa Briggs in her book "The State of Prosperity from a Historical Perspective" notes that the term "State of Prosperity" was used in 1945. then to describe Labor UK.
 From here it spread all over the world.
 This term has been freely used by politicians and journalists to describe societies at different levels of development.
  However, the term "welfare state" was seldom used.
  Historians have borrowed this term.
 The latter tried to rewrite the 19th-20th centuries. history, especially the history of Great Britain, presenting it as a process of "origin" և "development" of welfare.
  This term was used to describe both social and economic change. ”2
  Briggs believed that his historical analysis justified his attempt to define the welfare state as a state in which organized power was deliberately used (through politics and management) to change the rules of the market in at least three directions.
 According to Briggs, these areas are: • creating guarantees for a minimum income, • protecting risks from unintended loss of income, • exercising the right of everyone to the highest possible standard of living.
These three criteria proposed by Briggs apply not only to monetary income but also to real income, while Wederberne uses only monetary income.
 Thus, the definition of a "welfare state" proposed by Briggs is more concise.
 However, both Briggs and Weberbern, when analyzing the content of this concept, come to the conclusion that the welfare state ensures the welfare of everyone only to a minimal extent, with the help of both preventive and corrective (corrective) measures.
In fact, it is possible to reach a general agreement among scientists on the basic principle of clarifying the content of the "welfare state".
 Analyzing the meaning of the term "welfare state" in the works of their contemporaries, Wederberne և Briggs found that the latter used the term in the same sense, although not obviously, but realized the existence of criteria that characterize the semantic differences of the welfare state.
  This consensual approach uses either the guarantee of a minimum real income or the idea of ​​providing everyone with the highest possible standard of living.
 All modern developed countries try to mitigate the influence of market forces in the interests of their population groups for the sake of their well-being.
According to Weberbern, his contemporaries agree that the social policy of the welfare state should be aimed at the poor, the socially isolated, the marginalized, those who are completely deprived of economic rights.
 Wederbern found that very few use 1 See Wedderburn D., Facts and Theories of the Welfare State // the Socialist Register 1965 / R. Miliband, J. Saville (eds.), L. MerlinPress, 1965, p. 127 -128.
2 See Briggs A., The Welfare State in Historical Perspective // ​​European Journal of Sociology, 1961, p. 221.
3 See ibid., P. 228.
This term is as broadly used as that used by economist James Mead.
According to the Midi definition, "the welfare state includes the collection of taxes from the incomes of the rich for the purpose of directly or indirectly subsidizing the incomes of the poor" 2.
Thus, looking at the poor as a necessary criterion for defining the content of a "welfare state", ensuring the well-being of all presupposes the creation of a system of social protection for the poor with the least efficiency, which would work on a residual basis.
  This circumstance already reserved the right to be called "welfare states" even for states built on a non-egalitarian, hierarchical integrative model3.
  Conversely, any state considered egalitarian (for example, the United States), which provided a large part of its population, could not claim to be called a welfare state if it excluded any group of the population from the sphere of support.
Referring to the conceptual confusion of research projects, it should be noted that, in fact, the emergence of problems is largely due to the fact that some authors do not explain what program (project) they use when applying the concept of "welfare state".
  An analysis of the scientific literature on the welfare state shows that the discrepancies between the approaches proposed by different authors are mainly due to the fact that the latter are probably consciously trying to implement incomparable programs within incompatible discourses4.
 At least six such projects can be distinguished: • Identify the types of welfare state, which is an abstract project.
 The latter presupposes the development of semantic criteria.
• Describe the main characteristics of a welfare state according to the above types, which is an empirical project.
• Classify the functions of the state in the field of social policy.
  In this case, the project becomes more analytical than descriptive.
• Indicate the actions of the state in the field of social policy.
In this case we are dealing with a program, normative project.
• Explain how the state started implementing social policy.
This approach presupposes the implementation of historical analysis.
• Assess how effectively the state is performing its functions in the field of social policy.
 Such a project requires the development of functional efficiency criteria.
The disadvantage of the above is just the ideal classification of projects.
  But in reality, different authors can combine the elements of the projects in different ways.
  But do they operate within the framework of the same intellectual discourse?
 Even if the latter speak "the same language", do they mean the same projects?
In the presence of the above-mentioned issues, both scientific research and social policy will significantly benefit from the use of criteria such as terms on the content of which there is some agreement, which will allow: • Clearly distinguish only for a certain part of the population Citizens who have welfare states from those states that provide welfare for all citizens.
• In this case, it will be much easier to assess the effectiveness of the welfare state.
In conclusion, we can conclude that within the framework of the scientific literature related to the welfare state, to date, there are no clear criteria developed to help 1 Mead was not only a scientist, but also an official of the Ministry of Finance.
 So, within the framework of the definition proposed by the latter, the position of the government was also used.
2 See Wedderburn D., 1965, p. 128.
3 On the European continent such countries were, for example, France and Germany.
4 The problem of poverty ժամանակ In the analysis of the social policy of the state, according to Michel Foucault, several contradictory discourses are used at the same time, which may determine the efficiency or effectiveness of research.
It is possible to describe the welfare state.
 Moreover, there is no temporary agreement among scholars on the question of which discourse is expedient to work within: historical, ideological, institutional, functional, etc.
Marine Yarmaloyan ON THE ISSUE OF CLARIFICATION OF THE CONTENT OF THE WORD "STATE OF WELFARE" Keywords: welfare state, social policy, poverty, living standards, real incomes.
