"MASIS" NEWSPAPER ABOUT THE CRIME (EASTERN) WAR The "Masis" newspaper, which was published in 1852-1908, reports quite interesting and extensive information about the Crimean War.
 From a chronological point of view, the events of the war are presented smoothly and clearly, examining the military operations of the Russian troops, allies of Great Britain, France, Austria, Sardinia and the motives for involvement in the war, as well as the aftermath of the war The proposals of England and France to the Russian tsar, the military operations of the Caucasian front, the battles for Sastopol, etc.
Diplomatic relations between the Ottoman Empire and Russia gradually deteriorated after Turkey rejected the message of Russian Emperor Nicholas I as the "patron" of the Orthodox population of the Ottoman Empire.
 Prior to the war, Russia had made military preparations, recruiting an army of 30,000 in Sastopol.
 Tensions between Russia and Turkey have severely damaged trade relations, with Russian ships barred from navigating the straits of the Black Sea.
"Masis" newspaper reports that the political influence of European countries was great in the tense, tense, hostile relations between the Ottoman Empire and Russia after the establishment of diplomatic relations with Russia.
The fact that the Ottoman Empire unleashed a war is substantiated by the fact that the Russian side, having sent troops to the Wallachian territory of Moldova, had to take that step.
 Some historical sources state that the number of Russian troops on the Danube was 150,000, while the Masis newspaper reported 120,000.
According to modern European newspapers, European countries continued to have formal diplomatic relations with Russia, but were preparing for military action.
  On the eve of the war, the Russian emperor Nikolai was in Odessa, and according to contemporaries, he had great expectations from the victory of his own people.
 "Masis" newspaper reports on the consultations held in Vienna and the proposals made by the Russian side to the Ottoman Empire.
 Austria tried in every way to normalize the Russian-Turkish relations, presenting the peace-loving aspirations to the European countries.
  The "Masis" newspaper did not notice those diplomatic intrigues.
  According to the newspaper, Britain was doing everything in its power to rule out a solution to the problem of Turkey's Archelian (Tajik Armenia) in favor of the Russians.
 This was a characteristic feature of British foreign policy: to put one's own political interests above all, to act against Russia.
 "Masis" newspaper realistically analyzes the opinions of the European press, the real political goals of the big states, giving its assessment of the events taking place.
 The daily says that the entry of Russian troops into the Danube caused general discontent and accelerated the start of hostilities as Russia intensified its fight against Turkey.
"Masis", being well aware, presents the military operations launched by the High Door "between Russia".
  The newspaper did not hide its attitude towards the parties.
  It was noted that the High Door had declared war on Russia, which was dissatisfied with the demands of the great powers in the Vienna Declaration in favor of Turkey.
 However, subsequent publications of the newspaper show that it was a more vivid understanding of the policies pursued by European states, noting the entry of British and French ships into the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles.
According to the information reported by the newspaper, France had 40,000 troops, 16 steamships, waiting for the order to move.
  The European press reported that "Masis" was ready to take that step.
 Enver Pasha demanded that Russian Foreign Minister Gorchakov leave the Danube within fifteen days, otherwise he would threaten war.
"Masis" newspaper made a special reference to the issue of Tachka-Armenia.
 1853-56 It created a situation in which the Armenians were preparing to support the Russian army, to leave Turkey, and therefore to fight for basic rights and national independence.
1853 The number of newspaper articles on the military operations in Crimea (Eastern War) has been gradually increasing since October.
  They are celebrated in 1853. The military operations for the Shekvetili Fortress on October 15, 1945, the strong resistance of the Russians to the enemy, the four-hour military operations, the losses of the Russian army, and the defeat.
  At the same time, on the Danube, near Oltenesia, the commander of the Turkish army, Ahmed Pasha, was wounded.
 The Russians suffered heavy defeats both in Ardahan and Bayazet, as well as during the two-and-a-half hour military operation in Akhaltsikhe.
"Masis" newspaper covered the military operations of the Crimean war in detail.
 Thus, in 1853 On October 29, 1945, due to the extremely cold snow conditions on the Danube, Enver Pasha sent troops to Oltenesia winter camps.
  On the same day, the Russian army fought fiercely against the Turkish army near Akhaltsikhe.
 In November, the Russians attacked Shekvetil again, but retreated with losses.
The daily covers the November 18 fighting in Sinop Bay, the sinking and losses of the Turkish Navy.
 According to the information we received, not only Russians but also Caucasian Armenians, Poles and even Muslims fought in the Russian army during the Crimean War.
The Turks suffered heavy losses and casualties during the battle of Sinop, including the captives of the Egyptian detachments.
"Masis" was aware of the military preparations of Sastopol.
There were four fortifications, three of which had 120 cannons, and the fourth had 400.
 1854 The Allied forces entered the Sea.
 According to the newspaper, England և France was preparing for military ․ By the decision of Tuerliplat, France was going to send 50-60 thousand troops to Tajik Armenia, and England - 25-30 thousand.
 The Russian side was very dissatisfied with the Anglo-French fleet entering the Sea.
"Masis" newspaper notes that this step of England and France was the response of the Russian army to enter the Danube.
  European countries demanded that Russia maintain neutrality in Tajikistan, as only then would a Turkish attack on Russian ports on the coast be ruled out.
  The Russian side was well aware that the main goal of the West was to trap it, weakening the role of the Russian gendarmerie in the straits in the Black Sea.
"Masis" completely publishes the diplomatic relations between Russia and the Western countries.
  The paper realistically states that this "should give rise to long negotiations again, long negotiations again - fruitless correspondence should take place" [14].
 The daily says that Britain և France։ took every step to resolve the Eastern issue without any consequences, without disturbing the peace of Europe.
Emperor Napoleon III of France in 1854 In a letter sent to the Russian Tsar on January 29, 1945, he proposed an end to hostilities and the start of negotiations to settle Russian-Turkish relations peacefully.
 Tsar Nicholas replied that he could make peace only under the conditions he proposed.
 According to the newspaper, the Russian emperor's response showed the latter's determination to continue hostilities.
  "Masis" emphasized positivity.
 According to the newspaper, Russia was intensifying the struggle against the Turks.
The newspaper often refers to the hostilities on the Danube-Caucasus front, moreover, it is more inclined to praise the courage, strength and endurance of the Russian army, as well as the huge losses of the Turkish side.
"Masis" also informs the attitude of the European society in 1853-56. to hostilities.
  They see two reasons in the Crimean war. The first is Russia's goal to destroy the Ottoman Empire, and the second is Britain's goal to preserve the integrity of the Ottoman Empire by thwarting Russia's plans.
The newspaper makes a very interesting reference to the military operations in Sastopol.
  Before the events in Sastopol, he referred to the advance of the Allies in Kerch, the Sea of ​​Azov on May 25, and the firing on Russian fortifications from there.
  According to the newspaper, the French bombed the fortress called "Green Mountain".
 The Russians, although stubbornly resisting, were defeated, surrendering their strength to France.
  The port of Anapa fell into the hands of the Allies.
 In parallel with the events in Sastopol, "Masis" also provided information about the military operations in Kars on the Caucasian front.
During the Battle of Sinop, Nakhimov, following the enemy's preparations for war, showed negligence and was mortally wounded by enemy fire.
 The newspaper presents the capture of Sastopol by the allies with very interesting details.
  The allies first of all disrupted the communication between Sastopol and Simferopol.
 Russian ships stationed in the northern part of the city were trapped "facing the election" և They either had to sink or be taken prisoner.
  The Russians preferred the first option եցին sank the ships.
  The allies captured St. Nikolai, St. Alexander the Great Fortress and Quarantine.
"Masis" reports that the 20-day attack on the city was very expensive.
The allies were constantly receiving new recruits.
 The news of the destruction of the city was reported to Gorchakov on September 9.
  Queen Victoria of England, Emperor Napoleon III of France, awarded the military invaders of Sastopol with honorary military orders.
Thus, according to the newspaper, Russia lost a number of strongholds, so it relied on Prussia to convene a new conference and make decisions in favor of Russia.
The "Masis" newspaper did not cover in depth the issues of the participation of the Eastern Armenians in the military operations, the roles played by them in the victories of the Russian army.
 According to the latter, Russia was not ready for military action on the Caucasian front, as it was busy suppressing the Caucasian mountaineers (Imam Shamil's uprising).
1856 The Treaty of Paris, signed on March 30, 1853-56, ended. The Crimean War.
  Russia was returning Kars to Turkey in exchange for other Russian cities occupied by Sastopol և allies.
"Masis", in all probability, knew more details about the end of the war than he tells.
LITERATURE [1] "Masis", 1853, August 5, No. 31, page 1.
[2] "Masis", 1853, August 12, No. 32, pages 1-2.
[3] "Masis", 1853, August 19, No. 33, page 2.
[4] "Masis", 1853, August 26, No. 34, page 2.
[5] "Masis", 1853, September 30, No. 35, page 3.
[6] "Masis", 1853, October 7, No. 40, page 1.
[7] "Masis", 1853, October 14, No. 41, page 2.
[8] "Masis", 1853, October 21, No. 42, page 4.
[9] Masis, 1853, November 4, No. 44, pp. 3-4.
[10] "Masis", 1853, November 18, No. 46, page 1.
[11] Masis, 1854, January 14, No. 103, pp. 1-2.
[12] "Masis", 1854, February 4, No. 104, page 3.
[13] "Masis", 1854, February 4, No. 106, page 1.
[14] "Masis", 1854, February 11, No. 107, page 4.
[15] "Masis", 1854, February 18, No. 108, page 2.
[16] "Masis", 1855, June 16, No. 177, pp. 3-4.
[17] "Masis", 1855, September 15, No. 190, page 3.
[18] "Masis", 1856, January, No. 206, page 2.
Badalyan Sonya "MASIS" NEWSPAPER ABOUT THE CRIME (EASTERN) WAR Keywords: "Masis" newspaper, Crimean or Eastern war, Russian-Turkish war, allied countries, Russia, government.
