THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON TELEVISION ULTRADE EXCHANGE OF TRANSFER OF INFORMATION AND FORMATION OF RELATIONSHIPS EXCEEDS MORE THAN 3 BILLION PEOPLE.
 The Internet has reduced the world several times and almost eliminated the borders.
 Moreover, during their creation, the print media, radio and television did the same, but in a narrower sense.
 Marshall McLuhan generally considers the emergence of electrical technology to be a factor that has irreversibly turned the planet Earth into a "global village".
 Establishing relations with the public has become technically extremely easy, but it has become several times more difficult to maintain those relations in the right way.
 They can be the target of information wars at every step.
 The latter have become more commonplace because "every new technology requires a new war."
Information is the basis of human actions.
 Depending on what information we have about a given event or subject, we decide our steps towards the latter.
  Information allows the consumer to evaluate, compare և make a choice.
 The better the information is presented, the more likely it is that the addressee's decision will work in its favor.
 But very often the reason for not becoming a consumer of a product is either due to the fact that the information is poorly provided or that it has not reached the consumer at all.
Every business has a need to build public relations, if it does not want to stay on the boulevard level.
There is no better place to be in constant contact with the consumer than social media.
 It provides all the opportunities that public relations people need.
 But the latter do not fully understand the role of social media.
 Maybe because social media is a new phenomenon, it is tricky, or it changes every day, throwing new challenges.
There are several manifestations of the above, due to which the thematic nature is conditioned. Public relations developers do not clearly understand the role difference between social and traditional media.
In building public relations, they continue to work in a classical, accepted way, believing that social media revolves around them and works for them.
They ensure their illogical representation in the social sphere by not making the right and targeted choice of social media platforms.
They do not take into account that working with social media means working with the general public on the one hand, and with artificial intelligence և robots on the other.
 Therefore, just publishing texts and press releases is not enough to achieve results, it is necessary to be armed with the technical knowledge with which digital media is built.
Public relations has a clear purpose. they are "aimed at maintaining harmonious relations with the public, aimed at creating a positive image of the company" [3].
 Different (media) platforms have been considered the best way to express public relations at different times.
 It goes back to the Caesarean times, when the city square was the link between the people and the government, and then the newly written newspapers.
 Julius Caesar was the first ruler or official to establish relations between the "individuals" of the object (here in power).
 In The Life of the Twelve Caesars, Gaius Suetonius mentions that the first thing he commanded after Caesar took office was the publication of daily reports on the people and the senate.
After the advent of television, it was the leading platform through which most steps were taken to establish public relations.
 Moreover, each object uses the opportunities of television in its own way. If for politicians and state officials the dialogue with the public takes place in the media field, then those engaged in business activities are interested in advertising campaigns.
 In this context, one could assume that a new media platform would come, which would provide more resources to business and public figures than television, with its limited airtime and expensive advertising policies not available to everyone.
1995 The first social network is created, which means that since 1995 the role of television in favor of social media has been decreasing more and more.
  The study of statistics shows that the transition from television to the Internet, particularly social media, is largely due to age.
 "People under the age of 24 watch TV less than 2 hours a week than last year.
 25-34 year olds are 1 hour less than last year, 35-49 year olds are more stable. The difference between their views is 22 minutes, to the detriment of television. "[5]
Reducing the time spent watching TV, people go with the alternative այսօր which today is represented by Facebook (Facebook), Twitter (Twitter), LinkedIn, Instagram, Snapchat, YouTube, Vkontakte և etc.
  To be sure of the truth, to reinforce the idea that becoming an Internet user almost means becoming a social media user, let's look at the following digital image presented by the wearesocial.com resource in its 2018 digital media review.
 This year, the number of Internet users has reached 4 billion, an increase of 7% over the previous year.
The number of social media users has exceeded 3 billion, which is 13% more than in 2017. [6]
 Statistics show that the number of social media users is growing every year more than the number of Internet users in general.
 It is about a double increase.
It is not difficult to investigate, after a while the numbers will speak about the fact that almost every Internet user is a consumer of any social media.
Under these conditions, social media becomes the fertile ground where more than 45% of the Earth's population can be found.
 If we talk about the local audience, as of 2017, the number of Facebook visits in Armenia on a monthly basis has reached 1.2 million, and the monthly active number of Instagram users is 550,000 [7].
  These data have risen sharply in just one month, which was due to the political situation in Armenia (it is natural that the external situation, the political situation affects social media in that country in particular).
 The annual growth of the number of users in Armenia fluctuates within 10%.
We did not accidentally define social media as an influential platform in terms of establishing public relations.
  Meanwhile, elsewhere we have attributed the leading role to television.
 Survivors of different audiences show that television remains the most popular today.
 In that case, how can social media be influential for those who want to build public relations with people, consumers?
In the case of traditional television, the views are distributed as follows: People under the age of 35 watch TV for a maximum of 19 hours a week.
 People between the ages of 35 and 65 spend about 50 hours a week watching television.
2016 Donald Trump won the US presidential election.
  The international press attributed that victory to Twitter and Facebook.
  In an interview with CBC News, Trump said this about his victory and social media. "I have 28 million followers on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram."
 This is a modern way of communication.
 I won.
 I think social media has more power than their (Hillary Clinton և her team, ed.)'S spending. ”[9]
 The 45th President of the USA did not win only by the votes of the people who subscribed to his social accounts.
  And this is where the influence of social media doubles.
70% of social network users in the world are under 35 years old.
 Fifty-two percent of those who voted for Donald Trump in 2016 were citizens over the age of 45, [10] who were active users of traditional media rather than social media.
  Trump ran his entire campaign on Facebook and Twitter.
 Now he confesses that he won thanks to the latter.
 In that case, how can this paradox be explained, when in the pre-election period the traditional media of the United States worked exclusively in favor of one of the candidates Hillary Clinton?
Today, social media is one of the leading sources of traditional media coverage, including television.
 This situation has developed for several reasons.
  Take Armenia as an example.
  Many politicians and officials inform about their announcements and decisions on their personal Facebook or Twitter page (especially after May 8, 2018, when Nikol Pashinyan was elected Prime Minister of the country, he formed his own government, whose representatives many ministers began to communicate with regular posts and live broadcasts. with the society).
If we talk about the traditional, it requires the opposite approach. The spokesperson of the conventional agency should send a press release to the editorial offices, from which the audience will know about any decision or announcement.
 Until 2016, the most active Armenian party and political figure on social networks was Armen Ashotyan [11], who in 2009-2016. During his tenure as Minister of Education and Science, especially during the last 2-3 years, he was the first to post his decisions on his Facebook page, from which, like ordinary users, sometimes even later, journalists and media outlets knew about him.
 The same way of working is typical for the spokespersons of different departments.
 Moreover, many avoid even direct contact with the media.
 There are many cases when a journalist calls an official or his spokesperson, but the latter refuses to answer the question, saying that he has already written about the question on Facebook, advising to read the post.
2016 In the US presidential election, this social media led to the fact that although the authoritative TV channels were pursuing anti-corruption policies, they could not refrain from publishing or discussing his posts on Twitter or Facebook.
As a result, it became clear that social media is so influential that in addition to transmitting information to the audience, it penetrates traditional media pages or screens, conveys the information it wants to the audience of the latter, which in this case were people aged 35-40.
 It turns out that in 2016 In the election, Donald Trump, thanks to the correct and transparent organization of public relations on social media, delivered his message to the consumers of traditional media after the age of 40, who received 52% of the votes for Trump to be elected president.
The US President և or his media executives work so carefully with the information on social media that The Guardian columnist John Naton makes an impressive remark. "People have been wondering for years what Twitter is for.
  But now we know. It was created to help Trump lead the global news agenda. "
So, with careful processing of public relations և information, it is possible to become a major player in public relations, dictating the global media agenda, thanks to social media.
It is safe to say that the world, thanks to US President Donald Trump, realized the power of social media and began to take it more seriously.
In addition, Trump became one of the three US presidents who turned the media into a tool of politics, creating a winning public relations.
 The New York Times columnist Frank Rich writes: "John F. Kennedy did the same thing for television as Roosevelt did for radio. He turned the media into a "political force."
 We confidently supplement and rephrase this argument: Donald Trump did the same for social media as Roosevelt did for radio and Kennedy did for television.
 When the latter in 1960. He became president, 90% of Americans had a TV.
 He was the first politician to come to terms with this fact and enter into a dialogue on television.
 Donald Trump did the same on social media.
 The three US media presidents were declared serious political actors due to their media awareness of public relations.
LITERATURE URL:
453, URL.
 http:
//robynbacken.com/text/nw_research.pdf. [4] Morikyan A ․, Journalism. What? How. Why, Yerevan, 2006, p. 28.
[5] Koblin J., How Much Do We Love TV? Let Us Count the Ways, June 30, 2016, URL.
https:
//www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/business/media/nielsen-survey-media-viewing.html(Accessed.
 07.09.2018). [6] Kemp S., Digital in 2018.
 World's Internet Users Pass the 4 Billion Mark, January 30, https.
//wearesocial.com/uk/blog/2018/01/global-digital-report-2018(Accessed.
 10.07.2018). [7] Martirosyan S., Social Network Changes in Armenia, May 14, 2018, URL.
 https:
//media.am/social-media-spring-2018-armenia (Accessed.
 09.07.2017).
[8] The State of Traditional TV.
 Updated With Q2 2017 Data, December 13, 2017, URL.
https:
//www.marketingcharts.com/featured-24817 (Accessed.
 07.07.2018) .URL.
https:
//www.cbsnews.com/news/60-minutes-donald-trump-family-melania-ivankalesley-stahl/ (Accessed.
 10.07.2018) .URL.
 https:
//edition.cnn.com/election/2016/results/president (Accessed.
 10.07.2018). URL.
http:
//www.regioncenter.info/sites/default/files/Facebook_and_Parliamentary_Electio
07.
00 GMT, URL.
 https:
//www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/jan/07/how-donaldtrump-helped-twitter-find-its-true-purpose (Accessed.
 06.07.208). [13] Diggs-Brown B ․ , Strategic Public Relations.
  An Audience-Focused Approach, Australia, Boston, MA.
 Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2012, p. 54, ISBN 10.
 053463706X. Melkonyan Samvel THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON TELEVISION FIELD: INFORMATION TRANSFER AND PUBLIC RELATIONS, RELATIONSHIP
