PIERRE BOMARCHEN AND THE AMERICAN REVOLUTIONPier Beaumarchais was not only a great writer, but also a flexible politician, a pretty good spy.
  As a spy, he went to London to study the political situation there.
 The Seven Years' War had just ended, and France was worried about the situation in England.
Being a supporter of the monarchy in England, he was also in opposition, he was able to understand what was really happening in the English parliament.
 He became close to some politicians, from whom he received a lot of information.
 It turns out that the English parliament "had no secrets from Beaumarchais."
 Beaumarchais wrote secret letters to Louis XVI about the situation in official London. "By the end of the winter, either the head of the king's party or the opposition will fly."
  Beaumarchais detailed every event, explaining that relations between the "king" of the opposition had strained, especially after the American colonies began to move for independence.
There were even some arrests during the parliamentary sittings.
Beaumarchais' testimonies to Verjen have always been paramount.
  Before the decision was made in England, Beaumarchais was already informing Verjenni of all the details.
  The same goes for American colonies. By the time the news reached Europe, France was well informed.
 While the other diplomats were receiving second-hand information, Beaumarchais was well aware of whose door it was knocking on and when it was being opened.
 Moreover, he was highly respected in London.
The French undercover agent was the first to correctly assess the situation.
 In his letter he wrote that George III considered these events nonsense.
From the moment the rebels rose up in America, Beaumarchais sided with the colonies.
 Like many others, he greeted the "Bostonians".
 He well understood that in order to weaken England it was necessary to help the colonies as much as possible.
 He was well aware that France could not afford to go to war, so instead he had to provide secret assistance. 2 Lord Rochefort even obeyed Beaumarchais' "laws".
 And when George III offered him the post of Prime Minister of Ireland, Rochefort went to consult with Beaumarchais.
American colonies 1.
 Realizing all this very well, he persuaded the king to the French government in every way that the rebellious colonies needed help. "Sir, the inter-conflict between America and England, which will soon change its course and the European system, is forcing any empire to do the right thing for itself. Here are the points that need to be taken into account.
1. If England is re-established in America, then only through a large number of lives and rather large sums of money.
 In order to cover such large expenses, England hoped to return to America and occupy the French islands, thus becoming the only supplier of expensive sugar.
 It will forever strengthen the income of the British.
In that case, sir, you will have to make a choice. " to start a war that would be in vain յուն in vain, or to have to sacrifice the English colonies for the sake of poor reconciliation և to lose 280 million capital և 30 million.
2. If the Americans win, they will be set free at once, and in that case the British, who are in despair, whose domains have been reduced by three quarters, will at least hurry to disperse themselves and begin to conquer our American colonies.
 And do not doubt that they will succeed easily.
3. If England nevertheless agrees to grant independence to its colonies by peaceful means, they will still lose their domains, and their trade will be divided again, so that for us the consequences are almost the same as in the previous cases.
 But the difference is that England, without waging war against America, will become stronger militarily, and in that case it will be easier to occupy the territories under our control.
4. If the opposition nevertheless comes to power, it will sign a treaty banning ties with the colonies, so that the Americans, in retaliation for the French for not helping them in time, will join Britain and try to conquer our territories.
 So how do we protect our territories without violating any order?
And believe me, sir, France's current savings will be more expensive for France in the future - "economically," militarily, "financially, not to mention human casualties."
It should be noted that Foreign Minister Verzen agreed with Beaumarchais.
Louis XVI soon gave his consent, on the condition that Beaumarchais act as a sole trader in the United States in order to maintain his secrecy.
 1776 On June 10, Beaumarchais received a final answer from Verjen that he would be given the promised million, and the remaining two million were to be sent out to Spain.
 This is how Beaumarchais became involved in the struggle of the American colonies.
  Instead of receiving the status of official diplomat, Beaumarchais was given the right to work as a secret spy and a secret supplier of weapons.
 Beaumarchais needed some finances to be able to raise arms, and later to pay for volunteers.
1 Feuchtwanger L., Lys in the vineyard.
 оружие для Америки, Москва, 1959. For the first time, Foreign Minister Verzhen provided Beaumarchais with 3 million livres.
  Financial support was provided by King Louis XVI, Beaumarchais's friends, and his Mason brothers.
 Beaumarchais had the means to save.
Gathering all the means, Beaumarchais set up the Rodrigo Gortales trading company, which was ready to smuggle weapons to the shores of America.
  This fleet consisted of 12 merchant ships, which were to be loaded with weapons and the necessary ammunition.
1776 On March 3, 1945, the Secret Committee sent Continental Assembly member Silas Dean to France as an undercover agent.
  His goal was to get help from the French government, and the negotiations with him were conducted by Beaumarchais.
 1777 Lafayette armed the "Victory" warship with his own means and left for America 1.
They came to an agreement with Silas Dean, under which the United States undertook to reimburse the French government for all expenses, including Beaumarchais.
  Compensation had to be made either in cash or in kind.
  In addition, France provided support by defending the islands, gaining an advantage over England.
The creation of the "Rodrigo Gortales" company caused a stir in England.
 Although it was to operate under the name of a trading company, the British secret agents had some doubts, they had provided some information to the British government.
  The "Rodrigo Gortales" company was going to take out 200 cannons, 25 thousand. a weapon that would reach the American shores.
 This was more difficult than passing on secret documents, especially when Britain had taken a controlling fleet off the American shores.
 Beaumarchais invested 5,600 pounds to load his 10 ships.
1777 Three ships of the company, loaded with ammunition, anchored in the American port of Portsmouth.
 1777-1778 Beaumarchais invested more than 3 million pounds in American aid.
 1778 In May of that year, the French navy, led by Admiral d'Estaing, left Toulon and headed for the United States.
 There was a clash with the British near the English Channel, after which Beaumarchais was unable to send his 12 armed ships to America for some time.
  Until 1778 Beaumarchais has already provided more than 5 million financial support to America.
 Not satisfied with financial and military support, he hired 800 soldiers with his own means, and before sending them, he managed to obtain 100 cannons by secret means.
Beaumarchais Verjenni informed that the situation in the English Parliament is such that it is very possible that the opposition will take power, և it is not excluded that it will make peace with America.
 Realizing that in such a case France would be completely "hanging in the air", he offered to start an open strategy of England and recognize the independence of the USA.
1778 On March 13, the Anglo-French War broke out.
  Shortly afterwards, on July 20, 50 artillery pieces and a crew of 350 were mobilized through Beaumarchais.
 1779 The ships of Beaumarchais, a counterfeit trade company, fought against the English ships near Grenada and won.
It should be noted that Beaumarchais' fleet suffered heavy losses.
1 See “Vesemirna яstoria я diplomatija.
 the struggle of the American colonies for independence ”, Moscow, 2000.
Beaumarchais was trying to get money to the United States in the form of gold.
  1781 A joint plan was developed, according to which, with the help of the French in 1781. Yorktown was to be captured in October.
  Thanks to Beaumarchais' direct participation and funding, the United States celebrated victory.
  As for the reimbursement of Beaumarchais's expenses, the US was constantly postponing the repayment of debts.
  The Congress was limited to letters of thanks, which, of course, would not cover Beaumarchais's financial losses (5 275,000 at the Battle of Grenada alone).
 He repeatedly wrote letters to Congress to reimburse his expenses, but Congress did not respond.
 Even Talleyrand wrote a letter to Congress demanding reimbursement of Beaumarchais.
The Congress owed 3.8 million pounds.
  Beaumarchais' heirs in 1834 They received only 800 thousand of the total debt in modern francs.
Contradictory assessments have been made of Beaumarchais at various times.
  He was called a liar, a scoundrel and a hypocrite, who sees everything in his interest.
  Even Arthur Lee once wrote a letter to the Congress, in which it is said that Beaumarchais should not be repaid the debt, because he is a subversive.
 Some historians consider Beaumarchais not only a brilliant satirist and playwright, but also a rather serious and skilled diplomat, and make no mistake about the fact that thanks to him the American colonies celebrated victory.
All the assessments are, with some reservations, fair, because there were two people sitting in Beaumarchais, on the one hand, a deceitful and false person who "made" money from everything, on the other hand, a fair and honest man, who thought of his country's security and honor. and for wealth.
 Beaumarchais selflessly helped the colonies, which was appreciated more by the French government than by the Congress.
  He was deceived in this struggle, receiving only a small part of his compensations.
 His successors were able to get only a small percentage from the Congress.
Armine MatinyanPIER BOMARCHEN AND THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION Keywords: spy, secret letters, secret agent, "Rodrigo Gortales", income, Mason brothers, secret committee, pseudonyms.
