MANA (KURMAN (N) A) STATUS OF THE COUNTRY IN THE EARLY PERIOD OF ARGISHTI'S THRONE AND SARDUR II'S RIGHTING in the reign of King Van (Biaynil, Urartu) 764 1 [6, 10].
  From the very beginning of his reign, the king took steps to expand the kingdom.
  Within a year, Argishti had invaded different parts of the country.
  He created a powerful worldview that became a major threat to the significant powers of the time.
Argishti I expanded the borders of the kingdom to the north to the Chorokh basin, the north-western shores of Lake Sanaa, the areas north of Lake Childer, from west to southwest from the upper Euphrates to the east, from north to south, from east to south. .
 During his reign, the king successfully conquered the land of Mana (KURMan (n) a), establishing his dominion over the southeastern regions of Lake Urmia.
 He conquered the lands of Diaukh, Abu, Anishterga, Khati, Tuatech, Uburda, Pashto, Khakhia, Eriakh, and others.
  The latter presented the achievements in detail in "Khorkhoryan Chronicle" 2 [11, 13].
1 Menua had two sons, Argishtin և Inuպpua (Unuուpua).
 Argishti continued to rule the country.
 As for his brother Inushpua, several records have been preserved about him, one of which is in the "Kurshu-Jami" mosque in Van.
 Perhaps, like his uncle Sarduri, he also took the path of religion and became the head priest of Musasir.
2 In 1827, an French scholar F. was sent to Van on a business trip by a French Asian company. E. Schultz, who copied about 40 protocols, laying the foundation for the study of the Urartian language.
 The latter discovered the "Khorkhorian Chronicle" in 1828, which is the largest known Urartian inscription to date.
 The first seven of the eight columns of "Khorkhoryan" contain descriptions of the invasions undertaken by Argishti I, and the last, eighth column contains the king's curse on those who will try to damage the inscription.
Picture 1 ․ "Khorkhoryan Chronicle" Repeating the invasion of his father Menua, Argishti I initially directed the invasions to the north, successfully carrying out the conquests of Diaukh, Igan, Tariun, Abun, Irkua, Eriach, Erikuan and other countries.
Successfully expanding the country in the north, Argishti began to expand the kingdom from the south.
  The conquest of Manaerk was of great importance among the countries conquered during the invasions to the south of Argishti I.
In the "Deep Chronicle" the country of Mana is mentioned several times.
 It is obvious that the country of Mana from time to time tried to get out of the 3 hegemonic powers, as well as the countries of Pashto, Etiun and Eriah.
 However, it is obvious that Argishti has subjugated the data to him again.
Mana (KURMan (n) a) Mention of the country in "Khorkhorian Chronicle" ․ Having such a vast kingdom, Argishti I could not maintain his supremacy in all the conquered countries at the same time, as from time to time, taking advantage of the fact that the king was busy expanding the kingdom, some countries tried to restore their independence.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that some countries are mentioned several times in the "Deep Chronicle".
  Among such countries were Mana, Pashtun, Etiuni, etc., who wanted to get rid of the Urartians. The terms "Urartu" and "Urartian" are used in the work not in an ethnic but in a contemporary sense.
from domination.
 That is probably why revolts and riots were organized against Urartu.
 However, Argishti invaded those countries with the aim of re-establishing his supremacy.
 Argishti successfully carried out his raids, returning to the country with prisoners of war and booty.
Argishti conquered a number of countries, which at that time were a certain force.
 One of the conquered countries was the famous Mana.
  This country was spread in the southern and southern regions of Lake Urmia4.
  The country was bordered by Urartu to the north and the southern border to Parshua (Barshua), not far from the base of the Diyala River.
  The country of Mana was under the rule of Urartu in the initial period of Argishti's rule.
 This is evidenced by the fact that only in the eighth year of his reign (around 779 BC) he invaded the land of Mana.
Argishti writes about the first invasion of Mana ․ "Khaldi invaded, subjugated the country of Iyan with his own weapon (?), Subjugated Mana (the country), Pashto (the country), encamped them in front of Argishti" [5: 9].
It is obvious from the above-mentioned protocol that Q.A. Around 779, Argishti successfully conquered the land of Mana.
Next year, K.A. In about 778, Argishti invaded the south again, during which he mentioned the land of Mana.
"Khaldi invaded, subdued the land of Mana with his own weapon (?), Subdued the land of Irkiun (the land), encamped them in front of Argishti" [5: 9].
Continuing the text, Argishti writes: "In the Assyrian sources, the Manichaean kingdom of Chaldea 4 is found in the land of the Manichaeans, and in the Hebrew text of the Bible, Minni.
  It was probably formed around the end of the 9th century BC.
I conquered Mana (land), captured Irkiune (land), cut it to the Assyrian plain.
․․․ » [5, 9].
  It is obvious from the above text that once again the invasion was crowned with success.
Q.A. In about 777, Argishti invaded the lands of Mana-Pashto, successfully re-establishing his supremacy.
"Khaldi invaded, subdued the land of Mana with his own weapon (?), Subdued Pashto (the land), encamped them in front of Argishti-Minuayord" [5: 9].
In another part of the protocol, Argishti mentions that Mana tried to restore independence and even make achievements.
 Mana captures the city of Sira և tries to get out of the domination of Urartu.
  However, Argishti moves with his army to Mana, captures the city of Sira և and besieges the country, successfully capturing it.
"Khaldi marched, subdued the Mana (country) army (?) With his own weapon, and put it in front of Argishti և Minuayord.
  Khaldyan says to Argishti Minuayord: When I built a canal from the river Argishtikhinil (city), I crossed a canal to the Azayan country, I heard that Mana (the country) had conquered Sira (the city).
 . . . Argishti says ․- (...) in the army, in front of the regimentև, I invaded (և) Sira (the city) and besieged Mana (country) ”[5, 9].
 The above-mentioned invasion was carried out by Argishti A. in BC. about 776.
Q.A. Around 775, Argishti continued to expand the country.
 "Khaldi marched, subdued with his own weapon (?) The Tuareg plain to" Karku (mountain), subdued the Mana (country) army, encamped them in front of Argishti ".
Գնդ I sent troops and marched on Mana (earth).
  I ate (appropriated) the country, I burned the cities.
 I was cutting as far as Vihika (city) of Pashto (country) "[5, 9].
Argishti writes about the last invasion of Mana (probably referring to around 774 BC) ․ "․․․ I marched on Mana (country), ate (appropriated) the country, burned the cities.
 The city of Shimerekhadere was royal, (which) was fortified, I captured it in battle.
Man, woman, I drove from there ”5 [5, 9].
Information on the management of Argishti I in the following years is very small ․ they are almost absent.
  The seventh column in the "Deep Chronicle" is almost completely deleted.
  The reason is that there is very little information about the last period of Argishti's rule.
Nevertheless, during the last reign of Argishti I, Ts Manaerkir continued to be under the rule of the kingdom of Van.
 The so-called proof is that when the power passed to SarduriB after Argishti I, in the initial period of his rule he made an invasion not north-east, but north.
 It is obvious that in the initial period of the rule of Sardur II the situation in the south or south-east was stable, which cannot be said about the northern regions.
In order to be able to understand the status of Manaerkir in the last period of the reign of Argishti I, we must pay attention to the directions of the invasions made in the initial period of the reign of Sardur II.
  This allows us to understand what the borders of the kingdom were like during the last reign of Argishti I, which is passed on to his son, Sardur II.
5 The city of Shimerekhadere was probably the center of the country during this period.
Picture 2 ․ Map of the Kingdom of Van Reflection on the Chronicle of Sarduri II ․ Before moving on to the chronicle of Sardur II, we must refer to another inscription left by the king, according to which: "Khaldi invaded, subjugated the land of the Arkuk (tribe) with his own weapon (?).
Sarduri says. "I invaded, conquered the land of Arkuk (tribe), cut it to Urtekh (land)" [4].
 Followed by the royal title series 6 [5, 9].
 The land of Urtech mentioned in the above-mentioned inscription corresponds to the Great 6 The inscription is engraved on a large stone near the southern shore of Lake Sanaa.
According to this protocol, Sarduri II had conquered the countries of the Lake Sana'a basin, reaching as far as the borders of Artsakh.
The Artsakh province of Hayk (according to GA Ghapantsyan), which proves that Artsakh was still part of Armenia during the reign of Van 7 [1, 7].
 It was located in the northeast of the country.
 The king first marched in this direction, then wrote: "Khaldi marched, subdued the land of Mana with his own weapon (?), Laid siege to Sardur Argishtordord".
 Khaldin (my) is powerful, Khaldyan weapon (?) Is my powerful.
 He attacked Sardur Argishtord.
 Sarduri says: - I camped on the land of Babil (ni).
 I conquered the land of Babylon.
 I was cutting to Baruata (the country) "8 [3, 5, 9].
  In the above text, Sarduri II mentions the land of Mana, then invades the land of Babil (ni), conquers it, and then mentions that he reaches the border of the country as far as Baruata (land).
 In order to understand whether kings were to conquer the land of Mana, we must pay attention to the directions of the invasions.
Sarduri B, as it was said, first invaded the north, the land of Arkuk (tribe), և reached տ Urtekh (land).
  Then the land of Mana moves, "according to the text," subjugates "it.
The cuneiform inscriptions are very stereotyped, so the question arises whether Sarduri II "subjugated" the country of Mana or simply passed through the territory of that country.
 Because it is evident that the focus of the king's attention was, not on the land of Mana, but on the land of Babylon (the land of the city of Babylon).
After conquering the land of Arkuk in the north, Sarduri set himself the task of moving south to expand the southern borders.
 Since the country of Mana was under the rule of the kingdom of Van, the king did not "subdue" 7 Artsakh was the tenth province of Great Armenia.
 It had 12 provinces: Myus Haband, Vaykunik, Berdzor (Berdadzor), Mets Kuanq, Mets Irank, Harchlank, Mukhank, Piank, Papankank, Sisakan-i Kotak, Kust-i-Parnes, Koght.
 Artsakh was spreading east of Syunik, between the Kura and the Araks rivers.
  According to some historical evidences, the province of Artsakh included the area in the northeastern part of Lake Sana (up to the Aghst River).
  The earliest mention of Artsakh dates back to BC. In the 8th century.
 This information proves that during the reign of Sardur II Artsakh was part of the Kingdom of Van.
  In the cuneiform inscriptions of Van or the Ararat kingdom, the province of Artsakh is mentioned by the words Urdekhin or Urdekhe.
8 According to Igor Diakonov, the land of Namr mentioned in the Urartian texts appears as "Babylonia" (URUBabilu (ni) KURebani).
  In our opinion, Diakonov may have ruled out that the Urartian army had deepened to the south, so that is the problem of the above-mentioned opinion.
that country, but "passed" through the territory of the country to conquer the land of Babylon.
The king then mentions that he reached the border as far as the land of Baruata (it was located south of Lake Urmia, probably at the time of Mana).
This begs the question: why did the king move south through Mana and not to another country?
 To answer this question, we must refer to the general description of the land of Mana.
Mana (KURMan (n) a) General description of the country ․ The country of Mana was spread in the southern-southeastern areas of Lake Urmia.
 It was one of the most powerful political units at that time.
  Still Q.A. Around the year 820, this country aspired to play a role similar to that of Urartu in the unification process of the "Nairi countries" or "near Nairi".
  The land of Mana then occupied Nerkin Zamua, occupying not only the southern-south-eastern but also the southwestern part of Lake Urmia, [2] which was, of course, a great achievement.
Mana later ceded its position in the Near East to another political force.
 However, already during the sole rule of Menua, the country of Mana began to grow stronger, which was due to the noticeable weakening of Assyria and the success of the Jurassic in the north of the Armenian Highlands.
  Later, the Urartians sought to expand to the south by establishing military bases in the basin of Lake Urmia.
 This invasion would allow the Urartians to establish their influence on the trade routes of Zagros.
 Under such conditions, Mana's confrontation became inevitable.
It is obvious that from the last period of Menua's rule Manan appeared under the rule of the Urartians.
  And already during the reign of Argishti I, the Urartians managed to establish their supremacy in the country of Mana, waging a number of victorious battles against the latter.
We should not rule out the fact that even under the rule of the Kingdom of Van, the country continued to maintain its power.
  Therefore, it is not accidental that one of the powerful kings of the Kingdom of Van, Argishti I, made several invasions to re-establish the rule of Mana (see in detail the textbook of the history of the Armenian people, volume A, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 161-72).
 This allows us to talk about a stable military force in Mana.
9 BC In the 820s, another political force was mentioned in the region.
 Mana is replaced in the region by Shartsina, the grandson of Mektiara, who was an ally of King Ishpuin.
In such conditions it is not accidental that Sarduri II invaded Babylon (ni) through the territory of Mana.
 The motives were several: • it was under the rule of Urartu, • the existence of Urartian military bases, • rich booty.
These three points were considered a very important factor in continuing the further invasion of Babylon.
 Since Sarduri had marched north against the land of Arkuk, he needed a place where the army could be trained for the next raid, and the land of Mana was chosen.
  It was under the rule of the Eurartians, where the army could regain its strength by moving to the land of Babylon.
In conclusion, it should be noted that according to the cuneiform inscription left by Sardur II, the country of Mana was still part of the kingdom of Van in the last period of the reign of Argishti I.
  The country was part of the powerful cosmopolitanism created by Argishti I until it remained part of the kingdom of Van during the early reign of Argishti's son Sardur II.
LITERATURE [1] Aghababyan S. A., Gharibyan A. A., Artsakh (Artsakh from ancient times to 1917: A look at the past), Yerevan, 2014, pp. 6-8.
[2] Grekyan E., Urartu և Mana (On the Problem of Establishing Urartian Dominion in the Merdzurmyan Basin), Archelk, Ancient-Middle Ages, Yerevan, 2001, pp. 6-7.
[3] Grekyan E., On the question of rewriting the years of the reign of King Argishti I. Historical-Philological Journal, № 3, Yerevan, 2016, page 3.
[4] Karageozian Y., Cuneiform Places (in Ayrarat և adjacent states), The Armenian Highland in Cuneiform Sources, Volume A, Book A, Yerevan, 1998, p. 184.
[5] Harutyunyan N. V., The formation of the state of Urartu, "Armenian People's History", Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, volume A, Yerevan, 1971, p. 304.
[6] Textbook of the History of the Armenian People, Volume A, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 165-74.
[7] Ghapantsyan G., The History of Urartu, Yerevan, 1940, p. 156.
[8] Mkrtchyan Sh., Artsakh, Yerevan, 1991, pp. 7-9.
[12] Zimansky P., Ecology and Empire.
  The Structure of the Urartian State. Studies in [13] Salvini M., Corpus dei testi urartei, vol. I. The descriptions of pietra and roccia.
 I Testi, Baghumyan SiranushMANA (KURMAN (N) A) THE STATUS OF THE COUNTRY AT THE LAST THRONE OF ARGISHT I AND THE SUCCESSION OF SARDUR II), conquered, Lake Urmia, Assyria.
