THE HEAD OF THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL MANAGEMENT AND THE INTEGRATION OF THE TEACHING STAFF Due to the reforms taking place in the educational system, the requirements for the school principal have changed.
  The principal acts as an administrative employee, as a manager, that is, the principal, in addition to carrying out the current management of the school, also manages the educational and administrative work.
  The efficiency of the processes taking place in the school, the peculiarities of the educational environment directly depend on the in-school management system, the principal's work style, in particular, on the personal-professional qualities.
The article presents the peculiarities of collective-interpersonal relations arising from the director's management style.
  The basis for this research was the diagnosis of school principals' management style based on surveys conducted in a number of schools in Vanadzor.
  In conducting the study, we were guided by the method of "Management-administrative style decision (E. Tunik adapted version)" 1.
The distinguishing feature of this method is that the conclusion about the leading style of management is given on the basis of certain judgments.
 These are: • How do I manage և control, • My attitude to regulations, • My behavior in crisis situations, • My attitude to work planning.
According to the results of the research conducted by the method of "determining the administrative style of management", the lowest score is the administrative style that prevails with the manager.
  Summing up the results, we came to the conclusion that, according to E. Authoritarian, democratic, non-intrusive, cooperative leadership styles are more prevalent among school principals in the 7 styles of the tunic (authoritarian, democratic, cooperative, limited participation, bureaucratic, non-interfering, friendly, tyrannical).
  As a result of the conducted researches, the following opinion was formed. One of the main factors influencing the formation and development level of the school pedagogical staff is the principal's leadership style.
Management is the organized, planned and coordinated impact on a certain object.
 Without management it is impossible to improve the educational process, to solve all its problems.
 The basis of school management for the educational process is 1 See Fetiskin N., Kozlov V., Manuilov G., Socio-psychological diagnostics of the development of personalities in a group, Moscow, 2005.
The creation of response conditions is 1.
  The nature of the school management is conditioned by the interpersonal relations of the pedagogical staff, in particular, cohesion and conflict.
In order to study the interpersonal relationships of the pedagogical staff, 4 schools with different styles of principal management were selected.
  The management style of the director depends on և´ objective (working conditions, level of team development), ներից on subjective factors (manager's personality, level of training).
  Specialists in management theory and social psychology distinguish authoritarian, democratic-liberal styles of governance2.
 Each leadership style has a number of features.
  The democratic style is more effective, which leads to the increase of the level of cooperation, relations և mutual cooperation, leading those relations from personal orientation to social orientation3.
Management is a part of the administrative activity of the school staff, through which the relations between the members of the staff are ensured, which in their turn contribute to the realization of the goals of the school4.
  In the management process, the internal working rules, traditions and customs of the team are developed.
  This is where the logic of the team's work is formed: the consciousness of its members, the activity, etc.
  A number of psychological factors are also formed here, which affect the level of team organization, the level of initiative and entrepreneurship5.
The pedagogical staff is a group of pedagogues working with each other, which has common goals, the realization of which is of personal importance to those members, իր realizing the process of interpersonal relations և cooperation, contributes to the realization of common goals6.
 The pedagogical staff is considered to be a kind of social group, where interpersonal relations are formed on the basis of the harmony of public and personal interests.
 In social psychology, interpersonal relationships are viewed as interpersonal personal relationships that objectively emerge in the և nature of their forms of interaction, in the way people interact and communicate.
 Renowned specialist in educational process management psychology R. Shakurov, studying the problem of the relations of the pedagogical staff in the management process, distinguishes practical-social-psychological relations in the structure of the staff.
  The practical structure consists of the practical interactions of people during the performance of their official duties.
  The social-psychological structure consists of invisible emotional connections: respectful և disrespectful attitude, sympathy and dislike, և mental life: interpersonal ha 1 Amirjanyan Y., Sahakyan A., Pedagogy, Yerevan, 2005, pp. 403-404
3 Khrimyan S., Hovsepyan A., Melkonyan M. և Others, School Management և Management, Yerevan, 2004, p. 135.
4 Asatryan L. և Others, Fundamentals of Education System Management, Yerevan, 2003, p. 170.
5 Khachatryan G., The Economic Manager և Management Psychology, Yerevan, 1989, p. 102.
6 Asatryan L., page 171.
from other forms due to relationships.
  From the social-psychological phenomena, the psychological atmosphere prevailing in the team is mostly connected with emotions.
  The psychological atmosphere can be characterized as a set of predominant emotional states, a relatively stable emotional mood, which penetrates the whole mechanism of activity, having its impact on the contacts and relations of the team.
  Mentally healthy, responsible, high moral atmosphere are typical of a psychologically healthy team.
 Unhealthy psychological atmosphere is associated with negative emotions, which reduces the efficiency of the team 1.
  R. Shakurov points out that the psychological atmosphere at school is largely due to the non-fibers that determine the transparency of team members' information, bring the instructions given by the supervisor to the subordinates, and find a positive response when there is a corresponding "staff". connection 2.
The pedagogical staff of the school has a number of features, one of which is the unity of the staff.
  The collective begins with the unity of people, but not with mechanical, but with social-psychological unity, when that group of people can give more to the society, each of them individually.
  The unity of the team is characterized by the fact that it can withstand external influences, maintain internal unity in different conditions 3.
 It contributes to the improvement of all aspects of the life and activities of the team, to the significant increase of educational opportunities, as well as to the moral and psychological unity and organization of its members.
  Team cohesion is one of the powerful levers of effective management.
  It is the power of the groups that the leader should strive to use in achieving the goals of the organization.
  The more united the team is, the easier it is to manage.
  A united team is a stable team capable of successfully resisting the influence of internal and external forces, which is aimed at weakening the ties between members.
 Consolidation is one of the most difficult features of a team.
 It can be based on various factors.
 One can separate the purposeful, interpersonal psychological, ideological, organizational factors.
  Organizational cohesion reflects the aspiration of the staff members to stay in their team, to work, to continue their activities, it can be not only the attractiveness of the content of the work in the given school, but also the goal of the interpersonal-psychological unity of the staff.
  Ideological-interpersonal-psychological unity can significantly deepen the need to work in the organization in organizational unity, connected with joint activities, which contributes to the development of common views on the goals and problems of the organization, the development of non-racial, friendly unity in the team.
 An indicator of unity is also the organizational unity of the pedagogical staff, which reflects the teachers' desire to work in that staff; it has a social-psychological 2 Asatryan L., p. 100.
There are important meanings.
 Unity also expresses the common opinion and activity of the team in solving various issues.
Conflict situations often arise in the process of team management.
  Conflicts lead to a social deterioration of the collective, a decline in labor productivity, a split in the collective.
 However, conflicts are an inseparable part of human relations, contributing to the development of the individual, raising the level of responsibility and self-esteem 1.
  The causes of interpersonal conflicts are mainly due to psychological factors - differences in personality traits, interests, interests, beliefs, attitudes, desires2.
  Conflict between team members is mainly due to professional competition and behavior, and the reason for the director-pedagogical collective conflict may be the bias in the official powers of the director3.
 The choice of management methods and styles, the correct planning, implementation and control of school activities are important for overcoming conflicts and maintaining a healthy moral and psychological atmosphere of the staff.
Organizing and conducting research.
  The research was conducted through conversations, surveys, "Behavior types in conflict situations (according to K. Thomas)" tests4.
K. The purpose of the Thomas methodology is to reveal a person's behavior in conflict situations.
 The test consists of 30 dilemma questions.
 K. Thomas singles out the following means of resolving the conflict: • Competition - the pursuit of one's own self-interest to the detriment of others; • Cooperation - a mutually beneficial mutually beneficial agreement; .
Table 1 CollectiveCompetition Collaboration Compromise Adjustment AvoidanceSchool ADSchoolBSchoolGSchoolResults analysis և discussion.
  According to the research conducted in the "Types of Behavior in Conflict Situations" test, the results are as follows (see Table 1). There is more or less a conflict situation in the pedagogical staffs of the four schools.
 The cause of teacher-teacher conflicts is mainly professional competition, the main way to resolve which is compromise as a result of mutual agreement.
Principal-teacher conflict can be caused by bias in the principal's official authority.
In order to study the existing interpersonal relationships in the team, depending on the management style (the development of unfavorable relations between the team members due to the dependence on the team leader or insufficient control of the team), we conducted a survey with a pre-designed questionnaire.
Summing up the results of the surveys, we found out that in the collectives where the dependence of the team members on the leader is below average, the unfriendly relations between the members of the team are almost absent, there is a united, low-conflict collective.
 And in the teams where the dependence of the team members on the leader is above average, the conflict is high.
Conclusion.
  Summarizing the results of the research, let us come to the following conclusions. • The establishment of a favorable moral and psychological atmosphere among the members of the staff, the relations between the members of the staff, the conflict, the unity of the staff depend on the management style of the school principal.
• No single management style can be effective.
  Management should be flexible, situational, in accordance with the state և level, level, conditions of activity.
31% 6% 63% School Existence of unfriendly relationships in the staff Insufficient control of the team by the managerThe dependence of the team on the manager 18% 35% 47% School Existence of unfavorable relations in the staff Insufficient control of the team by the manager 30% 15% Inactive 45% School Existence of unfriendly relations in the staff Insufficient control of the staff by the supervisor • There is a direct connection between the cohesiveness and the "conflict" of the pedagogical staff, which is of the opposite comparative nature.
Anna Hovhannisyan SCHOOL LEADERSHIP MANAGEMENT AND PEDAGOGICAL TEAM ASSOCIATION Keywords: school principal, leadership style, pedagogical staff, unity, conflict.
