Information technology is a complete process of data collection, processing and transfer methods and means, which is designed to obtain new quality information about the condition of the object, process or structure from the initial information.
The purpose of information technology is to produce information for human analysis, to take action and to make decisions based on it.
The learning process requires a variety of technologies.
  Such technologies include interactive technology, where the teacher and the student are subjects of the learning process.
 Interactive learning is a special form of organization, in which it is excluded that the student does not participate in the collective, complementary, cognition of all participants in the educational process.
  The main goal of interactive learning is to organize the educational process so that all students find themselves in the process experimentally.
The educational process must be carried out in a coordinated and joint manner.
  In order to organize interactive learning more effectively, it is necessary to use the following technologies.1. Working in pairs. The teacher has to develop new methods for organizing the work in pairs, where the students have to learn to ask each other questions independently, to answer the questions of the "opponent".
2. Carousel. Learners like this kind of interactive technology when two inner-outer rings are formed in the classroom.
 In this way, they manage to talk about several topics in a matter of minutes, trying to prove the correct answer to the interlocutor.
3. In the aquarium. The meaning of this technology is that some students play the situation in a circle իսկ while others, following the situation, analyze the results.
4. Task tree. The essence of this technology is the following. The class is divided into three or four groups.
 The groups have an equal number of students.
  Each group discusses the issue, makes notes on "their tree", then the groups, moving to the "neighbor tree", present their opinions.
The use of interactive learning technologies in the educational process is conditioned by the following stages.1. Orientation. Training of game specialists and experts.
The teacher presents the work procedure, discusses with the schoolchildren the main goals and tasks of the lessons, giving the characteristics of the rules of the game.
2. Readiness check. The teacher suggests the nature of the game, reflects on the tasks, rules, roles of the game, the course of the game, the rules of counting points (a table is made about the game).
  Students gather additional information, consult with the teacher, discuss the content of the game and the process.
3. Holding a game. From the moment the game starts, no one has the right to interfere և to change the given steps.
 Only the moderator of the game can adjust the actions of the participants if they deviate from the main goal of the game.
The teacher cannot participate during the game.
  The task is such that he has to go back to the calculation of the game actions, results, points, clarify inaccuracies and help them at the request of the participants.
4. Game discussion. Stage of game analysis, discussion և evaluation results.
  Teacher և participants, discussing with experts, exchange opinions, defend their positions և solutions, express impressions և draw conclusions.
 At this stage, two models are implemented. 1. passive: the student acts as an "object" of learning (only hears or sees), 2. Active: the student becomes a "subject" of learning (independent work, creative tasks).
Thus, the process of interactive learning takes place in conditions of constant mutual activity of all students, due to which the efficiency of all types of learning processes increases և the quality of the trained personnel.
BOOK 2. Суварова Н. Interactive training.
