Suicide is currently a global social issueis.
  It is studied by a number of sciences: law, social sciences, psychology, ethics.
  This article addresses the psychological aspects of suicide prevention.
  Someone almost every five minutesIt deprives him of life.
  Most worrying is the fact that the number of suicides among people aged 15-24 over the last 30 yearshas tripled in the period [2; 3; 4].
 In our country in 2011 suicides
and suicide attempts in 2010 increased in comparison
by 9.4%, amounting to 647 cases [1].
  As a result, suicide is the second leading cause of death among young people (accidents are the number one cause of death).
  For suicidesThere are various motivations for avoiding pain or mental illnessfrom tension, directing aggression towards oneself, a means of punishing loved ones through the emergence of guilt, with the influence of momentary illogical emotions և impulses.
  Suicides are committed by single people.
 They often suffer "Tunnel vision" when assuming suicideis the only way to overcome the problem.
 The unfortunate thing is that the problemsThey are transient, and suicide is irreparable.
There are many myths about suicides that can be trusted to lose a person.
 The most common misconception is that suicide is mentally abnormalpeople in good condition.
 There is also a widespread opinion that it existsa special psychological type of person who is prone to suicide.
However, anyone can end his life, regardless of his psychological type.
 Another misconception is that if a person decides to commit suicide, he will definitely do it.
 In a crisis situation, a person really feels the need for mental support, emotional warmth, compassion.
 However, the desire to commit suicide may be temporary.
 The next misconception is that "the people who speakabout suicide, they will never do it. ”
  In contrast to thisMisconception: Most suicides before deathdirectly or indirectly announces his plans.
 The opportunity to discuss their intentions helps people who are sufferingto overcome dangerous intentions և to know supportWhere to apply.
Most people who commit suicide do this or thatHe tries to attract attention.
  Signs of impending suicide may include:1. Expression of suicidal thoughts2. Previous suicide attempts;3. Depression experienced by unhappy love4. Despair caused by a chronic illness, educational or work failure;5. Obvious personal changes;6. Alcohol or drug use;7. Feeling helpless;8. Changing habits.
Recently, much attention has been paid to suicide prevention [7; 10].
 It is necessary to remember that suicideEvery threat to do so must be taken seriously.
  UsuallyThe cry for help is hidden under it.
 If you notice your relativesor something unusual in the behavior of friends, trymake sure they get professional help.
 First, what?That person should be taken to a psychologist or psychotherapist.
  If he:refuses to go to a specialist, you need to help him express himselfto show genuine compassion։ care.
  You can:You suggested that you consider other ways to solve this problem.
It is also necessary to find out whether there is a specific plan to commit suicide.
  If such a plan exists, the situation becomes more dangerous.
 If a person chooses to commit suicidethe place, the weather, the means, then it proves to be the last stepIt is very close.
  If he persistently refuses to go to a specialistWhen you leave, make an appointment for the next meeting.
 During that time you:You can get advice from a specialist yourself.
  SuicideThe person who desires it needs to instill confidence in his or her personal merits համար because he or she needs others.
His support can save his life.
Suicide prevention can have many problemsto solve Control of access to various means of autoaggression և
Restriction, control of risk group, factors, provision of medical-psychological assistance.
  R. Kochyunas provides psychological counseling to people who intend to commit suicide
the rules.1. Meet them often2. Emphasize the positive aspects of their lives.3. Do not panic և try to hide that feeling from the visitortelling the moral norms of inadmissibility of suicideabout4. It is necessary to include in the consultation important people for the visitor;5. Allow the visitor to contact the consultant at any timewith6. control the possible manipulations of the visitor,7. Inform the important people for the visitor,8. Remember that he is more responsible for his actionsbears the visitor [6].
Psychological help is especially important for people with severe suicidal ideation, the vast majority of whom are healthy.
  The main purpose of emergency care is to preventFurther development of the response և Suicide [5].
  Its:It is necessary to help a person to master the situation like himto correct և correct non-adaptive personal positions, which:They condition crisis situations and suicidesthe development of tendencies.
  We must assume that the crisis is notit is as much a consequence of the circumstances as it is negative about itattitude as a consequence is considered a traumatic situationStable germination on it.
The urgent steps of crisis prevention are:1. The conversation.
  The first step in preventing suicide is to establish personal contact and gain trust.
 Often a suicidal person is in a state of psychalgia (unbearable mental pain)Consciousness is hurt, that's why talking to someone elsecan reduce the level of anxiety.
  The most important thing in this situation is to be able to listen.
  It is necessary to encourage the open expression of thoughts and feelings through empathy, reducingtension.
  At this stage, it is also necessary to conduct an assessment of the circumstances and the degree of risk of suicide.
  If it:If the conversation is real, then the conversation should be aimed at delaying the decision to commit suicide.
2. Conscious possession of the situation.
  With the help of special questions, assertions it is necessary to overcome the exceptional, the insurmountablethe feeling of the situation.
 The severity of feelings can be reduced by focusing on previous achievements and successes.
  At this stageYou can also use methods such as reflecting emotions, recasting suicidal ideation, and searching for sources of emotion.
3. Approval of the agreement.
  The next step is suicide is the solution to the problem underlying the activity.
 But in no caseYou can reduce this problem in the eyes of the person, but on the contrary, try itDivide into parts տալ give their solutions separately.
 At this stagecan help with the problem of finding a suicidal personAlternative solutions.
  The main ways of workingThese are: proposing solutions to the situation, drawing up a plan, maintaining silence in order to stimulate the initiative of the person, and giving time for the development of the plan.
4. Active psychological support բարձր increase self-confidence.
The leading methods of this stage are persuasion, inspiration, personalactivation of resources.
 The final step in that trustThe inspiration is that the person will definitely overcome the problem.
5. Search for resources to overcome the crisis situation.
Such resources can be family, professional activities, close people, the realization of dreams.
 It may be like thisto talk freely with the person so that he does not feel in the role of the interrogated.
 This:At this stage, it is necessary to outline the crisis situationThere are several ways, but in no case should your opinion be dictated to him.
In the end, it should be discussed what to overcome this situationwill be useful in overcoming new difficulties in the futurefor.
As a result of the listed activities, the person must make sure that:1. Severe emotional states are temporary ընթացքում during therapywill change2. Others are just as bad in similar situationsfelt, and then their condition was completely restored,3. He can be for his relatives, friends, and for lifeIt will be very difficult for them to leave.
In the extreme case, one can convince him that each personhas the right to freely manage his life, but that's an important issueThe solution can be delayed for a few days or weeks until laterto weigh everything calmly.
  When working with such people, it is especially possible to show tenderness and respect for a person freelythe right to choose, but also to remind that other people have the rightto help him reconsider his decision.
It is advisable after the provision of crisis assistanceTo organize the further work using different therapeutic methods: cognitive psychotherapy, speech therapy, axiopsychotherapy, art therapy.
The first approach to solving this problem is public attentionStrengthening is the search for ways to prevent it.
 A lotThere are round-the-clock crisis centers in citiesspecial telephone services that employees seekdetermine the severity of the caller's intentions, enterIn communication with him, expressing empathy, understanding his problem, discussing possible ways and means to get out of the current situation, trying to get agreement from that person to get help in advance.
  We think that it is time to create psychological telephone "hotlines" in our city as well, in the center of which, in addition to psychological violence, there will be various psychological issues, problems, including the early prevention of suicides.
V. The satirist mentions. "Problems will always be with us.
 The problem itselfIt is not a problem, the problem is how a person overcomes it.
 This is what has a negative impact on people.
 If we:If we learn to deal with the problem differently, then the problems will become different. "[8]
BOOK: 1. Statistical Yearbook of Armenia, Yerevan, 20112. Vardanyan K. The role of psychological characteristics of a person is suicidal
in the chain of causality of behavior, Yerevan, 2008Information about the author:Haykuhi Maenlesti Knyazyan - care. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan said
State Pedagogical Institute, Chair of Psychology, E-mail:
