In the last few years, the category of "capital" has gained wide application in sociology, often talking about reputation, trust, legal and other capitals.
The basic properties of capital have been substantiated by the German thinker Karl Marx, [2] but the meaning of the latter has expanded in modern sociology.
 Today's Russian sociologist V. V. Rada, relying on the political-economic interpretation of capital, emphasizes its social essence.
  According to him, it "can accept not only materialized, but also incorporated eggs, that is, they are embodied in the relations between individuals and individuals", սոցի the sociological understanding of the essence of capital significantly allows to expand the range of eggs being analyzed [6, p. 22].
 Note that the Russian sociological approach is based on how P. Bourdieu, as well as J. On Kulman's views.
 Our focus is on corporate authority in the context of symbolic and social capital content.
  Accordingly, it is logical to briefly present those eggs first.
In fact, in sociology, insufficient attention has been paid to the study of meso-level social and symbolic capitals - individual enterprises, firms, companies - corporations.
The term "social capital" was first coined by the American sociologist Glenn Lowry.
  However, one of the well-known concepts of social capital belongs to James Coleman, according to which social capital has the potential of mutual trust and mutual assistance in a purposefully formed interpersonal relationship. Liabilities և expectations, sources of information և social norms [7,9].
  According to Culman, social capital is a set of relationships, the parent of actions, and these relationships are associated with the expectation that agents will fulfill their obligations without sanctions, [8] and the simultaneous concentration of expectations and obligations is expressed in a generalized sense of "trust".
 It turns out that the more obligations are accumulated in a given society, the more vividly expressed the "faith" expressed by both sides, and consequently, the higher the level of social capital [12, p. 66].
  In this case, social capital is viewed at the micro level, particularly in the context of mutual trust and purposeful actions.
However, it can also be offered in the broader definition of social capital, in which the person is not the only one in the role of a social actor.
  The definition suggested in one of the famous Russian sociological magazines is more acceptable. "Social capital is the conscious use of social networks by an individual, organization, social group or society as a whole, which, due to trust, norms and rules, becomes a means to an end" [3, p. 33].
In such a definition, social networks are spectacular, which are one of the basic components of social capital.
 According to the Australian sociologist J. A. Barnes's social network is a system of points, one part of which is connected to the other.
 People are points of that system, ացման the connection lines of these points indicate which people interact with each other ”[1, pp. 53-54].
 By enabling J. A. Barnes' approach will be viewed not only by people, but also by social groups and organizations.
 According to that, the social network is a set of existing social connections between individuals, social groups and organizations.
The use of social networks is not accidental, as they are closely linked to the reputation of the organization.
 One of the scientific works of the Australian scientist Rosa de Carvalho, dedicated to the management of the corporate reputation of the organization, is memorable.
The peculiarity of the work is the title "Reputation management as a relationship management" [13].
  It is clear from the name that the management of social interactions and relations is crucial for the management of the organization's reputation.
 But the management of relations is impossible without the use of other components of social capital.
  One of the main structural components of social capital is trust, the impact of which on the social capital is ambiguous.
 American economist, philosopher, political scientist F. with Japanese roots. Fukuyama [9] emphasized the importance of trust as a component of social capital, which promotes interaction among the employees of the organization, leading to its more successful work and increased performance.
 Harvard University Professor R.D. Patnem [12] considers it as an element of social capital.
  Patnem believes that the stronger the relationship of trust and solidarity, the more individuals and groups seek cooperation and mutual assistance, the more social capital accumulates [5, pp. 210-211].
 E. L. According to Lesser [10], "trust" is a separate concept; it can be both a source of social capital and its result.
  It is clear that the ties between the social capital and the trust are quite complicated, to some extent tangled.
After observing the initial components of social capital, let us move on to the no less valuable capital horse, which is the symbolic one.
P. Bourdieu's conceptions of symbolic capital are often quite comprehensive.
 For example, one of the comments is as follows: "Symbolic capital is any property perceived by social agents, any kind of capital, the categories of perception of which are such that they allow to know about it, to notice it, to give it value" [14, p. 116].
  The main point of this sociological-economic definition is in the recognition and evaluation of different stakeholders, which is identical in content to the understanding of "corporate authority".
 A similar understanding can be found in Russian sociologist A. In the concept of A. Mestnikov, who considers "symbolic capital" as a property of market participants, manifested in influence, prestige or recognition. "Եւ A potential factor in the venture capital market is the investment of symbolic capital as a market participant (venture fund, management company) when it is perceived by other agents who, in their experience, are able to value that attribute և determine their position in that market. with the participant.
  Պետ The state is the source of symbolic capital ”[4, p. 113].
It should be noted that specific P. In Bourdieu's concept, authority, along with trust, honor, and reputation, is one of the symbolic forms of capitalism.
  The corporate reputation of the organization is a symbol of capital, but it is closely intertwined with the social capital of the organization and is based on it.
Trust is a form of expression of symbolic capital և at the same time it is an integral part of social capital.
  Accordingly, confidence can be viewed as a corridor between the two capitalists (see Figure 1).
Trust The Symbolic Capital of the OrganizationThe Social Capital of the OrganizationDraw 1. The Social and Symbolic Capitals of the Organization րանքThe link between them.
Thus, in the initial stage of the formation of each organization, one should first think about the formation of a positive social network, norms and rules, which will allow gaining the trust of key stakeholders over time.
  In turn, effectively managed social capital will serve as a basis for the acquisition and accumulation of symbolic capital.
 Undoubtedly, the accumulated symbolic capital, in its turn, will have a positive impact on the social capital of the organization.
 Accordingly, ensuring the legal authority of any organization is anchored on both the symbolic and social capital of the organization, as it supports the other.
Literature of tour systems.
 Dis. candidate of sociological sciences. M., -2005.- 130 p.2. Marks K. Capital (Volume I) // Marx K., Angelus F. Soc. 2-ое изд. T. 23. М .:
Asked organizations.
  methodology of research .// Sociological research4. Местников А. А. Develop a venture capital investment.
  sociologicalги5. Патнэм Р. The Democracy Party worked.
  Civil traditions in modern Italy. -M.
 Ad Marginem, 1996. - 258 p.7. Швери, Р. Theoretical Sociology by James Coleman.
 analytical order. London.
Profile Books, 1999— P.354.Slusher JA Boston.
 Butterworth Heinemann, 2000. P. 123-131.http.
//195.130.87.21.
8080 / dspace / bitstream / 123456789/163/1 / Carvalho14. Bourdieu, P. (1994). Practical raises. On the theory of action. Paris.
  Seuil, Information about the author Teresa Artur Khachatryan - Applicant of the Chair of Applied Sociology, YSU Faculty of Sociology, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, Lecturer of the Chair of Economics, E-mail.
