As we know, during microparticle interactionsRedistribution of energy և impulses of colliding particles takes place, which may be accompanied by the formation of other particles.
 In particular, elastic interactions are characterized by the conservation of the total kinetic energy of the interacting particles.In all cases, simple geometry can be describedschemes with the help of pulse diagrams.
  And of courseIn the case of high energies, relativistic versions of diagrams are considered.
  Generally pulse diagramsThe method is widely used in elastic non-relativistic [2] ևrelativistic [3], as well as for non-elastic collision processes.
  Impulse diagrams provide the opportunityto find the impulses and energies of the interacting particles at the arbitrary scattering angle after the scattering process, how to solvethe opposite problem.
The following approach is proposed below for the graphical analysis of similar processes.
  Using impulse energymathematical relativistic invariant from the presentation:idea where horizontalpauseimportenergy values, and:two-dimensionalenergy space  the axis is dated by a particle vertical axis according to "movement"is the impulse.
  energy values ​​where:particle relativisticWith such geometric modeling, in particular,Line 1:The energetic state of the relativistic electron will be mapped with a segment whose horizontal "component" is:
is the pause energy of the electron, and the vertical "component"
, where:   is the relativistic impulse of the electron (Fig. 1).
  Thus, the energy states of the particles  are reflected in the energy space dictated by dots or structural convenienceswith non-directional segments that connect the starting point O (the beginning of the energy calculation) to the position of the particle in the energy space42022cmcPE20cmEPcPeE20cmEeexcPEeeyePEOyE, x, 20cmeeEcPe.
  Now let's try to analyze one using such modelinghow many relativistic processes.
1. Compton's appearance.
Line 2:How do we know? Interaction of radiation with the environmentleads to its dispersal.
  Let's build the energy of Comptonthe diagram.
  Pre-interacting particles (free ևto represent the energetic states of an immobile electron and a falling photon) in space, respectively A և Bwith points (OA =:
և OB =:
  passages where:  is the initial impulse of the photon).
The law of full energy conservation proves the full energy of an isolated system of interacting particles (OA և OB segments)Invariability of lengths (OA + OB sum).For the geometric representation of the last factConstruct an ellipse with points A և B that passes through the space EO O. starting point (Line 2).
Ellipse, being a geometric place of points on which:The sum of the distances from the two given points (A և B) has the same constant value, unites in the energy spaceall possible systems of interacting particles (electron և photon)energy production states before փոխ after interaction.
EO2cmecPP.2constcPcmOBOAeEOAKBKKFIIIIII One of such possible productive states is, for example, the systemThe initial state reflected by point O.
 Consider the system:the output state indicated by an arbitrary point K, which will be mappedThe state of the system after a certain process of electron-photon interaction (after the process of scattering a photon on an electron).
 Need it here?assume that the BK shock reflects the scattered photon energystate, and AK refers to the electron of the repulsion (though similarCompliance is not uniform, "it is one of the possible outcomes of the process."inverse compliance).
 Now let's rotate AK ևBK segments, scattered photon և backward electron energyto compare the conditions of the energy metering system with the EO fixed systemfor the purpose.
  Such a function will allow to detect the electron of the strike  և scattered photonthe magnitudes of the pulses(Line 2).
Step 1
Draw with center B և with radius BK  intersection at the point.
 In this case  bow up to the axis E  is the energy of the scattered photon,scattered photon impulse.
Step 2.
Draw with center A և with radius AKwith:    intersection at the point.
 In this case the bow up to the E axis, where: - is the electron pulse of the strike.
Step 3.
Draw with center O և  bow to point F.      Crossing with a bow.
  As a result, a BOF pulse will be formed with radius: triangle (Fig. 3), where:.
Line 3:ePPIKcPKBPIIK422222cmcPOAKOKAAKee, cPKOeePKOIIIIcPcPcPecPOBcPKBBKBF PcPKOOFe It is obvious that on the basis of the BOF triangle, by means of large-scale shifting, the pulse diagram of the Compton phenomenon can be plotted (Fig. 4), Line 4:  is the scattering angle of the photon.
where:Let us now analyze the energy diagram for Compton's eventconstruction և possible application steps.
  Suppose the wavelength of scattered radiation is experimentally measured (scattered photonfrequency), ie known as scattered photonsimpulse, as well as reflecting its energy state in EO space    Absolute values ​​of length.
  It is possibleUnderline the following algorithm for the construction of the energy diagram (Figure 5).
On line 5, fix the falling photon արժ real electron on the axesrepresenting energy states B (OB =:
) և A (OA =:
points.
2. Construct an energy ellipse passing through the starting point և O with focal points A and B.
3. Draw with center B և arc with radius to the ellipse at point K.the intersection.
 In this way it will become certain from the interacting electron և the photonThe position of the point K representing the productive energy state of the system consisting of EO after interaction.
4. Construct the AK part of the energy state of the repulsive electron  ).
Further construction should be continued according to the above (1-3)procedure.
Thus, a diagram of energy states is an opportunityallows to estimate the known value of the scattered photon frequency impulse,photon scattering the magnitude of the angle of the strike electronas the size of the angle.
  It is also possible to study the different possible output parameters of the scattering processinterconnections, the effective state of the system after dispersaldefining point K according to the permissible displacements of the energy ellipse arcIn this case.
It is easy to see that the final product of the system is the point M., kickback electronin the case shown, when AM = OA =
Impulse:
(This can be confirmed by drawing կենտրոն AM with center A  a bow with radius that intersects with the E axis at point O (Fig. 6)).
Line 6:cP2cmecPIeEeP2cme0eP Continuing construction according to steps (1-3) of the procedure և accountGiven that OA + OB = AM + BM, that is, BM = OB we can be sure that:The pulse diagram in this case will look like this (Figure 7).(no scattering).
Line 7:Line 8:And when the final product state of the system is depictedwith point N, then the procedure of steps (1-3) leads to center B ևTo the constructions of arc I with radius BN and center O, to radius III with radius ON, which intersect only at point N (Fig. 8), ie photon - immovableThe electron scattering diagram on the electron in this case will take the following form (Fig. 9).
Line 9:(scattering backwards).
  Thus, the final product state of the system, the point K representing the photon after scattering on the electron, is permissible.shifts can be made according to the energy ellipse arc MN segment, և accordingly the scattering of the photon  in the range.
    the angle changes  Let us now consider the opposite problem.
  Suppose it is required  the wavelength of the scattered radiation wave  frequency).
  To do this, let's pre-determine some(photonThere are analyzes (Fig. 10).
Line 10:Here:.
 And according to full energy conservationof the law, where:-strokeis the full energy of the electron.
according to the cosine theorem  , where:.
 On the other hand.
 From the last two relations we will get:  But how do we know about Compton?Comparing the last result with (**), we will getLet's address the opposite problem and offer energy(by:   of).
  (4)                                                                                                                                    The following procedure for constructing a diagram.
 in space let us construct the energy ellipse where2. From point B, take BC at a known angle to the axis OE    straight.
3. Rated from point B to the ellipse axis according to relation (4) angle BD, the intersection of which K with the energy ellipse will determine the final state of the electron-photon systemafter the dispersal process.
 Moreover,.
4. Draw an arc I with center B և radius BK intersecting the line BCAt point F.
 As a result, a Compton BOF pulse will be formedthe diagram whose sides are .
Here:  is the pulse of the electron of the strike.
  So knowing the photon scattering(4) Evaluate scattered photons through relevance  angle, one can characterize the energy diagramfrequency pulse,as if it were an electron  the magnitude of the impulse anddirection.
Now let's look at the following using an energy diagramThe problem of scattering photons on real electrons.
Using the laws of conservation, show that the free electroncan not absorb a photo.
Solution.
 According to the system of interacting particles in question, the initial ground state includes a photon և free electronThe initial energy states expressed in EO energy space are expressed as two OA =
 with sections (Fig. 11).
This is how the ellipse with energy points A, B is centered, which:In the EO system of energy calculation, the NM arc of the permissible positions of the point K representing the final state of the photon-free electron system (AM = OA) is predetermined.
    It is easy to see that the position of point K (the final state of the system) with respect to the focal points A և B (systemto the initial state) is given by two (AK և BK) energy segments, which in itself proves that the final state of the system is two-component.
  In this way, free is excludedThe physical reality of the absorption of a photon by an electron, which would lead to the existence of a single component state of the electron absorbed by the photon.
  OtherwiseThat is, storage laws only allow free electronsPhoton scattering phenomena when a two-component system is maintained(electron-photon) composition before և after interaction.
Line 11:Literature Information about the author:Nikoghosyan Hrachik Suren - physicist. Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan
State Pedagogical Institute, physics, technology և their teachingChair of Methodology, E-mail.
