The works of the well-known Armenian writer Avetis Aharonyan / 1866-1948 /, in particular the fiction, have been evaluated, interpreted and interpreted from different points of view.during the author's lifetime.
  Literature published in the pressin articles, some textbooks, or individual books dedicated to the writerHis prose works have been evaluated differentlyA number of generations of Armenian writers, critics, public figures,other intellectuals.
 In this article, we draw the readers' attentionPresented by Western Armenian and Diaspora Armenian writers and criticsPrinciples of analysis of Aharonyan fiction ևtheir assessments.
During the Soviet years he was a member of the ARF նախագահ to the chairman of the National Council of the First Republic of Armenia A. AharonyanNegative attitude made him a forbidden, rejected writer ևIt was removed from a wide circle of readers in Soviet Armeniafrom works.
  Themes taken from the national life of the Armenian-Armenian prose writer with patriotic and freedom-loving ideasThe inspiring works were close to the hearts of the Armenians living in the Diaspora, longing for the homeland.
  Aharonyan saidSuch prominent writers, critics, scientists and other intellectuals as Western Armenians and Diaspora Armenians, such as D. Hovhannisyan, evaluated the ideological and artistic merits of stories, novels and novels. Varuzhan, K. Zaryan, N. Adonts, M. Barsamyan,
N. Aghbalyan, H. Oshakan, Hamastegh, H. Karapents և others.
  Original:It is only in the post-Soviet years that a number of prominent people in the homelandof writers and literary critics / St. Topchyan, A. Yeghiazaryan, J. Kalantaryan, D. Gasparyan և others / was appreciated
The legacy of the prose writer.
 At the same time, the opinions of the above-mentioned Armenian-Armenian and Diaspora Armenian writers, critics and intellectuals about Aharonyan's work are of both literary and contemporary significance.
  They contribute to the writer's prose in a unique wayto evaluate the different aspects of the artistic and ideological content of the works.
In the 1900s, unlike A. Aharonyan, "Lalkan"And for those who consider him a pessimistic writer, Daniel Varuzhan praises him as a singer of the liberation struggle, as the poet put it, an apostle of the struggle.
  Especially his "TribeThe heart "/ 1909 / was widely recognized by VaruzhanPresent the poem "The Shepherd" in the "Epic" part of this bookto "A. Aharonyan" 1.
  The theme of the poem was close to Aharonyanto his work, especially on his "Road to Freedom" / 1906 /to the stories in the collection.
 Varuzhan is probably well acquainted with them, as with other works of the prose writerbeen.
  This is evidenced by the fact that the poet was interested in Aharonyan's drama "Valley of Tears".
 While still working as a teacher in Sebastia, “a group of girls led by Varuzhan representAvetis Aharonyan's "Valley of Tears" for the benefit of the carpet workersunion.
  Before the performance, Varuzhan gave a speech (it was not preserved).
And here in 1909. Varuzhan writes the poem "My Deputies" on the occasion of Aharonyan's imprisonment in Metekh prison in Tbilissi (Georgia).
  1910 This was published for the first time in "Azatamart"
The striped had the gift "to A. Aharonyan" / the author later itposted in 1912. "Golgotha ​​Flowers" of "Pagan Songs" published in
in row 3 /.
  Here, with his typical image, Varuzhan gave hope to the imprisoned writer, tightened his belt, writing: But there the Fighting Apostle m, has a cranite in the prison.Strike hard with your fingers, smash the shard on its window,And you gave me the shunt, Sing of hope, lying on his shoulder.
Say that soon we will stand the statue in its glory.
Ah, go, hawk, I will give you a laurel.
Famous Diaspora Armenian writer and critic H. Oshakan still refers to Aharonyan's works in the 1910s
evaluation.
  With its characteristic aesthetic taste and insight, it presents a number of significant achievements and shortcomings of the writer's multi-genre works.
  Appreciating A. Aharonyan's prose worksIn the processes of Armenian literature of the time, the critic considered the writer's contribution unconditionally significant in 1895-1896. tragic
and in responding to the heroic events, the feudal struggle in an artistic way.
  He considers the collection "On the Way to Freedom" to be the writer's creative achievement in that field.
"He is the most beautiful memory of our heroic battle, patrioticA glorious height in the literature of societies, where the eyesThey love to rest with pride.
  Hundreds of thousands of martyrsstained with pure blood, with the immortal devotion of our heroesvibrating, that book is the best gem we can put in our heartson the immortal grave of the dead, somehow comforted in our mourningwith the proud peace bestowed on that precious gift. ”4
S. Yeremyan, an Armenian-Armenian critic and member of the Mekhitarist Congregation, emphasizes the writer's preferences for expressing "pessimism" and "fighting moods", testifies to the influence he has gained and the influence he has had on young writers.
From 1929 to 1930 The Diaspora Armenians widely celebrated the 40th anniversary of the famous writer's literary activity in different colonies of the world.
  The highlight of the event was the Sorbonne in Parisat the famous university in 1930. May 1 honoring
where Aharonyan is speaking.
  On the occasion of this anniversary, in the pressIn addition to various published materials and articles, they are publishedsee books dedicated to his literary activity.
  Their authors analyze the writer's prose works or express opinions on them at different levels of professionalism.about.
  A well-known Armenian historian in European scientific circlesN. Adonts delivered at the Sorbonne University on the occasion of the writer's anniversaryIn his speech he refers to Aharonyan's workstypical իր realistic, եր romantic shades.
  It's worth itThe originality of the works and the generations of the Armenian peoplethe great potential for education.
 "Aharonyan's volumes," he said, "should be."to educate and ennoble the generations by instilling a knightly spirit forFor the welfare of the Homeland, inspiring love for the Armenian people, the Armenian Homeland, its wonderful nature ”5.
Aharonyan's fictional prose is more remarkable from the point of view of analyzing it in the scope of one work. Writer-critic M. Parsamyan"Avetis Aharonyan, his life" published in Paris in 1930Literature ”study.
 The author comments on Aharonyan's works based on world aestheticson the ideas of some new understandings, existentialism, philosophical view of existentialism, intuitionism spread in the Western European literature of the beginning of the century.
  The characters created by the writerexamines their conscious and subconscious potential, the relationship between the individual and society, using the inner world of the Armenian man to national and universal valuesthe circumstance of raising from the perspectives.
  M. Parsamyan tries to regularize him in his relatively extensive bookcreative activity.
 The critic is able to show subtle observation in connection with the comments of individual works, tries to reveal the context of a literary work, to showliterary creation, characters with realityrelations.
  In spite of all this, we believe, he has remained at the level of interpreting literary phenomena with their visible surface.on.
  The enthusiastic high marks of individual works are often not substantiated by full and comprehensive interpretations of the content and the horse, or superficial explanations are given.
  And sometimes given to some works too muchThe high rating was probably due to the fact that more attention was paid to them.
  For example, referring to some really artistically valuable works / "The Traveler", "When"The snow is falling," "Katushk", "Under the Ashes" /, he writes. "With this new series of his stories, Aharonyan of our fiction
He painted new horizons in it.
 The universal questions that are under his penthey begin to take it ”6.
  Especially the writer's prose works from the DiasporaTaking into account the new ideological and artistic qualities, he singles out this period and makes original observations.
 Speaking of "MyThe book "՝ mentions its unique significance in the writer's legacy.
 "It is the condensation of its content literature, thoughts and sensitive soul" 7.
  There are remarkable interpretations in the study, but they do not present the deep, comprehensive literary analysis of Aharonyan's work with a coherent logic, complete and solid narration.
  This book by M. Parsamyan, however, remains the only comprehensive study of the author published before, containing in some cases accurate comments and assessments.
Speaking about Aharonyan in this period, literary critic N. Aghbalyan emphasized his ideological, philosophical position of relating the national to universal problems. "How much և?
There should be a dispute about the perfection of his art, but only if he tastes itHe does not give satisfaction, he speaks from the heart of a thousand, he teaches thousandsTo think and act in public is a big deal in itself.
 This is the daily breadFor the political Armenians, the great impetus for the self-contained Armenian to come outfor its individuality ”8.
The constellation was noticed in Ts. Aharonyan's worksdifferent literary directions / realism, fiction,Mysticism, decadence / manifestations of typical principles.
 In addition, he saw a close connection between Aharonyan's works and Armenian writers of the past (Abovyan, Raffi, Alishan, Peshiktashlyan).between the ideological and artistic traditions created by him.
  Ibra!Out of the originality of the writer's style, Hamastegh emphasized Aharonyan's subordinate, ideological-aesthetic approach to the creation of characters.
 "For him," he writes, "he had something to sayto say in a beautiful way.
  It was a deprivation for him not to enrich the type or description with his lavish imagination, if that was the "Mother" և or the owner"Soghon" 9 ".
 The constellation proves that Aharonyan's name is for the peopleIt had become "charming and magical", and there were preconditions for thatis the sincerity of the writer, the emotions and feelings of the peoplethe ability to express and the ability to be a great patriot.
"In Aharonyan's literature," writes Hamastegh, "there was one aspiration,one goal - to save the Armenian people. Like Laocoon և like his children
He was caught with huge snakes.
 That is what the critics did not want to understand. "They looked for the description of a literary school in Aharonyan.
 Aharonyan ifIf he was not literate, he would have to walk in the mountains of Armenia like a feta:to sacrifice himself to the Armenian people.
  An Aharonyan or AndranikThe roles have been the same in the struggle for our national existence. ”10
The writer's son, V. Aharonyan, succeeds in Boston, USAFrom 1947 to 1951 he published ten volumes of his father's works.
  In the first volume he posted "Avetis Aharonyan / Life"Extensive overview entitled "The case /".
  It is especially valuableAuthentically written by the author about A. Aharonyan's biographythanks to the information.
1958 In an essay written on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the writer's death
Writer-publicist H. Karapents approached the appreciation of Aharonyan's works especially from the point of view of creating images with psychological nuances in dramatic situations.
"His focus is on man and human tragedy," he writes.
 - And hisThanks to the ability of the psychologist, Aharonyan accurately analyzes the inner worlds, penetrates into the hearts, touches the essential, creates patterns.
  Aharonyan is unsurpassed when dealing with descriptions subject to mental anxiety.
 It is there in its perfect element. ”11
A. Aharonyan's interest in his works reaches its next focus in the Diaspora in 1966 as a writer
on the occasion of the 100th anniversary.
  "Bagin" published in BeirutThe complete 8-9 joint issue of this year's literary magazineDedicated to the famous writer.
 Among the new materials published, the analyzes of several valuable Aharonyan stories are especially remarkable, which are given to P. Snapyan's "Tribal Field" grooves ", A.Haykaz "Reading" Hazre ", N. Patanyan's "Run to freedom
on the road. ”
  These were the first attempts to analyze these stories.
 The "managing editor" of the magazine K. Sasuni aspiresOutline the place of the writer and the novelties brought in the Armenian literature, noteliterary influences.
 He wrote in particular: "If one side
Let's put Aharonyan's political, philological and "historical works"We should only pay attention to his literary worksLet's see Raffi's immediate successor, with his breath and national aspirations.He continues to write fiction in Eastern Armenian literature with a wide breath.
  The difference between Raffien Aharonyan is that he is pious andAharonian will embrace a mystical direction, keeping a novelistschool properties ”12.
 And here is the writer, literary critic Mushegh Ishkhan,emphasizing the romantic /Kh.Abovyan expressed in Aharonyan's worksThe combination of such "a poetic soul" / և realistic principles, adds that. "The general ideological concern is his
is more powerful than the pursuit of artistic perfection.
  Sometimes hisHeroes turn into incarnations of suffering or epicof superhumans.
  Instead of all these exaggerations, which are:If they harm the nature of his works, Aharonian will enchant us with his colorful descriptions ”13.
  Expressed in the above printed materialsapproaches, regardless of the degree of accuracy of the formulations / howfrom the effort to praise a fellow party member /, A. Aharonyan's literatureheritage seriously, generally accepted in literatureThey were observations from the point of view of understandings, in this case, historical and theoretical patterns, not counting the partial mistakes.
In the pre-Soviet period in the Armenian-Armenian reality, in addition to praising Aharonyan's artistic works / Leo, Vrt. Papazyan և others /, there were expressions of sharp critical attitude.
  Aharonyan's works were critical from the point of view of their political and aesthetic views evaluation Ց. Khanzadyan, famous poet V. Teryan.
 It is known thatV. Teryan, in his speech-study "The Coming Day of Armenian Literature" / 1914 /, thinking about the prospects of the development of Armenian literature, openly denied the effectiveness of Aharonyan's literary path, giving preference to Shirvanzade.
  Modern:It has already been observed in Armenian criticism that he is like the great Armenian poetThe other extreme assessments expressed in that speech were conditioned not only by the demand for high standards of artistry, but also by ideological differences.
  Teryan saidsocial and political tendencies of national partiesIt was opposed from the point of view of the national-political and cultural programs of the "new intelligentsia", the "advanced Russian democratic intelligentsia".
"To a large extent, this ideological opposition must be attributedThe extreme of Teryan critique of 19th century literature and worldview ”14.
We think that V. towards Aharonyan Teryan's attitude
It was partly due to the fact that the prose writeralready well-known figures of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun party at that timewas.
  In fact, he criticized Aharonyan mostly from that political point of view. Khanzadyan.
  Former Speaker of the Parliament of the First Republic of Armenia A. Towards Aharonyan
Due to the negative attitude in the Soviet years, when evaluating his works of art, J. was mostly limited. Khanzadyan, Ed. Jrbashyan, A. Ohanyan said
with obviously one-sided assessments and superficial analyzes15.
  In this context, the opinions and comments of the Armenian-Armenian authors presented in the article are morecontributes to the popular and wide-ranging period of his lifeto the literary analysis of the reader's works.
  This has become especially evident today, when Armenians are modernArticles about Aharonyan have been written by well-known literary critics with an unprejudiced approach and scientific integrity.
  About himdefended candidate / author: V. Grigoryan / և doctoral
/ author: G. Khachikyan / dissertations.
 What follows is a biased approach driven by political views and interestsWhen analyzing or valuing the writer's works of artprevents the literary phenomenon from being evaluated impartially, according to real merits.
Literature 1. Varuzhan D., Complete collection of works, in three volumes, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSRհրատ., Ե, 1986, հ. 1, p. 204.
2. Sharuryan A., Chronicle of the life and work of Daniel Varuzhan, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, E, 1984, p. 154.
3. Varuzhan D., Complete collection of works, in three volumes, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSRհրատ., Ե, 1986, հ .2, էջ 116.
4. Oshakan H., Armenian-Armenian Faces, Beirut, 1999, pp. 99-100.
5. The speech of Nikoghayos Adonts on the occasion of Avetis Aharonyan's anniversary //"Literary newspaper", E, 2000, September 1-15, page 2;6. Parsamyan M., Avetis Aharonyan ..., Paris, 1930, page 79.
7. Note. work., page 84.
8. Quoted by G. Lazyan, Faces of the Armenian Liberation Movement,Cairo, 1949, p. 238.
9. Hamastegh, Avetis Aharonyan // "Bagin", Beirut, 1966, No. 8-9, page 22.
10. Hamastegh, on the occasion of A. Aharonyan's death // Hamastegh, Forgottenpages, E., h. B, 2005 page 68.
11. Karapents H., Two worlds.
  Literary essays, Boston,1992, p. 323.
12. Sasuni K., Avetis Aharonyan/ brief overview /// "Bagin",Beirut, 1966, No. 8-9, page 27.
13. Ishkhan M., Works, "Nairi", E, 1990, page 535.
14. History of Armenian Criticism, in 2 volumes, total. ed. S.N. Sarinyan, "Science" publishing house of NAS RA, Y., 1998, vol. 2, page 220.
15. See Khanzadyan J., Avetis Aharonyan, State Publishing House of the USSR, E., 1926.
  Հայ:History of New Literature, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, E., 1979, vol. 5, pp. 81-83,
749-752.
Information about the author:Khachikyan Gagik Vahe - b. c. Associate Professor, Gyumri State University after M. Nalbandyan
Pedagogical Institute, Armenian Literature, its teaching methods ևHead of the Chair of Journalism, E-mail.
