The world is changing at an unprecedented rate.
  The demands of life are constantly changing unpredictably, the imperatives dictated by them, from which no sphere of life can be free.
  Everywhere in this rapidly changing reality, people constantly find themselves in unprecedented situations.
 And there can be no one constantly, the teacher, who will give a ready answer or will do something for that person.
  So, today more than ever, human protection requires literacy, awareness of situations in which a person often finds himself unintentionally or unplanned.
The process of change has also penetrated all levels of education: general education, university and postgraduate system.
   Information attacks like a torrent.
 And as in many other cases, in this case և adolescents are considered to be vulnerable and ignorant youth.
  Among others, which are not the problem of the article, the university constantly updates its work plans and curricula, aimed at raising the level of awareness among the youth, as a civic education ready for the challenges of the human immune response time.
It has been two years since the Department of Biology introduced the "Healthy Lifestyle" course at the GSPI Faculty of Natural Sciences and Geography, for which a university program has been developed, based on the school curriculum, taking into account the age and education level of the students.
Let us present the justifications with which our proposal on the necessity of introducing the "Healthy Lifestyle" course in the pedagogical university curricula for all specialties was dictated.
First of all, it was conditioned by the fact that this subject has become compulsory in the 8th-9th grades of the secondary school in recent years, and from the 2011-2012 academic year also in the 10th-11th grades of the high school, which proves the importance of the subject.
  Besides, in the future it is envisaged that only a pedagogue with a master's degree will have the right to teach in a high school.
  Without discussing the reasons, it should be noted that on the one hand, the university may not have the "Healthy Lifestyle" teaching professional qualification department, on the other hand, any literate, pedagogically educated person, being familiar with the "Healthy Lifestyle" school curriculum and teaching methods, can teach it.
 It should be noted that during the above-mentioned years, different specialists taught the subject at the school, passing only relevant training courses, which, of course, is far from meeting the requirements of today's school.
 Therefore, in order to organize an "ambulance" for the school, we consider it expedient to introduce the "Healthy Lifestyle" course in the curricula of all pedagogical professions of the university, ensuring the initial preparation of any specialist who obtains the qualification of a teacher to teach the mentioned subject.
On the other hand, many of the most difficult problems facing humanity in the 21st century relate to the maintenance of individual and public health.
 Alcohol abuse, tobacco and drug use, various forms of violence, human trafficking, premature and unwanted pregnancies, HIV infection and sexually transmitted diseases, stress, sex discrimination, etc. are considered to be health threats. 3].
 And in order to avoid all the listed types of health threats as much as possible, as a means of protecting a person, not only certain medical and biological knowledge is needed, which is not available to everyone, but the manifestation of a person's responsible behavior in any unpredictable situation is undeniable.
  The most favorable condition for the development of self-responsible behavior is literacy and awareness on all the mentioned issues.
That goal is the main one during the study of the "Healthy Lifestyle" course.
 In order to achieve that, we have used a methodology that is not yet typical of higher education, an interactive methodology, the features of which we will present below.
Each problem in the classroom is mastered not only by studying the theoretical material, but also by discussing the textbooks, pedagogues, real or supposed situational options suggested by any student within the given topic, legal documents and laws related to the responsibilities and rights of the person in each specific situation [4,5].
  Moreover, each issue is analyzed with a multifaceted approach, discussing the possible options for preventing the positive and negative sides, causes, consequences, on the most typical principle of interactive learning, that is, not the person, but the idea, the way of performance is criticized.
This method of working has many advantages, it solves goals that are almost impossible or not very effective with the traditional teaching method.
 Here are some of them: • In the learning process, the lecturer changes from a decision-maker, a demander, a dictator to an observer, mentor, supporter, and encourager [2].
  The opinion, equal to the opinion of all the participants of the debate, is subject to criticism, rejection and supplementation by the discussants.
 And if we add that the subject of debate is almost always in our reality mainly unresolved, forbidden issues, as mainly mentioned above, then it will become clear that what is described contributes to the creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust in the audience, and ultimately guarantees high learning efficiency.
• Involvement of the lecturer in the process of question analysis as an equal, who has the right not to have an opinion or specific knowledge on the issue, as well as respect for the right to have an opinion increases learner ease, self-confidence, makes it possible to get rid of various complexes.
• In the situation described, the lecturer can become a trustworthy open person to consult on the most difficult personal and situational issues that concern the teenager and young person.
 Having such a literate and reliable friend will help every teenager and teenager to get rid of stressful situations as much as possible, preventing many undesirable phenomena in the society, their spread.
Each learner will have the opportunity, in addition to acquiring life-appropriate academic knowledge, to master many skills and abilities, such as listening to others, supplementing, respecting, making decisions on their own, finding solutions, supporting others, learning or mastering the rules of cooperation. bringing և etc.
• The wealth of knowledge acquired by everyone in a pluralistic environment will contribute to the formation and development of a sense of responsibility for one's own behavior as a guarantee of protection in the most unpredictable situations, as well as the reduction of aggression in various human relationships.
In order to achieve the expected result, the high level of general development, professional, pedagogical and methodological training of the lecturer is undeniable, that the most important thing in pedagogy is one's own work, as well as the ability to love others.
One of the features developed by the chair for the methodology of the course is that it does not imply a unit assessment.
  The highest score of the course is the acquisition of knowledge that contributes to the health of the people around them and the protection (including legal protection) in various unprecedented situations, and the manifestation of the required behavior, which, we hope, has the potential to increase students' interest in learning.
  Discussion of each topic ends with a test.
  And at the end of the course you can hold a competition, individual or team, depending on the number of students or their purpose.
   Two years of experience in teaching the subject at the faculty allows to assure that many of the problems envisaged through the subject have been solved.
  The interest of the students in that group has increased, the desire to actively participate in the lesson, the interest.
  The "Healthy Lifestyle" course was highly praised by the students as a knowledge-intensive course that develops very useful knowledge and skills, helps to change attitudes and thinking about reality.
In our opinion, the subject, among others, has a great opportunity to nurture, strengthen responsibility for one's own behavior, which can invisibly become a character, a way of life, in any situation, to be educated in general, to increase responsibility and diligence for each case, etc.
Taking into account the above, we suggest: 1) To make the "Healthy Lifestyle" course a co-institute subject, in order to give the opportunity to teach that course to any specialist graduating from the university.
2) The course in the Master of Biology of the Faculty of Natural Sciences and Geography, as the most probable specialist in teaching subjects in public schools, will continue in the 2nd year of the Master's program, deepening the content and methodology of teaching.
3) To suggest to the relevant general education institutions to try to include the course in schools in the obligatory thematic plan of the teachers in order to discuss the program issues during the lessons.
  4) To ensure a proper attitude towards the subject, as well as the opportunity to choose the best teacher to teach the subject at school, take into account the results of extracurricular activities, such as essay competitions, and a number of topics discussed in the Healthy Lifestyle class.
 These may be "People living with HIV", "A person close to someone living with HIV", "A healthy person surrounded by people living with HIV" և Other topics on which the following questions can be discussed: a) What? People with HIV need, what do they expect from those around them, close ones, who can they turn to with different problems?
(b) What can society do to prevent people from becoming infected with HIV?
c) Who is most at risk of HIV infection, etc.?
 [2]
In the process of organizing events on the mentioned topics, it is desirable to involve students conducting pedagogical internships at school.
5) Winners of all types of competitions will receive some incentive to support learning.
Competitive reporting ող Incentive incentives, in our opinion, can be a means of promoting learner պատասխանատվ responsibility բարձր improving the quality of learning.
