1918-1920 Georgia was no exception among the neighboring countries of the Republic of Armenia in terms of claiming historical Armenian territories.
 Taking advantage of the difficult military-political situation created for Armenia, Georgia tried at all costs to take possession of the historical Armenian Lori and Javakhk, populated mainly by Armenians.The territories eventually reached the annexation of some of them to Georgia.
Armenian-Georgian 1918-1921 Quite extensive literature has been created on relations (including territorial issues) (Melkonyan A., Javakhk in the 19th century առաջին in the first quarter of the 20th century, Yerevan 2003, Sardaryan K., Armenian-Georgian relations
1918-21, Yerevan, 2002, Virabyan V. Georgian-Armenian war, RA
Government's military-political activities և parties, Yerevan, 2003 և etc.), but even today the comprehensive coverage of the topic has a modern-scientific significance.
Georgian historiography and the press do not always give an objective assessment of the events that took place at the beginning of the century.
  His:Guram is especially prominent in anti-Armenian publicationsՄարխուլիան (Guram Marhuliya, "Betrayal of Armenians in the Roofs", iberiana.Georgia ", kavkasia.net/Armenia/article/1324960915.php).
  While historicalDiscovering the truth is not only a scientific necessity, but also!is aimed at maintaining and strengthening the Armenian-Georgian neighborly relations.
 In this respect, the topic is topical.
The urgency of the article is conditioned by the fact that both Georgian-Azerbaijani and Armenian-Georgian border adjustments are taking place at present.
  In such cases, controversial questions arise about this or that part of the border.
 A striking example of this is what happened in the Bavra region, when 300 of the territory of ArmeniaYes, agricultural lands were attributed to Georgia, interferingimplementation of agricultural works.
  There are controversial issuesIn the parts of Aghkyorpi և Khojorni, which are mainly conditioned by the border crossing with a forest layer.
Our goal is to once again specify the area of ​​disputebecame the subject of centuries-old conflicts in the early 20th century.
The study of the issue was carried out by historical sourcesComparative examination, comparison of facts և generalizationsmethod.
  The conclusions put forward are based on the sourceson the evidence.
Disputed territories between Armenians and Georgians were the province of Akhalkalaki (historical Gugark province of the world Gugark) along with the adjacent Tsalka region (historical Gugark world of Tregk province), the southern part of the Khram River south of the Borchalu province of Tbilissi (southern part of the historical Gugark province).
 The latter of the XX centuryAt the beginning of the 19th century, it corresponded to the police stations of Yekaterinenfeld and Lori in the province of Borchalu, to the south of the Khram River of the Trialeti police station.
 The southwestern Armenian part of Ghazakh province was also disputed.
 There was such a national proportion in the disputed area - 260 thousandArmenians, 7 thousand Georgians և 30 thousand other nations 1.
1 Asryan A., From the history of Armenian-Georgian relations (Armenian-Georgian conflict on the border), ed. Banber of the Archives of Armenia, vol. 2, Yerevan, 2009, page 67.
The issue of the administrative re-establishment of Transcaucasia on a national principle arose before the revolution.
  It was discussed at the 1909 և 1916 consultations.
 According to the Armenian project, territorial division according to the national principle to each nationprovided a proportionate amount of land.
  According to the Armenian National of BakuCouncil of 1918 According to a document drawn up in December 1, if we take the total number of Armenians, Georgians and Muslims in Transcaucasia, then
It turns out that Georgians make up 28%, Armenians - 29%, ՝ Muslims - 43%.
  According to the Armenian project, respectively, 29% of the territory should have passed to the Armenians, 30-33% to the Georgians, and 38-41% to the Tatars.
 The Armenian project was based on a fair principle - և Armenian democracyhe assumed that justice would prevail after the revolution.
The three main ones in Transcaucasia after the February revolutionThe nations, declaring themselves the owners of the territory, decide territoriallyto resolve the issue on a national basis.
 This principle was at the heart of many governmental and public interethnic consultations։ was approved by all ruling parties.
 Both the Social-Democratic Mensheviks and the Georgian National-Federalists believed that the demarcation of the borders should be based on this or thatthe real distribution of the nation.
 According to Georgian socialist-federalists:"The following provinces should be included in the territory of Georgia, including the province of Tbilissi (Georgia): Tbilissi (Tbilisi), Gori, Dusheti, Telavi, Sghnakh-Tionet, Borchalu, Akhalkalaki, Akhaltsikhe.as well as the province of Kutaisi, the region of Batumi, a district of Sukhumipart.
 As for the Borchalu և Zakatala districts, then they areThey will join Georgia only through a referendumthat is what the majority of the population wants. ”2
 1917 In the summer, the Ministry of Internal Affairs held a consultation on the transcaucasian order, in which it participated.
It was the representatives of Transcaucasia, it is also a national decisionto change the administrative structure of the region.
  For that purposeA commission is set up headed by Senator, Professor of State Law Prince Zurab Avalov.
  Commission protocol:we read in: "Commission members Shahkhatunyants ատ Khatisyan suggest taking Lori police out of Borchalu province
The rural communities of Borchalu and Yekaterinenfeld adjacent to it, which have a widespread Armenian population.
  SameFrom the Trialet precinct to the province of Akhalkalaki to connect to Ashghali 1 Ibid., p. 68.
2 Ibid., P.
(Ashghala Nerkin, Ashghala Verin) 1, Avranlin (Avranlo) 2 և Nardevanrural communities.
  Take 2 villages out of Bakuriani rural communities of Gori province: Kzil-Kilisa (Ghzilkilisa) 3 և Molit.
 To take the province of Akhalkalaki out of the province of Tbilissi ”4.
 The members of the commission state that it is expedient to cross the border into Khramby the river.
After minor changes, the Ministry of Internal Affairs sends it to the Transcaucasian Special Management Committee, whichconvened consultation (15 members, 5 from each nationalitymember (presided over by New Jordan) also approves the draft based on the national principle.
 Only the National Democrats are from Borchalu Վրաստանի from Georgia ևAgainst the withdrawal of Akhalkalaki provinces5.
 It must be said that even then the issue of borders was at the level of state-territorial, not just administrative divisions.
 After the proclamation of the Transcaucasian Democratic Federal Republic, when againThe issue of border revision is raised, it is already clearer,We are talking about the borders of the three Transcaucasian republics, which would be connected by a federal principle.
Prior to the declaration of independence, the Georgian National Council agreed to be part of Armenia on a national basisAbout 2/3 of Borchalu province և the whole Akhalkalaki province6.
  And in 1918During official talks with Armenian ministers in June, Jordan stated that Georgia had no ambitions for Lori.
 Thus, the setback is one. of disputed territories to Armenia և Armenian
Belonging to the people was accepted as national and political in Georgiaby circles.
  But soon the situation changes dramatically.
1918 According to the Batumi agreement of June 4, Akhalkalaki province
passes to the Ottoman Empire.
  By German-Turkish troopsLori (Borchalu province) and Pambak (Alexandropol province), east of the border established by the Batumi Treaty, remain military.
1 village in the Tsalka region of VH.
 Dictionary of toponyms of adjacent regions of Armenia, h. 1, p. 292.
2 Hayabnak village in the Tsalka region of the Republic of Armenia, in the same place, page 369.
3 Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia, T.Kh. Hakobyan, St. Melik Bakhshyan, H.Kh. Barseghyan, Yerjan University Press, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1991, page 500.
4 Asryan A., From the history of Armenian-Georgian relations (Армяно-грузинский:конфликть по поводу границъ), հրատ. Bulletin of the Archives of Armenia, page 70.
5 In the same place.
6 Ս. Vratsyan, Republic of Armenia, Tehran, 1982, p. 205.
At the same time (June 6) in the official "Caucasus" newspaper the Georgian government made a statement thatIt is only the responsibility of these countries to clarify and establish the borders between Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan, so that the Georgian government can hold direct talks with Armenia and Azerbaijan on these issues without Turkish intervention.
 At the same time it is announced that on territorial issuesagreement, if such will be signed between Turkey and Armenia "It cannot be obligatory for Georgia1.
  Georgian on June 11The government has decided to set up a commission to adjust the bordersfor.
 The commission defends Georgia's "economic, strategic" borders, including Armenian territories:up to Lake Sanaa.
  Representatives of the Armenian government invited for a joint discussion insist on the possibility of maintaining the national principle.
  But the Georgian governmentorders to occupy the area up to the central part of the tunnel between Gharakilisa and Shahali, against which "Paykar" newspaper protestsis the Armenian National Council.
Under certain conditions, the Armenian government considered it possible in principle to make concessions to Georgia, Akhalkalakiin the matter of the province.
  It was supposed that the Armenian-Armenians living hereGenerations can be resettled in the territories to be given to the Republic of Armenia under the pressure of the Entente.
 Georgia, in turn, undertakes to defend the Armenian demands before the Peace Assembly in case of receiving Akhalkalaki, at the same time to support thatAzerbaijan will agree to cede some disputed territories to Armenia2.
Georgian military units manage to capture Lori police stationMost of the area (northern part) ել establish checkpoints with the Germans along the left bank of the Kamenka River (Dzoraget).
Their main outposts were Vorontsovka, Haydarbek,In Alexandrovka, Tsater, Kober, Karinj settlements.
  And Turkish?The line stretched along the right bank of the Kamenka River to the villages of Novo Pokrovka, Jalaloghli, Nikolaka, Gyargyar, Vardablur, Kurtan, Darakend.then east to Kober և Collageran StationMarch և Lorut settlements 3.
Georgian party and politicians were vyingTo see not only the whole province of Tbilissi, but also Georgia3 R. Hovhannisyan, Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2005, pp. 75-76.
Pambak Valley (First Police Station of Alexandropol Province, Yerevan Province) 1.
 During the talks between the representatives of the Armenian and Georgian National Councils, one of the leaders of the Georgian Social-Democratic Party, member of the government I. Tsereteli states that the Armenian-Georgian border should be such that it is Georgian
The provinces of Borchalu and Ghazakh are on the side, and the Turks are leavingthen he - the province of Akhalkalaki - Pambak of the province of AlexandropolDistrict 2.
 Khalil Pasha, commander of the Turkish troops on the Eastern Front, secretly warns in Tbilissi (Georgia) in October to maintain their position in the Caucasus and deepen the Armenian-Georgian conflict.Jamalyan that Georgia is going to occupy not only the entire provinces of Akhalkalaki and Borchalu, but also the Pambak region.which was part of the Republic of Armenia since its independence, where there were no Georgianslives 3.
  Of course, both Pambak and ElisavetpolThe Georgian ambitions towards the Kazakhs had a purely tactical purpose, to later announce that they were ceding those territories to Armenia.
Georgian politicians try Georgia's ambitions in Lori ևTo substantiate historical, geographical in relation to Akhalkalaki,by economic factors, ignoring the national principle.
 However, the need for those territories to be part of Armenia is substantiatedFirst of all, in national terms.
  In the disputed part of Borchalu province և    105,000 Armenians, 15,000 Muslims and 1,150 Georgians lived in the Pambak regionև 13000 other nations (Greeks, Russians և etc.) or 85.81% Armenians և 0.85% Georgians.
 What?refers to the province of Akhalkalaki և Tsalka region, which is its naturalThere were 82,000 Armenians, 9,000 Muslims, 7,400 Georgians, 8,000 other nations, that is, 77.35% Armenians and 6.9% Georgians4.
  Geographically, Lori and Akhalkalaki belong to the Armenian Highlandsare part of.
 Historically, both provinces have been lost many timesThey have gained a hand, but have always preserved their Armenian nature.
  Strategically, they are a natural defense border, and economically, for the Republic of Armenia poor in natural resources, pastures, forests, mineralsThese resource-rich regions are vital.
The Armenian government has made several official complaints1B. Harutyunyan, Atlas of the History of Armenia, Part B, Yerevan, 2008, pp. 62-63.
2 A. Jamalyan, The Armenian-Georgian Wrinkle, Yerevan, 2011, p. 32.
 Dro, Biography. memories, compiled,
edited by A. Andranikyan, Yerevan, 1991, p. 113.
4 Ibid., Pp. 94-95.
presented to Turkish-German governments, German-Austrian missions, Armenia under Batumi TreatyOn the liberation of the territories belonging to him և has always received the answer that this occupation is temporary1.
 Turkish on October 5According to the protocol signed between the Armenian headquarters, TurkishThe troops are obliged to leave the territory of the republic2.
  Finally, after the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Pambak and southern Lori on October 18, based on the same protocol, 3 Armenian troops attached to the Dro officer corps in Dilijan occupiedLori, from Shahal station on the border of Yerevan province to Kamenka river, that is, to the Turkish line.
  Several patrols along the railway reach Lori under Georgian control.at the end of the section Tsater և Kober.
  But German officersThe presence on the Georgian side forces the Armenians to leave Kober andThe feet.
  Once again the Armenian side occupies Korinj (Karinj) andThe villages of Tsater, however, will have to leave on October 26the two villages4.
 The Germans ask the Armenians not to cross the Tsalka River,which they consider the Georgian border, at the same time bannedThe Georgians should cross the "Turkish" line5.
Thus, in the first period of the Armenian-Georgian confrontation, Armenia managed to establish control over South Lori, andAttempts to move north failed.
All attempts to resolve the issue of the Lori territory through peaceful, diplomatic means failed, the Armenian-Georgian armed conflict became inevitable.
 On December 5, the Georgian troops enter Akhalkalaki.
  Upon learning of the incursion of Georgian troops, an Armenian detachment occupied by the government on December 7Avoid the area adjacent to the Alexandropol province of Akhalkalaki provinceFrom the military conflict with Georgia.
  This is a demonstrationThe aim of the operation was to confirm the right of the Armenian side to Akhalkalaki, but at the request of the Georgian side they retreated.They left Alexandropol, leaving the villages of Efremovka and Troitskoye in the province of Akhalkalaki6.
  That "cautious" step of the Government of Armenia in the issue of Javakhk, which is rather wrong in a situation of indecision 1 Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2010, p. 67.
2 М. Tumanyan, p. 78.
3 In the same place.
 Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia,page 67.
4 S. Vratsyan, Republic of Armenia, pp. 207-209.
5 М. Tumanyan, p. 81.
6 Ս. Georgian, page 216.
It was a matter of redevelopment, it was quite expensive for the Armenians of Armenia, particularly Javakhk.
  Հայաստանի Armenia is quite lateThe steps taken by the leadership did not yield tangible results. ”1
  The difficult situation for Armenians in the Lori regionIt is discussed at the December 12, 13, 16 sittings of the Council of Armenia2.
By the order of the Government of Armenia, Dilijan-Lori military unit DroOn October 14, 1945, Vorontsovka-Privolnoye, on the line of Opret-Ayrum, moved forward.
 Until December 15, the Armenian troopsThey occupy Vorontsovka, Privolnoye, Sanahin, Mikhailovka, Alaverdi.
  They will be released on December 16-20Ayrum station and Bolnis-Khachen.
 Capturing the village of Shulaver, ArmenianThe forces reached the Khram River and were liberated on December 22Sadakhlu station and the outskirts of the village.
  Armenian Armed Forces occupy Beliy-Klyuch village of Shulaver and Tbilissi (Tbilisi) provinceappear at a distance of 50 km from the capital of Georgia4.
  On December 25, the representatives of the allies in Tbilissi (Georgia) demandto stop the war.
  According to British Lieutenant Colonel Jordan, who arrived in Tbilissi from Baku, the Armenian and Georgian armed forcesshould have released the disputed formerly under Turkish occupationThe area, including Akhalkalaki, was և replaced by British troopsuntil their status is decided at the Paris Peace Conference.
Georgia rejects the offer - the British their initialmake changes in the proposals, according to which:Georgian troops were to remain in Akhalkalaki, north of BorchaluArmenian troops in South Borchalu, and the area between them should have been a "Neutral Zone" under British controlunder 5.
  Thus, the Armenians were to retreat to the Dsegh-Jalaloghli line.
They had to give in to strong British pressure because of howThe holder of Armenian-Georgian as well as the whole Transcaucasian issuesIt was a British military mission6.
1919 At a conference of Armenian and Georgian allies on January 9-17, 1945, the Armenian side was forced to agree to 1 A. Melkonyan, Javakhk in the 19th century and the first quarter of the 20th century in Akhalkalaki, Yerevan, 2003, p. 299.
2 Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia, pp. 116-135.
3 S. Vratsyan, page 220.
4 R. Hovhannisyan, page 121.
5 Ս. Georgian, page 225.
6 Sukiasyan H., Armenian delegation to the Armenian-Georgian peace conferenceReport (December 1918-March 1919), Historical Journal, No. 1,Yerevan, 2009, p. 190.
Two battalions under the control of the Allies will be guaranteedThe participation of Armenians in the board, which did not happen.
  In:Eventually, Georgia finally settled in that area.
 The conference approves the program proposed by the BritishOn the creation of a neutral zone in Borchalu, which would extend from the outskirts of Sadakhlu to the Armenian troops two weeks agothe positions occupied by the war.
1919 January 25 at the sitting of the Armenian Parliament Foreign
The Minister of Foreign Affairs presents the 1919 January 9-17
at the conference between the "Plenipotentiaries of Armenia" of Georgiathe signed decision.
 According to the decision, the border of the neutral zone of Borchalu province in the north was to form the line that connected in 1918. Occupied by Georgian military units as of December 31, 2006
points.
 It stretched from Legli-Dagh in a straight line to the mountain range to Irganchaythe village, then a straight dividing line to the top of Kulutash ևAlong the peak of the Armenian mountains of Georgia to the village of Saati յալ again to the peaks to the village of Ghandar (Chadar) և Aghkyorpi, then to the village of Opret ևThe ruins of Khojorni church, then to Brdadzor village, Sadakhlo village, Sadakhlo station, to Tanadagh mountain, then the border is reachedto Mount Khachkaya ները the peaks of Palutli Bash.
Irganchai, Saati, Jandar, Aghkyorpi, Opreti, Khojorni, Brdadzor,The villages of Sadakhlo remain north of the border line1.
It is considered to be the southern border of the neutral zone of Borchalu provinceDsegh-Jalalogli line, which was determined in 1918. by the agreement of December 25.
  Thus, it can be said that the boundaries of the Neutral Zone were crossedin the following context: The southern border was Dzoraget, the northern border was the Armenian Mountains of Georgia, the western was the Wet Mountains, and
to the east, the Gugarats Mountains2.
 Georgian troops in the north of the neutral zoneThey occupied the part from Akhalkalaki province to the village of Opret.
  The Armenian troops were to be deployed from Kolagera station toThe Dsegh section, as in the Jalaloghli-Gyargyar section.
  Lori neutralThe zone included Alaverdi copper mines, 43 villages, mostlyThe 30-mile section of the Armenian railway with 6 stations.
 The territory of the neutral zone was divided into Uzunlar, Vorontsovka և Alaverdi precincts, each of which had 4-5 volosts, provincial-village groups.
  The Alaverdi precinct had 4 volleys with 11 villages, Uzunlarin(now Odzun) - 4 volos with 11 villages, Vorontsovka - 5 vols - 15 Gy 1 Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia, p. 163.
2 Atlas of the History of Armenia, page 22.
with ghee 1.
  The Armenian-Georgian border was the same in 1918-1920. It was not clarified.
  Later, in 1921, it was finally clarified.
  By agreementThe border started at the border of Turkey, Armenia and GeorgiaOrtul Dagh reaches the east from the top of Uch-Talalar mountainThe mountain then bends northeast to east, leaving Lake Madatapa and the village of Troitskoye to Georgia, Tatoi Kharaba (now Shirak region).Bavra village), Karmir Kharaba և Darakey (Saragyugh) villages in Armenia to Legli Dagh (now Achkasar peak in Javakhk mountains),then the border would cross the watershed of the Armenian Mountains to PalutliMount Bashi 2.
  According to the specialists of the People's Council of the Armenian SSR, ethnographic,From other economic points of view, Agh Korpi, Opret, Khokhmel, Brdadzor,Gyulibagh, Damia, Lichkadzor, Khojorni, Chanakhchi, Chochkan և other villagesThey must be part of Armenia with their lands.
  That is,They were against the Armenians north of the watershed of the Armenian Mountains in Georgiathe annexation of villages to Georgia3.
  But the border was mostly crossedNeutral zone of the northern border 4.
  The examination of the material allows the following conclusions to be made:Akhalkalaki province, which is a disputed territory between Armenians and Georgians, through Tsalka region, Borchalu province, Tbilissi (Tbilisi) provinceThe part south of the Khram River, as well as the southwestern part of the Kazakh province, which belonged to the Armenian people in ethnic, geographical, economic, historical and strategic terms, in 1918-1920. They became disputed territories between Armenians and Georgians.
Possession of disputed territories to Armenia and the Armenian people,"Before the proclamation of nation-states in the Caucasus, they accepted it."Georgian national and political regions.
  Moreover, the issue was raised at the level of state-territorial, not just at the level of administrative divisions of Transcaucasia.
In the first period of the Armenian-Georgian confrontation (October 1918)The control of the Armenian side over South Lori was established,but attempts to move north failed.
The victory of the Armenian army in the two-week Armenian-Georgian warforced the Allied forces in Transcaucasia to take Lori out of Georgian control, to create a Neutral Zone there, which1 Ս. Karapetyan, Armed Uprising in Lori in 1921, Yerevan, 1955, pp. 12-14.
 A.Melkonyan, page 308.
2 A. Melkonyan, page 345.
 Topographic maps, K-38-100, K-38-101, K-38-102, www.abp.am.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia, page 163.
later made it easier to annex that territory to Armenia.
The Armenian-Georgian border crossed the northern border of the Neutral Zone.
Literature   1. Asryan A., From the history of Armenian-Georgian relations (Armenian-Georgian conflict on the border), ed. Banber of Armenia
archives, h. 2, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 66-70.
2. Dro, biographical memoirs, testimonies, mouse book. series, compiled, edited by A. Andranikyan, ed. "Free speech", Yerevan, 1991, 410 pages.
3. Karapetyan S., The armed uprising in Lori in 1921, Yerevan,1955
4. Minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia 1918-1920, ch. Editor A. Virabyan, National of Armenia
archive, Yerevan, 2010, 616 pages.
"Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia", T.Kh. Hakobyan, St. Melik-Bakhshyan, H.Kh. Barseghyan, h. 1, Yerevan University Press, Yerevan, 1986, 991 pages, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1991, 991 pages.
6. Harutyunyan B. H., Atlas of History of Armenia, Part B, Macmillan Armenia JV CJSC, Yerevan, 2008.
7. Harutyunyan B. H., Atlas of the History of Armenia, Part C, Manmar
JV CJSC, Yerevan, 2012.
8. Hovhannisyan R. G., Republic of Armenia, Volume I, NAS RA
Institute of History, Tigran Mets Publishing House. Yerevan, 2005, 570 pages.
9. Melkonyan A. A., Javakhk in the 19th century առաջին in the first quarter of the 20th century, Institute of History of NAS, "Zangak 97" publishing house. Yerevan 2003,
544 pages.
10. Jamalian A., The Armenian-Georgian Wrinkle, "Mitq" Analytical Center,Lusakn Publishing House, Yerevan, 2011, 244 pages.
11. Vratsyan S., Republic of Armenia, III edition, Tehran, 1982.
12. Sukiasyan H., Armenian of the Armenian-Georgian Peace ConferenceReport of the Delegation (December 1918-March 1919)Historical Journal, vol. 1, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 185-206.
13. Topographic maps, K-38-100, K-38-101, K-38-102, www.abp.am.Information about the author:Abrahamyan Varditer Mikaeli - hist. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri M.
Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, History և Chair of Law, E-mail.
