 Any coverage of Nakhichevan's problems, which:It will be dedicated to its history, demography, culture, historical-architectural heritage, it is very modern and urgent.
 In recent years, Armenology has referred only to the clarification of certain issues of its history, at present The study of the complete history of Nakhichevan is gaining more political significance and importance.
 Being caughtTo Azerbaijan, its history has been distorted with greater vigor andDuring the last twenty years, the Armenian cultural layer has been completely destroyed at the state levelThe Armenian traces of his homeland have been erased from the pages of "historiography"from the land that is an integral part.
This article makes a small reference to the internal life of the Armenian Catholic community in the Nakhichevan region, which is of great value and interest.
  Due to the analysis of Armenian and foreign sources, a period of one and a half centuries has been revealedThe complete picture of the life of the Armenian community.
The Armenian Catholic community has played a major role in the political, economic and cultural life of the Nakhichevan region.
  We in this articleLet's examine the origins, spread, development, decline of Catholicism in the region, the Armenian Catholic community, East and Westissues related to the role of diplomatic contacts.
Catholicism penetrated the territory of Nakhichevan in the XIV century.in the beginning by the Franciscan-Benedictine clergy, which are widespreadin the Armenian villages of Tuman-e Nakhichevan * Azat-Tsirani and Darashamb mahal, in our bibliographyThey are known as unitary or unitary.
 The Tuman-e Nakhichevan administrative unit included Nakhchavan-Goght of the Vaspurakan province of Greater Armenia.Syunik: Vayots Dzor, Chahuk, Yernjak and Tsghuk provinces.
  It bordered Yerevan vilayet to the northwest and Ghapanat to the east.orotin (province).
 The natural boundaries of the region crossed the Arpa River in the west, the Vardenis Range in the north, the Syunyats Range in the east, and the Araks River in the south [17, p. 303].
  Tuman-e Nakhichevan was divided into two large districts, Jugha and Shahapunik, whose main cities were Ordubad.and Nakhichevan [23, p. 362].
  These in turn were divided into mahals,Jughan to Azat-Tsirani and Darashambi, Shahapunik to Daralagyaz mahal and Sisakan olka [12, pp. 47, 77].
 Azat-Tsirani mahal is spreadingin the basin of the Geghan River, including the provinces of Goght and Yernjak in the Vaspurakan and Syunik provinces of Greater Armenia, bordering on the eastIt was the Syunik mountain range.
 It was bordered on the west by DarashambThe mahal, from which it was divided by the Yernjak River, included Vaspurakan:Nakhchavan and Chahuk provinces of Syunik.
 Darashamb's mahal was spread outIn the basin of Nakhichevan river.
 It bordered the Yernjak River to the east,from the north to the mountains of Vayots Dzor, from the west to the Arpa River, southThe border reached the Araks River.
1318 The Archdiocese of the Eastern Provinces was established under the auspices of Pope John XXII of Rome, with the city of Sultania in Persia as its center [15, p. 1714].
 1330 In Qrna (settlement in Nakhichevan HP)
The 12 monks gathered, mostly from the disciples of John of Carnet, decide not only to obey the Pope personally, but also to submit to the Catholic Church.
 1350 The city of Nakhichevan becomes a Catholic bishopric
a century later, the episcopal center was moved from Sultaniye to here [6, p. 200].
  XIV century Dominican religious in the middle
Bartholomew of Bologna և Active activity of Peter of AragonAs a result, a number of Armenian Catholic or Unitarian communities were formed in the above-mentioned mahallas of Nakhichevan [19, p. 514-522], where Pope Innocent VI in 1356 A separate Catholic Congregation was formed under the auspices of the head of the Dominican Covenant [1,
page 388].
  The activity of the Armenian Catholic community lasted for about four centuries, XIVuntil the XVIII century. half [2, page 80].
XVII century The Armenian Catholic community in the Nakhichevan region at the beginning of the 19th century
It was quite crowded and had ten functioning churches [3, p. 148].
 According to J.Alishan, the number of unitary Armenians in the above-mentioned regions reached 19 thousand.
 This population was located in 3 cities and 12 villages, making a total of 1830 houses [1, pp. 385-387].
 However, Alishan has a small mistake, which repeated the same problem this or thatSome scholars have referred to it that way.
  According to NakhichevanArchbishop Azaria Friton, Archbishop of the Armenian Catholics of the region, 1601 According to the report, there were about 1780 Armenian families living in the province or 19400
The population was located in the villages of Ketsuk and Artaz in the Maku region of the Nakhichevan region: Aparaner, Aprakunis, Qrna, Saltagh, Khoshkashen, Metsshen, Gandzak, Shahapunik, Gharaghush, Tsghna.
    XVII century at the beginning of the 19th century next to the Armenian population in these settlements
193 Muslim families appear [20, p. 416-449], whose ethnicity
It is impossible to determine the affiliation.
The role of the Armenian Catholic community in the Nakhichevan region increased especially in the 17th century.
 The Catholic Church's close attention to Nakhichevanwas due, first of all, to the fact that they were on that territorypasses trade transit roads from its settlementsmany (Nakhichevan, Jugha, Agulis, Ordubad, HP) international tradeThey were important nodes, where huge from East and WestWealth was accumulating.
 The Catholic Armenians of Nakhichevan were so interested in the Safavid interests that the Western European statesIn need of help, they tried to help those countriesTo fight against the Ottoman Empire, Armenian Christian merchants from Nakhichevan and Julfa, who were engaged in diplomatic activities in European countries, were sent to the West.
With the mediation of the Europeans, Shah Ismail I was still in power(1502-1524) granted a number of privileges to the Armenian Catholics of the Nakhichevan region [7, p. 176].
 But when interests changeThe grants of the previous ones were losing their force ուժ they needed to be reaffirmed.
  During the reign of Shah Abbas (1587-1629), the old privileges of the Catholic Armenian communities of Nakhichevan were restored during the reign of Shah Abbas (1587-1629).Most of them were declared "khass" and received local immunityto taxpayers [1, p. 394].
  Maintaining diplomatic ties with the Persian court provided a great opportunity for the Pope and the Western European monarchs to sponsor the Armenians of the Nakhichevan region.to Catholics.
  Embassies often came from these countriesIsfahan.
  And they all carried letters of recommendation,in which the Pope asked the Western European monarchsto protect the interests of the Armenian Catholics of their religion [4,page 317].
Thus, when a special delegate was appointed by Pope Paul V.The religious of Poghos Chittadin, Dominican, Augustinian և CarmeliteAccompanied by monks in 1615 Shah Abbas introduces himself to Fahrapat on December 13
The conventions are returned, the confiscated property of the Catholics is returnedAn Armenian governor was appointed in the Azat-Tsirani mahal, which was the center [15, p. 606].
Attention to Catholic Armenians in Nakhichevanincreases from the first quarter of the XVII century, when Rome begins separatelyto pay attention to the Christians of the East is a more serious stepan application to subdue them.
  1622 Pope Gregory XV in Rome
He founded a large religious institution called the Holy Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith.
 This is in Armenian Catholic literatureThe Congregation is called the "Holy Congregation of Propaganda", the "Holy Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith" and the "Holy Congregation for the Faith".
 1627 Pope Urban VIII established a multilingual school in Nakhichevan to train Catholic preachers [15, p. 318].
 The school, open to Catholic Armenians, was staffed by a number of Vatican clergy, including Poghos Piromali of the Dominican Republic, who1632 was established in Armenia in 1654-1664. He was the Archbishop of Nakhichevan and ruled the Catholic Armenian community [15, p. 606].
  The latter was the religious through which "Catholicos Philip of Etchmiadzin wrote to Innocent Ժ the creed of the Catholic faith, which was signed by IE bishops and eight monks and in the hands of Paul BiromaliHe sent Dominican to Rome ”[14, pp. 177-178].
1669 By special instructions of Pope Clement IX, King Louis XIV of France, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Venice Senate
Archbishop of Nakhichevan Matteos Hovhannisyan sent to Isfahan to obtain privileges in favor of his Armenian Catholics[8, pp. 64-67].
  Thanks to those negotiations, the former privileges of the Armenian Catholics of the Nakhichevan region were re-established.
  That is,The Armenian Catholic communities were declared "subordinate" and recognized as "subject"especially for the immediate benefit, free from the authority of the prince. "
 This meant that the Catholic communities would henceforth be under the personal tutelage and patronage of the Shah.They would pay taxes և duties directly to him or acquire the right of tax "immunity" [16, p. 385].
 These rights were acquired by the Armenian Catholics of the Nakhichevan region during the reign of Shah Abbas I,but Persian officials ignored the interestsorders, էր needed to re-establish each new interestthe privileges of his predecessor.
The relationship of the Catholic Church with the Persian courtThey get special importance in the 17th century. in the second half of the reign of King Louis XIV of France.
  It was at this time that the territory of Nakhichevan became a possible link between the Persian court and the political relations of the West, as there was an opportunity, it was the Catholic Armenians of Nakhichevan who were awarded the King of France.attention [4, p. 323].
 Thus, in 1664 in a letter he wrote on February 7
In Louis XIV he hinted that Catholics, like other Christians, obeyed the law of "Imam Jafar" in Persia [22, p. 288-289], according to which every Christian, converting to Islam, took possession of the property of Christian relatives [5, p.
219-221].
 Asking for the law to be repealed, the king hastened to add that he was referring only to the Christians who called themselveswere Frankish (Catholic) չի does not refer to heretics at all, ieto non-Catholic Armenians [4, p. 323].
Despite numerous letters and requests from the West:The situation of Catholic Armenians continued to remain difficult.
  1682 October
Father Peter, a Jesuit preacher who arrived in Persia on the 15th of Louis XIV on the instructions of Louis XIV, reported to Shah Suleiman (1666-1694) the concerns of the King of France over the territory of Nakhichevan.in connection with the ongoing violence against Catholic Armenians [18, p.262-263].
 If XVII c. There were 5-7 thousand Armenian Catholics in Nakhichevan in the middle of the 18th century. In the beginning it was not their number
passes by several dozen people [10, p. 9].
 In such difficult conditionslived the Catholic Armenians under the patronage of the Western European states and the Pope.
  The reason for this is Persiawas an unstable administrative-political system. or orders of interests!
they did not reach the local governors, or they were simply ignoredNaturally, such foreign diplomatic interventions could not have any effect on preventing all the illegalities stemming from the rotten Persian state system.
Despite the patronage and tangible assistance of the popes of the Western European countries to the Catholic Armenians of the region:XVIII century In the middle of the year their activity ceases.
Thousands of Catholic Armenian families in Nakhichevan region in 1746emigrate to Turkish territories of Asia Minor, in particular:Smyrna [1, pp. 406-407].
  Several communities of Catholic Armenians convert and convert to Islam.
 About this Lazar Chahketsiwrites. "Similarly, in the land of Nakhichevan Akhtarma, many beauties became converts to the Persian religion, such as Salitagh, Qrna, who translated Alpert into the abyss of madness," Ketsuk, Soka all of them, and Aprabunis, Khosharan " , but in the geographical town there was a Chahkay:
The Akhtarmiks did not convert to the Persian religion because of our monotheistic nation, which we have placed among them ”[9, p. 334].
 It was easier for the Armenian population to convert to Catholicism, being cut off from their church, whose role was invaluable in preserving the Armenian identity, leaving their national culture.falls victim to the policy of assimilation of the Muslim authorities[3, p. 151].
Thus, in the XVIII century. in the middle of an unstable administrative system
պատճառ due to heavy taxation, lack of security of life and property, violation of dignitySome Catholic Armenians in the Nakhichevan region converted to Islamthe rest were deported.
 According to a report submitted to the Assembly of the Faithful, Khulikhani (Nadir Shah) from the villages of Krna և Aparanner1736-1747 H.P.) from the last beast wars "Armenian brothers were driven away [13, p. 21].
 Ղ. According to Alishan, after those events, the Italian missionaries who visited Nakhichevan met only 60-70 Catholic Armenians [1, p. 387].
Conclusion. European countries ուշ Pope's attention to Catholic Armenians in Nakhichevan is huge
should have left an impression under Persian-Turkish ruleto the rest of the suffering Armenians because of that attentionIt was not imaginary, but it brought real benefits, of course, this in turnshould have awakened the hope that it could be achieved through conversionphysical security.
 But Catholic Armenians are still physicalThey did not achieve security, this is clearly seen in Armenia in the 17th century. recently
One of the letters of the missionary Jesuit preachers, one of which reads: "... I can not remember without horror,
what difficult conditions the Armenians of Nakhichevan province lived inCatholics among Muslims ... ”[21, p. 195].
 Nevertheless, the Armenian Catholic community, emerging as an independent, living inward lifebrought a great contribution to the international diplomatic relations between Nakhichevan և West and East - an important roleplaying on the one hand for the interests of the Pope and European monarchs, in particular King Louis XIV of France, and on the other hand with the interests of the Persians.in diplomatic contacts between the courts.
Literature 1. Alishan J., Sisak, Venice, 1893, 522 pages.
2. Alishan Ts., Topography of the Great Armenians, Venice, 1855, 105 pages.
3. Bayburdyan V., XVII c. Catholic missionaries in Eastern Armenia
From the history of activity, PBS, 1989, N 2, page 148.
4. Leo, Armenian History, vol. Գ, Ե. 1969, 517 pages.
5. Karapetyan M., The Law of "Imam Jafar" - All Armenians (XVII-XVIIIcd.), PBH, 1988, N 1, pp. 219-221.
6. Kostikyan K., The Catholic Propaganda in Iran և The Armenian Reality, Near և Middle Eastern Countries և Peoples, Archaeological Collection, XXI, E., 2002, p. 200.
7. Hovhannisyan A., Episodes in the history of Armenian liberation thought, vol.B, E., 1959, 611 pages.
8. Hovhannisyan A., New materials from Armenian-unitary historiography,"Ararat", 1915, pp. 64-67.
9. Ghazar Jahketsi, Theological Book to Call Paradise Desirable, K.Constantinople, 1735, 704 pages.
10. Jemjemian S., Nakhichevan Armenian School and Rome, Venice-S.Lazarus, 2000, 271 pages.
Matenadaran after Mashtots, Catholicos Divan, paper. N 1a,
վավ. 99.
12. Matenadaran Persian proclamations, volume III, compiled by K.Kostikyan, E., 2005, pp. 47, 77.
13. Voskyan G., A Brief Overview of the History of Unifying Brothers in Armenia, Bazmavep, 1922, January, p. 21.
14. Stepanos Roshkay, Chronology or age of the clergy,published by H. Hamazasp Voskian, Mkhit. From the Covenant, Vienna, 1964, p
177-178.
15. Ormanian M., Azgapatum, h. Part B, Beirut, 1959, 2305 pages.
Information about the author:Hrachya Yerani Panosyan - Candidate of the Institute of History of NAS RA, E-mail:
