This article examines tomorrow's horsesin German, their typological features, which are presented in combination with Armenian, if necessary.
Recently, these tense forms have been the subject of numerous discussions in the grammar literature.
 AparniThe differences around it are conditioned by the dual nature of the day after tomorrow.
 Moreover, in one casedenies the temporal perception of the afterlife, using only the weather nature, in the other case denies the weather nature, the primaryconsidering the temporal meaning of the day after tomorrow.
 In addition, the first և secondthe horses in German are located in the same rock area,indicate belonging to different time plans.
 Based on Yu. Classification of Gabrielyan's German temporal forms:
For tomorrow's horses we present the following picture of the classification. on the first day of the morning acts as an absolute temporal
according to the following position, while it belongs to the second dayis relative to the time plan according to the preceding position (2, 59-61).
Therefore, the aim of this article is to examine more comprehensively the principles of the placement of herding horses in German, theirtypological features, to show the temporal-weather nature of these horses, to discover the possibilities of their sale.
  The presented topic is more topical և linguisticOf greater interest from the point of view of studies is the fact that German is examined:Linguistic facts studied by us in combination with Armenian linguistic facts, which allows to reveal a number ofsimilarities and differences between the combined languages, thus solving one of the key issues that is important from the point of view of linguistic studies.
  Tomorrowգերման in German և հայերեն in Armenian is the causal main temporal snow of the transmission of the meaning of the day after tomorrow, which in any neutral contextor expresses out of context the meaning of the action, the event expressed after the moment of the word.
 However, in contrast to the present-past tenses in the semantic field, these tonesThe action expressed is never available և it is visible, it canbe perceived as a pure intention, intended, expected realityor event.
  In German, as in Armenian on the verge of tomorrowThe placed horses indicate temporal և weather meanings in the content plan.
  The day after tomorrow is definitely considered temporary,For example, so I's in the Tageslohn workplace. Meanwhile in the next example
The action expressed during the day after tomorrow is definitely as weather. Peter will be the longest in Cologne. This:
This fact, however, is interpreted differently in grammar.
 Գ. Hellbig և Y. Busha is accepted for the German verb two aparni
options. in one case it is the meaning of the action currently assumed
is the program, in the other case, the action of the day (5, 137).
 In addition to such differentiated functions for Aparni, it is necessary to give onea definition of a common denominator that would include both componentsat the same time, temporal և weather.
  In fact, the horses of tomorrowThere are two possible versions of the description.
 Can be temporaryor consider one of the meanings of the weather as primary.
  Accordingly, in sentences such as Das wird derBe a postbote. The weather value should be considered as a derivative of the main temporal function that contributes to the future
to the nature of the forecast in the forms, that is, it states as a subtext that "I say in advance that it is the postal messengeris. "
  Thus, the validity of this expression will be clear only after the moment of the speech, with the use of a shepherd's horse only in a timely manner.
But it is also possible that the opposite approach, in the matter of defining a cliff, the weather element indicating the cliff relation is realized firstin expressions such as Sobald er das hört, wirdis for Wut platzen. In this case, a prediction is expressed in German by the equinox, which is presented as an assumption.
 AparniRelying on the characterization of Yu. Based on the results of Gabrielyan's typological study, we accept the definition of the "default" first day for tomorrow, in which case
double transfer. In the first case, the field of "presupposition" or hypothetical meaning from the border sphere, such as Er wird zu Hause sein.
He should be at home.
    In the second case, a time transfercurrent field, when the given egg of the first day can be represented by twowith semantic components. presumption նում coincidence at the time of speaking (2,
59-61).
  Such an application of aparni can be justified aparnithrough the temporal elements that are present in each assumption as the validity of that assumption is establishedonly tomorrow at any time.
 Therefore, we consider it necessary for the definition of tomorrow in German for tomorrow's horsesnot to distinguish two separate meanings in different spheres of their application, as only in parallel with their realization the nature and internal structure of the given time horse is conditioned.
  In German, the choice of the past participle as an action tense can not be said to depend on the past participle of the past participle.from the circumstance of placement in the sphere, but directly from the attitude of the speaker towards the expression.
 It is used not only because the action takes place after the moment of speech,rather, the speaker is anticipating, anticipating, or predicting the performance of a future action, as opposed topresent և modal verbs with which it comes in thisin the semantic field.
 Tomorrow's horses are preferable in this field when the prediction, assumption, expectation of tomorrow's action comes from the present.
 By the way, the general meaning of these horsesThere are two separate semantic components in the definition.exclusion of action from the moment of speaking և its appearance after the moment of speaking.
 From the point of view of function, however, tomorrow's horses are endowed with a number of typological peculiarities, which in many cases do not find a corresponding reflection in Armenian.
  In Armenian aparniTime does not cause difficulties in defining meaning և function.
 Armenian, having mastered the verbal system of rich weather horses, fully distributes the weather meanings of these horsesintermediate, while in German hypothetical, compulsory, modalThe meanings are expressed in part by the words of the day.
  In part,because there are also a number of other language tools in the language, such asfor example, moderatorverbs that carry a givenfunction.
  Grammatical time, however, does not reflect such temporal differences.
  Time distribution:It is expressed in language in terms of time.
  Armenian grammarsThey rightly point out that the snow in the border weather is the leastThey are practical.
 This is explained by the fact that the meaning of tomorrow is expressed in the form of hypothetical and forced weather.
 German places two's in this field, which, in the sense of time expressed by them, give rise to very contradictory interpretations.
  It is expressed in German on the second dayAssumption, desire for past action, event,Intention, that is, all the semantic secondary manifestations that were revealed by the examination of the first day.
  The difference is that the meanings mentioned by these horses are taken in relation to the past.
  The actions and events reported on the second dayThe following semantic elements can be distinguished for: • expression of supposed action in relation to the past;• Post-harvest significance outside of the supposed past action;• A report of the action taken against the victim.
The semantic element of the assumption of the eggs of the second shepherd is quite explainable to the weather elements of the supposition of the eggs of the shepherd.by availability.
 It is useful in cases when it is reported on the expected action as a confirmation, assumption, prediction.
 The post-sowing significance, on the other hand, comes from the second dayconsists of the meaning of Infinitiv Perfekt, where the auxiliary verb + Partizip IIThe composition indicates post-sowing significance, such as Peterbe careful. As a consequence of this sentence, it is assumed that he was going to sleep, he will be asleep until the moment he
follows the execution of the action, being during the day after the given action.
 The meaning of the done, completed action is also derived here from Perfekt of the second dayfrom the composition as Bald werden wir es geschafft haben. In German:
The second day, as a temporary egg, has a very limited use.
 It is often interchangeable with Perfekt temporal forms when it comes to assumption or postpositional meaningin relation to the past, as: Wenn du morgen früh ins Büro kommst, binich wahrscheinlich schon losgefahren. Such expressions are mainly of a predictive nature, which may or may not be confirmed over time.
 German, placing two temporal eggs in the sphere of the rock, the first և the second rock, thisIt is opposed to Armenian by its feature.
  Modern Armenian will be lostThere is a period of one day in the field. "
  Some linguists accept the past tense of the past tense for the Armenian verb.
 The status of these eggs in modern Armenian is no longer debatable in the sense that these eggs are finally verbal.are not included in the verb tense system.
Thus, examining the possibilities of realizing the meaning of aparni in German, the grammar of the realization of this meaninghorses, it becomes clear that for the description of these horses is greatercomponents such as exclusion of action from the moment of speech և its appearance after the moment of speech are important;which in all cases act as possible criteria.
 This:In the framework of the article, an attempt was made to answer such important questions, which are directly related to the semantic-functional features of the future, due to the temporal-weather nature of these horses.
 In case of tomorrow, time և weatherThe mid-range is minimal.
  This is confirmed the day after tomorrowwith the presence of weather elements in the horses.
This article has a wide range of practical applications.
Such researches can be of great importance for the practical teaching of German, typological courses of German-Armenian languages, as well as for the clarification of translation problems.
time form.
  first and second futurum. The first futurum is as follows:
forms:
 Future I (Futurum I) and Future II (Futurum II). It should be noted that Future:
Literature 1. Gabrielyan Yu., Typology of the German language, Yerevan, 2000,101 pages.
2. Hovhannisyan A., Comparative tense of Armenian and EnglishAnalysis, Yerevan, Artagers, 1999, 96.
19. Aufl. Leipzig.
 Langenscheidt, 2001, 656 S .. Information about the author:Ter-Adamyan Shushanik Volodya - applicant, Gyumri State PedagogicalInstitute of French and German և their teaching methodsLecturer of the chair, E-mail.
