"Right" totalitarianism is based on the ideology of National Socialism, preferring the National-Racist.
The Soviet model of totalitarianism, thoughfailed in the USSR, in a number of Eastern European countries, however, the issue of scientific coverage of this issue became more and morebecomes urgent in the modern conditions of democratic development.
Totalitarianism as a political system is manifestedthrough the regime.
Political regime, being created socio-politicalby the interaction of the structural elements of the system, unique is a set of means, methods և ways through which the ruling political elite exercises purposeful state power, relying not only on institutional mechanisms, but also oneven solutions beyond legal standards.
There are now more than a hundred political regimes in the world, which are similar in many ways.
65 out of 165 sovereign states in the world have democratic regimes and 50 have semi-democratic regimes [1].
There are different approaches to the classification of political regime in the political science literature.
  R. Dali և J. Blondel typology stands out among the various classifications of political regimes [2].
R. Dal uses two main criteria. political
the degree of admissibility of the opposition to the processes հրապարակ public competition for power.
J. Blondel divides political regimes into 3 groups:• Political competition, open or closed; • Elite structure: monolithic or layered; • The degree of involvement of the population in political life.
Political scientists take basis when classifying regimesThe following criteria: rights and freedoms of citizens, nations and nationalities, party systems, politicsThe existence of the opposition, the level of separation of functions of state bodies, the political culture of the people, etc.
There is a democratic առանձն no to all these criteriathe ratio of democratic political forces.
  Political scientist I. Balyan, based on the level of development of society democracy, modern political regimes (in a broad sense)Classifies as democratic (presidential-parliamentary), non-democratic (totalitarian-authoritarian), orsimply: totalitarian, authoritarian և democratic [3].
We agree with the author that this classification is considered conditional because it contains a general, transient, mixed (hybrid)yours!
 There are mixed regimes in the world that are closely intertwinedelements of totalitarianism, authoritarianism and democracy.
 A unique mixture of totalitarianism and authoritarianismAn example of a regime is the Franco regime in Spain.
Totalitarianism entered the political literature in the 20thcentury, when society entered the industrial developmentstage.
  The term "totalitarian" is the first in political circulationintroduced in 1925 to the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, which makes sense
expressed in this way. "Everything is inside the state, outside it
nothing չկա there is no one, so no one can oppose the state. "[4]
According to historian I. Petersen, the concepts of "totalitarian" և "totalitarian system" were first introduced in 1923. political
Italian Liberals Introduce Vocabulary by Giovanni Amenddolan և PieroHobbett [5].
  And the first political scientist to use that concept was the German K. Schmidt in the 30s of the 20th century.
1929 The Times published that notion to mean
having the Soviet political regime.
  And in the USSR the term "totalitarianism" was put into scientific circulation in the post-war period, mainly in Hitler's Nazi Germany.To condemn the blatant dictatorship of the backward bourgeois state of Italy.
The scientific coverage of totalitarianism began in the 4050s of the 20th century and continued into the following decades.
  It is widely usedIt was touched upon for reasons of ideological struggle against the socialist countries in the East.
Totalitarian rule has only come to an end in the 20th centurywhich was the result of the crisis of classical liberal ideas ազատ mass socialist movements.
  That regimeThe main feature was that the "builder", the social pillar, in contrast to the previous regimes, was considered a broad mass of people, which in the new ownership relations became a socially alienated object, that is, an individual deprived of property, independence and self.
The social pillar of "left" totalitarianism is the lower classesThey were, first of all, the multinational proletariat, which was fighting against its own owners.
The tough, powerful administration promoted not the national but the class interest; it identified the individual with the state and the society.
Class unity ignored the conflicting interests of different ethnic groups.
The social basis of "right" totalitarianism was the extreme mood of the middle class.
  German Nazism wonsupport from large capital.
  The ideology of National Socialism was called to unite the German ethnos, ignoring themsocial conflicts, he identified the society և the nation, the nationև the state.
 The country had a large politicized working class, and a large part of the peasantry ran a large agrarian economy.
 A middle class of small and medium-sized entrepreneurs and craftsmen was formed.
According to the dictionary of political science (VF Khalipov, RG Grigoryan,AV Grishin, V. Ս. Ovchinnikov և others) is considered totalitarianism
political regime, a system of state power characterized by the exercise of public administration through direct violence, political pluralism (Latin pluralism), lack of democratic freedoms, and restriction of the political rights of the entire population.
Totalitarianism is a political regime in which the state seeks complete, inclusive control over society as a whole.
The above definitions are typical of all types of totalitarian regimes.
Within the framework of totalitarianism, a number of authors (R. Kochesokov, M. Vasilik, etc.) distinguish between fascist, Bolshevik, and Nazi regimes.
  They are among the countries of the totalitarian regimeNazi, Nazi Germany, Italy, the USSR, China, Albania, Cambodia, and other countries.
The totalitarian regime, as an alternative to civil society regimes, existed in Nazi Germany in 1933. until 1945, in the USSR in 1922. until 1991 in Albania
E. During the Khoja era, in North Korea after World War II, in Vietnam Վ Cambodia in 1975. then.
If the "right" totalitarianism is characterized by a nationalist ideology, the "left" is characterized by a socialist-communist version.
Political scientists distinguish between religious totalitarianism, which is permeated by theological presuppositions.
Usually guided by the ideology of totalitarianismThey are undemocratic political forces, so it is rejected by the civilized world.
A totalitarian regime cannot be equated with a dictatorial regime, as it is a unique form of coercion of state control that is acceptable to the majority of the population.
The dictator himself chooses the apparatus of public control,strives to prevent the participation of the masses in governance.
In totalitarian societies, there are "illusory" levers of control that are viewed not by the elite.apparatus, but an instrument that fulfills the will of the people themselves.
  People thinkthat they decide the means of pressure, coercion, societyactivity values ​​և orientations.
Political in totalitarian-dictatorial regimesThe mechanisms of exercising power are radically different.
If in dictatorial regimes the state opposes the individual և the latter is an object of political power, then in a totalitarian system the individual identifies himself with the state;It is difficult to distinguish his "I" from the general "we"as a "subject of political power."
Of course, the identification of a person և state is's feminine.
 Such political system has been called "mass" by Western political scientistsdictatorship of the movement "[9].
The characteristic feature of totalitarianism is the absolute violence of the subjective factor towards the objective reality.
The second important feature of totalitarianism is the molding of social consciousness, ideological monism (one,the only one).
 The Stalinist version of totalitarianism is transformed Marxismwhich was the ideological basis of party-state totalitarianismfor the regime.
  The theoretical basis of totalitarianism can be:every idea - class (communism), national or racial(fascism), religious (communism) և etc.
  Communist ideas և:Values ​​do not in themselves give birth to a totalitarian regime, as some doit seems.
  If they become self-serving, reprehensible, thenthey inevitably give birth to totalitarianism.
Nazi Germany persecuted those with communist views, but totalitarianism was established there.
The Khomeini people are not only religious fanatics, but also unique bearers of totalitarianism.
It was typical of people in all totalitarian countriesThe "savior", the "ideal monarch" who gives eternal happiness orFaith in the leader.
It is one of the most important features of a totalitarian regimethe extreme politicization and ideology of the whole social life.
The next characteristic of totalitarianism is material, especially careful self-isolation.
 Soviet society, especially during the Stalin years, was deprived of the opportunity to have economic and cultural ties with foreigners, to communicate and compare with them, to listen critically to the opinion of others.
 Indifference to objective reality is a result of the violence of the subjective factor.
Totalitarian leaders believe in a new societyThe key to building is to create a new person, which is automaticIt happens with the change of social relations.
A totalitarian regime ends the division of society into conflicting social strata, condemning all members to "leveling".
  Nevertheless, the official ideology of the Soviet country, drumming up the number of the working classThe constant increase, the productive activity, he declared"Leading", "leading force of the society".
The other factor in the institutionalization of "left" totalitarianismwere the laureates of the Stalin և state prizes, well-known figures of art, literature and science, who received permanentsupport from the political elite.
The relationship between society and the "individual" becomesone-sided, everything for the society, nothing for the individual,because the individual was identified with society.
In the USSR, elsewhere the totalitarian regime was brutalHe persecuted the clergy.
 The "death of God" was necessary for thatso as not to limit his one-sided influence to the peopleon the thoughts and souls of the masses.
Organized, large-scale uprisings, political movements, riots, and demonstrations were ruled out in Soviet society.
 The people did not alienate the leaders from themselves, it was not theirsviewed as exploiters.
  The person was completely losing his individualityMerit և becomes a defenseless, powerless և subject to the powerful state authorities.
 A system was formed to restrict people's initiative, depriving talented people of the opportunity to express themselvesfrom opportunity.
  In the country, disobedient people were considered "dissidents" or"Enemies of the people" - a tragedy that stems from thiswith consequences.
Classicism is preferred during the totalitarian regimethe ideological point of view of the works.
Works that did not comply with the "policy" of the totalitarian regime were banned from publication.
  Censorship was spread to those media outlets that did not support state-party affiliationpolitics.
There were petrifications and distorted assessments of political phenomena in the ideology, as well as the mythological orientation aimed at building a new society.
In Soviet society, elections were very formalThere was no competition, no alternative candidates.
 Prohibited:There were various mass political movements, rallies, demonstrations, hunger strikes, etc.
  There was no unique mechanism for lobbying or other pressure groups to influence government structures.
  Lobbying movement in some countries (USA, Germany, etc.)legalized or allowed with some reservations և viewedas an important component of a democratic political system.
In the economic sphere, private and individual activities were prohibited, the economic stimulus of work was ignored, and administrative levers were used.
The country had a "closed" culture, which was characterized by political inclusion.
 He was terrorized during the dictatorship. "Innocent people, racial groups.
The propaganda distorted and colored the reality.
  And:The USSR Constitution was the veil of its declared ideals - the real lifefor existing contradictions.
The totalitarian regime of Stalin Brezhnev is anti-nationalDoctrine violated the rights of the Soviet nations ազատ nationalities արմատ, ignored the non-radical interests of the peoples, carried out forced deportations, arbitrarily demarcatedThe borders of the republics were redrawn, the process of national assimilation was stimulated.
Abuse of official duties and corruption have become commonplace among leaders.
 HoweverDuring the totalitarian regime, the society suffered the biggest loss in the moral sphere.
  Finally, a totalitarian is formedthe kind of person who not only does not like freedom or does not want anyfreedom, but he is afraid և he cannot use it.
  Such a personIt is very beneficial for political leaders in the period of origin, establishment and strengthening of the totalitarian regime.
  Such people hinder the social progress of the society, lead to stagnation.
 Meanwhile, for the development of the societyWe need thinking, creative, self-acting individuals,and only free people can be like that.
Totalitarianism differs from other regimes in the degree of control.
There is no dictatorial regime except totalitarianestablishes a unified official ideology in the society, does not seek to control the whole activity of the society.
Thus, the main features of the former Soviet totalitarianism are the over-centralization of the party-state bureaucracy, the hierarchical apparatus, the cult of the charismatic leader, the monologue-oriented monologue.Censorship of the media անք persecution of dissidents, violation of the rights of citizens և peoples' freedoms,Violence by law enforcement agencies, implementation of anti-national doctrine, formation of a new person who prefers "us", exclusion of an alternative candidate during the elections, churchInterference in affairs, unified state planning of the economy,Prohibition of private և individual activities և in societyExistence of two morals. "We say something, but we do
something else. "
Based on the facts, it is obvious that the collapse of the Soviet totalitarian regime was inevitable, it was transient.nature, of course, was not eternal.
In the USSR, "left" totalitarianism, which is characteristically characteristic, was established in the will of the people.
characterized by main features.
 unlimited strength of national leader monodialogy, one party:collective mechanism of governing.
BOOK: 1. What is Democracy?Company, July 1992, pp. 2-3.
3. Political science.
 Educational manual, YSU, Yerevan, 2006.
4. AI Kravchenko.
 Sociology.
 Textbook, "Zangak-9", Yerevan, 2004, page 311.
translator in the course "Politics", Rostov-on-Don, 1990, p.3.9. Die Totalitarismus-doktrin in Antikommunismus.
 Critical of one of the main components:Information about the author:Hakhverdyan Vardan Tachat - Candidate of Philosophy, Associate Professor,Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, lecturer.
