Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are rapidly entering various fields of educational activity.
 Thatcontribute as external factors that are conditionedAccording to the general information of the society, the need for training of relevant specialists, both internallyfactors related to modern education systemsAdoption of state-interstate programs on computer equipment, software dissemination, education informationThe emergence of the necessary information experience among pedagoguesto come.
  The use of ICT tools has a really tangible effectthe intensity of the work of teachers as well as studentson the effectiveness of teaching.
  The main reason for raising the professional qualities of modern school teachers and studentsOne of the tasks is to increase their professionalism in the field of ICT use.
  Introduction of computer technology in the educational systemgives great opportunities to improve pedagogical methods not only in the exchange of experience և in creative activity, but also in the solution of practical problemstime, which are based on the accumulation of teaching materials, the use of internal information technologies և Internet technologies դպրոցի Internet technologies by teachers և students.
 ICTuse gives the teacher great opportunities in the subjectduring training.
  Classes are accompanied by multimedia presentations, on-line tests, and software packages that allowAllows learners to deepen their prior knowledge.
Teaching students any new material using ICTgives opportunities to think և participate in the creation of lesson material, which is accompanied by their interest in the subjectwith development.
New educational technologies are characterized by educational materialsImplementation using special computer technologies, such as computer design, hypertext եդ multimedia technologies.
 Training using computer design technologyThe materials of the documents can be formed in certain dimensions, organized in certain structures, expressed in certain compositions of elements.
 They provide visual informationaesthetic requirements of the presentation, peculiarities of its perception ում ensures convenient reading of documents արդյունավետ effective comprehension of information.
The use of modern technologies in education creates favorable conditions for the development of the learner անձ meets the requirements of modern society.
  Note hereWe have a competent use of the information source, evaluation of its reliability, comparison of new information with previously acquired knowledge, proper organization of the information processability.
The use of modern technologies during classes in various subjects (chemistry, physics, etc.) significantly increasesThe effectiveness of teaching, helps to create an atmosphere of cooperation during the lesson, arouses interest among studentsto the material being studied.
The use of ICTs increases the interest in the lesson, activates the students' cognitive activities, develops their cultural opportunities, allows them to organize independent group work during the lesson.helps to improve learners' practical abilities մտ skills, allows them to search, develop և master various sources;as well as information on the Internet.
The use of ICT in the learning process can be organizedin two directions: demonstration և independent electronicjob creation.
 In the first case, learners have the opportunity to comment on what they have seen, to make remarks, to make changesto insert.
  With the help of text editors the student immediately sees the results of his work: the computer highlights spelling, grammar, verbal and punctuation errors, և helpsAs a result, the learner sees and analyzes the mistakes of the student in selecting and correcting those mistakes.
Communication skills such as text are developed during self-presentationPerception, emphasis, planning, etc.
 Independent workCreation is a more complex task that requires technical skills, various communication skills to complete the material.
  It is done in a constructive research methodbased on.
  In both cases, tests on relevant subjects are developed to reinforce and test the knowledge.
Thus, the main directions of ICT use can be emphasized.• visual information / inspection, visual material /,• Demonstration material / exercises, tables, concepts /,• games,• Monitoring learners' abilities and skills;• Independent search for students, creative work.
• Make the learning process creative, exploratory.
Thus, the work of pedagogues in the educational systemThe use of ICTs has a significant impact on the intensity as well as the effectiveness of students' teaching.
  While working with ICT tools, the personal regulation of students' thinking activities changes. rise to the person
The role of defensive methods, subjective in achieving the goallevel, activity control methods are changed, motives are regulated.
