The study of world experience shows that during different stages of economic development, the effective implementation not only of monetary policy, but also of fiscal policy of another important macroeconomic tool.
  Both monetary and fiscal policy are important components of the general economic policy of the state.
The latter is a complex of functions performed by the state, aimed at the regulation of economic processes, regulation, and the provision of defined target indicators.
Although the theoretical basis of fiscal policy has been sufficiently studied, the directions of scientific research in this field of economics have not yet been exhausted.
  There are a number of potential unresolved issues in this area, the impact of which on the economy requires both their prompt and effective solutions and further improvement of the theoretical basis of fiscal policy.
 The development of new approaches to fiscal policy, especially after the recent financial and economic crisis, is especially needed to overcome its negative effects and to be better prepared for further similar challenges.
Fiscal policy is a set of financial functions by the state aimed at generating government expenditures and revenues.
  It is a set of state measures in the field of public expenditure, tax policy, change of state budget indicators and management, aimed at economic growth, full employment, as well as the balance of payments.
Fiscal policy, as an effective and influential method of influencing the economy, has emerged most prominently since the 1930s, with the development of its economic base largely linked to that of the eminent British economist John Maynard Keynes.
Keynes, and later his ideological supporters, attributed the state's fiscal policy to the most important role in stabilizing economic growth and ensuring full employment and price levels.
 In the core of their economic research, Keynesians view aggregate demand based on the idea that it is through the latter that aggregate supply is formed.
  According to this theory, the reduction of tax rates leads to an increase in gross demand, which, in turn, increases real GDP, raises market prices.
  As a result, inflation rates are also rising, and state budget revenues are shrinking in the short term, and the deficit is widening.
Contrary to this view, proponents of the "supply economy" argue that aggregate supply shapes aggregate demand; in their view, Keynesian theory does not take into account the impact of taxes on aggregate aggregate supply.
 Proponents of the economic theory argue that tax cuts stimulate aggregate supply, increase tax revenues, and reduce budget deficits.
However, not all economists agree with this view.
 In fact, a reduction in taxes may lead to an increase in tax revenues, but it will take a long time, while the impact on aggregate demand will be more short-term, more visible.
  In economic theory, both of these opposing approaches are applicable, the dominance of either of them in terms of practical application depends on the economic situation of a particular country, the economic policy adopted by the state.
The main targets of modern fiscal policy are economic growth, full employment, leveling of territorial disproportion, socio-economic development of the country.
 It should be noted that in order to describe the fiscal policy of the state, it is necessary to find out its specific goals.
  It can be distinguished from the latter. - Reduction of cyclical economic fluctuations, - Overcoming the effects of financial and economic crises, - Ensuring economic growth, - Reducing inflation or maintaining its corresponding rates, - Ensuring full employment, etc.
The primary goal of fiscal policy is to attract and concentrate monetary resources for the generation of state revenues in the appropriate funds, through which the economic, including financial policy of the state is implemented.
Naturally, the most important of such funds is the state budget.
 The latter is the state financial plan for a certain period (usually one year), which consists of state revenues and expenditures.
 Moreover, their detailed structure is reflected in the state budget.
The essence of an effective fiscal policy is reflected in the precise planning of the state budget, which is ensured by the precise definition of the tax-efficient system ծախս budget expenditure directions.
Public spending և The tax system are the most important tools for regulating the economy.
  Through the latter, it is possible to manage GDP growth according to the set goals և indicators, as public expenditures և taxes have a direct impact on gross income, gross demand, production volume, employment.
 It can be said that at present the tax system has turned from a means of generating state revenues into a tool to influence gross demand, which, naturally, is conditioned by the development of the economic management system - economic progress.
Impact on the economy through fiscal policy instruments is done by direct։ indirect methods.
  The main direct method is budget regulation through the provision of appropriate revenues and expenditures.
  By indirect methods, the state affects the financial capabilities of businesses and the growth of aggregate solvent demand in the country.
 By changing tax rates, providing various tax benefits, changing the non-taxable income threshold, the state ensures the preferred level of gross demand, stable production volumes, and most importantly, appropriate indicators of economic growth.
Taking into account the above, it is customary to distinguish between discretionary and non-discretionary directions of fiscal policy.
  Discretionary fiscal policy is the targeted manipulation of taxes and expenditures by the state in order to change production, employment levels, control inflation, and accelerate economic growth.
  Methods of this policy include changes in tax rates, such as volume changes in public assistance programs, public procurement, and various state-funded programs.
 In unfavorable socio-economic situations, the state uses various tools of discretionary fiscal policy to reduce social tensions, provide additional material support to vulnerable segments of the population, prevent further decline in production, and reduce unemployment.
  Various tax benefits are applied to prevent a sharp decline in the incomes of businesses and the population, as well as the revision of certain tax rates.
Discretionary policy is also implemented through state transfers and purchases.
 The change of the latter directly leads to a direct change of gross expenditure, which in turn leads to an increase in gross demand.
 The nature of discretionary fiscal policy, the use of this or that tool, mainly depends on the economic situation in the country, the economic policy pursued by the state.
Within the framework of fiscal discretionary policy, there are the following financial interconnections.1. The increase in public spending increases gross demand through both private consumption and investment, resulting in increased production և employment.2. The increase in taxes reduces the incomes of businesses and the population, as a result of which the gross supply decreases, which in turn leads to a reduction in production and an increase in the unemployment rate.
As a result of the economic downturn, particularly the financial and economic crises, the state is pursuing an expansionary fiscal policy, which is reflected in the discretionary fiscal policy with a significant increase in public spending and a reduction in tax rates.
  In general, such a policy presupposes a significant deficit of the state budget, but on the other hand, it allows to prevent a significant decline in production.
As a result of the increase in public spending, there is a so-called "exclusion effect" as a result of competition between the state and private investment, as well as the redistribution of factors of production in favor of the state.
  The increase in government spending ultimately leads to an increase in market interest rates, which in turn contributes to a reduction in private investment.
 The reduction of the latter contributes to the outflow of capital, has a negative impact on economic growth and the living standards of the population in the country.
  The effectiveness of this policy depends on the optimal definition of public spending.
 On the contrary, in the period of economic growth, the state fiscal discretionary policy aimed at curbing additional demand and maintaining price stability is pursued by reducing public spending and increasing taxes.
  When such a policy is implemented, the state budget is usually in surplus: the revenues collected exceed the planned expenditures.
Non-discretionary fiscal policy presupposes a change in the net tax revenues of the state budget as a result of a change in the volume of national production.
 Basically, state expenditures and taxes change automatically.
  This is, as a rule, the result of progressive tax rates է state transfer system.
 Non-discretionary fiscal policy operates independently due to internal market regulators.
  The latter are market mechanisms operating independently of the state policy, through which the ups and downs of the economy are significantly leveled.
The peculiarity of internal regulators is that tax rates are correlated with the level of income, for example, income tax, profit tax, etc.
  The change in tax revenues, depending on the change in the level of income, is a consequence of the external regulators.
  During the period of high GDP growth rates, tax revenues increase, provided that the tax system is progressive.
 As a result, the purchasing power of the population is limited, which, in turn, inhibits economic growth.
 And in the period of economic decline, the exact opposite process takes place.
  As we can see, internal regulators are important tools for economic stability.
  They, being important components of the state fiscal policy, mitigate the undesirable fluctuations of production volumes and employment, but do not eliminate other unfavorable consequences of the volume change of production.
 Internal regulators mainly affect production volumes, price levels and market interest rates.
  In case of reduction of the gross demand, the internal regulators prevent the drastic changes of the production volumes.
 Their impact is reflected in the cyclical surplus or deficit of budgets.
Discretionary fiscal-non-discretionary policies are applied taking into account the specifics of the economic policy pursued by the state, as well as the possibilities of applying direct or indirect financial instruments and methods of economic regulation.
 The effectiveness of the state fiscal policy largely depends on its timeliness and the ability to respond in a timely manner to economic situations.
Its use for purely political purposes, as well as crisis situations in the external economic environment, reduce the effectiveness of the state fiscal policy in the country.
 That is why, before launching this or that direction of fiscal policy, the peculiarities of external and internal economic situations, as well as the peculiarities of those policies, are taken into account, taking into account the accurate assessment of their possible impacts on the country's economy.
Fiscal policy, as mentioned, is implemented through its toolkit.
 The latter includes the economic mechanisms that ensure the implementation of the goals set by the fiscal policy.
  Among the tools of fiscal policy are state subsidies - transfers, public procurement, changes in taxes, their rates, the definition of new taxes.
Each of these tools has a different impact on the economy.
For example, changes in different tax rates have different effects on both economic indicators and the incentives that drive economic growth.
 The use of different forms of public spending also has different effects on the economy, as the multiplier effect is different.
 For example, it is natural that the increase in the country's defense spending will affect the economy in another way, and the increase in state transfers in another way.
  Depending on the corresponding stage of the economic cycle, in which the country's economy is in the given period, առանձնահատ the peculiarities of the state economic policy, the fiscal policy tools find different applications.
Particularly in the period of economic downturn, the tools of stimulus and expansionary fiscal policy can be: - reduction of taxes, as well as the abolition of some types of taxes, - increase of remittances, - increase of the volume of public procurement.
One of the tools of restrictive fiscal policy can be distinguished: - reduction of public procurement, - increase of tax rates, as well as the introduction of new taxes, - reduction of government transfers.
Of course, there are also other infrequently used fiscal instruments, in particular public works, which the state organizes by involving the temporarily unemployed to ensure an appropriate level of employment, agricultural subsidies provided to ensure an appropriate level of income in the agricultural sector, and so on.
Now let's refer to the analysis of the peculiarities of the pre-crisis and post-crisis fiscal policy in Armenia.
 It should be noted that the fiscal policy implemented in Armenia before the financial and economic crisis, after 2004, was restraining.
 Due to this policy, the aggregate supply was significantly restrained, as well as the state budget deficit was reduced, which is the right direction in the given period of economic growth.
 As a result, it was possible to reduce the debt / GDP ratio.
  Thus, if in 2000 the foreign public debt amounted to about 45% of GDP, then in the following years this indicator had a tendency to decrease steadily; at the end of 2008 it reached 13.2%.
 This greatly facilitated the possibility of attracting new financial resources in the future in order to overcome the negative consequences of the financial and economic crisis.
 It should be noted that the fiscal restraint policy was accompanied by a mildly restraining monetary policy.
 However, it should be noted that despite the application of a restrictive economic policy, in the economy, however, by 2008 the degree of overheating was observed.
  The actual state fiscal policy during that period was restrained, but not enough.
 This was mainly due to the fact that the level of tax collection did not rise, there was no competition in some sectors of the economy, rigid prices were fixed, as well as certain shortcomings in the implementation of structural reforms in the economy.
 These circumstances significantly reduce the resilience of the economy to crisis situations և the multiplier effect of fiscal policy.
 As a result, in the stage of economic growth, the economy is more likely to overheat, and in times of crisis, the level of economic decline is deeper.
The effects of the financial and economic crisis on the Armenian economy began to be clearly manifested in October 2008.
 The peculiarity of the impact of the crisis in Armenia was that its primary impact, that is, the panic of the financial markets, the liquidity problems of banks and other financial organizations were addressed.
 This was largely due to the fact that the fund sector of the financial market in Armenia is not so developed, which is also explained by the fact that the Central Bank of Armenia used a rather strict policy of control over financial institutions.
However, the secondary impact of the financial and economic crisis was observed in Armenia, which affected the economy in the following four directions: - significant reduction of private remittances from abroad, - decrease in prices of raw materials, especially metals, - decline in exports of goods and services, gross demand in the world economy As a result, - a decrease in the volume of investments flowing into the Armenian economy as a result of liquidity problems of financial assets in the world economy.
Under the above conditions, the economic growth decreased from the double-digit indicators of the last years of 2008, making only 6.8%.
 And already in 2009, the negative consequences of the financial and economic crisis began to appear more vividly in the Armenian economy.
  According to the RA National Statistical Service, in January-April 2009, compared to the same period in 2008, a 9.7% economic decline was registered.
To overcome the negative effects of the crisis and to avoid further deepening, both fiscal and monetary policies need to be expansionary, ie the public sector needs to be cost-effective in reducing demand to meet the necessary level of demand կրճատ to counteract the influx of cash inflows.
 Due to the global nature of the crisis, it was largely possible for all countries to pursue stimulating macroeconomic policies, including fiscal ones.
 Only one or a few stimulus policies would be accompanied by an increase in the import of those countries, slowing down and in many cases failing the process of economic recovery.
  It should be noted that almost all major developed countries have adopted macroeconomic expansion policies, which, we believe, will help to quickly overcome the negative consequences of the crisis.
There was also a need to coordinate fiscal and monetary policies within the economies of individual countries.
 In particular, the reduction of bank interest rates through monetary policy instruments alone was not yet sufficient to significantly stimulate aggregate demand, as the cautious approach to lending by the banking system hindered the effectiveness of interest rate transmission mechanisms in the event of increased risks to the economy.
 In this situation, the policy aimed at directly stimulating demand was more than possible, the effective version of which was the expansionary fiscal policy.
  In this case, the increase in government debt through the expansion of government bonds could lead to an undesirable increase in long-term interest rates.
  In such conditions, there is a need to implement a systematic monetary and fiscal policy.
 In particular, in addition to lowering interest rates, central banks were required to carry out large-scale direct purchase operations of government bonds to prevent the growth of long-term interest rates.
  Naturally, the financial support of donor countries of international organizations was strongly used for the implementation of the expansionary macroeconomic policy.
In order to mitigate the effects of the global financial and economic crisis, the Government of the Republic of Armenia has adopted the following principles of macroeconomic policy:
In the conditions of economic decline, the implementation of anti-cyclical fiscal-monetary policy is used.
  In general, macroeconomic and financial stability, as well as the elimination of the above distortions in the economy, are preconditions for the effective implementation of the anti-cyclical policy.
Based on the above principles of economic policy, the expansionary economic policy of the government has proceeded in the following directions: • Implementation of infrastructure projects, which would directly contribute to domestic demand, consequently, job creation, • targeted assistance to enterprises with temporary financial difficulties, • improvement of business environment. support for small and medium-sized businesses by removing barriers; • implementation of socially oriented budget expenditures; implementation to alleviate social pressures; և pessimistic public expectations.
For the effective implementation of the above-mentioned strategic tasks, we believe that at the present stage, the following tactical measures ընդգրկ implementation and implementation of the following tactical measures are greatly used in the field of fiscal policy pursued by the Government of the Republic of Armenia: 1. Reduction of the VAT rate up to 15%, which will contribute to the reduction of the level of RA ums, the increase of business activity and the stimulation of the gross demand.
2. Establishment of differentiated progressive profit tax rates, and reduction of profit tax rate for small and medium enterprises up to 15%.
3. Increase of the amount of personal deductible from the income tax up to 50,000 AMD, in other words, non-taxable increase of the income tax threshold.
4. Revision of income tax rates.
  In particular, the reduction of the rate for low և middle incomes (up to AMD 200,000) to the level of տոկոս 7%, which will greatly contribute to the growth of consumption by the majority of the population.
 Instead, set progressively high rates for high-income earners (AMD 1,000,000 or more).
5. Review of the list of economic entities taxed with fixed payments.
6. Establishment of state guarantee funds to assist companies operating in the real sector of the economy in attracting financial resources.
7. Providing tax exemptions to newly established companies, and in case of creating a small or family business, also exemption from taxes in general in the first two years.
8. Increasing the amount of unemployment benefits.
9. Organization of public works by the state for unemployed persons վճար payment for them in the amount of average salary.
10. Organizing and launching large-scale educational programs for the retraining of the unemployed.
11. Co-financing mortgage loan interest rates in order to activate the real estate market.
  Similar measures have already been launched, especially for young families "scientists", but the interest rates on these loans are still quite high, the terms of use are limited, so they are not widely available to everyone.
 It would be expedient for such programs to be implemented for other segments of the population և to review both the interest rates and the conditions of loans with such support.
12. Full forgiveness of previously expired tax liabilities, provided that the companies will continue to operate and create new additional jobs.
13. Providing tax benefits to new companies creating additional jobs.
14. Provision of financial support and tax benefits to export-oriented enterprises.
15. Establishment of free economic zones, mainly to solve the problems of disproportionate territorial development in the remote regions of the Republic of Armenia, to develop the productive and social infrastructure of those territories, as well as to prevent the emigration of labor.
16. Further simplification of tax administration ապ Ensuring transparency.
We believe that the implementation of the above-mentioned measures will make the fiscal policy implemented by the Government of the Republic of Armenia more effective and targeted, will ensure stable economic growth for the economy of Armenia in the near future.
