Along with the improvement of market economic conditions, Armenian companies need to introduce modern management methods and models aimed at increasing their competitiveness.
  The efficiency of investment management is of special importance for the realization of the long-term goals of the companies և for sustainable development.
  In practice, investment decision-making is extremethe complexity due to the long use of capitalterm, high uncertainty of investment project resultsdegree ով complex nature of investment processes, especiallysharply puts the limited financial, human ընկերության of the company ևThe need to develop a comprehensive system for managing investment projects aimed at maximizing the efficiency of the use of material resources.
  Any decision to invest capital is accompanied by uncertainty.
  In such conditions, regular research on investment attractiveness acquires special importance.
  Investment attractivenessare the quantitative expression of the means invested in the economyInvestment risks that reflect the probability of loss, which:They arise for many social, political and economic reasons.
 It is possible only as a result of a general risk assessmentbecomes to evaluate the effectiveness of the investment project.
In economic activity, related to the issue of risk,It should be noted that it is an objective phenomenon, ie if it is implementedWhatever the activity, the risk definitely exists, regardlessfrom it, they take into account that they ignore it {2}.
      We propose to use a general comprehensive criterion in risk assessments, which will describe the amount of possible losses as a result of the implementation of the investment decision.
  The criterion can be conventionally called the price of risk. C risk = {P, L} where L is the sum of possible losses as a result of the implementation of the investment decision
P is the probability of an unfavorable outcome (incurring losses).
        It is advisable to use only to determine the risk priceindicators that are considered unsuccessfulthe probability of the outcome, as well as the magnitude of the losses from it.
 As such indicators, we suggest using first of all dispersion, standard (mean square) deviation և coefficient of variation.
 Moreover, the assessment based on these indicatorsDo not encounter unnecessary complications during the economic interpretation of the results և comparative analysisIt is necessary to bring them to monetary proportions.
        In world practice, the risk of uncertainty is usedNumerous methods for evaluating the effectiveness of investment project management, which assume the application of two main approaches: quantitative and qualitative.
       The main problem of the qualitative approach is considered investmentIdentification of possible types of project risks ացումը identification as the risk affecting that typeIdentification of sources and factors ագր description.
 Qualitativean approach that does not allow you to quantify investment project risksize is the basis for further research using quantitative methods.
As for the quantitative methods of assessing the effectiveness of investment projects in conditions of risk and uncertainty, the most common of them are:1. statistical method,2. Discount risk adjustment method;3. the method of reliable equivalents;4. The method of sensitivity analysis of efficiency criteria;5. Scenario method.
         Statistical method of risk assessment of investment projectsis based on the use of statistical criteria.
  By the way,Mathematical expectation, dispersion, mean squared deviation և coefficient of variation are more widely used.
The method of adjusting the discount rate is practically the simplestէ is the most used method.
 Its main idea is to estimate the current value of cash flow expected as a result of the implementation of the investment project using a risk-adjusted discount rate {4}.
  Moreover, in order to adjust the amount of the discount rate, a certain base amount is taken, which is considered notrisk or minimum acceptable risk, to which is then added the expected risk premium.
 It is self-evident that there is a risk in the case of high-risk projectsThe premium must be high.
         As already mentioned, the main advantage of this method is the simplicity of performing the necessary calculations.
  At the same time, the method has serious drawbacks that limit its scope of application.
 The disadvantage is that in order to adjust the amount of the discount rate, future cash flows are brought to a higher discount rate at the present time.using value, which, however, is about the degree of riskdoes not provide information, ie it is not so clear for the investor,what possible deviations of the indicators reflecting the effectiveness of the project can be registered.
 In addition to the application of this methodIn this case, a constant coefficient reflecting the risk is used when calculating the current effectiveness of the projectThis is not a good thing, as many projects are characterized by a gradual decrease in the level of risk at each subsequent stage of its implementation.
  Other:In other words, profitable projects that do not involve an increase in risk over time may be misjudged, which of coursewill lead to decision making.
After all, the effectiveness of a project depends on only one indicator, the risk-adjusted interest rate, severely limiting the ability to consider and model a large number of options.
Unlike the discount risk adjustment method, reliableIn the case of the equivalent method, it is not the discount rate that is adjusted, but the originalthe amount of cash flow.
  The adjustment is made by means of reliability coefficients for each project implementation period.
  Reliability coefficients are expressednon-risk իսկ cash flow ratio.
  Their formula has the following general appearance.where the CCFt project is not risky during the t periodis the amount of net cash flow expected from operations,CFt is the expected net cash flow in period t, at is the reliability coefficient in period t.
          Despite the seeming simplicity of calculating at coefficients, in practice estimating them is not an easy task {5}.
Most often at quantities are derived by the method of expert estimates, և in which case they reflect cash flowthe trust of experts in obtaining this or that componentdegree.
at coefficients can be used to obtain the net expected during the entire project implementation periodCash flow risk adjusted.where CF is the cash flow in period t, T is the projectI0 is the amount of initial investment.
        Preference is given to the project that provides the largest cash flow adjusted for reliability.
       It should be noted that this method is not without its drawbacks.
 Among them:It is possible to indicate the reliability coefficients that fully correspond to the risk inherent in each stage of project implementationthe complexity of the calculation, as well as the probability of the variablesthe impossibility of analyzing distributions.
       The method of sensitivity analysis of indicators is quite wideIt is used in financial management.
 In the general case itleads to the analysis of the sensitivity of the overall index to changes in component indicators.
  In other words, an attempt is being madeAssess the fluctuations of the output variable in case of fluctuations of the input variables.
In the end, the project is selected, the efficiency index of which records the least fluctuations, which is considered asEvidence of minimal risk.
The main disadvantage of this method is that it is possibleAssess the effect of fluctuations of input variables on the output indicator separately, ie each variable is considered in isolation from the others.
The scenario method allows the sensitivity index of the output indicator to be combined with the analysis of probabilistic estimates of its deviations.
In this case, the minimum risk is considered the lowest averagethe investment project with the standard deviation and variation coefficient.
If the probabilities of creating this or that situation included in the scenario are known, then the expected integral of the projectThe result can be evaluated through mathematical expectation.where NPVi is the integral result of the implementation of scenario iin this case pi is the probability of the implementation of the i-th scenario.
The risk of the whole project is assessed in negative NPV scenariosthrough the sum of probabilities.In the event of an ineffective project outcome during these appointmentsThe average amount of loss will be estimated as follows:In general, the presented method allows you to get:A complete picture of the individual project implementation options : Provides information on their performance indicatorssensitivity և possible fluctuations.
In addition to the above, investment project risk assessmentAmong the methods we can mention such no less accurate methods,such as game theory methods, imitation modeling, nomethods based on the theory of definite sets.
 The evaluation of the effectiveness of the investment project endsIt is necessary to determine the level of its profitability in absolute terms.
  A number of quantitative and qualitative indicators are used to assess the effectiveness of investment projects.
  Most often, interconnected is used for this purposeThe following system of indicators: 1. net income (NI),2. net discounted income (NDI) or, as:it is also called an integral product,3. net present value (NPV);4. profitability index (PI);5. Internal rate of return (IRR);6. payback period (PP);7. Investment efficiency ratio (ARR).
These indicators, despite their significant practical significance, have significant shortcomings.
 Thus, they are mainly partial in nature; they characterize the economic efficiency of investment projects from one point of view or another.
  For that reasonFor a more comprehensive evaluation of projects, it is necessary to consider these indicators as a systemic whole, each component of which tries to supplement as a result of the use of the others.the resulting gap.
 However, even with the application of all the observed indicators, it is impossible to avoid serious complications.
 So how many?that they are different in nature, so their values ​​can create the opposite picture.
 In this case, the problem of giving preference to one of the indicators arises, which, although very often solved by NPVin favor, but this solution ևs defective և does not have sufficient justification.
Based on the above, it can be concluded that investmentOne of the common shortcomings of the described project performance indicators is the requirement for baseline data certainty, as an arbitrary investment project is characterized by uncertainty.by a multitude of factors.
  That is, an arbitrary investment projectanalysis leads to the need to predict the future values ​​of a large number of uncertain variables in the market situation, ևIt is natural that it is impossible to get an absolutely accurate forecast.
Considering the investment project as a return on profitabilityAssets package with different levels of investment riskIn our opinion, the problem of reduction can be solved by choosing a packagea structure that provides minimal dispersion.
Literature   3. Èãîìèìà, Ë. Ë. '' Èìâåðòèöèè ''.
 ñ‚åá. ïîðîáèå / ïîä ðåä. ä-ðà íêîí. ,ê, ïðîô.
Â. À. Ñëåïîâà. - Ì. .
 Ýêîíîìèñòú, 2004. - 478 ñ.7. × åðìîâ Â.À. '' Èìâåðòèöèîììà ðòðàòåã ðòðàòåãè ‛'. - Ì.:
  ÞÍÈÒÈ-Äàíà, 2003.– 158:8. http:
//www.ada.am/arm/for-investors/fdi-statistics/ Armenian developmentThe official website of the agencyInformation about the authors:Tamara Surik Simonyan - Economics scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri State University
Head of the Chair of Economics of the Pedagogical Institute, E-mail:
 Tsimonyan62@mail.ru.Israeli Khachatur Sargsy - Gyumri State Pedagogical InstituteLecturer of the Chair of Economics, E-mail.
