The question of tax efficiency assessment still has no final answer.
 It is not clear which part of the taxpayer's income is effective - a quarter, a third or a half.
 That is why discussions on the effectiveness of taxation are often built on international comparisons based on planned or actually paid at the macroeconomic level.total amount of taxes և gross domestic product, and at the micro level - planned or actually paid taxes and grossincome percentage ratios.
In our opinion, to calculate these indicators with the mentioned approachIn some cases, they can not reflect the real state of taxation, as the tax revenue reserve is not included in the calculation.The potential for tax arrears, the calculation of which պար in the case of international comparisons, the picture can change significantly.
 In that sense, it is necessary to move to the field of international comparisonstaxes levied and the full tax potential (actually leviedTaxes / taxes actually levied + tax arrears) percentage ratios, which give an idea of ​​the behavior of unscrupulous taxpayers, the "shadow economy", the extent of corruption, the efficiency of the tax system, etc.
  Meanwhileare only the indicators determined by the actual taxes collectedgives an idea of ​​the effectiveness of law enforcement taxpayers և tax administration.
Describing the effectiveness of taxation, generalizing it andIt is also considered an indicator used in international comparisons. "Gross domestic product per capita.
As a rule, the higher this index, the higher the tax rateRevenue և Percentage of Gross Domestic Product.
 It is also a proof of the fact that the level of tax efficiency is largely conditioned by the level of development of the country and the solvency of taxpayers.
Describing the effectiveness of taxation, generalizing it andis an indirect indicator used in international comparisonsև Direct tax rate ratio, which gives an idea of ​​the application of the principle of tax fairness.
The higher the share of indirect taxes, the lowerAttention will be paid to maintaining the principle of tax fairness, as indirect taxes are included in the prices of goods and services, shifting the tax burden on consumers.the majority of which is the population.
Describing the effectiveness of taxation, generalizing it and"Non-transparent taxes", ie bribes paid by taxpayers and time spent in contacts with various state bodies, are considered non-traditional indicators used in comparisons.losses, the presence of which further reduces their growththe level of tax efficiency.
According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, taxpayers in countries with economies in transition2.1-6.8% of income (which can be considered a bribe tax"Rate" 1) is used in different countries to bribe various officials ("pay bribe tax"), and that tax1 The share of illegal payments made to government officials in the total income of taxpayers.
Payment frequency 1 fluctuates in the range of 8-60% 2.
  According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, both the corporate tax rate and the frequency of its payment are higher in all surveyed countries, in small and medium-sized enterprises, and in small businesses these figures are relatively small.
 He is no less important!the time that managers of economic entities losein various contacts with state officials.
 For countries with economies in transition, this figure is the time tax (which:Describes the share of taxpayers' total working time in public office (assessments) confirm the need to pay due attention to non-traditional methods of taxation.about 3.
It should be noted that it characterizes the effectiveness of taxationIt is necessary to calculate general and international indicators, but it is not enough to assess the level of tax efficiency, as differentTaxation mechanisms used in different countries differeven by type of tax, depending on the types of tax benefits applied in the country, the degree of their coverage,Framework for determining the tax base and the scope of taxation,differentiating tax rates and other tax determinantswith factors.
  In this regard, it is necessary to use and calculate the features of the calculation of individual types of taxes, which:reduce or increase the efficiency of taxation according to individual types of taxes.
Along with increasing tax efficiency, taxThe share of revenues in the state budget revenues canto grow.
  It can also contribute to that in economic policyThe application of the basic principles of tax regionalization, which is weakwill give in terms of border, mountainous business developmentapply less tax cuts in less attractive settlementscoefficients.
1 Share of taxpayers making illegal payments to government officialsamong the total number of taxpayers.
After the proclamation of independent statehood, supposedly market-based organizational relations were formed in Armenia.certain structural and legislative preconditions;which were a prerequisite for ensuring the continuity of the transformation process.
 Systemic changes were also implemented in the fiscal system of the republic, aiming to create an effective, efficient mechanism in that sphere.
 And despite the recent years in the tax sphere of the republicThe reforms carried out significantly contributed to the establishment of the fiscal system of the republic, however, at present there are a number of problems in this area, which reduceThe efficiency of the tax system, which is due to awith a number of objective և subjective factors.
  Currently, one of the objective factors influencing tax policy can be consideredthe following.• Low opportunities of the tax system in concentrating revenues in the amount defined by the legislation; • Volume of tax burden on GDP;• Distribution of tax burden to a narrower circle of taxpayers, which:As a result, the tax pressure on the latter increases, ային the tax burden increases,• Transformation of the tax system as a factor hindering economic growth, reducing investment activity;• Decreased opportunities for the real sector of the economy as the main taxpayer, which is a result of declining profitability to work at the expense of economic entities;• Criminalization of the economy, which results in increased taxationthe army of evaders, • Tax mechanism in the direction of business activityweakening of regulatory and stimulating levers, etc.
There are subjective factors influencing tax policy.• Unjustifiably economically unjustified steps, mistakes and omissions in the development and implementation of tax policy;• Existence of uncoordinated steps between different directions of financial and economic policy (in particular fiscal-monetary policies);• Lack of practice of գնահատ expertise ման legislation for effective fiscal policy;• Lack of a system for forecasting fiscal policy results;• Dependence of fiscal policy on international financial organizations;• Lack of tax policy safeguards against lobbying;• Instability of the legislative field և imperfection;• Low level of tax administration in the tax authoritiesInsufficient professional level of the employees involved.
Obviously, the impact of the above-mentioned factors has a very negative impact on the country's economy and financial system, leading to a reduction in the revenue part of the state budget, a decrease in the level of financial security of the state to perform its functions.
  In this regard, financial stabilization measures in the country can not be effective as longQualitative changes are not recorded in tax collection ևin budget execution.
 Currently, more in the tax system of the republicThe problem of non-payment of taxes, which, in fact,may be due to the general financial crisis in the real sector of the economy, stagnation of production and non-declaration of income.
Tax collection is the most important criterion for assessing the activities of the entire state government, the tax system ևA direct indicator of the efficiency or inefficiency of tax services.
  At the same time, it is considered by a number of international financial organizations as a key tool for assessing a country's creditworthiness.
 In general, the factors affecting tax collectionThey are grouped according to the crisis situation of the economy, management and regulation activities և motives of taxpayer behavior.
  It has its material effect on tax collectionleaves a large portion of the cash in circulation, whichautomatically complicates the financial processes of economic processescontrol օրինակ is a unique reason for the expansion of shadow activity.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the stateIt is a very dangerous phenomenon to meet financial needs the practice of tax evasion by taxpayers.
  TaxViolations in legal relations are very bigThey pose a threat not only to the tax, but also to the socio-economic and political system of the whole country.
  As a rule, in terms of non-declaration of income, weak control over that sectorThe spheres of trade and small business stand out in particular.
  Within which it is in these areas that the cash flow is highestthe volume.
  The situation is further complicated by the fact that at presentThere are no precise calculations in the country, for example,To determine the average level of profitability of the trade sector, which would allow to form certain ideas about the tax potential of that sector.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the tax administration is becoming an urgent issue in those areasreinforcement, where there are wider opportunities for shadowingfor activities.
A significant reason for the low efficiency of the tax system is the number of employees involved in the tax authoritiesQualification level, work organization, socialissues related to nature.
  The means of material incentives created for that purpose in the republic, it can be said,They do not serve that purpose at all.
  In this regard, it is very important to set new quality requirements for those involved in the system by providing appropriate guarantees.
 It is no secret that the ultimate goal of economic policy in any country should be economicEnsuring sustainable growth.
 Therefore, in this regard, in order to solve the strategic problem, a tax system corresponding to the requirements of a market economy must be formed in the country.
 Of course, at the initial stage of the formation of new relations for the state budget asThe main source of income is indirect taxes, which, according to usIn my opinion, it is objective because they are short of fundsUnder these conditions, they are able to fulfill the role of budget replenishment more successfully.
 In fact, at that stage, the burden of the tax burden falls mainly on the less well-off sections of the population.
  However, it should be noted that this situation can continue for a long timeto become extremely dangerous for the country, especially when:they can not even fully solve the problem of financial security of the most important functions of the state.
  Budget in countries with effective market economiesThe income part is mainly formed at the expense of direct taxes levied on legal entities and individuals, ie on labor and business taxes1.
 High taxes in the tax system of the republicThey come as a deterrent to general demand, which causes the economy to decline.
  Indirect taxes are not, in fact, directly related to the efficiency of labor and capital.են They contradict it to some extent, because their calculation is mainly based on the factors that determine the profitability of production.
  In some ways, they are anti-marketnature, therefore their specific weight should not be large.
In our opinion, the gradual rather than drastic reduction of the share of indirect taxes in the tax system of the republic should bebecome one of the main directions of economic transformation.
 One of the qualitative characteristics of the efficiency of the tax system is the assessment of the tax burden.
 Of course, it should be noted that it does not exist yet!Clearly developed methodology for tax burden assessment.
  SimplyThere are some indicators that can give an indirect idea of ​​the weight of the tax burden in this or that area.
 Many official sources do not deny the tax burden in the countryThe fact that it is difficult, which becomes an obstacle to the expansion of entrepreneurship, the improvement of the investment environment.
 Although:The weight of the tax burden on the GDP in the republic is the sameis about 14% *.
  In this regard, it should be noted that tax policyThe main problem should be a balanced tax burdendistribution, taking into account the provision of social justice ևthe need for economic development.
 Given the fact that the economy of the republicIn some sectors and areas, the tax burden is quite heavy, ևtaxes are levied on their non-typical, that is, economic entitiesThe function of confiscation of funds becomes an urgent needThe application of the differentiated rate of value added tax is provided by the * Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Approval of the State Budget Report for 2012".
like in those branches և areas that have for objective reasonslow level of profitability.
  We also need technologyReduce value added tax for some parts of the chainrate, and with lower profitability և working at a lossapply zero rate in areas.
 The tax mechanism is needed for effective interactionbe in line with monetary policy, providing certain benefits to financial and credit institutions that use long-term borrowing for investment purposes.
1 It is necessary to regulate the activities of the entities operating in the securities market in a differentiated way, giving privileges to those engaged in targeted investment activities.
  At the same time, it is necessary to show qualitatively new approaches to the institution of tax benefits, a principledefining their strict expediency և maturity.
They should be provided only to those sectors of the economyare of primary importance for development.
  Privileges:The provision must correspond to the state investment itprograms with a degree of predictability of effectivenessIt is quite high.
 Severe of the current problems in the countrystructural reforms are being implemented.
  That:In this regard, we believe that the exemption from taxation of any investment in capital investments can not contribute to the solution of this problem,because structural transformations imply economic onesClosure of some unpromising production.
  That:Exemption from profit tax for the expansion of such productions, in fact, the tax system indirectlypromotes non-profit production.
  It is not possible to increase the investment activity of all economic entitiesto be a subject of economic interests of the state.
  That:and because of that, we think, it has become very urgent for the republicsetting priorities for economic development, after whichonly to promote investment in those areasthe provision of tax benefits.
 In conclusion, it should be noted that only the protection of the interests of the state, the expanded reproduction of the economyensuring, creating a competitive environment և investment act 1 Suvaryan Yu. Մ. Strategic management. Methodology և Current issues, Yerevan State University, Yerevan, "Economist", 1996, 152 pages.
fiscal policy aimed at increasing efficiencycan ensure stable rates of economic development.
  WithIn which case, such a policy requires a tax ևComprehensive understanding and evaluation of the principles of budget policy, as well as the creation of program bases for the implementation of measures conditioned by them.
