Aragats massif is an important tourist object, that is why its relief has been evaluated for summer-winter recreation.
At the same time, the severity of winter conditions was assessed.
In many cases, unaware of the potential of the area, tourists do not visit the area, which hinders the development of the region.
In view of the above, a recreational assessment of natural conditions becomes necessary, which will allow to study ներկայացնել to present to the public the possibilities of organizing recreation in the given region.
The natural conditions of the area in question are quite well studied, but they are not made from a recreational point of view.
The historical monuments located in the foothills of the Aragats massif are relatively well studied, which mainly limit the visits of tourists.
  In general, most of the monuments are located at an altitude of up to 2000 m, above which only unregulated mountaineering routes are carried out.
The purpose of this article is to show և evaluate the recreational opportunities of the highlands of Aragats massif, how to map them.
Study methodology.
 By choosing the Aragats massif as an object of study, we have taken into account several circumstances.
Second, the natural landscapes of the highlands (above 2000 m) are little altered by humans, it has a diverse terrain.
The development methodology is based on the principle that each type of recreation has a certain "requirement" of natural complexes.
 Taking into account this circumstance, we have assessed the summer recreational opportunities of the Aragats highland part for the walking-aesthetic type, as well as for the alpine skiing sport.
The combination of summer and winter recreation will increase the economic profitability of recreational facilities in the region.
The organization of summer rest in the regions higher than 2000 m is carried out for physically healthy people, who can stay at such heights for several days.
  For this purpose, it will be necessary to assess the relief of the area, which is directly conditioned by the impassability, climate training, as well as the aesthetic perception of the area.
It is difficult to refer to the evaluation of all components within one article, so it is expedient to present the methodology of self-relief evaluation.
The nature of the mountainous terrain is a potential resource for recreational activities.
  The latter was studied by many scientists as a recreational resource [1; 2; 3].
During the recreational assessment of the relief, the quantitative assessment of the relief indicators becomes more important, on the basis of which it is possible to say in which direction the recreation can develop in the given period [4].
In the case of such works, the most important indicators are vertical, horizontal slope, slope slope, and position.
Taking into account the above, we have calculated the dimensional indicators of the relief of the studied area1.
Based on 50,000 scale maps.
 Moreover, the calculation was made for the area extending above the horizontal altitude of 2000 m.
According to the cartographic data, the area of ​​Aragatslern massif is 944 km2 within the mentioned borders.
 Considering the fact that the massif has the shape of a cone, the area we are studying is divided into 4 sections (sectors): northern, southern, eastern and western.
  The division is conditional վել was made on the basis of the directions built from the top of Aragats.
  Moreover, they are drawn in such a way that they coincide with certain lines.
 For example, the area of ​​the northern part is enclosed by a line leading from the top to Harichbnak, which passes through the Mantash River valley to Nigavan.
  Within such borders, the northern part occupies 192 km2.
 The southern slope occupies a larger area, which is enclosed from the top to Artashavan և between the Davtashentan directions և.
 It occupies 296 km2 or 31.3% of the study area.
Table 1 presents the altimeter data of the study area.
Table 1. Occupied areas of Aragats massif Aragats massif area Sections Sectors North-South-West Archelian 944 km 2192 km 2296 km 2292 km 2164 km2 According to the table, the largest areas are occupied by the south-western slopes, which are due to the south-western slopes.
Calculate the slope of the slopes for all sections of the mountain range, which is the most important indicator for organizing summer hiking, mountaineering, mountaineering, skiing and skiing.
Slope data (km2) are presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Slope data of Aragats massif 1 Slope slope (˚) SectionRecreation typeHealthySkiingAlpinismAlpinistismNorthSouthWindArticleArticle Surveillance Surveillance
  To obtain the latter, we used the embedded formula, which has the following form: where S is the total area of ​​the section, S1 is the separated area of ​​the dimensional index of the relief (in this case, the slope of the slopes).
Based on the data in Table 2, it can be argued that the slope slopes of 1015 ներից predominate in all sections, which is most appropriate for the development of walking tourism.
The slopes of 15-25 slopes, which occupy the largest areas in the southern part of Aragats (211 km2), have a significant surface area with high coefficients and a total coefficient of 0.88.
  These slopes are more expedient for the development of ski tourism.
In the Aragats massif, the opportunities for the development of mountaineering are smaller, as the slopes with a slope of more than 40˚ occupy only 79 km2 and have a total coefficient of 0.33.
In order to make full use of the recreational resources of Aragats, it is necessary to use the winter opportunities, as a stable snow cover is formed from the height of 2000 m.
1 The meter shows the area in km2, declares the suitability coefficient.
SSK1 Given this fact, it is necessary to introduce the severity of winter weather in the highlands, which is a prerequisite for the safety of tourists.
There are many methods for calculating the severity of winter conditions [5; 6; 7], of which the Bodman calculation method was used to estimate the winter conditions of the Aragats massif, which has the following form: where T is the air temperature (˚C), V is the wind speed (m / s).
The assessment based on the Bodman index is performed according to the scale presented in Table 3.
Using the method proposed by Bodman, we calculated the data of several observation points on the Aragats massif, the results of which are presented in Table 4.
Table 3. Bodman Scale for Winter Weather Characteristics Strictness Index (Score) Minimum Conditions from S1 Weather Characterization Mild Not Moderate Strictly Strictly Very Strictly 6 Extremely Strict 2. Analysis of the data in Table 4 allows you to say that Within 5 limits, which is characterized as medium stringency conditions.
Comparing these indicators with the data of the relief slopes, it can be said that the conditions are sufficient for the organization of winter conditions, particularly winter rest.
Table 4. Meteorological data of observation points at different altitudes of Aragats massif. Observations High: Position. in the section (Garnahovit), which is conditioned by the predominance of windy weather during the winter months.
The zone with a height of more than 3000 m stands out with the most severe winter conditions, which is characterized as the most severe.
 Comparing the relief indicators with the data of Bodman index, it can be said that the highland zone of Aragats massif (above 3000 m) is not expedient to use for winter recreation.
 The conditions in this zone are more favorable for summer rest (hiking, geotourism, ecotourism), as well as for mountaineering or mountaineering in the presence of significant slopes of the terrain.
According to the researches, we have compiled a schematic map of the recreational nature use of the Aragats massif, which is presented below.
Conclusion.
  Based on the studies, it can be said that in general the Aragats massif has favorable conditions for the development of recreation.
  Moreover, from 2000 m to the top of the massif, the conditions are sufficient for the organization of summer recreation.
In addition to hiking routes, it is possible to organize a vacation related to geotourism, mountaineering and mountaineering.
Areas up to 3000 m hypsometric heights, where the Bodman Index has small indicators, are more favorable for winter recreation.
The analysis of the harshness of the winter conditions of Aragats massif shows one feature. There is no or very little "severe" weather type (according to Bodman scale - 3-4 points), which, in our opinion, is due to the peculiarity of the wind regime, as the decrease in temperature occurs regularly.
Scheme 1.
 Winter hardiness indicators of Aragats massif according to altimeter zones.
   M1.
750,000 Graphic wintering. Вып.2. - Read.
  Забайкальск. geographical information About the author. Leon Movses Martirosyan - geographical scientist. Candidate, Associate Professor, Head of Gyumri Head of the Chair of Geography and its teaching methods at the Children's Institute.
E-mail:
