At the current stage of economic development, there is an unprecedented increase in the role of the financial sector in the world economy, as well as an increase in the globalization of financial markets.
 This reality cannot but be worrying, as it not only contributes to the development of the economy, but also creates certain serious dangers for the further development of the economy.
  The rapid globalization of the financial market contributes to the fact that any external instability of financial instability can quickly spread around the world in a very short period of time, turning into global financial and economic crises.
Modern crises are significantly different from those of previous centuries.
 The point is that the nature of crises changes over time, համապատասխան the nature of anti-crisis measures գն directions change accordingly.
Referring to the general description of the previous crises, it should be noted that until the second half of the 19th century, the world economy was characterized by agriculture, which in turn explained the geographical nature of the economic crisis of those times due to unexpected environmental factors.
  The scientific discoveries of the 19th century The industrial revolution taking place in the developed capitalist countries, the technical discoveries made in various spheres of the economy, led to the fact that the causes of the crises began to be conditioned by industrial factors.
  At present, in developed countries, a post-industrial structure of the economy has been formed, where the service sector predominates, and the main component of the latter is the financial sector.
  All this leads to the fact that the causes of modern crises must be explained due to the financial sector of the economy, which has recently grown significantly worldwide. It is moving further and further away from the real sector of the economy.
Increasing Global Financial Assets լայն The widespread use of new financial instruments, of course, has many advantages, enabling businesses to put additional financial assets into circulation, but on the other hand, improper control over them can lead to the formation of so-called artificial financial "bubbles".
 In a situation where the financial market is able to ensure a higher percentage growth of invested funds, the financing of the real sector of the economy, which is the classic function of banks, loses its relevance.
  In the face of stiff competition, banks are entering the stock market instead of financing organizations and individuals in need of money, thus contributing to an increase in the number of speculative transactions.
 It is obvious that the deepening of the discrepancies between the real and financial sectors of the economy sooner or later leads to the emergence of a financial and economic crisis, which we have witnessed quite recently.
Another important feature of modern economic developments is that the uncontrolled development of the financial sector of the economy, as well as the significant increase in the money supply in the world economy, contribute to the formation of huge speculative capital, the application of which requires new areas.
  As a result, the world economy is destabilized by normal market relations, as well as by sharp and unfounded asset prices in the markets due to speculative capital pressures.
Referring to 2007-2009. The global financial and economic crisis, it should be noted that its depth առաջին degree of involvement ազդեց impact on the world economy is considered the first crisis unparalleled in the post-war years, which revealed structural asymmetries in the development of modern economics.
  As a result, there was a need to radically reconsider previously held scientific views on the causes of economic crises, as well as the directions and tools for overcoming them.
The current crisis took place in the conditions of the highest level of economic globalization, as a result of which the crisis is penetrating new countries at a faster pace.
The global financial and economic crisis had many negative manifestations, the main of which are the following: • The sharp decline in real estate prices, which at the same time became one of the main causes of the crisis.
 This was due to the fact that the unreasonably high price of real estate was formed not as a result of real supply and demand for them, but as a result of speculative transactions, and sooner or later that market would collapse.
• Massive outflow of capital from developing countries to developed countries.
 The reason was that in the conditions of falling real estate prices serious liquidity problems arose, as a result of which the investors hurried to resell their assets at low prices.
And the selling prices of the latter in developing countries, in contrast to developed countries, were lower.
• Significant increase in budget deficits due to the fact that many countries had to provide significant financial support from budgetary means to those production and financial organizations that, with serious liquidity problems, were on the verge of insolvency.
• Developing a recession on a global scale.
  It first developed in developed countries and then spread to developing countries.
 In such a situation, investments sharply decreased, which was due to the fact that during the crisis, negative expectations prevailed both among potential investors and the whole society, in addition, there were liquidity problems, which we have already mentioned above.
 There was a significant reduction of jobs in different countries, increasing the level of unemployment.
  During the crisis, companies sought to reduce costs, and since the sale of assets in a crisis situation posed serious difficulties, the fastest way to reduce costs was to cut jobs.
• The appreciation of the US dollar against the currencies of other countries.
In times of crisis, the assets of global enterprises and financial institutions were traded in dollars, which led to a significant increase in demand for the dollar, leading to a significant devaluation of the latter.
The global financial and economic crisis revealed the shortcomings of the financial and economic systems operating in different countries of the world.
 Although the latter were different in different countries due to the peculiarities of the economy, but at the same time there are a number of general shortcomings, from which lessons should be learned by all countries of the world.
The following are among the general shortcomings revealed as a result of the financial and economic crisis.1. Lack of "long money" in the economy.
  And that was the reason why the stock exchange indexes in 2008 They were further reduced in developing countries because the shares were placed in speculative assets and were taken out of circulation immediately after the first unfavorable signal.
 There is a lack of "long money" in financial institutions and investment companies.
2. High level of inflation.
  It should be noted that before the crisis in many developed countries the inflation rate was 1-3%, and in developing countries it was kept within 3-5%.
 It should be noted that the main reason for inflation was the rapid growth of budget expenditures, which in turn was due to the need to increase social spending, as in some developing countries there are many functions specific to the socialist state.
3. Imperfection of financial systems, especially at the level of developing countries.
  In fact, some of the investments of enterprises and organizations fell to foreign investors, increasing the foreign debts of developing countries, the repayment of which in turn complicated the devaluation of national currencies, as debts are mainly denominated in foreign currency.
  Therefore, in the current situation, it would be right to make the repayment of the external debt not only the external debts, but also the repayment of the internal debts, the source of which can be the state's gold-currency reserves and funds on more preferential terms.
4. The shortcomings of the state regulation of financial markets, as well as their imperfection of self-regulation, as a result of which a significant part of the turnover of financial assets became speculative.
5. Weak control over the banking system, banks' risky activities, as well as pre-banking oligopolies, as a result of which banks actively participated in the process of forming financial speculative "bubbles", depriving them of a significant part of the necessary financial resources for the economic sector.
6. Widespread distribution of offshore financial zones - lack of effective mechanisms for international control over them.
7. Unprecedented increase in the turnover of derivative instruments, as well as the significant predominance of speculative capital over capital flows in the economic sector.
8. Promoting private consumption mainly through loans.
9. Unfair and unequal distribution of national income, which is a consequence of inefficient tax policy.
10. Failure of the information system on market processes և Unequal distribution of information.
11. Lack of effective mechanisms for the supranational management of the world economy.
12. The use of the monopoly of one country's currency (USD) as an international means of payment in the conditions of globalization of the world economy; the lack of a sufficient level of international control system over the issuance and circulation of that currency.
Taking into account the above, as the main lessons of the recent global financial and economic crisis, we can present the following.1. Development of long-term capital aimed at the development of the real sector of the economy through the development of appropriate funds և investment tools‚2. Establishment of effective mechanisms for the supranational management of the financial-banking system and the world economy in general, 3 tightening the requirements for banks' credit activities, 4. Economic diversification, 5. Rapid development of market information systems, 6. Reducing external debt or at least avoiding new external debt as much as possible in order to reduce financial dependence on the external environment, so as not to take on the added weight of high interest rates, as well as to use the country's gold and foreign exchange reserves as a source of debt repayment. Following market trends during the crisis.
  Dangerous devaluation of the national currency և reduce export opportunities, 8. refusal to use the US dollar as a monopoly international unit of account, which will prevent its further unsecured assets; Avoiding inefficient social spending, which will reduce both the budget deficit and contribute to inflation.
In conclusion, we can say that the nature of the crisis largely depends on the structure of the economy, the spheres that dominate it.
  At the stage of modern economic development, crises are largely the result of disproportions in the real և financial sectors of the economy, as well as the weak control of state structures over the circulation of speculative capital.
  Therefore, it is necessary to develop such effective mechanisms at the global level, which will ensure an optimal balance between the mentioned spheres, will contribute to the progress of the world economy, avoiding the latter from various economic shocks.
Literature 1. Harutyunyan VL, Global financial and economic crisis. Causes, anti-crisis measures և lessons, -Yer., "Science" publishing house of NAS RA, 2009, 146 pages.
2. Harutyunyan VL, Sargsyan KS, The causes of the global financial and economic crisis և its impact on the world economy, the current problems of socio-economic development in the Republic of Armenia.
  Materials of the Republican Conference, Book 1, Yerevan, 2012.
3. Sargsyan KS, A. Sargsyan, Periods of Economic System Development և պատճառ Reasons for Their Occurrence, Current Problems of Socio-Economic Development in the Republic of Armenia, Materials of the Republican Conference, Book 2, Yerevan, 2012.
4. Sargsyan KS, The essence of the crisis ‚types և classification, current issues of socio-economic development in the Republic of Armenia / materials of the Republican Conference / Book 2 / Yerevan.
 "Science" publishing house of NAS RA.
 2012 ‚327 pages.
5. Аганбегян А. Crisis.
 misery and chance for Russia, M „ACT, Astrel, 2009, p. 46.6. The financial crisis in Russia and in peace. In order. Е.Т.Гайдара -М.
 Prospect, 2009. Information about the authors. Vladimir Liparit Harutyunyan - M. NAS RA. Director of the Kotanyan Institute of Economics, Corresponding Member of NAS RA, Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor.
E-mail:
 info@economics.sci.am Sh.Sargsyan Karen Samveli- M. NAS RA Kotanyan Institute of Economics, senior researcher, Candidate of Technical Sciences.
 E-mail:
