Corporate legitimacy և Corporate authority is a valuable resource that is achieved through the operation of the organizationIt is one of the necessary conditions.
  However, there are some difficulties in defining the definitions of "corporate legitimacy" and "corporate authority" in the scientific literature.
  In addition, there is limited theoretical material to clarify the nature of the existing social connection between these two phenomena, as heFeatures of corporate reputation managementconcerning.
First of all, let's talk about legitimacy, which has been around for a long timewas recognized as the starting point of political and governmental regimeselement regarding the public acceptance of regimes, institutions and the effectiveness of their use of powerrecognition.
 The notion that the complete scientific conceptualization of the concept of "legitimacy" was first implemented by M. Weber was strengthened in the sociological literature.
 According to Weber,The notion of "legitimacy" is enshrined as a social orderHaving ideas about "capacity", it is manifestedin the voluntary consent of the subordinates to the recognition of power, to obey its orders.
  Such an order is more than the regularity of actions և backwardness [2, p. 21].
Here it is appropriate to mention the views of sociologist P. Bourdieu.
According to him, the legitimate "is the power to which the one who submits gives itto the implementer, so to speak, a loan with which one gives to the other,fides, auctoritas, which one passes on to the other, instilling confidence in it.
 It is a power that exists only becausethe one who submits to it believes that it exists ”[1, p. 209].
the consent of certain stakeholders.
The notion of "legitimate organization" has emerged as a result of the academic focus on legitimacy.
Attention to the legitimacy of the organization is accidentalno.
  Legitimate organizations և their leaders are perceivedas "more valuable, more powerful, more predictable."more trustworthy ”than illegitimate organizations and their leaders [8, p. 575].
 In addition, legitimate organizations are likelywill receive support and resources from voters [7, p. 391]is no less active for nature.
Consider "corporate authority" և in the scientific literature on the concepts of "corporate legitimacy"two of the various definitions available.
It turns out that it is necessary to gain legitimacyAs for corporate authority, it's legitimacy is a generalized perception or assumption.that the actions of the organization are desirable, correct or acceptable within the framework of a socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs and definitions [8, p. 574].
Reputation is a collection of knowledge և feelings, which:have different interests in the firm և its actionssides [9, p. 418].
It is already clear from the above definitions that organizations, in the process of building authority, go backBy satisfying those public expectations and their actions, they become credible and legitimate over time.
  Short:In other words, the organization, gaining a positive reputation, at the same time gains a valuable resource called legitimacy.
  It is trueand the opposite assertion.
 However, it is pertinent to note that such assertions operate in the context of a democratic regime in which:One of the advantages is the adoption of universal values.
Moreover, in a democratic regime, there are competitive social relations within which organizationsThey develop and improve.
  Whereas in a non-democratic society one can speak rather of gaining legitimacy,about another attribution.
  Such legitimacy is "quasi-legitimacy."because organizations often deviate from the voiced or unvoiced rules in the performance of their functions, but with itAt the same time, they enjoy the tolerant attitude of the initial stakeholders.
  The reasons for the admission of these organizations are hidden in the shortcomings of macro systems, which ultimately find their expression in the submissive behavior of an ordinary citizen.
 Requirednote that along with the "quasi-legitimacy" of the organization canto have a negative reputation.
  Positive reputationThe option is also not excluded if the organization uses itmanipulative communication as well as voiced negativesanctions.
In the further wording of the article, corporate authority և legitimacy will be seen in the context of a democratic society.
And so the organization while maintaining a dominant cultureA stable line of acceptable behavior, principles, norms within the framework of which acquires a positive reputation over time.
  In other words:In case of a positive reputation, one can speak of the organizationabout expected behavior.
It should also be noted that the behavior of the organization canlargely in line with the rules of society, but sometimesmay deviate in part from them.
  One can assume that the organization, by deviating from the rules, can maintain or even increase its corporate reputation, if its social organizational behavior corresponds to the fundamental values ​​of the majority of society.
 In particular, reputable organizations are able to deviate from standard practices and continue to support their high status, legitimacy, as authority expands the scope of strategic management.
 In this case, we can say noabout other innovative organizations.
As for the differences between legitimacy and "authority", let us mention at least one. while legitimacy is social
perception, which is the result of regulatory, normative or cognitive norms and expectations, the authority of organizationsis a comparison based on a number of features that may include these same regulatory, normative, or cognitive dimensions [4, p. 332].
It turns out that the scope of corporate authority management, respectively corporate authority management, is wider,than corporate legitimacy and governance.
As for corporate reputation management, thenFor the organization itself, this new domain can be ignoredto have irreversible consequences because of the information societyWithin a short period of time, different stakeholders of any organization can be formeddifferent social perceptions, which will determine the givenThe process of further development of the object.
  Accordingly, the organizationReputation management should be viewed as an organizationa strategic issue for and develop in advanceaction plan for the construction of the latter, the life of whichThe title will allow bringing the current state of the organization's reputation closer to the desired one.
    Here it is appropriate to quote the judgment of Driscoll and Cromby that no organization can be respected,popular with all audiences, organizations then select and respond to the concerns of the most influential stakeholders [5, p. 445].
Famous in the field of public relationsOne of the experts, Kim Harrison, singled out the improvement of corporate reputation among the main stakeholdersThe following six steps are taken.
1. Conduct research aimed at better identifying baseline stakeholders.
2. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of stakeholders like himto focus on the inner essence and the perceptions of the stakeholdersexisting inconsistencies.
3. Examine your organization's reputationfactors and bring them in line with policies,systems և programs that are all functionaldimensions.
4. Develop plans to exceed stakeholder expectations.
5. Involve the CEO as a reputation program champion.
6. Regularly measure barriers to achieving goals and actto improve the results [6].
The entity responsible for managing corporate reputation during the construction of corporate reputationmust also be well-versed in corporate reputation managementThe following five principles are:1. Differential force. Firms occupy a different, special space in the views of stakeholders.
2. Focus. Firms emphasize the starting point,
3. Consistency. Firms are consistent in communicating with all stakeholders. 4. identity. Firms are considered by stakeholders as:
real,5. Transparency. Firms related to running their business
are seen as open and sincere [3, p. 8].
The main actions aimed at building the corporate reputation already observed within the article andAdherence to the principles will allow the organization to improve itselfreputation among the initial influential stakeholders.
BOOK: 1. Бурдье П. Sociology of policies.
  Per. с фр. / Сост., общ. OK. and predisl. Н. А.
Шматко ./- М ..
 Socio-Logos, 1993.-336 c. 2. Завершинский К. Ф. Legitimacy.
  genesis, housing and development concept //3. Burke, R., Martin, G. and Cooper, CL, (Eds.) (2011) Corporate reputation.
  managing:opportunities and threats. Series.
 Psychological and Behavioral Aspects of Risk. Ashgate:
Management Studies, Vol. 42, No.2.
 pp.329-360.good neighbor.
 The case of Nova Nada and JDI. Business & Society, 40 (4), 442-471.
Source: http.
//www.cuttingedgepr.com/articles/corprep_important.asp(Accessed.
John T. Jost, and Brenda Major, eds. The Psychology of Legitimacy.
 Emerging Perspectives:on Ideology, Justice, and Intergroup Relations. New York.
  Cambridge University Press,8. Suchman, Mark C. (1995). “Managing Legitimacy.
 Strategic and Institutional Approaches, ”Information about the author:Khachatryan Teresa Arthur - YSU Faculty of Sociology, Applied SociologyApplicant of the chair, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical University
Institute, Lecturer at the Chair of Political Science and Economics, E-mail:
