Impartial to current political, educational and cultural issuesThe coverage stems from the imperative of close Armenian-Georgian cooperation and restoration of friendship.
The aim of the present study is to resolve the "Armenian-Georgian wrinkle" with ethno-educational purposeful models, to prevent day by dayThe deepening crisis, the assimilation of the Armenians of Javakhk and the mass emigration.
  The various approaches to the issue mislead the international community and lead to the uncoordinated behavior of stakeholders.
Georgian historians with the infamous treaty of 387Based on the changes made, they claim that Gugark alwayswas part of the Kingdom of Kartli [7, 69].
It is indisputable that A. The testimony of Shirakatsi that although Gugark
It is now part of Virk, taken from Armenia [12, 297].
  Javakhk is greatIt was one of the 9 provinces of Gugark province of Hayk, and Gugark was the firstHe even joined Virk in 387 [7, 67].
In 1830, the Armenians of Erzurum and its environs en masseThey migrated to Javakhk.
Javakhk (part of it) in the 20s of the 20th century as:Ethno-territorial unit, to reunite Armenia or GeorgianOn the creation of one Armenian administrative unit in the USSR (Al.Bekzadyan, Al. Myasnikyan) the appeal was rejected by the Georgian state circles [7, 18 և 21].
According to Georgian historian Leonti Mrovel, before that Javakhkwas not deserted, St. Nino in AD In the 3rd century in Foga, on the shores of Lake Parvana,
He spoke Armenian with the pastors.
  Hence the country temporarilyThe fact of rejection of domination cannot serve as a basis for "one's own."area "to be considered.
Samtskhe-Javakheti occupies about 10% of the territory of Georgia, where more than half of the Armenians of Georgia live, and in Javakhk alone, which occupies 3.7% of Georgia, 94-95% of the population are Armenians [10.14, 14], it now makes 125 thousand Armenians (according to unofficial data - 145 thousand).
  Javakhk is not a Diaspora, the Armenians of Javakhkis a subnet that lives in its cradle on a historic site,therefore, due to the compulsion of national security, it becomes necessary 1 Javakhk Armenians are the Armenians living in Javakhk.
 The Georgian-Armenians ("Georgian-Armenians") are aliveThey are Armenians living in Georgia.
 The term "Georgian" is not a surname here.
to raise the issue of granting the status of autonomy within the administrative-territorial structure of Georgia.
  Otherwise, the Armenians of Javakhk will lose their ethnic identity in the near future, will integrate into Georgian culture under the pretext of creating a civil society.
  This process corresponds to the general logic of global trends, as self-isolation is impossible:by creating a self-sufficient system.
  All ethnic components are gradually merged into a single civic association, replacing ethnic identity with civic identity.
However, establishing an ethnic community in Georgia is difficult, especially for ethnic minorities.Among the "Armenians" of the Azerbaijanis, because their group political orientations and cultural demands are different.
  Besides that,The deliberate discrimination against the Armenians of Javakhk by the open, non-latent form of the radical ethnos cannot contribute to the formation of a national consciousness.
 Ernest Gellner is rightto mention "The satisfaction of some nations is the disappointment of others
marks ”[2: 10-11].
The Georgian side must take into account the historical ruthlessnesswith the truth ել to restrain the unfounded baseless ambitions towards the ancient Armenian territories.
  Gone are the days when:By spreading the language and changing the place-names, it is possible to Georgianize everything that is Armenian.
  Now with unofficial dataThere are 460 thousand Armenians in Georgia, and according to the officialabout 250 thousand sources, including 150 thousand in Tbilisi [13, 348].
In Georgia until 2002 were in second place
Armenians (437.2 thousand), and Russians (341.2 thousand) - the third [14, 13].
  Now:The rapid increase in the birth rate of Azerbaijanis has made this possibleThe ethno-religious group occupies the first place (6.5%) among the national minorities, and the Armenians the second (5.7%) [14, 13].
 2002 with data:
Up to 284.8 thousand Azeris live in Georgia, howeverthe latter are convinced that they are half a million և even more [9, 18].
Azeris live collectively in Kvemo-Kartliin the province, mainly in Marneuli, Gardabani, Bolnisi and Dmanisiin the regions.
 2002 According to the census, the population of that state
There were 497,530 people, of which 45.1% were Azeris, 44.7% were Georgians, and 6.4% were Armenians [6, 7].
  Announcements sound specialOn the creation of a movement aimed at separating KvemoCartle from Georgia, as a start to that process, the Azerbaijani language will be promotedthe issue of giving the status of a regional language.
If in Georgia Armenians are considered a national minority, then in homosexual Javakhk they are a national majority.
  Here:It was appropriate to quote OSCE High Commissioner Max van Der Stuldefinition. "… A minority is a group characterized by language,
ethnic or cultural characteristics such as:He is differentiated from the majority.
  Second, the minority is a group that usually seeks not only to preserve its originality, but also to express it vividly ”[3, 165].
As a result of ethnic discrimination, Javakhk is emptied of ArmeniansThe migration of a local radical nation becomes national securityproblem.
  Moreover, the Turkish-Azerbaijani element is being resettled. The issue of resettlement was with the Council of Europe
One of the preconditions for Georgia's membership.
  The resettlement of 400,000 Turkmen Meskhetians in the region is an intention to change the demographic situation of the Georgian authorities, which threatens interethnic-inter-religious relations.
At the beginning of the 20th century, multinational Georgia was self-defenseinstinctively set out to create a mono-ethnic nation-stateproject, which is a nationalist manifestation, to turn a multinational state into a violation of the rights of ethnic minoritiesmonoethnic, in other words, to assimilate the nation և state.
In international practice, a country is considered mono-ethnic, where 95% of the population is made up of one ethnic group (Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Albania, Malta, Jamaica, Yemen, Hungary).
 [17, 54]G.T. Tavadov considers that the nation-state is a state of ethnos (nation) formed on the basis of ethnic territory; it embodies the political independence and autonomy of the peoples.
 [16, 275]In societies with a mono-ethnic structure, more favorable conditions are created for democratization than in the case of ethnic heterogeneity.
  Ethnic conflicts in Georgia have led to the establishment of an authoritarian ethnocentrism, which is notmakes so-called multi-ethnic democracy easy,to what extent it is based on inter-group conflict.
  About thatEven international organizations, such as the US State Department and the Council of Europe Anti-Crisis Group, testify.
  In JavakhkThe educational and cultural sphere is endangered, they are closing at a fast paceArmenian schools, Armenian language classes are reduced, Georgian language is increased, the subject of "Armenian history" is banned,Toponyms are changed.
  It was accepted in Georgia in 2005Law on Public Education, according to which (Article 4.3): “Georgia"Citizens whose mother tongue is not Georgian have the right to receive a general education in their mother tongue," but the pan-Georgian education system is being prepared with fanaticism.to pass, which has already partially happened in practice.
 More:is imposed by the state in an area inhabited by more than 90% Armenianslanguage, accelerates the process of Georgianization of Armenians [11, 60.8, 142].
Candidates for Candidates for Teachers and Secondary School Principals in Georgian Languagetesting.
 It is argued that without knowledge of Georgian it is impossible to integrate into the Georgian state.
 Armenians do not neglect the stateThe language is Georgian, as all official documents are in GeorgianThey are in the language.
"Georgia" as a country in world cartographyIt is celebrated only in the 15th century.
  Before that they were mentioned in the region of GeorgiaColchis, Iberia և Mengrelia countries [1, 12].
  Armenians of other nationsequal participation with the Georgian stateto establishment and prosperity.
 The flourishing of the Armenian culture of the 5th centuryThe founder of the dynasty, Mesrop Mashtots, created the alphabet for the unfortunate Georgians.
  Armenians voted for Georgia's independencein favor of the Constitution guaranteeing the rights of national minorities.
1995 Admitted to national minorities in Strasbourg
Protection Convention (agreement), according to which the ethnic population living in a group in its historical territory has the right to at least linguistic and cultural independence, the cultural connection added to it with its mother state, although it is self-organizing.is not a viable model than the creation of a political unit.
International experience has shown that in countries where nationalMinorities make up 20%, they have the right to:to consider their mother tongue as a second regional language.
 20-30 of the world20% of national minorities living in countrieslanguages ​​have the status of regional languages.
 Spain:։ There are articles in the Italian constitutions that guarantee state support for the preservation and development of the languages ​​of national minorities.
  In Finland, the language of the Swedish minority (about 6%) is declared the state language [17, 50].
 This is uniqueThis is a phenomenon that is explained by historical motives, because in Finland at one time Swedish was considered an educational and cultural language.
Not only the provision of mother tongue educationpreservation of the general identity of the national minority andthe issue of language, but also the issue of language, the internal political stability of the countryis the guarantee of a democratic solution.
School graduates are given vouchers to study in Yerevanto continue, but the certificate is reserved only for students in Georgia.
 The state does not subsidize schools thatin which the number of students is less than 700-800.
In Javakhk, school communities are not only barred from participating in churches commemorating the victims of the Armenian Genocide, but also from the Georgian authorities.To this day, they have not recognized the Armenian Genocide for fear of worsening relations with Turkey.
After a long struggle, recently the Armenian Civil CodeHoly Apostolic Church 5 և 5 religious denominations in GeorgiaThey received legal status.
 [5]Armenian Apostolic Churches, Armenian buildings are not owned by the Armenian ethnos, they are GeorgianAccording to the laws, they are part of the Georgian Orthodox Church and the Georgian stateunder the auspices.
During the years of independence in Georgia, there were almost no Armenians among the oligarchs.
 Now the field of capital investments in the countryIt has become quite favorable for Armenian investors as well.
  Thus, in 2010 According to official data, 103 were re-registered in Georgia
Armenian company, հայ a union of Armenian businessmen was recently established[7,341].
The seeds of cooperation are also planted in the care of the Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Church in Georgiawith the structure.
"He is blocking Georgia's democratic process."The almost absence of Georgian-Armenians in governing the country.
  Georgian:The elite (elite) pushes the national minorities out of the system of government with a nationalist policy, creates a disproportion in the ruling elite.
 Now, according to unofficial data, the number of Armenians in the state system does not exceed 1-2%.
 This approach is explained as the state language of Armeniansignorance.
  Moreover, there are relatively few Armenian specialists in Georgiais paid.
Up to 67 Armenian NGOs are officially registered in Georgia, although in reality some of them are active.
  They:They have a national preservation function, mainly localat the expense of scarce means.
Georgia is integrating into the European Union and NATO.
  Georgia"South Ossetia has not only lost as a result of the conflict with Russia."Abkhazia, but was condemned to a long-term conflict zonestatus, which is a serious threat to Tbilisi's energy policy.
Georgia does not enter into diplomatic relations with the powers that recognize South Ossetia and Abkhaziaindependence.
Turkey's short-sighted strategic relations with Azerbaijan and Azerbaijan, a number of regional programs to be implemented with its active participation և The blockade of the Republic of Armenia is not in our interests.
The Armenian authorities are pursuing a balanced policy, as we are dependent on transit traffic from the neighboring country.
The traditional self-defense mechanisms of the Armenians of Javakhk do not have deep roots compared to the communities of the Diaspora.because living in one's own territory, near the mother country, is not enoughworries about the danger of assimilation.
Nevertheless, the demand for national self-determination of the Armenians of Javakhk (through a non-separatist program) is the result of the tough actions of the Georgian peopleeconomic exploitation, political pressure, national persecution,disenfranchisement, direct integration of the nation ծ assimilation.
It has been working on national minority issues in Georgia since 1997 with the aim of carrying out a planned missionOffice of the OSCE High Commissioner [3,115], which mainly:It deals with the solution of the problems related to the Armenians of Samtskhe-Javakhk region and the prevention of tension in that region.
Theories and methodological approaches to multicultural education have been developing rapidly in the West since the 1980s.
In countries where the demographic composition is multiethnic,Different educational models are offered.
Instead of the American "casting pot" strategy, the modern concept of "American salad" was introduced, in other words:A multilingual or bilingual (bilingual) education system was introduced, which:A model for overcoming interethnic conflicts is considered.
Bilingual content education in multiethnic societies allows to integrate into that society, preserving the national identity.
The foreign experience of bilingual education has 4 models, which:refer to the age limit for using a foreign language [18].
1. Radical (extremist) model. assumes from the first grade
Organizing education of students in non-native language.
2. Transitional language model. assumes gradual learning
Preparation for learning non-native language subjectsby increasing the number of teaching.
3. Advanced language learning model. assumes teaching all or a number of subjects in two mother tongues at the same time.
4. Linguistic survival model, according to which all subjects are taught in the mother tongue, and the foreign language is reserved as an auxiliaryrole.
The first two models are unacceptable because they leadthe loss of national identity.
 The last two models can be applied experimentally in some Diaspora communities where national education is endangered.
  It is advisable to use bilingualThe content type of education - the organization of the educational process in two languages.
Ethnic minorities according to their goalscan be classified into the following groups:1. The pluralist group seeks to preserve its ethnic identity, but actively participates in the activities of social institutions of society.
2. The assimilated (assimilated) group does not care about its ethnic identityabout storage.
3. The intolerant-fighting group is its own ethnic identitydrumming և strives for complete political independence.
4. A group participating in civic and social integration, which:seeks at least cultural independence or autonomy within the administrative territory of the state.
National cultural independence is specific to the Armenians of JavakhkBy legislative acts it allows to use its cultural value system, religious propaganda, to develop its language in public and official spheres, to study the Armenian history,To create national unions, to deepen cultural and scientific-educational ties with the Armenian communities and the motherland.
  A similar solution does not diminish the rights of other ethnic minorities.
The Armenian factor worries the Georgian society more and creates anti-Armenian moods.
Nevertheless, in the Armenian-Georgian relations in GeorgiaA new political cycle begins.
  Russian federal capitalflows to Georgia, which pursues a political goal of strengtheningcontrol over that country.
  That consensus is in his favor. "To the Republic of Armenia.
  The Georgian authorities have startedto ignore the complication of Armenia's relations with Azerbaijan, the restoration and development of Russian-Georgian relationsThey support the neighboring country, the Republic of Armenia.
The process of integration of minorities in a multiethnic society will proceed normally, without tension, if itis accompanied by the preservation of their cultural, linguistic and religious peculiarities, recognition of the diversity of the value system, ensuring active participation in public life;by the formation of an integrated multinational elite.
The ethno-political situation of the Armenians of Javakhk demandsDevelopment of a multicultural educational theoretical model that,Relying on international experience with great potential for national preservation, weakwill give at least cultural autonomy.
Literature 1. Galchian, Armenia in World Cartography, Yerevan,2005, 271 pages.
2. Gelner E., Nations երը nationalism, "Hayastan" Yerevan, 2003, 172 pages.
3. Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (History, Activities, Perspectives), A. Harutyunyan, Yerevan, "Antares", 2006, 300 pages.
4. Law, October 26-29, 2007.
5. Law, May 18-21, 2012.
6. Haykakan Zhamanak, daily, May 4, 2013, page 7.
7. The northern gates of Armenia. Javakhk, Lori, collection of materials, 8
(compiled by V. Sargsyan), Yerevan "Mitq", analytical center, 2012, 440 pages.
8. Public Administration, 2-3, "State Service", Yerevan, 2011, 183 pages.
9. Republican, RA Party, No. 1, 2008, 44 pages.
10. Voice of the Armenians of Georgia, "Unity of the Armenians of Georgia", NGO official newspaper, vol. 26,
February, 2007.
11. Minasyan S., Ethnic Minorities of Georgia, Yerevan, 2006,172 pages.
12. Shirakatsi A., Bibliography, Yerevan, 1979, 398 pages.
13. Vardanyan T., Armenian community of Tbilissi. New Challenges, Problems, Armenian Northern Gates, Javakhk, Lori, Materials
collection, 8, Yerevan, "Mitq", 2012, 440 pages.
14. Минасян с., Ьтнические меньшинства Грузија.
  Potential integrations of:all Republicans. http:
