Landscape geography of regional geographyis one of the directions that studies natural spatial complexes, landscapes, their interpretation.
  Landscape:Development of dynamics of interrelationships of unit propertiesRecognition of patterns is closely related to the natural environmentwith local features, so field (scientific expedition են) plays an important role in landscape research.stationary) methods.
Landscape laboratory labs areare one of the key components of a comprehensive student trainingone.
 During landscaping laboratory classes, the student works with a topographic map, and the skills to work with the latter, to use the information contained in it purposefully, is one of the most mandatory skills of a geographer, particularly a landscape scholar.
 Without it, it is impossible to engage in landscape mapping, especially landscapingby analyzing the relationship between the components.
The main purpose of this methodological article is to show the necessity of laboratory-practical work և to offer examples of laboratory work in parallel with the theoretical course on landscape science.
  Using the basics, students should be able to create their own landscapeprofiles, text, graphic, spreadsheet legend of maps,Large-scale landscape maps.
It is also a problem that has been reinforced by students in the pastknowledge gained during lectures, practical trainings և internships և achieve them horizontallyfree reading of the depicted relief.
Theoretical issues of landscaping are covered in the lecture of the course "Landscape", after which the student,regardless of his narrow specialization, he should be able to read not onlyGeneral geographical, other thematic maps: geological, geological, terrestrial, botanical, etc. [6].
 They shouldThey need to correctly explain the rich information of landscape maps.
Such knowledge is not an end in itself - their strengtheningis implemented with the features of natural territorial complexes (BAT)Against the background of analysis related to the lithological composition of the relief or the strength of surface sediments, hydrogeological conditions ևwith changes in surface flow regime.
  Same climate,Tectonic structure պայմաններում In the conditions of the same ancient geographical past on the small surface of a certain landscape mentioned aboveThe changes take place mainly in the soil cover, which in one way or another has its effect on the redistribution of moisture and heat.
  In fact, the tasksWhen doing so, the location must be marked in the BTC rowPatterns of change of natural features from the highest to the lowest grades.
In the practice of landscape research, they have to come across such works in the preparatory stage of field research, preliminarywhen compiling landscape maps, when topographic maps reveal the genealogical elements of complex natural spatial complexes or the types of habitats of plant communities.
During laboratory exercises, the following are performed:tasks [4]. 1. Marking of special borders on a cartographic basis, presenting the relief horizontally, drawing natural mapsdifferent types.
2. Preliminary landscape decoding of aerial photographs նախ Preliminary typological description of natural regional complexes.
3. Large-scale landscaping planning (viewing)in the marking of the list of points մ routes, development of landscape surveys on the given surface).
4. Analysis of geological structures of landscapes with landscape maps and aerial photographs.
  Methodology for studying landscapes of different types of morphological structuredefinition of features.
5. Compilation of a large-scale landscape map of a field complexAccording to the materials of studies, in the system of geological parts of landscapes, typology, composition of a legend.
6. Compilation of special և applied maps landscape mapbased on.
Because each of the exercises is large or smallincludes questions that need to be understood in the course of further topics, then students should pass the completed task on the eve of the next task.
At the beginning of the laboratory work, students are given excerpts from maps, on which the relief is marked horizontally (drawing area is about 4 cm2, scale is 1.
10,000, rarely 1.
25,000 or 1.
5000,Horizontal crossing at most every 1 m, sometimes2.5 ,5 0.5 m).
 They are needed!a. observational կոնկրետ specific to other manuals, educational exercises
Methodical instructions for species management, b. Large-scale topographic map for subsoil exploration
with points և results,c. edaphic network of plants,
d. Large-scale aerial photographs և space photographs.
When preparing for laboratory work, students are given a list of necessary literature.
The regional selection of maps for educational purposes should generally be done in such a way that the maps include a part of the landscape area where the students are doing an internship, or something similar.landscapes, for example, students of the Department of Geography of Gyumri Pedagogical Institute their landscaping practiceThey are held in the territory of Lake Arpi National Park (Akhuryan River)Gorshaberd gorge upstream, the shoreline of Lake Arpiև etc.), which is considered selected for laboratory workIt is a convenient area.
It is possible that the morphological structure of the landscape is relatively simple, with no more than 10-12 species of faeces.
  Such a choice allows students to make patternsto apply their first field experience knowledge during the analysis.
  In addition, this eliminates unnecessary technicalitiesdifficulties in making maps.
The observation points are made on the training maps, for which the full entrails are mentioned in the working legend.the name, that is, the genealogical name, its mechanicalcomposition և the soil that forms the subsoil.
  It should be noted that natural spatialIt is not by chance that many features of complexes are discoveredwith the characteristics of the subsoil, which in their structure անիշ featuresinclude a variety of natural processes and phenomena that act as subsoil factors.
Thus, to perform the task, there is some information on the relief (horizontal of the map), the lithological composition և strength և of the surface sediments (soil-forming rocks).characteristics in the legend), general lines of humidity և flow mode(map ություններով with soil type differences), soil type differences և their characteristics (which reflect the peculiarities of erosion, washing, activity of Greek processes) ևabout others.
Based on these basics, the student must performIndependent work to compile a series of plant habitats corresponding to existing ecotopes.
  For that we need information about forest, sub-forest, grass,on the main types of land cover, ecology,For example, the Gorshaberd site requires an aspen natural relic forest (about 57 ha), a post-forest, artificial forests on the left bank of the Akhuryan river valley (Crimea և common pine species), , information about Gharsi Tuftavard (etc.) [3].
    Vegetation is provided to help studentsSchematically generalized ecological series, forest typetables, literary sources.
To complete the idea of ​​what they look likeDifferent landforms are used on the site և on the mapModel guides, topographic maps  on the terrainImage sample albums, "topography" related to the subjectbooks, exact characteristics of the surface slope.
The laboratory work is carried out in the following order: compiling a map, developing a legend, analyzing the content, discovering the patterns of natural differentiation of landscape development processes, and compiling an explanation.
We present several laboratory works that can be carried out in the conditions of the Republic of Armenia.Laboratory work N 1:Topic - Compilation of a map of the lithogenic base of the landscape1. Based on the data of descriptive analysis կազմել Based on the data of geological research, compile a map of the lithogenic base of the landscape.
2. Create a legend of the landscape lithogenic base map.
3. Carry out the formation and development of the lithogenic basis of the landscapeAnalysis of modern structure.
Laboratory work N 2:Topic - Compilation of a land map of the educational area1. Lithogenic landscape map հիմ soil surveysBased on a land map.
2. Create a land map legend.
3. To identify the patterns of development of elementary land formation processes in the studied area.
Laboratory work N 3:Topic - Landscape map making1. To make a landscape map based on the lithogenic basis of the landscape և land map.
2. To compile a landscape text, graphic-table legend of the studied area.
3. Separate the patterns of natural differentiation of the educational experimental area.
Laboratory work N 4Topic: Landscape profile making1. In the training areathrough a landscape mapcompile the landscape profile.
2. Separate և record the patterns of natural differentiationin terms of landscape profile.
Laboratory work N 5:Topic - Compilation of a landscape map of "Gorshaberd" sanctuary    to increase environmental efficiency recreationalfor embezzlement purposes1. Take aerial photographs of the area of ​​"Gorshaberd" sanctuary (M.1.
10000-1.
25000) decoding [5] և compiling a landscape map anda legend.
2. Separate the orthological structure of the landscapefeatures.
3. Conduct an environmental քի in the area of ​​"Gorshaberd" sanctuarythe ecological landscape basis of recreational activities.
At the end of all the laboratory work, the student must composereport.
Conclusion. These laboratory papers are presented first
even with the relevant methodological guidelines suggested in the article, are applicable to students majoring in geography at higher education institutions;In the process of organizing practical, meaningful, purposeful laboratory work within the framework of the subject "landscape science".
  These laboratory papers will enable students to develop their theoretical knowledgePractices of practical application, development of cartographic skills նպատակ application, targeted implementation of field practices.
Literature 1. Gabrielyan H. K. - The landscape layer of the Earth, Yerevan, YSU hr.
2000, 182 pages.
2. Poghosyan D. A., Khoyetsyan A. V. - Landscapes of the Armenian Highland
իկա Physico-geographical regions, Yerevan, 2008, YSU Sq. 230 pages.
3. Martirosyan L. Մ. - Biodiversity of "Gorshaberd" sanctuary
քանի On some issues of its protection - GSPI Public. scientist
Materials of the session, Gyumri, 2011, pp. 148-151.
Information about the author: Gayane Roules Avetisyan - work scientist candidate, Gyumri M. State after Nalbandyan
Pedagogical Institute, Assistant, E-mail.
