The world history of governance distinguishes two leading models: American-Japanese.
 Each countrybuilding a governance model presupposes the customs of a given nation, compliance with values ​​and mentality.
 To date, studies have confirmed the management of Armenian enterprisesinclination towards the individual American model.
  HoweverModern research has suggested its useIncompleteness of efficiency and the need to record elements of collective management.
  Basis for these assumptionswere our compatriots S. Harutyunyan և N. The results of Khachatryan's "Intercultural Study of Cultural Values ​​Orientations of Armenians", according to which Schwartz
Armenia is on the map of cultural territories offeredAmong the "cultural territories of South Asia" of Eastern Europe.
Intercultural analysis showed that the supremacy of belonging values ​​to autonomy is characteristic of Armeniavalues, which can be used to build a management modelfor registration [2, pp. 80-83].
 How is each person's "I" more?becomes noticeable in social situations, and the real picture of each nation can be more pronouncedto see in the social environments of other nations.
 Living for many yearsIn all parts of the world, Armenians have expressed their national identitytypical psychological features.
  In each country,wherever an Armenian lives, builds and builds schools, churches,which testify not only to the preservation of the national image, but also to the path of self-affirmation and self-realization.about the creation of the spirit, և all that the Armenian national potential moreIt is to feel close.
 Regardless of the success of effectively combining management models, management is considered a key issuethe exact placement of the national image in the motivational template.
 If the individualistic nature of the American model and the public nature of the Japanese model stem from the originality of the processes of nationalization and national preservation of the latter, then we are acceptable to both of them.harmonious combination.
  Seeking individual investment separationand evaluation, at the same time we are aimed at the need to create a group spirit around us.
  This completes the human essencereferred to the qualities of E. Fromm in his ontological claims to "establish connections" և "to roots", according to which:
People need to feel an integral part of their worldat the same time separating and preserving their individuality[12]
  An effective governance model can be built onPrinciples of individual appreciation and respect for human natureat the same time accounting for the exact psychological balance of the need to be close to his peers, to be constantly compared to them.
Analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of the American-Japanese governance models, one can single out the following principles and provisions of governance that are most preferable to our national characteristics.1. The preference for a voiced American governance structure is nofrom the Japanese, by reducing a large number of American levels of government, which will make individual levels of government more manageable և moreto conduct monthly reports quickly and efficiently.
2. The American model prefers individual responsibilityJapanese collective responsibility will enable each employee to measure their contribution to pay more attention to their activities.
3. Instead of individual management decisions, the joint discussion of issues with employees contributes, firstly, to the fact that employees skilled in the given work process can offer more optimal solutions, and secondly, to feel their significance and usefulness;own contribution and responsibility in decision making.
  A combination of options discussed jointly by the supervisorMaking a final decision will allow you to choose the solution to the problemfor a more inclusive և multifaceted reasoned version.
4. As a means of personal control of management, we believe:will be true of the quality խմբի time spent on the groupDaily, monthly and annual individual reports of individual members, and based on six-month reportsուս group encouragement will help to compare group members ևDefining group control in a competitive environmenteffective combination of individual and group controls.
5. Clearly voiced control procedures by managementcombination with non-voiced group control procedures.
  Clearly recorded control procedures allow the employee to perform a continuous performance appraisal as definedstandards, and the performance of all employeesConstant awareness helps management to provide timely feedback.
  Non-voice control is performed in group activities when:Each individual influences and interactsby others.
6. Rapid evaluation of work results ապահով Providing feedback on the basis of relevant reports at the expense of individual efficiency քանակ Number of specializations.
7. Selection of the leader according to the number of different specializations կ flexiblemastery of qualities.
 Three to five within the same enterpriseonce a year to employees in one specialized jobgroup transfer to another job - Japanese individualInstead of relocation, it will allow all employees to become proficient in several specialties, and the analysis of employees ամս monthly և annual reports will help to see the higher scores of each of them in different specialties, which will allow them to orient themselves.in the matter of the manager's preference for management.
  As a result, the more real: the employee will become more visibledeveloped abilities and potential opportunities:Deployment in the required area, which is a two-way streetHas the acquisition of a flexible, well-developed employee from the point of view of management, in addition, the employee will have the opportunity not only to test his strength in various fields,but training and self-efficacy within the enterprisea clear preference for the field.
  You need to choose a leader by:years of work activity analysis և differentspecializations.
  A person skilled in various specialties,In case of quality control և management will be able to offer more flexible means to employees, take into account the specifics of the production process when making decisionsand be a role model for each employee.
8. Individual և group orientation combined managementPrefer style where monthly and annual reportsare aimed at the normalized, standardized measurement of individual productivity of employees, shortcomings and investments by the management and, according to the data, the salaryEnsuring a flexible system, incentive mechanism և service growth.
  Every three to five years, the relocation of the working group from one place to another facilitates the rapid adaptation and speed of training of employees transferred due to competition, group facilitation, competition, and the publication of six-month group reports.allows individual competition to be combined with group competition, which will contribute to the double promotion of employees.
9. Orientation of managers towards achieving individual results in group template.
 Employee group work and:transfers are aimed at making employees feel close to each other,group facilitation, employee comparisons, competition, and rapid adaptation, but eachAn employee should be evaluated for his or her contribution and productivity, so the team is needed to create a positive work environment, and management is focused on increasing employee productivity and activity within that field.
10. Accurate combination of formal and informal management relations with subordinates.
 The official relations of the management will allow maintaining the organization of production activities according to the established standards, the activities of the employees tending to abuse the friendly approach.Clear և regulated implementation, strengthening of an objective attitude towards all employees.
  Employees with the development of the manager's perceptual abilitiesInformal relations with them will allow the formation of mutually trusting relations, the identification of labor problems in order to provide timely solutions.
 The success of formal և informal relationships comes from the flexible, well-developed qualities of the leader և allowsto avoid the shortcomings of the separate application of formal-informal relations, ignoring neither the individuality of the employee nor the seriousness of the perception of productive activity.
11. Service a conditioned by the individual efficiency of the employees քանակ the number of different specializations Ճ.
  Monthly:որոշում Determination of individual productivity according to annual reports և According to the number of specializations - salaryaddition.
12. According to in-house training every three to five yearsdifference in the Japanese model of employee individual mobility for the purpose of specialization, group of employeesportability to another specialized department of the enterprise is weakwill help employees to avoid indifference and frustration due to many years of work in one profession, will help to recognize and evaluate the real capabilities of employees, and instead of individual, group mobility of employees will helpto adapt more quickly to the working peculiarities of the new specialized department through group facilitation և to carry out professional training faster.
13. Ensuring continuous training of employees through group shifts within the enterprise will promote the enterpriseto increase their commitment to them, and the flexible salary system to encourage them to work to their full potential.
14. The preference for Japanese hierarchical governance over US general governance will allow the leadership to establish effective oversight and ensure constant awareness of all departments.
 The preference for a hierarchical nature of governance stems from the peculiarities of our national family model.
The successful implementation of any enterprise management model is largely due to the effectiveness of the use of means and mechanisms of impact on human resources.
 The integrity of the governance model is determined by the comprehensiveness of the human being.
  Taking into account the dynamics and constant variability of the motivational sphere of human nature, it is necessary to create a multi-layered and flexible motivation system, which will enable the maintenance of a stable motivational field in the presence of constant variables of the external environment.
BOOK: 1. Ա. Markosyan, D. Hakhverdyan, Corporate Governance. Expectations և:
reality.
 Yerevan, Tigran the Great, 2003. - 416 pages.
2. Ն. Գ. Khachatryan, S. Ն. Harutyunyan, Intercultural Study of Cultural Values ​​Orientations of Armenians / Current Issues of Theoretical-Applied Psychology.
  Materials of the international conference.
Yerevan, "Edit Print" publishing house, 2011, pp. 80-83.
3. Воловой Д. В. History of management.
 Учебное пособие, ИНФРА - М., 1997. - 256с. 4. Geronik N. Япония.
 что такое побизненний найм. // Союз. 1990 N 17. С. 10.
English - M.
 ,Кономика, 1991. - 319 с. 6. Kochetkov G. B., Supyan V. B. American Model Corporation. SPB.
 Peter, 2005. 320 p.7. Levin K. Dynamic psychology. Selected works. M.
 Смысл. 2001. - 246 p.
8. Morito Akio. Made in Japan. M.
 Progress, 1993. -300 s.12. Fromm E .. The anatomy of human destructiveness. New York.
 Holt, Rinehart and Winston.Information about the author:Yeghiazaryan Satenik Emini - Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, Lecturer of the Chair of Psychology, E-mail.
