One of the main goals of the educational process of any nature is to create such mental states in students, which will ensure the formation of new "sustainable qualities" and their application in various fields.
  Hovhannes Hindlyan, an Armenian pedagogue, once thought that education would be a way for children to graduate from school not only armed with the necessary knowledge, but also morally, physically and aesthetically mature, and for that the school should be brought closer to life. "Keep up with life, realize that a nation is worth as much as its school, and the task of that school is to make the student human."
1 The basis of the effectiveness of teaching methods is the active involvement of the learner in the educational activity, when the latter gets the opportunity to express his / her point of view, to defend, debate or supplement with new judgments.
  Perception of information is an active process, when it combines emotional impressions and visual perceptions from the external environment, the learner shows a more active interest in participating in person, supplementing the knowledge gained through group activities.
  Armenian pedagogue Minasyan wrote. "The purpose of education is not only to give the child acquaintances, knowledge, but also to put them in such a state that the child can use them properly.
 It is necessary for every idea to be acquaintance, strength. ”
2 In this regard, visits to museums are not only a display of values, but also an exchange of emotional impressions from the display.
  In the field of museums, science and art have one goal, that is, to help a person to understand the connection between the phenomena of knowledge, to direct him to a comprehensive cognitive activity.
  In this respect, the teaching of the writer's biography in his house-museum contributes to the realization of the student goal of the class.
The state education system of the Republic of Armenia poses new problems to pedagogy, particularly the teaching of literature in the Armenian language, and the need to develop new approaches to solve them.
  The most important of these approaches are the requirements for the content of education, the implementation of which will ensure the unity of different fields of education, the acquisition of sound knowledge, the development of learners' skills, the development of a value system, the discovery of creative abilities.
 Teaching Armenian literature in high school, on the one hand, greatly contributes to the acquisition and practical application of language knowledge, on the other hand, becomes an irreplaceable factor in the comprehensive upbringing of an individual.
 One of the conceptual goals of the teaching of Armenian literature is the mental and intellectual development of the individual, for the realization of which it is necessary to make the students aware of the caring heritage of the Armenian people, national and universal ideals and aspirations.
  All this can be done not only by introducing students to purely literary phenomena, but also by educating literary heroes, why not him, by the example of our greats, authors - the spirit of humanity, high moral qualities - patriotism, patriotism, honor, kindness, moral qualities of a full and harmonious person. .
In particular, we can say that the teaching of Armenian literature in high school is carried out as a course for the study of the history of Armenian literature, the main content of which can be considered the study of the development of Armenian literature, the writer և period relations, literary directions և schools.
The realization of one of the conceptual provisions, the unique role and significance of the writer in literature, prompted us to reflect on the unique personality of Khachatur Abovyan in the history of the caring culture of the Armenian people, about whom Av. Isahakyan wrote. "He, Abovyan, is the greatest martyr of our new history, decorated with an immortal crown of light.
 He is our new myth, the new national myth, he is our new Mherne, liberated, unchained. "
3 Kh. Abovyan is an encyclopedist in all respects, the discovery of his image is a precondition for teaching his immortal work.
  Therefore, in order to organize the complex and difficult process of detailed interpretation of the literary-enlightenment activity of Abovyan's life, it is necessary to use all the opportunities available today, widely using all the media - Internet, manuals, documentaries, textbooks, etc.
Let us add that today the lessons that ensure the learner's independent educational activity become more interesting with his direct-active participation in the process of acquiring knowledge, when the student has the opportunity to watch, listen, feel and perceive.
  And when during the mastering of the material the student gets an opportunity to bring together, to summarize, to strengthen what he has seen and heard, an environment of self-education is created, a striving for self-improvement is formed.
To implement all this, we offer, as an alternative way of organizing training, Kh. To organize the teaching of Abovyan biography in his house-museum.
  Such a lesson gives an opportunity to study all the circumstances of Abovyan's biography.
  As a result, this teaching egg, which differs from the traditional lesson, becomes meaningful, interesting and impressive, which in turn contributes to the formation of the student goal.
Taking advantage of the students' independent research abilities, the teacher instructs the students to study the literature on the topic beforehand before the visit (A. Bakunts "Khachatur Abovyan" novel, E. Charents "Depilar Masis" poem, textbook, Ashot Melkonyan "Arar Hayotsutyan" book և film, internet և etc.).
In the process of teaching students, the teacher, as a primary goal, should use the following tasks: Kh. Extensive knowledge about Abovyan's life and patriotic activity, as well as the characterization of him as the leading thinker, teacher, skilled pedagogue, writer, pedagogue of "History of Tigran", "Pre-school education" and "Children's Draw" works.
  The preparatory work is followed by an educational-cognitive excursion to the writer's birthplace, Kanaker.
The latter, with its rich centuries-old past, majestic and beautiful landscapes, attracts the students' attention with the majesty of St. Hakob և Astvatsatsin churches, intertwining cognitive skills with subtle, deep emotional perceptions.
On the teacher's instruction, one of the students reads the words of Abovyan dedicated to Zangi. "Call, call, sweeten my call. In your fierce, indomitable front, they fired a huge brave fight.
  Zangi, the chosen youth of the Haigazian dynasty, you have seen a terrible… ".
4 The patriotic spirit of the writer was born from the very generous love that originates from his native place of birth, then completes to Armenia.
 The inspiration of this love is breathed when the children enter the writer's grandfather, Fr. The pleasant family house built by Apov, where Khachatur Abovyan spent his nine years of childhood.
  This house accurately represents the patriarchal Armenian family with its way of life, customs, color, completing the image perception of Abovyan's ancestors as the elders of the Ararat world.
It must be assumed that as a result of what is seen, the cognitive field is formed in the students, which is very important for the multifaceted perception of the material, for the strengthening of knowledge.
  Then the children's initial impressions are supplemented by the comments of the museum employee, which are rich historical evidences about the period, as well as the legends related to the origin of the Kanaker settlement and its name.
  The students are deeply interested in the references related to the explanation of the name of the ancient settlement, as well as the explanations given by Abovyan, which the students have the opportunity to hear on the spot (they keep what they see and hear in the form of short notes in the notebook).
Education is a social process that leads to the goal-dependent interdependence of the individual towards intra-group "dynamic wholeness", leading to the realization of the common goal.
  In this respect, what can be learned with the help of an adult or a peer is several times greater than the possibilities of learning alone.
  Communication is a high and irreplaceable snow of human mental development.
  As a result, an interactive environment is created, when students individually or in groups express what they know, compare facts, make generalizations.
 Still German pedagogue I. Herbert noted. "Feelings arise from thoughts, and from them - principles-actions."
5 Thanks to the lesson held in the museum, students get an opportunity to understand the complex, contradictory events in the Transcaucasia in the 19th century, particularly in Armenia, the policy pursued by powerful tsarist Russia, and then the conclusions that played a decisive role for both the Armenian people and its prominent children. In the life of Abovyan.
  After all, Abovyan was in the vortex of that difficult and controversial period.
It would not be wrong to say that one of the requirements for the content of teaching literature is the creation of an interdisciplinary connection, which is one of the preconditions for the realization of the common educational goal.
 And the maps presenting the rich and content-historical events in the museum, the artists, as an educational material, bring the presentation of the material to the final goal, ensuring the connection between history and literature, which contributes to the complete mastering of the material.
  G. Khanjyan, A., who was in the museum. Parsamyan, E. Isabekyan "F. Parrot "," F. Parrot "Khachatur Abovyan on the heights of Ararat", "Nerses Ashtaraketsi", G. Bashinjaghyan's paintings "Apovents Tun winter" leave an unforgettable impression on children.
  And the portrait created by the famous painter Ludwig von Maidel, which is the only portrait of Abovyan, like the great Schiller, Rousseau, F. Parrot's portraits are an indispensable tool for teaching a writer's biography, providing students with direct contact with art.
And when the presentation of the facts of the writer's biography is paralleled - the teaching of his moral qualities, an environment of empathy is created, when the learner feels the writer's inner world, feelings, his goals and ideas become clear to him.
  Finally, the student is even more interested in what happened in Abovyanikyan, especially those students who are usually inattentive during classes or do not want to participate in classes.
In our opinion, due to the lesson organized in Abovyan House-Museum, the topic is fully presented and mastered, as the teaching technologies are characterized by the planned results, when the teacher is obliged to provide the students with planned indicators of the content of the educational material, such as the writing period, important historical events. , material evidence of the writer կյանքի's life և activity, then the learners as a result of cognitive activity receive combined knowledge material, due to which they first understand the capacious material, then they are able to apply what they have learned at that moment under certain conditions.
 In this case, the learners can apply all this in the next lesson, during the teaching of the topic "Circumstances of the creation of the novel" Wound of Armenia "in Abovyan".
The teaching of Abovyan's biography in the writer's house-museum is valued by the fact that school tours and excursions are of great importance from the point of view of both physical and mental upbringing.
  In his time, the great enlightener Abovyan himself gave a great place to school excursions in pedagogy, substantiating their educational role.
According to Abovyan, the precondition for effective և intelligent learning is "visibility, simplicity ությունը justification in teaching ... The transition from the known to the unknown, from practice to theory, from the spiritual world to the abstract ... comparing the unknown with the familiar, understanding, often repeating what we go through ... the relevance of educational subjects to adolescence և understandings ... ”.
6 Literature 1. Simonyan R. Essays on the history of the Armenian school և pedagogical thought.
 Yerevan, Yerevan University Press, 2003, pp. 200, 29.
2. Minasyan B. Fundamentals of Pedagogy, Tabriz, 1931, pp. 24, 27.
3. Isahakyan A. S., Collection of poems, volume 5, Yerevan, 1977, 434 pages.
4. Abovyan Kh. A., Wounds of Armenia. Lament of the patriot, Yerevan State University, Yerevan, 1959,222 pages.
6. Abovyan archive, c N 31.
7. Armenian Language and Literature, No. 5-6 (61), National Institute of Education, 2009, pp. 39-44 (D. Gasparyan), 50-52 (N. Toghanyan).
Information about the author Gayane Razmik Gorgyan - Shirak region, "Benjamin Secondary School" SNCO, teacher of Armenian language and literature, E-mail.
