The public demand for the formation of the "geopolitics" system in our republic is more than obvious.
  However, we consider the need to develop this intellectual direction not only from a worldview-scientific, but also from a practical-scientific-practical point of view.
  That is, the public demand for the scientific circles of our society is conditioned not only by the capacity of academic, but also by practical research.
 It is obvious that at first glance our judgments may not be accepted unequivocally, as it is impossible to imagine a geopolitical country in the world, 78th in terms of population, 134th in terms of population, 125th in terms of GDP, 84th in terms of population. Ability to participate in processes independently.
However, we consider it necessary to emphasize that we consider "geopolitics" as a discipline that scientifically substantiates the geopolitical potential of states against the background of regional-global geopolitical processes (geopolitical challenges) arising from the nature of the modern geopolitical structure of the planet.
  In this context, the Armenian statehood acquires a special significance, which we consider the main actor for the expression of national geopolitical ideas, the only precondition, a possible plane of activity of other sectors.
In the professional literature on geopolitics, "actors" are defined as the totality of all people և structures that develop spatial-temporal conceptions of local, regional-global spaces; .
It is also obvious that certain factors in a given area interact with other actors.
 And that interaction can be both cooperative and contradictory.
Geopolitical actors, both at the scientific level and at the practical level, are anchored in the territorial (territorial) notions, which are the possible "grounded elements" of their political behavior.
  Accordingly, hepoliticians make a distinction between the geopolitical perceptions of the leaders of the society, the "geopolitical formulas" that are aimed at influencing the consciousness of the members of the society.
  In other words, these formulas are simplified denied expressions of geopolitical notions that can affect the public consciousness.
The political behavior of geopolitical actors directly depends on the territorial features, the registration of which is a direct necessity in describing the actors.
Geopolitical actors are distinguished not only by their spatial peculiarities, but also by the unique nature of their relations in space.
As a result of all this, each geopolitical sector historically defines its own sphere of activity - the social layer that will be the social pillar.
  That is, the actors are a unique tool of social control through their spatial activities.
Many geopolitical actors circulating in the professional literature are mainly classified according to the following principles: • Classical or traditional geopolitical actors, attributed to state, army, church, • New geopolitical actors, including political parties, non-governmental organizations, military groups, economic structures, public relations and ways, • Modern geopolitical actors.
  This group is attributed to organizations and individual groups that express certain geopolitical projects on the basis of national (nationalist) or religious ideology.
Before discussing the actors of Armenian geopolitics, let us note that the novelty and complexity of the research problem do not allow us to fully include in our point of view all possible objects and subjects that can condition the content of Armenian geopolitics.
 Moreover, it is not possible to exhaust the consideration of all the factors that determine the dynamics of a complex system integrated with natural processes within one research.
  Therefore, we consider the actors we have singled out to be a priority only in the spatio-temporal sense.
Based on the scientific-methodological peculiarities of geographical research, we have conditionally included the actors of Armenian geopolitics in the following groups: 1. Armenian state.
 We consider it separately from the other actors ն Primarily, as we consider the Armenian state to be the only precondition for the expression of national geopolitical ideas, the main object-subject of geopolitical processes, a possible sphere of activity of other actors.
2. Actors determining the Armenian geopolitical potential.
In this group we include two mutually agreed but relatively independent dimensions: potential social և natural components.
We use the standard of living of the society for the social component, because in order to express and make the wishes of geopolitical ideas a reality, a certain level of material and careful satisfaction is necessary.
For the natural component of the geopolitical potential, we consider the geopolitical demand of the state territory to be primary, and the factors of drinking water from the natural resource potential.
3. Classic actors of Armenian geopolitics.
The Armenian army, the Armenian Diaspora and the Armenian Church should be considered in this group of actors.
 The latter two, endowed with relative independence, have emerged in separate historical regions as the main (sometimes even the only) link for the expression of national geopolitical ideas, however, today, in the conditions of the existence of the Armenian state, they become integral parts of the whole.
 Let us especially emphasize the fact that the new situation of the above-mentioned actors in the sphere of realization of national geopolitical ideas does not reduce, but re-interprets the significance of the latter.
 The Armenian Diaspora եղ Church becomes important (but not independent or the only) actors in ensuring the viability of Armenian geopolitics.
As for the Armenian army, its strength in terms of state security and geopolitical independence cannot be overestimated.
Such a logic of classification makes the observation of the Armenian statehood as the main և the only precondition for the expression of national geopolitical ideas a priority.
Let us emphasize that the state is the main category of geopolitics.
  From the geopolitical point of view, the state is distinguished by three important functions: structure, legitimate authority, territory.
  That is, the states are the "main subjects" of the geopolitical processes, the main objects.
We do not consider it superfluous to note that the Armenian nation has been deprived of statehood for centuries, and consequently it has been deprived of the real opportunity to realize national-geopolitical ideas.
  Due to the lack of statehood, the responsibility for expressing these ideas, with very limited opportunities, was taken over by various entities: the church, Diaspora organizations, separate social strata (businessmen, intellectuals) and individuals.
In the case of the Armenian republics formed in the 20th century, these entities continue to maintain their relatively independent behavior in the field of geopolitical processes.
Often the independent behavior of the above-mentioned subjects contradicts the implementation of general programs, thus reducing our overall potential to influence and even adapt to geopolitical processes.
  All this was especially evident during the existence of post-Soviet independent Armenia.
Although, due to the Artsakh conflict, in the first years of independence, the activities of the actors in the field of realization of national geopolitical ideas coincided, nevertheless, the following years revealed changes in the development of the problem.
  In particular, the realization of a common goal, the victorious outcome of the Artsakh war, raised the issue of clarifying priorities in national geopolitical perceptions.
  The Republic of Armenia, which was objectively assigned the main role in the realization of national geopolitical goals, gradually ceded its functions to other actors.
Moreover, the Armenian Diaspora received the main function of influencing regional and global geopolitical processes.
  In this case, the main scope of generalization of the geopolitical ideas of the Armenian state and the Armenian Diaspora was defined as the international pursuit of the Armenian Cause.
  This issue was to some extent subordinated to another issue of vital importance for Armenia - the final settlement of the Artsakh conflict.
In such a sub-category of national geopolitical notions, the strengthening of the Republic of Armenia was pushed into the background.
This issue was considered a possible, but not the only precondition for ensuring the realization of national goals in geopolitical, geoeconomic, geocultural domains.
 It has been proved many times in the world practice that the efficiency of the realization of geopolitical ideas in the case of any ethnocultural unit directly depends on the power of the state.
 Even in the defeated countries (Israel, South Korea) (Israel, South Korea), the strengthening of the state and raising the living standards of the society were considered the only preconditions to ensure their geopolitical independence and influence in the geopolitical structure of the planet.
Let us emphasize one possible circumstance. The Republic of Armenia stands out with a high index of national homogeneity.
  Therefore, groups of national minorities representing a certain segment of society can not hinder the expression and realization of national geopolitical ideas.
  Moreover, this circumstance gives additional advantages to the "Republic of Armenia" geopolitical subject to avoid the constantly developing geopolitical processes in the region on a national background.
Thus, the fact is obvious that the only precondition for the realization of the geopolitical aspirations of the Armenian nation is the existence of the Armenian powerful statehood, at least for the time being, in the historical homeland.
  The Republic of Armenia should not act as a separate link in the chain of Armenian geopolitical actors, but as the only sphere of activity of those links.
 Therefore, the main component of the resolution expressing national geopolitical ideas is the Powerful State. Where: A - Armenian geopolitics, P - Armenian statehood.
This resolution confirms the fact that in general the content of national geopolitical ideas is a function of the degree of power of the Armenian statehood.
 In other words, only a powerful Armenia at all levels of the world geopolitical structure can formulate the aspirations of national geopolitics.
Thus, Armenian geopolitics, considering it as a means of claiming the real place and role of the Armenian type in the modern world, presupposes the provision of a corresponding consciousness, the core of which should be the provision of a unique program of geopolitical education of the nation, because, as K. Hausofer, The problem of limiting the space available for the full-fledged vital activity of each nation must be realized by every stratum of society, every individual. ”
In our case, the creation of a united Armenia will be possible only if every citizen of the Republic of Armenia perceives it not only as a desire for moral victory, but also the only justified opportunity to expand its living space.
REFERENCES 1. A. H. Nersisyan, "The need to reveal the Armenian civilizational originality as a precondition for geopolitical independence", GSPI, Materials of the Republican Scientific Session, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 538-540.
2. A. H. Nersisyan "The scientific content of geopolitics.
  The place in the system of classification of sciences ", VSPI, scientific materials, volume B, Vanadzor 2011, pp. 170-179.
3. A. H. Valesyan, L. H. Valesyan "Political Geography" Yerevan, Yerevan University Press, 2005, 339 pages.
4. В. В. Желтов, М. В. Zheltov Geopolitics.
  "History and theory". Moscow 2009
, Изд.
 Vuzovski textbook.
 INFRA-M, s. 455.5. Нартов Н. A., Geopolitics, ed.
 - M.
 ЮNITI-DANA, Edinstvo, 2004, 544 p.Global Prosperity. - New York.
 Harper Business, 2003, 396 p. Information about the author Armen Hovhannes Nersisyan - geographical scientist. Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, Lecturer of the Chair of Geography, Armenian State Pedagogical University, Socio-Economic Geography, Lecturer of the Chair of ADM, E-mail.
