Rumors are an integral part of the informal communication structure of society.
  Rumors are of unknown origin, insufficiently verified data in the process of interpersonal communication.
The study of rumor psychology can be done for two reasons.
  First, rumors are a powerful means of "public expression of public opinion"; second, they are one of the most effective means of influencing mass behavior.
Rumors are usually unreliable information or a distorted way of transmitting any information, spread exclusively by word of mouth, as if it were secret news.
If we think about what rumors can be about, we will find that everything.
  Thematically, they occupy the whole potential world of human society. they are the most mature.
 Of course, rumors have their hierarchy, "region", their sensitivity index.
Let us emphasize that rumors are always distorted, not completely reliable, completely unreliable, at least, unverified information.
 Ordinary rumor is, first of all, a "shadow" world, a unique "market" of information.
    The "value" of a rumor is that it is indebted, unofficial, passed on to "one's own", meaning it is about "strangers".
  In other words, they are news about all the interesting strangers (or seemingly strangers).
 Thus, rumors play a unique role in the realization of the "stratification" of the society. The world is easily and steadily divided into "own" and "foreign".
Ջ. Terner proposed the theory of social identification.
 It is located there. a) we divide people into groups (categories), this is convenient, tagging people is the shortest way to know more about them, b) we establish our identity, we associate ourselves with a certain group by calling it a group; c) we compare ourselves with others, we oppose our group to a foreign group - people outside our group.
  The feeling that "we are together" strengthens our Self-composition.
 This is a favorable feeling.
 We have respect for ourselves ենք we are proud of our group.
According to the mass consciousness, strangers are those who are high either in the social plan (government, leadership), or in the culture ("stars", aliens), so the world of rumors is a hierarchy, reflected on the screen of "equalizing" consciousness.
  However, it is possible to bypass the hierarchy.
 By spreading rumors, a person gets subconscious lightness from the way the listener reacts to the program with surprise, fear, pride, satisfaction.
  To enhance the impression, the information is often "creatively" enriched with unpleasant details.
 This mechanism is especially strong among people who are not satisfied with their social and psychological status and have not found a worthy place in life.
 Here I consider it necessary to refer to the notion of "our place".
The division of one's own and strangers has bases of archetypal thinking.
  Finding our place can be understood literally as "in space", or in other words, our "place in life" as an aspiration to acquire some "meaning".
  O. Genisaretski notes that the orchard space is meaningful. The top and the bottom are sacred, the sky is not only something above, but it is the house of God, the bottom is not only something below, but the world of the dead.
These appointments have penetrated deep into our modern consciousness.
  Concepts such as "concentration" (thought), "survival", "attribution", "influence", "close", "insight", "environment", etc., are clearly spatial, embodying traces of the archaic meaning of space. .
  In this sense, "one's own place" or "someone else's place" are deeply symbolic and can be understood as archetypes.
 [1] In order for rumors to spread, generalized judgments or rumors that go beyond "own" must be empowered by other groups to obtain "symbolic" measurements.
 It is necessary for the rumors to acquire stylization and necessary generality during the elaboration of the intergroup choice.
  This may not be a common denominator of categories։ science procedures, legal norms, or other results of world rationalization.
 According to the internal structure, this is a "racial", "natural" universality.
  In the social sense, this corresponds to the general level in the social life structure, where the differentiations end.
There are such non-partisan-collectivist dimensions as the people, the nation, "all as one."
The issue of the speed of rumors is interesting.
  The speed of rumors is quite high.
 Consequently, they usually have a "priority" effect in delivering information to the audience.
 The "speed" of the rumor is facilitated by the effect of the communicative closeness of strangers.
  Ս. In Milgrimim's scientific experiment, an individual citizen was asked to spread some information to a random person through a chain of acquaintances.
  It turns out that two strangers living thousands of miles apart just need to say "hello, I'm talking about Bill կողմից" need an average of five people.
 [17] Extraordinary events and heroes are considered to be important points of rumors.
 The originality of the hero colors the opulence of the event և is determined by his obvious or hidden status և by special abilities.
 The hidden opposition is obvious, the game of rumors on that ambiguity.
Hence the secrecy of the rumors used to act on them.
  The knot of the hero և events is a "problem", a "painful point", a sphere of maximum tension or breakthrough of the social structure.
 It can be an economic collapse, a succession of political power, the formation of a new elite, international conflicts, etc.
It is possible that he is a mediator between the worlds of "strangers" and "his own". it is the anointed one.
  This is the narrator of the rumors, who often repeats his personality in one image, as a witness.
 This can be a relative, acquaintance or "a boy".
  A. Schutz called this generalized image "a well-informed citizen."
[20] The term "citizen" is not accidental here.
 The events told by the rumors take place in a "other" demonstrative environment.
 That alien, untouchable, repulsive, dangerous, attractive world is dreamed through the eyes of the suburbs.
  Remember the kitchen and benches for women, the backgammon table and pigeon huts for men, and the basements for children.
In any case, it is possible to contrast the closed world with the open world, the identification of the narrator's listener can be directed to this or that.
 And the more "closed" the environment, the more life is fueled by rumors, including slander, gossip, trials, accusations, betrayals, and other such phenomena.
Rumors with moral qualities are, first of all, quite generalized, not localized, which opposes gossip or its expression, betrayal and misinformation.
  Second, rumors hold the knot of time և with their environment of origin, thus contrasting fables with superstition.
  Third, the rumors are accompanied by fresh news, moreover, often even in the future - this contradicts the legends, anecdotes.
 Fourth, rumors are unofficial in advance, often unofficial, thus contradicting purely information.
  At the same time, the rumors are related to all the mentioned social communes by their origin, conditions of operation, internal structure, means of application and transmission.
Some communication technologies are used in marketing.
    The majority of the population today does not perceive advertising at all as a reliable source of information.
  In this context, viral marketing is becoming one of the newest tools for market progress, which, however, is still considered difficult to manage.
  People traditionally rely more on the advice of relatives, close people, in the environment of which various rumors are more often transmitted.
 That is why they are a powerful tool for disseminating positive information about the company, production, brand.
 For example, once an advertising agency in the subways of St. Petersburg gave the opportunity to hundreds of model-looking girls, walking in pairs, loudly discussing the new catalog of the cosmetic brand "Fleur de Sante".
 This reality has envied the envy of the women around.
  At the end of the action, the catalog sale reached high indexes, and those who wanted a consultant stood in line.
 At the same time, communication is the least manageable tool in all communication functions.
 It is possible to influence only "feeding" through the "release" of information և ways.
  It is difficult to predict how the information may be commented on.
 Rumors have serious shortcomings, due to which this means of communication is rarely used.
  The "spread" process is practically impossible to manage. It is an element that is spread by its laws, which still need serious research.
Rumors are an additional means of communication with a negative sign.
Any information that goes through rumors is mostly acquired in a negative light, regardless of the initial purpose.
 Mass consciousness tends to react to the negative ականը the barrier.
  Negative consequences of the use of rumors are known, which force companies to make large enough investments to solve the "s" rumors.
  For example, in the middle of "Coca-Cola" the baby tooth is dissolved during the night, in "Jermuk" arsenic compounds have been found… The change of information is in fact inevitable.
The main theories of rumors.
  Let us briefly present the main theories of rumors: Allport, Postman (ALLPORT, GW, & POSTMAN, L. 1947).
  The theory is based on two principles: • Rumors are spread when people make an effort to find meaning in things.
• When confronted with ambiguity and uncertainty about possible issues, people try to find some meaning by retelling interrelated rumors.
This meant that the power of rumors որոշ the definition of rumors are the variables that predict whether rumors will spread or not.
  As the rumors spread, they become polished, shorter, shorter, sharper, cut from the details, and perceived by the more understandable, interesting listeners.
  Abrasion, sharpness և perceptibility do not occur due to the cognitive component of the people. This is what happens when people process information.
  Rosnow (Rosnow RL 1991) modified և slightly modified Allport ոս Postman's ideas.
  Rosnow argues that rumors are passed on because people need to explain vague suspicions, and that talking about them helps to clear themselves of the anxiety that accompanies it.
  He mentions four factors for the spread of rumors: • Rumors should be for potential listeners.
• They should increase personal anxiety.
• Must contain generalized uncertainty.
• Must be somewhat truthful [19].
Shibutani (Shibutani T. 1966) gave more importance to rumors, describing them as a collective experience.
 Rumors are seen as a recurring form of communication through which people come together in an uncertain situation in an attempt to create meaningful interpretation of that situation.
  This can be seen as a collective solution to the problem.
Classification of rumors.
   According to information typology, rumors are absolutely inaccurate, with truth-like elements - inaccurate, with elements of truth, inaccuracy - reliable.
  Rumors can be spontaneous, spontaneous, deliberately fabricated, and targeted.
  Intermediate varieties are also possible.
R. Nepp suggested classifying rumors according to the predominant type of motivation.
  He singled out hatred, fear and desire as the main motives for spreading rumors.
  We meet the same with G. At Allport - aggressive rumors, alarm rumors - talk-dreams.
 "Conversation-desire" contains a strong emotional desire, reflects the current needs and expectations of the audience (for example, the shares of the USSR state loan must be compensated in drams).
  "Conversation-desire" performs a dual function.
 On the one hand, it satisfies people's desires and thus promotes their social existence.
 These kinds of rumors calm down, hinder negative emotions, the development of anxiety and excessive aggression.
 On the other hand, such rumors, by creating excessive expectations, demoralize the population.
  Over time, it becomes obvious that the wishes will not come true, the opposite can happen: panic reactions, outbursts of aggressive behavior, hatred of those who "promise".
  For example, among the captives in apathy in the syndrome of "barbed wire disease" there are many rumors circulating every day that it will all end soon.
 Naturally, the wrong news about the end of the war led to deeper and sometimes final disappointment.
 One of the captives was so sure of the day of liberation that he lost consciousness that same day and died the next day.
  For him, the war really ended that day.
"Terrible rumors" carry և evoke expressed negative, terrifying moods ուզ emotional states, reflect to some extent current, but not desirable expectations of the audience.
  Usually these types of rumors arise in the stages of social tension (natural disasters, war, coup d'etat).
 Their plots range from mere pessimism to clear panic.
  These rumors are gaining ground in difficult social-political reforms, in the conditions of change of power or socio-political system.
 In such situations a limited set of plots appears; these plots are the basis of influential rumors.
  Some of them change depending on cultural, religious or national traditions.
The most frequent of the "terrible rumors" are the impending famine of rising prices for inevitable food prices, their elimination.
  Such rumors were recorded in Russia in 1917, in Chile in 1971-1973, in Afghanistan in the 1980s, in Armenia in 1991-1992, in the issues related to the "bread problem", a few years ago at the end of the year, the egg deficit in our country.
  Accepting the rumors as a "place of persecution", some part of the population buys even unnecessary food or acquires unbelievably large quantities of it, as a result of which the market situation (conjuncture) is actually distorted.
  Food quickly disappears from the counters, upward inflation occurs, often there can be a real famine.
Rumors about the "forthcoming counterattack of the opposition", the impending military coup, the revenge of those collaborating with the new authorities are spreading in this way.
  The "main problem" of such rumors is understandable, on the one hand, the terror of the population, on the other hand, the experience of active resistance of new social forces, the intensification of chaos and disagreements, the erosion of social peace.
"Aggressive rumors" or "divisive rumors".
  These not only create negative moods և states that reflect the unwanted expectations of the audience, but are also aimed at provoking an aggressive emotional state և behavioral response, gross aggressive actions.
These kinds of rumors arise in situations of sharp contradictions, which are connected with social, inter-group, inter-ethnic-international conflicts.
  The plot of "Aggressive Rumors" is based on an aggressive charge.
 The main function of aggressive rumors is not just to intimidate, but to deliberately provoke aggressive actions.
These rumors are not made up narratively, which is a characteristic of wish-rumors or terrible rumors, but have a sharp, "telegraphic" look.
  In short, the episodes convey certain facts that "call for revenge."
  These carry a very strong emotional-negative charge, forming the "we" affective community as opposed to "their" society.
  Such rumors demand retaliatory aggression.
 They spread in Baku against the Armenians in Sumgait.
Depending on the consequences of influencing people's consciousness and behavior, rumors can: a) to disturb public opinion, but not to go beyond clearly expressed antisocial behavior, b) to cause anti-social behavior in any part of the population, c) to destroy social ties between people և to lead to mass disorders.
In order to gain practical use in the process of studying rumors, we consider it possible to study certain types of rumors.
  Different rumors have different sources of origin, they are spread by people with different psychological characteristics, and the patterns of change of such rumors also differ.
  Consider the political rumor research program.
  Essential characteristics of the listener for the tendency to gossip, in addition to the main personal characteristics - anxiety, extroversion, it is necessary to study political conservatism (it is assumed that people of liberal orientation are more inclined to believe in gossip), political insight, level of group identification.
  A detailed analysis of the social environment in which the rumors circulate is also possible.
 Here we can include the level of group solidarity, the level of intra-group-inter-group conflicts, the nature of the influence of the media, the means of political struggle in the society.
BOOK 2. Grachev GV, Melnik IK Manipulating a person.
  organization, abilities and technologies of information-psychological education. M.
 Algorithm, 2002. 6. Kitov A.I. Personality and perestroika.
 notes psychologist. M., 1990. 7. Allport G. Residence of persons.
 selected works. M.
 Смысл, 2002. 9. Психология для Вооруженных Сил.
 Textbook of the Armed Forces SSA / Under the order. Э. Boringa. Washington.
 Garvarsky University, 1943. Warsaw.
 From Min. nac. Оборо10. Frankl W. A man in a higher sense. - M.
 Progress, 1990. 13. Allport, g. W., & postman, l. (1947). The psychology of rumor. New York.
 Holt, Rinehart & 16. Linebarger PMA Psychological Warfare. Washington. OC.
 Infantry Journal Press. 1948. 17. Milgram, S. (1977). The individual in a social world. Reading, MA.
 Addison-Wesley.21. Shibutani T. Improvised News.
 A sociological Study of Rumor. Ind. Bobbs-Merril, 1966. 22. Turner, JC (1987). Rediscovering the social group.
 A self-categorization theory. New York.
Information about the authorVardan Mamikon Papikyan - Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, Chair of Psychology, E-mail.
