Karen (Gerasim) Sargis Mikaelyan is one of the unjustly repressed intellectuals during the years of individual worship (April 27, 1883 -13.12.1941), which was partially reconsidered after his posthumous acquittalHis literary legacy was published in 1961 in Yerevan"Long live the winners" collection of stories.
 The 12 stories that make it up are taken from previous collections.
 One of the worksA large part of it deserves to be reprinted, many of which are still unpublished("When I Was Crazy քաղաքական", a novel of political persecution(1927), Collection of short stories "Immortality" (1941)).
  Very little has been said about the prose writer in the literature, and his works have hardly been studied.
  Mikaelyan saidHe was well acquainted with the literary contributions of his predecessors, from which he inheritedThe short, concise narrative style, the precise, unambiguous, simple word.
His lyrical stories are especially remarkable"Winter Evening", "Erfurt Program", "War of Vardanants", "SakuliThe group "," The first sorrow "," Long live the winners "," Revenge ", etc.), where the human psyche is presented next to the magnificent images of naturefeelings: love, hate, disappointment, emotion and longingbeautiful parallels.
  There are in Mikaelyan's worksthe poetic breath, the relentless sadness without unnecessary convulsions,more the unspoken reality hidden in what is said, as well as the unusual charm of everyday indifference, carefully disguised in the ordinary, which are the writer's talent, delicate spirit and lyrical-philosophicalThey are the witnesses of the thought.
K. is interesting and attractive. Mikaelyan's writing style.
 It is sincerityinspires.
  Sometimes there is a conversation, a listener, a dialoguedirectly, sometimes concealed or concealed by the authorAs if from the point of view of a third person.
  Each of these horses has its ownattractiveness և corresponds to the chosen theme - accessible, simpleand making it honest.
  From human society alwaysThe tragedy is inseparable, but its realization is in the different heroes created by Mikaelyan.
  The question of life is hidden in it,without which there would be no contradictions, so life would cease to exist.
  A number of stories depict the life of city dwellers, the domination of money, the daily struggle unjustlyagainst a world where everything is foreign to the honest human soul, և to manIndifference to man leads to destruction.
 "Baker"Simon" in the story is that dumb indifference in the one who failsIt breeds evil և hatred.
  Easy to earn and safeHe went back to life in the city and moved his family, butUnable to withstand the new conditions, the woman fell ill and diedchildren.
 Convinced that the city was to blame, he went elsewhereTrying to adapt to fate, he lived without complaining.
  And:At the end of his life, when he was sick, hungry and helpless, he thought that:He was wrong in thinking that "not everyone in my world will be happy, that's itEven my world is not a worldbe… »[1, page 20].
  Maybe this?Simon would have remained convinced if the indifference of those around him had not changedhis attitude towards life and destiny.
  Everyone thought,that "such was the fate."
  "Tomorrow he will fall and die," without:Compassion and regret, full and safe people will say. "Why?
died, could not live, died ", because everyone can liveThey can not.
  The kind, meek and humble baker all his life from deathbefore he becomes born of rebellious indifference and contemptIn the last breath of evil he regrets that he did not mix the poison with the breadHe has been baking for others for years.
  The author tries to emphasizeput on indifference, finding that the world's greatest evilsthey are born from it.
  People should be kind to each otherespecially the elderly and the sick who need it most.
Such complex psychological feelings are presented to Mikaelyanin almost all stories.
  His characters think more,contemplation, overwhelmed by the hard feelings of their memories ("Revenge", "Hekaz"Bajin", "War of Vardanants", "Winter Evening", etc.)He is doing something.
The life of the porter Vartan goes in a different way.
  He:was dissatisfied. "We do not own our lives as much as a dog or a cat" [6, p. 43].
 OppositeHe does not agree with what his friend said, "Maybe this is our destiny?"
 Being ahead of the baker Simon, Vartan findshas its place in life.
The task of the literature of the time was to portray the new man as himselfto an individual who recognizes the rights.
  Mikaelyan has a number of works, the heroes of which are those transformed people.
  As an active public figure, he was well aware of the creation of a Soviet countrydifficulties և was almost convinced of the fate of the Armenian peopleit will open a fresh, painful groove.
  The tragic past of a miserable homeland,The heavy present and the uncertain future become the signals on the basis of whichWorks on the theme of the homeland ("Armenia"Map", "Independent Armenia", "Tell them not to forget the Old Armenian", "Allways", "On the shores of Peace", "Under the shadow of a fig tree", "The Illuminator", etc.).
The prose writer could not pass by the Armenian tragedy, deportation, indifferently.
  He represents Armenians living abroad,which live physically but are empty in souls.
The tragedy of the past, emptying their souls like a ghostfollows every step.
  They lost themselves as Armenians on foreign shoresPeople's mental feelings and sometimes seemingly carefreeMikaelyan presents the seemingly nightmarish life without undue joy, with all the misery and gloom.
  Many of the heroes do itThey are alienated Armenians who do not suffer much from the pain of losing their historical homeland.
 Some even shy away from being Armenian and tryto be as far away from the homeland as possible.
  I told the story "Arakel" from Shushihero does not return home after being wounded in warfor as he saith, "Have I lost my donkey or am I going to kick it?"
to give ”[5, page 55].
  He goes further in his patriotic ideasThe factory-owning hero of the "Internationalist" story, shamelesslyannounces "Forget that I am Armenian" [4, p. 56].
 War in ArmeniaHe is so happy not to be that he will not have to be miserableParticipate in an organized fundraiser.
  The hero of the "Allways" storyand his sister (the latter somehow escaped the carnage with two girls, losing her husband and two children), are still faithful!At their roots, they are concerned about the fate of Armenia and the Armenians.
There are young people next to them, many of whom do not know Armenian ևThey are indifferent to Armenia.
  The hero of the story is his painreports. "Do you know what a foundry America is?"
  What Abdul Hamid and?The "next ones" could not do it through persecution and massacre, they do withoutprison and a drop of blood ”[4, p. 82].
  "Evula", "Retreat" storiesThe heroes are the alienating generations of Diaspora Armenians who, if:They are Armenians with their ancestors, memories of the past, then they have nothing in common with the real type of Armenian in their way of thinking and behavior.therefore, in the future they are nothing for the Armenian։ homeland.
  They idiotare the last drops of water heated in the sand, for which the author is greatHe is in pain.
  The root of this tragedy is the deportation of ArmeniansThe genocide, which is not depicted, but this way of life of generationsIt is the direct consequence of that.
Former socialist Arsen Rostomyan ("Retreat") is incapableto work, has no craft, survived at the expense of ideological "friends"և When he loses hope of getting money from them, it becomes meaninglessto live!
  It is half a step from a weak criminal to a murderer.
  "Dumbpressing thick fingernails on a woman's soft neck "[6, p. 72], It seems that he is trying to suffocate his "soft" life and empty, meaningless existence.
The hero of the "Evula" story lives only with a bold philosophy. "This world is the square of Ghochagh [" [1, page 29].
 He pursuesdrunk in a cafe, robbed and left carelessly.
Some of those living on foreign shores are longing and proudAfter the strengthening and development of Armenia ("On the shores of Peace")"The turbid waters of the Mississippi River", "Map of Armenia", etc.).
  "IndependentIn the story "Armenia" the compatriots are so proud of the newly created independence of Armenia that the American journalist notices."If we have a state and a state budget, then you can pay yoursdebts, what your former administration did in America "[4,page 33].
Some of Mikaelyan's characters have a unique attitude towards Armenian-Turkish relations, Armenia's past in general, andabout the future ("In the hour of trial", "Independent Armenia", "Map of Armenia").
 The heroes of the story "In the hour of trial" are mutually exclusiveThey express opinions on the Armenian-Turkish massacres.
  One of the heroesIt is based on the slogan "the Turk should become gold, do not put it in your pocket" and calls for fighting against the Turks and taking revenge. "We must massacre… Dozens
For centuries they sucked our blood and squeezed our bones.
  If their sevenIf you tear Grandpa's belly, Armenian bread and Armenian blood will come out… Even nowfaithful to the contribution of their ancestors, continue the work they started,It is enough how long we have endured.
  We must unite as oneman ենք let us answer them by what they do ”[1, p. 52].
  And young?The teacher thinks that they should be friends, not kill each other, because he is ArmenianThe Turks suffered from those continuous battles.
 At the dictation of time, Mikaelyan expresses Bolshevik ideas, so being afraid to say his own word, he presents revenge on the Turks through the mouth of a hero.the idea of ​​solving.
In the short story "Map of Armenia" in the Armenian newspaper published in America, once again seeing the map of Armenia from sea to sea, he is indignant. "Such foolish maps only mislead us and irritate our neighbors" [4, p. 27].
  The author urges:to live in the present, not to manipulate the past.
 BC from the existing sea
Sea Armenia, which is a myth, unfortunately, Armenians are more excited than small,but with real Armenia.
In his stories, the prose writer referred to him as backwardmanners, traditional way of life, customs with all their charm and sometimes with destructive consequences ("Uncle's wedding", "Hekaz bajin", "Mahak-Tuman", etc.).
 Karen Mikayelyan's works, bearing the deep stamp of time, on the one hand, depictthe difficult situation of the Armenian labor, the formation of a new person and the political persecution, on the other hand, the alienation of the Diaspora ArmeniansMorals և The supreme desire of an Armenian to have a strong homelandthe dream.
Literature 1. Karen Mikaelyan, Emotions of Deprivation, Tbilissi (Georgia), 19072. K. Mikaelyan, Winter Evening, Moscow, 1912
3. K. Mikaelyan, Rural Telephone, Paris, 1926
4. K. Mikaelyan, Majestic, Moscow, 1928
5. K. Mikaelyan, The War of Colors, Moscow, 1929
6. K. Mikaelyan, Long live the winners, Yerevan, 1961
Information about the author:Khachatryan Naira Ararat - b. c. Associate Professor, ASPU Lecturer, E-mail.
