GSPI organizes two-level university education with a bachelor's, master's, as well as postgraduate, postgraduate study program.
  Teaching in the first degree և:The most basic of the many forms of learning are lectures, interactive teaching, laboratory, practical, seminar, pedagogical-educational practices, essays, folders, testing and testing, individual, independent-research works [1].
One or two research projects during the studyPerformance, even in the absence of clear co-institutional requirements, cannot provide the necessary level of learner skills acquisition.
  Experience shows the quality of research work in the master's degree programsuffers significantly due to lack of required skills.
  Therefore, we think that the issue of raising the level of readiness of students to do research work deserves attention.
In the work undertaken, we try to offerSequential steps to solve the problem և address some of themto the discussion.
 They are:• For research work by the studentCriteria for knowledge of different skills և their knowledgeDevelopment of requirements and unit values ​​for different levels և Use to evaluate work already donefor, • A questionnaire or test to check the level of knowledge of the requirementscreate• Establishment of a scale for evaluating the results of the test conducted through a questionnaire or test;• Depending on the purpose, knowledge testing through a questionnaire or test;• Use assessment results to develop a subject program that teaches relevant skills;• Introduction of the subject in the curriculum.
           In our work we will not touch upon the analysis of the last two points մշակ the elaboration of requirements for different levels of criteria,but we will present a sample for one criterion.
We have chosen the final work from the research work carried out by the student during the university education.
  In addition to academic knowledge, different abilities and skills are required for the independent "successful implementation" of this work.
  Let's agree on thatcall skills the criteria for student readiness orRequirements ներկայացնել submit them in the following groups:• General literacy skills: GH,• Research skills: RA, • Technical skills և IT skills: IT,• Presentation skills: NH.
The latter are not checked by a test or a questionnaire, butare revealed during the presentation of the work են have a certain influence on the formation of the overall grade.
After developing the requirements, we created a questionnaire to check the knowledge of those requirements, we suggested using it for testing.by different means, for example, by conducting a survey or testing.
During the survey, the learner will be asked to ask questionsextensive answer, and during the test choose the one offeredOne or more answers.
 Each of the test forms:Depending on the purpose, it has advantages and disadvantages.
 Survey:The results will give an idea of ​​the overall development of the studentlevel, master of the mother tongue, connected, logicalon the ability to construct a written word, to analyze, then this test will be more appropriate, especially among students of the humanities.
 However, difficulties will arise because the answers are not technologically verifiable, can not be uniform, և great rolefield will be created for subjective factors, will not ensure the objectivity of the assessment as in the case when the examiner is not the studentrecognition, otherwise.
 And for the test you need each questionnaireAsk a test question by asking the learner a choiceone or more correct answers, prompting the taskin.
 For simplicity, we only included it in the test we compiledTasks with one correct answer.
  Testing will provide:the technological nature of the test, but the objectivity of the assessment will again not be unambiguous, as such tasks increase the likelihood of accident, in addition to being visible.do not make the level of language literacy, analytical skills, etc., which were the advantages of the survey. [2]
The evaluation of the two test forms will also differ somewhatmethods.
  Each test task is graded 0or unsatisfactory, with a specific positive score or excellent.
  And if:If the test is done with a questionnaire, then different levels of requirements should be developed for the evaluation of each criterion (which:We have not considered the task of this work, but, for example, in order to clarify our logic, we present a sample of one of the different skills requirements)with values.
  For example, the "Topic Selection" criterion in Table 1The score is 0-8 points.
  Requirements with different unit values ​​can be conventionally as follows: learner
- had no idea that he played a role in choosing the topichas - 0 points,- considered the choice of the topic only the case of the head - 1 point,- chose a very "beaten, tortured", non-novel topic - 2 points,- Make a random selection of different ones suggested by the managerbetween topics - 2 points (tried to show selectivity),- substantiated his choice from the topics proposed by the manager - 3points (showed the ability to choose)- suggested a topic, but chosen at random - 4-5points (depending on the topic)- substantiated the choice of topic with the availability of the necessary literature - 6 points,- substantiated the choice of the topic with his own interest in the problems - 7 points,- suggested a topic, substantiating its urgency - 8 points.
Applying this principle with the assessment of all requirementscan be determined based on the total unit value obtainedlearnerDegree of knowledge.
  And the evaluationThe student's score on the scale will be insufficient, sufficient,good or excellent, will be decided by both the test and the questionnairein a certain percentage compared to the total unit.
For example,• 0 - 39% - unsatisfactory• 40 - 69% - sufficient• 70 - 89% - good• 90 - 100% - excellentThis scale is conditional, as any structure can develop if it sees the need to create a scale.its scale.
In both cases of testing, in addition to determining the total score, it is possible to separate the sums collected from different skills by determining the percentage value of each of them to the maximum intended for those skills.for a cost, get a clear picture of the level of skill of the respondent in each of the required skillsHe knows.
Table 1 presents the names of the required skills, the criteria or requirements for their knowledge, the conventional comparative points, the results of their testing և Some questions of the work evaluation methodology.
  [3]
 Our workIn order not to increase the volume inappropriately, we first offer the sample of "Test" used for the purpose of testing, and by separating the questions of the test tasks, we will also get the "Questionnaire" questionnaire.
 In:By the way, test discretors can be a guide with a questionnaireto compile inspection criteria (which we have already mentioned is not our job problem).
If the requirements of the criterion are evaluated with 0-1 points,then they will be considered as unsatisfactory-excellent levels, and ifA range of points is suggested for assessment, then the learner's knowledge is assessed for a specific score, such asWe have already mentioned that there should be requirements assessed at different values, with appropriate points և rating scale, whichIt will be determined what level of knowledge the student's score isInsufficient, sufficient, good or excellent.
Skilled:condition:երի:groups:GH:RA:RA:RA:RA:RA:RA:RA:RA:RA:Doing research և:Formulation requirements:Research ideasabout the types of works.
Topic selection.
Compilation of work plan.
Justification of the need for work,setting goals and objectives.
Sources of related literaturestudy.
References:Development according to the problems of the chosen topicrelations.
Logical connection between different materialsDiscovery և Presentation.
Own research methodology, materialessay.
Analysis of research results not onlypositive, other incomplete results, indicating ways to improve them.
Drawing conclusions that address each issue at workTable 1:Requirements:points awarded(total: 100)implementation, contain clear recommendations for further improvement of the problem, as well as the results of the workIndication of areas of application.
The job must have the type of job accepted by the institutionSections that meet the mandatory requirements:for example, content, introduction, literaturereview, own research material և methods, analysis of research results,Conclusions և Recommendations, list of literature, appendix.
  Be taken into accountthe remarks of the opponents (critics).
Sort the list of literature, for example, in alphabetical order, in which case the same authorsArrange the works according to the order of dates or according to the references in the essaysequence or other form as established in that field of science orof the given educational institution or unitwith mandatory norms.
  Write the full name of the work, put the divisor // sign, bring the place of publication, date, total number of pages orlink page.
For references in the essay, indicate in parentheses in the literature listjob number, if necessaryput a comma after the number և mark the page from whichThe link is made.
 Existence of a cover page is a formal workin a roof that is not numbered.
Start numbering from the content page:as the 2nd page.
The work can also have an application, which:The pages are constantly numbered.
  Therecan be to get the job doneused orders, normative documents, papers, spreadsheets.
Save on this type of workfor the norms of the educational institutionnumber of pages expressed, other technical requirements.
TC:TC:TC:RA:TC:TC:TC:TC:NH:NH:GH:GH:GH:TC:GH:Knowledge of the material, ability to communicate with the audience, reasoning on questionsAbility to respond.
Prepare a competent, clear, concise, complete, substantiated report and Ability to deliver orally.
What a stranger!ability.
 Comprehensible և Ability to express oneself in written or oral form.
Ability to use dictionaries correctly.
Ability to use IT correctly.
 Awareness of plagiarism.
to communicate in a certain languageWeaknesses and strengths of the student being testedIn order to make the assessment more visible, we have presented the results grouped by the skills with their total points and on the assessment scale in Table 2.
Research:work:Preparation: skills:/ requirements /Names:Research:work:Skills - RA: Specifications:Skills: Submission:Skills - NH: GeneralLiteracy:Skills - GH:Skills:Numbers:in Table 1Skill:of eachgeneralunit:Table 2:Evaluation:scaleSufficient: 40-41.4Good: 42-53.4 Excellent: 54-60                  Sufficient: 4.4-7.59                Good: 7.7-9.79Excellent: 9.9 -11Sufficient: 5,6-9,66Good: 9,8-12,46Excellent: 12,6-14               Sufficient: 6-10,35Good: 10.5-13.35Excellent: 13.5-15                 Specific for each type of skill in Table 2The scores were given as the maximum for each skill requirement in Table 1in the amount of points.
 And the levels of knowledge of the interviewee's skills are determined by the percentage of the student's score compared to the maximum, according to the scale suggested in the work.
 For example, if the maximum of all the requirements of the Republic of Armenia is 60Instead of one point, the student scored 25 points, according to the assessmentto the scale suggested in the methodology, it will be close to the maximum41.7%, ie it will be considered a satisfactory assessment.
Determining the remaining skill points on the same principle will give a clear picture of the surveyTo what extent does the subject master each of the required skills?
  And if it is necessary to express by one pointthe initial level of knowledge, then the sum of all skill units is averaged.
  For example, if the subject has receivedFrom RA - 25, from TC - 6, from GH - 6, then the average of all units will be37 points, which will be considered an insufficient level of training.
And the three skills mentioned as a result of the workThe performance skill unit will be added and the final grade will be formed.
Վերջ The final grade of the submitted work can serve as an indicator for the student's rounding ևother circumstances, for example: • Number of literature sources used; • Relative number of publications in recent years;• Compliance of the content և literature listto work, etc.
If another unit of assessment is accepted at the institutionsystem, then the points can be matched with the appropriate coefficient.
Adjusting the level of knowledge, as already mentioned above,can be used accordingly in the curriculumWhen substantiating the need to introduce a subject that teaches skills, then when developing a subject syllabus.
In order not to increase the workload unnecessarily, instead of compiling a separate questionnaire և test, we present it for testingThe sample of the "Test" serving, and separating the questions of the test tasks, the "Questionnaire" questionnaire will be obtained.
 By the way,The test discretes can be used as a guide for compiling questionnaire criteria (which we have already mentioned is not our problem).
 For each of the skills tested in the testThe number of questions provided is relatively adequate in the tablegiven the number of their requirements, therefore, given to the independent taskunit (conditionally we have chosen 5 points), the specific weight of the skill in the total unit will remain the same.
 For each skillThe tasks are grouped by number, indicating himthe total points for that skill.
