The aim of the work is to show the reality of the 30sTo present the path of only a small group of Armenian writers and intellectuals, based on the latest facts, some literarydestinies.
Ler Kamsar in his diaries (և not only), Walter AramyanIn his book "Colima", in his letters to Gurgen Mahari from exile, in the novel "Flowering Barbed Wire", Vahram Alazan in "SufferingIn the memoirs "brought Armenian literature facts which,no matter how fictional, but և they are real (these names onlywithin the framework of our article).
 Each of them chose the factsThey want to take out a unique egg. one with a diary և with a laugh, the second with a memoir, and the third with a tearful humor.
 These works could have appeared much earlier, but sometimes times are more than obligatory, it is not man who owns time, butjust the opposite. The dictator is the historical moment.
 "We continue to curseWe are Comrade Stalin, of course, worthy.
  But so am I.I want to ask. Who wrote the four million manuscripts?
  (That was the numbercirculated in secret party documents).
 Dzerzhinsky?
 Yezhov?
  Abakumov and Yadoga?
  No way.
  They wrote ordinarySoviet people.
  Does this mean that the Russians are traitors and?They are spies.
 No way.
 They just had a historical impactcurrent trends ”/ 4, page 56 /.
  Here is a remarkable fact. "… A citizen
He persistently wanted to study his father's "case" to find out who he wasto betray him in time… He was allowed to look at the forbidden pages.
 Must:was to see what was happening to him when he read that his father himselfHe testified against others… Not everyone wants to take it into accountwith the fact how difficult the times were, under what torturesThey gave testimonies ”/ 8, page 13 /.
  Nowadays by the dictates of timeThe former "forbidden fruits" are gaining interest, they sayPotential discoveries are coming.
 Nowadays already in this realityThere have been many references.
  Let us mention just a few of themin chronological order: David Gasparyan, Closed DoorsThe Secret (Charents, Bakunts և others), Yerevan, 1994, Szak Arzumanyan,Modern Armenian Novel, Volume 5, WUA Publishing House, Yerevan, 2004, Halatova Karin, DeloNo…, С пожелтевших страниц трагических судеб, Ереван, 2012.
"… Fate? Let there be fate. but so much long text on the forehead… should be wide, open, Let our fronts be very wide and open… ".
                                         Gurgen MahariAt the end of May 1936, Aghasi Khanjyan left for Moscow.to participate in the June plenum of the Central Committee of the Communist Party… "I am from that plenumsmelled of blood… »/ 1, page 3 / - Aghasi Khanjyan many years laterVahram Alazan refers to those words.
  In fact, A. Khanjyan said
The prophetic words were equivalent to absolute truthAs a result, one of the many broken biographies is himselfKhanjyan was lucky. "On July 9, Berian invited Khanjyan to Tbilissi (Georgia):
At the sitting of the presidency of the Under-Committee.
 At that meeting, Beria demandedthat Khanjyan confesses that he is a nationalist է sponsored N. Stepanyan's nationalist group.
 After the session, Beria killed Aghasi Khanjyan in his closet and officially announced thatKhanjyan "demonstratively committed suicide in Tbilissi"in order to make the Armenian people quarrel with the Georgian people ”/ 1, page 4 /.
 By the way,these և many other testimonies (prison 30s-40sabout the regime) V. They make this memoir of Alazan valuable
also in terms of factual material.
 1990 Vahram Alazan's memoir "Through the Paths of Suffering" was published, which was written in 1961-1965. It just couldn't be published earlier, like Gurgen
The works of Mahari, Ler Kamsar, Walter Aramyan and many others.
  Even one human destiny will tell about the historical reality without the fear of distorting even a word, becauseThe more different the "manuscripts" of the Siberians are, the more the ways of their suffering are the same. Vorkuta, Basargechar, Kolima, Boguchan, Krasnoyarsk, Kuray և այլ many other glaciers, which were warmed only by the breath of an exile.
 The fact is accurately described by the great satirist, Ler Kamsar. so many people were exiled
Siberia, which "bug" rises from there, the exiles, the heatUnable to bear it, "they opened the door and window of Siberia from the burnt area a little coolness penetrates inside… »/ 5, page 102 /.
Ler Kamsar, who was a feuilletonist, has to do it every day by force of habitHe reacted to the events by pressing his finger firmly on the day.
  And when he was already forbidden to express his thoughts, he did the sameby the power of habit "reacts" to events, this time alreadyotherwise in the form of a diary.
 The satirist blogged in exile,but, unfortunately, those diary fragments have not been preserved.
 And that:He really wrote, with rather stingy facts, but it is already recorded in 1953-1958. in a reflective diary.
 Here are some pictures of it. "In Basargechar, I wrote about outdoor grass
under the pile, folded.
  In prison իս I turned my shoes upside down.
  In exile on the back of my good friend Davit Gharagyozyan.
  Poor man,he bent for hours in front of me, muttering in his desk "/ 5, pp. 411-412, 77, 184 /.
Mount Kamsar wrote in all dangerous times, while his contemporary and fortune teller says with all caution. "I am not a diary
had.
 What diary was kept when Beria և Stalin spies?They even tried to read people's minds ”(1, p. 38).
 Alazan himselfhe was just "blogging" in his mind.
 In the memoirs of other citizens of the Soviet Union, their "freedom" was to be told, as a matter of courseA great saying sounded, which in those years was really a mockery of the timethrown in the face. "Man is the most precious capital" (I. Stalin) / 1, page 79 /.
And does not Alazan react to that same mockery with a mockery, noting: "Yes,
Man is the most precious capital.
 He opens the way for the horse ... "/ 1,pp. 118-119.
 There was a large one three kilometers north of the campforest.
 During the summer months, firewood was made in the depths of the forest to transport to a camp on sledges in the winter, but heavy snow and blizzards blocked the only road leading to the forest.A horse tied to a sledge could not walk through the snow… The snow on its feet remainedto trample, to pave the way for a horse /.
And Walter Aramyan is just the opposite. "The man of this life
it is only a mockery "/ 2, page 17 /.
 And he, the man, is tormented more than his ownViolation of human dignity.
  Alazan sufferingThe road has been long, full of uncertainty, which is more than torturous, but rightThat was one of the many tricks used by the leadership.
  From the moment he was imprisoned, like everyone else, Alazan was just shockedSeeing 37 notches on the prison wall.
 "Lord God, is my predecessor 37 days?"He endured these conditions, and I thought I would return home in a few days ”(1, p. 17).
  By the way, Gurgen finds himself in the same situationMahari. "I thought this story would end in days,
they will check կ they will miss ”/ 7, page 3 /.
  The same picture, or in another expression, also appears in Walter Aramyan's novel. The "new" prisoners refuse even food, always staring at the door, waiting for the "misunderstanding" to be revealed.
 But there is a sharp mockery. "Nothing, nothing,
only the first ten years are difficult ”/ 2, page 12 /.
  It is clear that this was of a general nature, by one logic, trials are perishable, as they say.
  But in front of everyone, the same (or:double և triple long) was the path of suffering to the valleys of death;where half-dead, half-buried or half-alive people "lived".
  Presenting the path of his suffering, Alazan reveals a wide horizon for the reader (և story), reveals manners, laws, even diet (see 1, pp. 189-190).
  Everything is the samethroughout the great Soviet country.
 Alazan tells the story of people who, regardless of gender, age and ethnicity, are identified with the status they have acquired.
 The writer in every detaildescribes a person as an individual during the years of Stalin's dictatorshipand community drama from the first days of imprisonment to exile,to justification, "freedom" և second exile և to covet…"Death that gave life to tens of millions" (1, p. 226).
  Then,As a summary, significant days and dates are singled out: "1954On July 9, 1945, we were released and acquitted "/ 1, p. 238 /.
  And MountKamsar "shrugs his shoulders" with bitter contempt. "What is the difference?
Does a person make people happy with his life or with his death? ”/ 5, p65 /.
  Alazan calls things by their names, and artisticIntervention is almost non-existent.
Evaluating the activities of the Stalinist regime, the writer comes to an interesting and sharp definition. "Stalin's massacre
One of the aspects of politics was that he was using one group of people to destroy another group that had already done its will, ուրիշ anotherHe used that group to destroy that group.
  The imprisonment of the Amatuni-Akopov-Mughdus gang was a manifestation of Stalin's policy. "page 53 /.
 And this was still a part of that monstrous policy.
 "Night to meThey were tormented by interrogation, by daytime by insomnia ", and on the other hand," the mystery, the uncertainty, the secret were specific to the Stalin era "/ 1, pp. 38,80 /, - the writer notes.
  One of the "discoveries" typical of that periodOne was to accompany political prisoners all the way to Golgotha ​​as a shadow, as the supreme "method" of punishment.were the criminals… And the only և undeniable truth was that they:Those who thought they were leaders really “did not want to come to terms with the death of the dying intellectuals.
  They wanted to destroy them with their own hands.
They knew their leader's "chosen taste" (2, p. 49).
To work as much as possible to lose, to forget the human face and dignity, to trample on self-love(Why was the mirror banned in prisons in the first place…).
 And that?tricks for as many as you can.
  Camping, which has already become a traditionIn addition to such innumerable tricks, new ones were invented day by day, and the criterion of success was cruelty. the more cruel, the more invaluable.
"If today they drive the vast land of Kolima by tractor, huge pyramids of bones of tortured prisoners will stand in front of you" / 1, page 110 /, wrote Walter Aramyan.
  Russian writer Solzhenitsyn mentions the Soviet31 years of imprisonment in prisons and labor camps in those years.
  Stalin-Beria was not capable of anythingthe car just to reach its goal.
  "The discretion of the ideology and practical propaganda of individual worship is humanignoring the individual, his inexhaustible inner possibilitiesand it was leveling, leading his role to the usual "screw" to whichYou can adjust or flip the egg as you wishyou find it possible ”/ 3, page 30 /.
 "The nightmare of Stalinism is not even thatMillions were killed.
  The nightmare of Stalinism is that it immoralized millions ”(4, p. 153).
 And no one would bear the responsibility!
 He presents this idea with his own paletteGurgen Mahari. "What are you guys doing? Why aren't you looking far?"
There is a history, there is a responsibility մեկը One of the investigators smokedhe said, pressing his professor on his forehead. "As long as we exist,
There will be no history, and when there is history, we will not be ”(6, p. 175).
… They are people of the same age who:They are similar in that they are capable of thinking և (hence և) are exiles.
The mentioned writers are some bright personalities, but they are և similar to each other և thousands. They were united by fate.
 The performance is accurateDescription of Mount Kamsar. "The prison of all independent thinkers
They filled it and closed the doors.
 There are some newborns who are not yetstart talking.
  As soon as they are kicked, they will be imprisoned… "/ 5, page 56 /, thenas a summary, adds: "Probably whoever conquers Siberia in a war will inherit the whole brain of Russia" / 5, p. 105 /.
Մեկի During one of the interrogations, in fact, Vahram Alazan and Gurgen Mahari huddled next to each other in the "cages" next night.
  Atypical and unknown remains of Mahari's workThe pages are already summarized in one book, which is a rather eloquent titlehas "Siberian".
 It was Gurgen Mahar's exile who created "flourishedThe term "barbed wire", which is very impressive and accurate, is used today as a general reference to the literature representing the whole region.definition / see 3 /.
  Siberia occupies almost two places in Mahari's lifedecade. he was isolated from his family, his surroundings, his literary life.
Mahari, of course, was not alone. Yeghishe Charents, Axel Bakunts, Vahan Totovents, Zapel Yesayan, Ler Kamsar, Vagharshak Norents, Vahram Alazan met the same fate with a small difference in time with him.
accept.
 And the accusing bodies took care of that, preparing the accusation in advance. such examples as much as the accused.
"If you have committed a crime for yourself, fine. They will look at your crime and you
will condemn.
 And if you do not agree, they have everything to themselvesThey will clothe you with whatever kind of ready-made crimes you haveYou will be condemned ”/ 5, p. 217 /, - notices the obvious evidence of what has been saidWe are in the case of Ler Kamsar.
 It is difficult to get used to the status of a prisonerwas not. Every day in prison he came to prove what had happened
is not an exception, but another page of an unprecedented tragic comedy.
 And the typical "formula" of distant glaciers is given by Grigor Achemyan. "Siberia… Country inhabited by multinational people, country:
with rich natural resources ներով… Stalin camps, which created the impression of real life, obscuring another worldly life flowing in parallel with the smoke.
 Siberia… Novoivanov camp or"Kraslag" hydra- one of the "trust" departments "/ 7, pp. 3-24 /.
  Let's turn to Ler Kamsar again. "Russia… Mausoleum of all freedom, lock
of the new word, the dungeon of all valuable people and finally prisons, prisons and prisons, so much so that you can be called a prison-country and a penitentiary ”/ 5, pp. 239-240 /.
 Mahar completes what has been said with false indifference. "It could have been a good laugh if it had been so tragic
if it were not "/ 7, page 693 /.
 Alive and inanimate during the years of individual worshipWitnesses can not forget even the greatest desireIn this case.
 Mahari's characters are also real, which he referred to in the Siberian stories.
 And next to the characters, the writer himselfIt is with his own thoughts and memories.
  Without going into all the depths of the writerIn the pages of "Siberian", let us only present the Mahari-Siberian word:aimed at future և history. "Թող Let him stand forever
the statue I saw, the creation of which still stands on the icefeet on my heart.
 That happened in the load of eternal icein a cruel zone.
  Outside the death camp, an ice visible from the campThe young detainee was stopped at a height with buckets of waterThey let him wear it and washed it.
 The water froze quickly, standing at a heightAn icy monument with human hands remained.
 It was the only monument to immortalize the memory of millions of dead and dying prisoners.
May that terrible monument stand forever.
 It was the frozen cry of the dead that generations would hear their voice, remember, not forget, remember anddo not allow this terrible story to be repeated ”/ 6, page 56 /.
A distance, Colima, from which almost no one returned, butWalter Aramyan had returned.
 The writer speaks about the facts and events like the others with the knowledge of an eyewitness, but heGives a crystallized assessment of the phenomena. he is not
is satisfied only with the pen of a documentarian.
  His hero is himself, but on the side,he said in the third person.
 Speaking of exile, the writer generalizesis. "This is the only place in the world where a person is not only 'free'
from the outpouring of emotions, but from the need and ability to think.
 It is complete "freedom" to solve the issue of living or not living here.
  No one will disturb anyone if he wants toto kill if he cries, even if he wants to sing… ”/ 2, p. 45 /.
… Aghasi Khanjyan's wife, who was also arrested, a secretIn the letter he addresses his exhortation to the lucky ones. "Come and stay!
"Despite all the difficulties, the day will soon come when the party will justify us all, will return us to the homeland" / 1, p. 111 /.
 His words came true, "and those who could begin to returndo not die, those who smile and their eyes are sad… ”/ 6, p. 411 /.
So we tried to present a picture of the 30sFrom the reality, draw a few Armenians who have gone through the path of Siberian sufferingthe writers' path to the valleys of death, ostensibly based on their works.
repression. It is based on their products.
  Lera Kamsara diary:writers during Stalin Regime. The following works serve as the basis for the article.
 “Red:Literature 1. Alazan V., Through Sufferings / Memories /, Yerevan, Council. writer, 1990, 239 pages.
2. Aramyan V., Kolima, Novel, Yerevan, WUA Publishing House, 2006, 239 pages.
3. Arzumanyan S., Modern Armenian novel, vol. 5th, WUA Publishing House, Yerevan, 2004, 411 pages.
4. Dovlatov S., Zona, Vipak, Yerevan, Literary Homeland, 2008, 200 pages.
5. Ler Kamsar, Red Days, Yerevan, "Nairi", 2000, 470 pages.
6. Mahari Gurgen, Collection of poems, vol. 5th, Yerevan, "Soviet writer", 1989, 672 pages.
7. Mahari Gurgen, Siberian / Poem, prose, letters /, Diligently by Grigor Achemyan, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2009, 848 pages + 16 pages insert.
Information about the author:Martirosyan Karine Hamlet - Gyumri M. State after Nalbandyan
Applicant of the Chair of Armenian Literature of the Pedagogical InstituteE-mail:
