In the process of teaching biology, the development of independent, practical work and especially the solution of problems are of special importance for the development of students' logical and natural thinking, which are at the same time various components of the practical unit of the new system of unit assessment.
 In order to develop the relevant skills of the students, biology petitions guaranteed by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia, problem-solving hours on certain topics are provided for the organization of general education, and in the biology professional program of pedagogical universities, a special professional practical subject "Problem Solving Methodology".
Problem solving is an active cognitive process that carries out many functions and goals of education and upbringing.
It can be considered a "method", a type of educational activity.
Problem solving is often understood as solving problems in a classroom or at home, doing exercises, and getting the right answers.
 This, of course, is necessary, but not sufficient to ensure the effectiveness of training.
 In fact, the methodological approach to problem solving is that the teacher is oriented են not based on problem collections, problem-solving databases, but includes a variety of tasks during the lesson or homework: qualitative, quantitative, simple-complex, difficult, easy, theoretical and practical , experimental, research, constructive և other nature [2].
 The problem-solving mentality and process should be included not only in the traditional "problem-solving" class, but also in any educational material, observations and experiments, and research work.
Problems can also arise during the discussion of any issue, teacher-student, student-student joint work, independent work, in different situations.
One of the most important sections of "Biology Teaching Methodology" university course is "Problem Solving Methodology".
 Based on our experience in teaching this course, it should be noted that in organizing training, we do not teach problem-solving techniques, but teach methodical steps to teach problem-solving through sequential, interrelated questions. [1]
In our work we will present our experience of problem-solving methodology և we will analyze the possibilities of achieving different goals of education and upbringing by solving biological problems.
Introducing students to a biology course in high school is not accompanied from the outset by raising awareness of the need to solve problems.
  Therefore, in the 8th grade, when the learner first encounters problem solving as a component of the assessment of academic achievement, an important and mandatory process of learning biology, he or she may suddenly find himself or herself in a stressful state, especially if he or she has not been "friendly" with math.
 It is clear that the development of problem-solving skills is a long and difficult task for the learner, and requires a particularly pedagogically literate, psychologically gentle and patient attitude from the biology teacher.
 It is very important to provide a psychological atmosphere so that problem solving is not perceived as a requirement to receive a grade with a relevant component in biology, a mandatory task, but to clarify the relationship between character education, human-nature, reality-personal life, biological knowledge for well-being, healthy lifestyle, economic activity. , a way to plan different processes, develop thinking, independence and other skills.
In our opinion, one of the priority steps for a teacher to start solving problems is to acquaint the students with the structural and content features of the questionnaire.
 The learner should be familiar with the structure of the questionnaire, the meaning of the symbols, be able to find the problems related to the relevant theoretical sections, use the explanations at the beginning of each topic correctly, as well as the answers and the appendix.
 Once you have mastered these skills, you can move on to developing problem-solving skills.
  Therefore, it is expedient to carry out the following steps: 1. clarify the topic to which the problem refers, 2. Carefully read the problem, explain, clarify the well-known և unfamiliar concepts in the problem, 3. to separate the main անդակ auxiliary concepts, information (for example, as a result of solving similar problems in the genetics section, the inheritance of the trait often mentioned at the end of the problem becomes not very tense, requiring mechanical treatment), 4. Teach the symbols used to solve the problem; Develop the skills to distinguish the conditions and requirements of the problem, to summarize the problem, 6. To identify the connection of the main concepts of the topic with the given conditions and requirements; Indicate the ways to use them (for example, the scheme of energy exchange reactions, the scheme showing the DNA-RNA-protein link, the theoretical ideas related to the problem, etc.), 7. make a scheme or plan of successive steps, 8. indicate the missing steps in the diagram, data, 9. Theoretically clarify the possibilities of implementing these steps based on the available data, 10. Develop creative thinking by finding ways to find missing data with the help of a diagram, 11. choose the most effective way, 12. be able to make transitions of units of measurement, make accurate mathematical calculations, check them, etc. make a scheme or plan of successive steps, 8. indicate the missing steps in the diagram, data, 9. Theoretically clarify the possibilities of implementing these steps based on the available data, 10. Develop creative thinking by finding ways to find missing data with the help of a diagram, 11. choose the most effective way, 12. be able to make transitions of units of measurement, make accurate mathematical calculations, check them, etc. make a scheme or plan of successive steps, 8. indicate the missing steps in the diagram, data, 9. Theoretically clarify the possibilities of implementing these steps based on the available data, 10. Develop creative thinking by finding ways to find missing data with the help of a diagram, 11. choose the most effective way, 12. be able to make transitions of units of measurement, make accurate mathematical calculations, check them, etc.
During the implementation of each of the mentioned steps, from the direct maturation of the process of solving the problem, many other goals appear imperceptibly, many other goals are solved.
 In our opinion, if these goals are clearly formulated, find a place in the "assets" of the educational and training tasks set for the teacher, then it can be said with confidence that the result of the training will be more satisfactory or multi-purpose.
In order to create this "asset", we used as a material the individual works created by them as a result of the discussions conducted during the study of the "Problem Solving Methodology" course of the GSPI 2012-2013 academic year biology students.
  For each topic discussed, students developed independent methods for teaching specific problem-solving [1] ավորել substantiate the goals achieved during that time.
 The steps proposed by each of them were discussed in the classroom, changed, supplemented, became everyone's property.
Before choosing the method of solving the problem, first the initial level of the class on which the teaching should be organized was assumed.
  Then the main, obvious, primary goals were determined, for the implementation of which the practical work of solving a problem is done.
  The logic of the proposed path և its correspondence to the grade level was substantiated.
By supplementing, replacing with new questions that everyone agrees on, a sequence of supposed answers to the questions that develop logic is developed: chains.
  Starting from some steps, different ways of solution were suggested in a different sequence, their strengths and weaknesses were analyzed.
  In the course of each question, the purpose for which this voluntary path was chosen was emphasized.
 The goal formulated in a certain step was separated - written in the "asset" of the specially created goals, indicating the number of the problem, the step that led to seeing that goal.
  Any problem, topic, as well as the teaching methodology offered by each student contributed to the continuous enrichment of those goals.
 Below we will present the final result, for the creation of which we used the version edited by students Tsoghik Meliksetyan and Lida Edigaryan.
  Any primary goal underlined is invisibly linked to other goals that we have presented in italics.
Thus, as a result of acquiring problem-solving skills, in the learning process it is possible to: 1. Make the lesson more interesting և active.
  Develop individual, group և collaborative work skills.
  The opportunity to use the theoretical material in practice, to work collaboratively, to communicate the opinions and suggestions of others, even with a small contribution to the solution of the problem, Gyle, make the lesson more interesting and useful.
 At the same time, they ensure the involvement of everyone, the development of individual, group and cooperation skills.
  In many cases, in the process of finding a solution to the problem together, the learners learn what they do not know from their classmates or overcome the difficulty with their help.
 Such an atmosphere develops moral values ​​such as friendliness, devotion, mutual help, the will and perseverance to overcome difficulties, to complete the work, to develop the ability to express and defend one's own opinion, position, point of view.
 And for the teacher, new aspects of the learner's character, temperament and abilities are revealed.
2. Helps those who do not have self-confidence to overcome or get rid of "fears".
  For this purpose, the learner with the lowest level of knowledge can be involved in the problem by asking him / her a familiar concept, guiding the concept of the question or extracting some information related to it, and necessarily evaluating it as an achievement.
 And even the smallest contribution to the success of a common cause or the smallest achievement in one's own achievements contributes to the learner's self-esteem, self-confidence, self-esteem, correct assessment of others' abilities and the formation of an objective opinion.
3. Development of the ability-skills to use the application book և other sources correctly.
 As we have already mentioned, at the very moment of solving the first problem it is necessary to get acquainted with the structure and sections of the petition, especially to use the meaning of the conditional և appendix section.
 The development of this feature will also develop the skills to use any source correctly.
4. Concentration.
  Before solving a problem in order to cultivate the ability to focus on work, one must first develop the awareness of the need to read carefully several times, to pay attention to each thought, requiring to read not only with the mind, but also aloud to understand the problem, its essence, especially unfamiliar concepts. , to find a connection between familiar and unfamiliar concepts, and finally to find the key to a solution.
5. Establishment of interdisciplinary և interdisciplinary connections, strengthening of knowledge.
 Applying theoretical knowledge in practice.
When solving any new problem, not only the knowledge and skills acquired from the related subjects, but also from other subjects (mathematics, physics, chemistry, ecology, mother tongue, etc.) are used.
 This ensures the repetition of the previous material, the opportunity to supplement the previous knowledge, the strengthening and development of what has already been acquired, the enrichment of knowledge, the development of skills to apply them in a new, unfamiliar situation.
6. Development of skills to evaluate time correctly.
 At first glance, it seems to be a skill that has nothing to do with solving a problem.
 Meanwhile, one of the key conditions for the success of any job is to correctly assess the timeliness and adequacy of other resources.
7. Development of questioning skills.
  Formulation of correct, guiding, purposeful questions is based on the knowledge of theoretical knowledge, the ability to find connections between conditions and requirements, the ability to penetrate into the meaning of the story, the knowledge of the mother tongue.
The questions that arise from one another imperceptibly develop logical thinking, the ability to express one's own opinion, to express oneself freely, to communicate with others, to speak orally.
8. Development of sequential steps of problem solving, development of rational ways, perception of cause-and-effect relationships, planning skills.
 It is directly derived from the skills mentioned in the previous points, as the perception of time as the most precious value leads to the formation and development of the ability to think rationally, to consider steps, to make the most of all possibilities.
 And through the questions composed in a logical sequence, the activity plan is designed for the learner, the sequence of purposeful steps is clarified, the possibility of choosing a more rational way to solve the problem in the given situation is formed, nurtures a meaningful attitude towards steps and actions.
9. Ability to distinguish the primary from the secondary.
 This goal is directly derived from goals 6-8.
10. Development of decision-making, orientation, choice skills.
 The ability to solve the same problem in different ways develops creative thinking և strengthens the ideas about the relativity of phenomena formed in the study of biology և related sciences, which is very important for making decisions, orienting, making qualities in any unexpected situation.
11. Creation of problem situations, acquisition of skills and abilities to get out of them, development of creative thinking and imagination.
 Creating a problem situation is one of the most expedient ways for the teacher to intervene in the problem solving process.
If the teacher guides the students to find a solution, it creates an opportunity for them to express their opinion to everyone, to analyze all the proposed options, to form a critical attitude, to develop.
 Such an atmosphere is conducive to the development of students' creative thinking, summarizing and drawing conclusions.
  For the teacher, the learning curve is revealed in a similar situation, his / her ability to find a way out of it և other features.
12. Development of knowledge coordination, schematic, application of symbols, modeling skills, ability to express concisely but clearly և.
  As a result of providing the skills and abilities mentioned in the previous points, the learner should be able to use the symbols, understand their meaning, read the information expressed by them, make combinations, expressions, make calculations, that is, complete the problem mathematically, achieve the final goal.
 The use of symbols to solve problems also develops symbolic thinking, which is very important for the development of logic and the perception of cause-and-effect relationships.
 The realization of all the goals mentioned in this point will serve as a practical basis for a variety of further development of the learner's skills for developing աշխատանք doing research work և formulating skills during work activities.
In our opinion, as a result of the realization of the presented goals, it will be possible to increase the level of general literacy and development, the development of the awareness of the evaluation of the teaching-learning process, which is the most important in the continuous process of cognition development.
Literature 1. N. Adamyan, G. Gdlyan, Teaching Methods of Solving a Problem of Genetics in Different Ways // Republican Sci. Proceedings of the session, GPMI 1314/12/2010, pp. 491-493.
Information about the authors Nelli Adamyan Volodya - PhD, Associate Professor, GSPI lecturer, Chief Specialist of KAI ShM, E-mail.
 jivhar@yahoo.com Gohar Gdlyan Perchi - GSPI lecturer, E-mail.
 gohar.gdlyan@mail.ru Lida Edigaryan Arseni - GSPI Master of Biology, 2nd year, 2014-15 academic year.
Tsoghik Meliksetyan Suren, GSPI Master of Biology, 2nd year, 2014-15 academic year.
