Teaching English oral communication is a complex system,which involves a number of mental processes, such as perceiving, remembering, recognizing, processing, and transmitting new information.
 Of these:each in turn represents a combination of physical և mental և actions, conditioned by a numberCharacteristics: learner's age, intellectual potential, worldview, general knowledge, language thinking, language perception, etc.
To ensure the effectiveness of the English language teaching process, it is very important to single out the components of language competence that delineate on English speaking.և in writing.
  These are: vocabulary, grammar, phonology.
Grammar.
 Oral short conversations are frequent,dialogues in which each thought can be expressed noin more than one word or on a short occasion, for exampleSuch conversations are possible, but they are short, it becomes virtually impossible to continue for a long time on different topics.
  Therefore, it is necessary to have a more meaningful conversationto take into account և to collect the grammatical "resources" of the language as well.
It should be noted that English has some peculiarities, which are delimited in written-oral speech.
 Thus. if in writing
If the subject + verb + problem (object) structure prevails, then in oral speech the stretched, alternative structures are more practical.
In the written word, preference is given to the indirect word, whileIn oral speech, direct speech prevails.
 In written speech, a simple word is preferable, while in speech it is mostly vague, not a simple wordapplied.
 There are few pauses in the written word, while there is oral pronunciationThere are many pauses.
  And last but not least, the headline made you read this articleoccupy a special place, including:  o fluctuations,o repetitionso Wrong starto incompletenesso Syntactical blends.
The peculiarities of written-oral speech are not limited to the above.
  There are other distinguishing features.
  For example:Oral personal pronouns (I, you, my, our ավելի) are more commonThey are used more often than writing.
  In addition, there are verbsSpecial of time, gender distribution and frequencylines.
 Let us present them briefly.
 Thus, in oral speech. present
time is twice as long as in the past,o Present-past continuous continuous eggs are rare,o Ordinary verbs make up only 2%,The modal verbs o will, would և can are very practical.
Grammar is one of the important components of foreign language teachingis one of the.
 Due to the grammatical rules, words unite and formword combinations և sentences, as a result, the word carriesmeaningful nature.
  The term "grammar" has many meaningsmeans. o A system of rules and structures of a given language and a set of patterns for changing words in sentences(normative grammar),o rules, structures and patterns of the languagescience (theoretical grammar),o An aspect of verbal activity where grammar worksas a possible means of serving verbal activitiesgrammatical operations system (functional grammar) [2].
o One of the most important tasks of a foreign language learner is the grammar of that languageknowledge is to communicate, write, speak, read competentlyfor.
From this point of view, situational exercises are a learning processImporting is very effective because learners do itbased on their life experience, facts of everyday life, realitieson.
 In addition, situations can arise from a variety of sourcesthrough pictures, films, tables, realities, etc.
Next we offer the following situational processes aimed at mastering grammatical language material.Role play.
 a shopping trip to buy a:Answer information questions.
 Name,Situational exercises give learners an opportunityAbility to use grammatical structure in verbal activity [4; page 5].
Situational approach in modern methodology is a lotis effective because it is fascinating և learners can at the same timeDemonstrate their linguistic and communicative abilitiesexperience.
 The teacher's task is to professionally prompt topics that:contain the right language և motivate learners to interact positively.
 In the presented situations, the teaching of grammar is carried out by a combination of interactions, including the corresponding language material.
 Learners are offered words, phrases, and vocabulary patterns that they must use in context, situations, or role-plays.
Thus, it becomes clear that the methods and approaches used in both vocabulary and grammar teaching are in factare aimed at learners' language and communication skillsdevelopment, whether they are perceptual or reproductive.
The teacher needs to know for what purpose this or that is being introducedgrammatical material to express thoughts (reproductive grammar) or to recognize or understand (perceptual grammar).
 The relationship between grammar and different types of verbal activities can be illustrated in the following diagram.
Grammar և verbal activity species ratioյ:
Talk:Listen:Spoken Wordn:
ւ:
o:
թ:
ւ:
o:
n:
a
k:
a
r:
e:
q:
It can be seen from the diagram that reproductive grammar is aimed at developing the ability to speak and write, and perceptual grammar is aimed at developing listening and reading skills.
n:
a
k:
a
ղ:
o:
r:
d:
a
t:
r:
a
r:
e:
V:
յ:
n:
ւ:
o:
թ:
ւ:
o:
n:
a
k:
a
r:
e:
q:
n:
a
k:
a
ղ:
o:
l:
a
k:
n:
H:
The written wordRead:Write:Learners of reproductive grammar skillsmust be acquired to understand the content of the text.
 Therefore, grammar exercises should be considered when developing or selectingto take the peculiarities of certain types of verbal activities, to complicate the content of the material և exercises, contextuse of the structure taught in [5; page 69].
 First of all, the teaching of grammar is aimed at the formation / development of learners' grammatical competence, the activation of their intellectual activity.
  According to the founder of modern European educationin the document: "Pan-European Language AwarenessVocabulary, grammatical knowledge and abilities together with phonological skills form the language competence of learners, which is the core of their common language and communication competence [1; page 69].
Vocabulary.
 Before organizing vocabulary training, it is necessary to develop և clarify a strategy, which includes the following:stages:- word presentation / explanation,- word memorization / reinforcement,- use of the word in communication.
Strategies for developing vocabulary knowledgeare constantly changing, supplemented with new exercises becauseTeaching methods, approaches, goals, and public order change over time.
 Vocabulary training is the core of language education, without which it is impossible to communicate in a given language.
 Communication is improved, first of all, by enriching the vocabularyև Used correctly.
 Learners' grammatical and phonological knowledge, as well as their cultural, practical, verbal, compensatory abilities are possible.
Today, when the interests of the learners are diverse and diverse, it is essential to learn a foreign language as much as possible and interestingorganizing.
  We should not enter new words in this regardLet's be satisfied with traditional teaching methods and means, but try to present as new and interesting solutions as possible, teach vocabulary in a communicative context, in an interactive environment.
 So, let's look at: guess the meaning - Thoughts that help usLive the exercise - "GUESS THE MEANING, Gaps and guessing.
  Thoughts:that help us to live ”. Note that students are usually fun
Do this exercise, especially if the teacher introduces the subject in advance.
1. The set timer is ten minutes.
2. The process.
Stage 1. The teacher writes a saying on the board with some words in itare not, for example, "A room without ……… is like a body without soul." (Cicero).Phase 2. The teacher suggests that students guess the word based on itfrom the context.
 Their attention should be focused on the author of the speech.
The teacher mentions that if the author, for example, is Franklin, M. Twain, b. Show:
։ others, then the thoughts will be wise or humorous.
Phase 3. When the missing words are filled in (for example "A room without books is:like a body without soul. "(Cicero), the teacher starts discussing the topicwhich he initially presented, for example:     As a result, a harmonious communication environment is created, students are involved in the field of verbal activity, each of them strives to express his / her opinion.
Thus, when choosing or importing a vocabulary, the topic of communication is essential, it must be authentic, interesting to the learners.
 It's very important to have an inner need to learnto stimulate, to develop active interaction.
 On the other hand, they will develop as a result of regular introduction of such exercisesstudents' perceptual, discursive, analytical-comparative verbal abilities.
Phonetics.
 Essential in the process of learning speechis the accent count.
  It serves to separate the flow, to emphasize the key meaning of the word.
Usually the accent of modern English is masteredthrough exercises and re-exercises.
 The whole meaning of a sentence or a word can be changed with an accent.
 So in addition to textbooks, a lotIt is possible for learners to hear and copy the language of speakers (live:speech).
 In this regard, it is appropriate to mention that in English with emphasisThe speaker distinguishes between nouns and parts of speech.
Next we present words - nouns with their corresponding verbs.
 When the first syllable is stressed, the word is a noun, and when the last one is a verb.
Exception: There are some points that are similar to the above words, but they do not have a change of accent, for example. CONtact, DIScount,
FInance, INterest; նաև conSENT, conTROL, disGUISE, diVORCE. However, every word has an accent.
  It should be noted that a lotoften the meaning of a sentence can change with a change of accent,for example, in the following sentence:a) The emphasis on the word "I". The point is, everyone likes to be late
The speaker does not.
b) The emphasis on the word "do not". everyone thinks the speaker likes to be late,
but he does not like it.
c) The emphasis on the word "like". The speaker shows that he does not accept the delay or even hates it.
d) The emphasis on the word "late". the speaker shows that he hates the most
is late.
For example, it changes when you emphasize different wordsthe meaning of the sentence.
Many times learners do not back down when communicating in Englishaccent.
  As a consequence, their words do not sound nice, instead they seem boring and unattractive.
  So the teacher must be rightinstruct students not only to speak competently, but also!They follow the correct pronunciation and melody of the word.
There may be one feature that is specific to English spoken language.
 This refers to the connection of new information in high pitch.
  Verbal tonal units at the end of the holidayThe height implies the continuation of the speech, and the low tone implies the end.
 Therefore, this feature in the learning processIt should be noted.
First of all, it would be right to combine phonetic-pronunciation works with teaching vocabulary and grammar.
  Requiredalways give learners the opportunity to hone their pronunciationEncourage them to write the spelling and transliteration of the word.
It is very important to take into account the factors of speech in order to ensure the effectiveness of the process of teaching English.
From this point of view, there are three possible factors that:They contribute to the fluency of speech.
 They are:cognitive, sensory, performance.
Cognitive factors include:o Introduction to the material. The more familiar the material of the conversation, the more meaningful the conversation.
 Naturally, the teacher's problemWhen choosing topics, take into account the opinion of the audience, preferences, age psychological factors.
o Introduction to the genre. Being familiar with the genre makes it easy to speak
to understanding.
o Introduction to the interlocutor. The better you know your partner, the easier it is to talk to him.
 Therefore, the teacher must be able to:Carefully organize collaborations, group work, in whichLearners should communicate as actively as possible.
o Sensory factors. In general, the initial disposition towards the material of the conversation or the speaker himself is provided
or verbal interaction fails.
 Naturally, the teachershould stimulate learners' inner desire to form their own message, to convey it, as he's the communicator, his opinionthe ability to respect, to tolerate, that is, to provide as much as possibleA learning environment of positive, relaxed and respectful mutual understandingin the class.
o Performance factors include:o Speech. Speaking face to face, sometimes body language (gestures, eyes)
contact, facial expressions, hand, foot movements) can provide more effective communication.
o Degree of cooperation. The more students are united and cooperative, the more they will have to say, the richer and
The material presented by them will be meaningful.
  On the other handthey realize the importance of helping each other because they are equalThey are responsible for the work.
o Effective time planning. This is a very important factor,
for only with proper and effective time planning can one prepare well for a conversation or presentation(presentation).
  The more time you have to prepare, the moreThe word will be smooth, infallible and literate.
o Environmental situations. They may be different, for example
speaking under loud music or in poor acoustic conditionsOf course, not everyone is comfortable or easy (even in Armenian).
 From here, things get trickier, and this is where the true meaning of life lies!It is also an essential factor.
o Motivation to speak. At the heart of any foreign language teaching is the principle of creating situations that facilitate learners' communication.
  The learner must always be motivated to speak, he և!motivation to speak.
  And the more convincing that motivation is,the more effective the communication [3; page 132].
Oral speech is one of the possible manifestations of human mental abilities.
 The development of oral speech takes place throughout a personduring life, bearing the complete stamp of the general development of the society.
  Continuous processing of oral speech is a mandatory, continuous and post-coherent process.
 Its development is based onexclusively on the actual function of language.
Here's a look at some of the factors to considerIt is possible in oral speech.
 However, it should be noted that they are not limited to predicting or guaranteeing the effectiveness of the conversation,because there are personal-psychological factors.
  Thus,Hastening can not always have a negative effect.
  Even some interlocutors are more fluent and systematic when:they have a problem with time։ delivery.
  In addition to oral speechThe physiological factor may also be present during exercise, e.g.Communication mood, fatigue, health condition, etc.
Both linguistic and non-linguistic knowledge are used for the success of oral speech.
  That is, effectiveIn order to have a conversation, it is necessary to have basic knowledge on the topic of conversation, such as judgmental or discourse knowledge, knowledge of the speech process, and finally, grammar, vocabulary, phonological knowledge.
Recording the above components can be a prerequisite for developing learners' oral communication skills ևrequires a systematic approach.
Therefore, it is necessary to review and amend from time to timeexisting teaching methods, approaches and technologies, which, due to objective and subjective circumstances, may be losttheir efficiency and timeliness.
It is obvious that their correct choice and application in the context of the dominance of communicative learning is aimed at increasing the effectiveness of teaching / learning for learners.the formation and development of language and communication competence.
Literature 1. Pan-European language knowledge / awareness system. Study, Teaching, Assessment, Strasbourg, Committee on Education, Language Policy Department, Translation, edited by S. Zolyan, M. Astvatsatryan և:
others, Yerevan, 2005, 278 pagesJuly, 2004, Available.
 http; // iteslj.org.4. Mora J. Teaching Grammar in Context. San Diego State University, 2010. Available.
http:
//englishenkaysway.blogspot.com/Information about the authors:Asatryan Susanna Parg - example. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor
V. YSLU after Brusov, pedagogy մեթոդ teaching methods of languages
Associate Professor, E-mail.
 asatryansusanna@yahoo.com, asatryansusanna@gmail.com:Harutyunyan Ani Mnatsakan - V. YSLU Master's Degree after Brusov Graduate, "Armavir Development Center" Non-Governmental Organization,http:
//armavirdc.org/, project coordinator, E-mail.
