Current trends in the development of society predict that:In the future, the socio-political and economic spheres will have high technological saturation.
 It applies equally to him. "general education.
 At the current stage of educational reforms, the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) is one of the conditions for increasing the effectiveness of teaching and ensuring practical orientation.
In the information age, in the field of educationRadical changes are closely related to modern ICT toolswith development and spread.
  In this connection, it is changingthe nature of teaching and learning (1,2).
  The peculiarities of the use of ICTs in education should be studiedinclude the introduction of information technology in educationFamiliarity with various factors.
 In particular, there is a need for technical as well as software tools used in educationDetailed study և their content supplement.
Various computer programs and the Internet are changing the ways and means of acquiring knowledge.
  Teaching և:Innovative teaching methods transform the classroomthe way of conducting a lesson.
It should be noted that not all methods and programs are harmoniousis involved in the educational process, which is explainedby both objective and subjective factors.
 Often the computer(with few exceptions) used in lessons as a means of demonstration ևdoes not fully ensure student activity.
 Here we workWe have "false information" with learning, when the computer is artificially involved in the educational process.
  This danger creates the illusion of a new method, in fact it reduces it more oftenthe effectiveness of the educational process.
  CognitiveIn the process, the teacher's computer culture presupposes ICTModerate, appropriate and timely complex application of funds (3,4).
It should be noted that computer technology training is neededtargeted to implement only the appropriate material base բազin the presence of the latter's software, the teacher's computer literacy culture.
Computer multifunctionality as different typesto be able to process information as well as to perform different operations with the same type of information (5,6).
The use of computer as a teaching tool in biology pursues the following goals: a)
Spatial structure and functions of biological objectspresentation and identification of features, b) presentation of the dynamics of the mechanisms of biological processes, c) experiments with a computer model of a biological object or phenomenond) Ensuring the mastery of biological concepts, e) Preparation of biological educational games, f) Automated testing of learners' knowledge, g) Learner's own knowledgeevaluation և etc.
    The learner is usually happy to join the assessment process when he or she has the opportunity to make his or her own choicesself-development to observe a task with a complexity corresponding to one's own knowledge և awareness.
The purpose of using computer technology in teaching biology is to develop cognitive skills based on the material being taught; second, to teach the material in a variety of collaborative ways, which in turn develops learners' communication skills.
 For example, multimediaTechnologies allow for thoughtful, harmonious integration of many types of information, allowing computer-based biology lessons to be presented in a variety of forms, such as moving images with sound effects, including sketches, drawings, slides, recordings, and music videos. animations իմ animated imitations.
  It is appropriate to mention here multimediaThe only և easy-to-overcome negative side of the funds is that of the fundsextra required from a biology teacher to work withis the preparation.
The use of computer technology in teaching biology provides a number of advantages.• Increased interest and motivation in the learning process;• Ability to model processes of biological objects,• Rapid assimilation of the content of the educational material, discovery of causal links, development of knowledge about biological patterns;• promotes impartiality testing of learners; • responds quickly to learner actions; • provides individual work (training) opportunities;  • Attractive use of information transfer վող changing formspromotes the educational process, • Provides immediate confirmation of correct answers when performing tasks; • Provides access to information resources for in-depth study of the material; • Provides an opportunity for rational implementation of independent work planning.
Thus, we can clearly say that the use of computer technology in teaching biology is teachingունի has indisputable advantages over other traditional means ևThe success of the educational process depends on the systematic use of ICTwith application.
The latter assumes biologists-specialists, programmers, teachers in accordance with the didactic principles of teaching ևcreation of joint e-courses by psychologists that:must meet the following principles:  Comply with biology curricula as:by volume of information as well as by structure, Խիստ Being highly dynamic, reflect modern biologyachievements,  : Should be distinguished by the simplicity of the structure և useefficiency,  should be used for a biology course orHighly customized quality software (account:taking into account the characteristics of each age group).
Conclusion.
 It is obvious that the efficiency of teaching natural sciences increases when the theoretical knowledge is strengthened by laboratory-practical works.
  It's for learnersphenomena of acquiring knowledge, making generalizations, analytical thinking, making independent conclusions,It is a necessary precondition for the development of the ability to interpret.
  Ours:Insufficient logistics of educational institutions these daysThe existence of the base can be compensated by a methodological new oneby introducing approaches.
With the integration of ICT, the above approaches will help learnersto develop the skills to conduct scientific research, to analyze the results of experience, and to make generalizations.
урока.
 explain new materials, improve it and check knowledge, skills,lesson.
  explanation of the new material, its fastening and to checking knowledge, skills,Literature   Undergraduate Science Education.
 A New Biology Education for the Twenty-First:2. Cookson P. (2000) Implication of Internet technologies for higer education.
 North:3. Information and communication technology subjectprogram, pp. 1296-1319.
  www.mes.gov.ge/uploads/gegmebi/8.docx.
в школе и ВУЗе ”, 8 - 10 ноября 2007 г. - Moscow, MGU.
 2007. С. 63-64.  Information about the authors: Alvard G. Kirakosyan - life. scientist Candidate, ASPU Associate Professor,
E-mail:
 kalvard@yandex.ru,Hakobyan Mamikon Zalibek - Tech. scientist Candidate, ASPU Associate Professor,
 E-mail:
