It is very good to be close to God.
And there is no other way to get closer,unless he enlightens himself with knowledge.
Gr. Master Pahlavuni
Today they are constantly exploited in the modern educational systemthe ongoing reforms and their results.
  Of course, too muchIt is possible to comply with modern requirements without falling behindfrom general pan-European programs, but in this case we value the goal of teaching and learningև national upbringing, which, by the way, recently in some casesis ignored.
 Note that from ancient times the Armenian intellectualsThey were concerned about the Armenian upbringing and the problems of national education.
Thus, for Grigor Magistros, the primary concern was "the rich Armenian Aramian school created by the efforts of many educational generations should never be forgotten, on the contrary, the torch of Armenian schooling should always remain bright at all times" (7, p. 263).
 Then, giving priority to the traditional Armenian upbringing for the future Armenian educational generations, the great scientist finds that creative works are stored there.The achievements of thought, which will become a solid foundation for the Armenian scholar when the sciences are on the right path (7, p. 291).
In this regard, we consider the existence of a high-leaning high school in our educational system, in this case the Trbanjyan Altar of Harichavank, which aims to bring up and educate Armenian Christians, as well as future clergy still in school.Providing comprehensive and in-depth education from the bench.
We will try to take our work in two directions. First, we will compare the modern-traditional, especially the educational realities of the 10-15th centuries and the teaching related to Old Armenian.
methods.
 Moreover, we have chosen the mentioned centuries, taking into account that:From the 10th century onwards, Grabar ceased to be the language of communication of society, remaining the language of communication between God and God.
 With this in mind, the teaching of ancient Armenian had a clear purpose.
 As for usNowadays, the teaching of Grabar in caring schools is conditioned by the preservation of the traditional language of the church rite.
  In fact, from the 10th century onwards, the teaching of Old Armenian todayOne of the purposes is to conduct the ritual of godliness competently,remains the same.
The second direction that we will follow is to compare and parallel the realities of teaching Grabar.with the realities of teaching modern literary Eastern Armenian at the school.It will be a forerunner and a pillar.
Thus, teaching in the altar is done in high schoolin accordance with humanitarian flow programs, including of a critical natureSubjects: Bible study, music, singing,History of the Armenian Church with a more in-depth program, Old Armenian, solfeggio.
  It is noteworthy that education is organized and conducted hereaccording to the traditions inherited from the Middle Ages, of course, without exceptionwithout taking into account the realities of the modern education system.
 By the way, when we say medieval or medieval, we do not mean backward, "dusted" traditions and methods, on the contrary, theyThese are realities that have been examined over time and are still relevant today.
  Examining the experience of the famous teachers of the past, we consider it necessary to refer to it, especially that "գործ many worksThey have found work to be done in our world as well, and worthy of a letter of remembrance. "
  For example, the altar is a boarding school և free of charge.
  In medieval Armenia it was used for teaching (especially elementary)availability. For example, Mkhitar Gosh (whom Smbat agreed with)
Gundstable) 1 states in the Court Book: "I do not owe my child
to teach according to the rule ”(14, pp. 76-77).
 And Smbat Gundstable, earlierHe was trying to regulate the vulnerable by legal meanseducating people by stimulating the flow of people seeking education ևs. "Then
commands the law to take care of the sick, to take care of them, to make them happya job that many will apply and come to hope ”(14).
 By the way, the last reality is thatMany people apply and come to hope, and now it is relevant to almost everyoneis one of the priority issues of schools.
Thus, the teaching was not natural or arbitrary, but thisSpecial works have been carried out in that direction.
  First, let's start with thatState care for education was considered a priority1 "My law commands that a priest should not be paid at all for reading a book or studying in a church of other sciences, but it is not appropriate to take a fee and then teach."
 See SmbatCommander, Judgment Book, 76-77.
and sponsorship.
 For example, Gr. Pahlavuni, concerned about the fact that students are disappointed before learning, wrote that the general development and education of the people is more backward և
It would be regulated if the Armenian kings approached this issue carefully and diligently. "For the pride of the Aramaean sex and
relentless nature and strict discipline I would not like to continue my education like this, or if not care, who reached the statebe lucky, be honorable and cut my prudent craft into kargonic ornamentsto Aparan, as the great Ptolemy and others like him ”(7, p. 320).
In order to further enhance the effectiveness of learning, Gr.Pahlavuni, as an in-depth pedagogue, hints in his papers about the age peculiarities of the students, according to which he changes his writing style, paying attention to the presentation of the material.relative simplicity, affordability, clarity.
  Moreover,This is in the case when Pahlavuni was generally against affordable teaching, considering it worthy of the lazy (7, p. 320).
  By the way, greatThe scientist wrote a series of eloquent words cursing the lazypapers, such as "Towards a Philosopher Not Directly" (DB),of hope and pride "(DZ)," In the sense of hope "(DZ) և etc.
The systematization of teaching was not overlookedwith a simple to complex transition. For example, the first Armenian secular scientist and
Pedagogue Grigor Magistros (990-1058) sent his students to Barsegh ևIn a letter to Elisha (letter XE) he explains the so-called study accepted in the Byzantine educational centers.a step-by-step system program that provided for a four-step version of learning.
 Thus, first of all, grammar was used with the availability of relevant auxiliary translation literature, secondly, rhetoric with its three sections, thirdly:Philosophy given in the works of Plato և AristotleBoundaries և Fourth: Pythagorean geometry. "Because first
It is necessary to study grammar fluently with translationand follow these three rhetorical divisions with unmistakable division, and then contain the Boundary, and the Platonic andof the definitions and judgments of the Aristotelian and again of the Pupagarian pottery ”(7, p. 302).
  But before all this, the student's foresight was used. the learner must be well acquainted
be Old և New Testaments, folklore, ancient Greek literature, which were new requirements for the period (7, pp. 312, 322).
 In fact, in this case, it was emphasizedthe need for foreknowledge.
Using the European medieval educational system, G. The Master has developed a new curriculum, taking the teaching to more complex than relatively easy-to-understand subjects, offering St.
book teaching, mythology, a selection of Greek mythologysamples, arithmetic, music, geometry, astronomy, grammar, philosophy, theology.
  Notethat the thematic content of the subjects was not blindly copied, buthas been periodically reviewed and amended as necessary.
In fact, "if grammar students in European schools were immediately taught grammar, then G. Master:
instructs that hard, difficult course to teach them moreeasy-to-understand, after teaching easy subjects ”(17, p. 16).
Later, Hovhannes Imastaser (1047-1129) generalized "coordinated not only the doctrinal curricula, but also the list of recommended literature, as he" enriched schooling and science by examining phenomena and realities - expertby claiming that experience is unequivocal ”(10), which, of course,It was a great progress.
One of the primary issues during the training was the language of instructionThe issue of accessibility is diverse, often controversialOpinions were expressed.
  For example, Gr. Pahlavuni was in favor of the tricky,
the spun language, which came from his pedagogical views.
First, he thought that his words were not directed at the lazy and the lazy, but at the otherto ignorant readers, to scientists with the imprint of other theoretical thinking, soaring in the air of infinity of ideas and views (7, p. 282).
 How did he use such writing style as if?stimulus, trying to arouse interest in learning.
 "Of courseHe did it in such a subtle way that the lazy ones left each othertheir weakness, and try to understand the Letter to them, in which theyThe genius was visible to the monk ”(7, p. 285).
We consider it necessary to refer to such realities as:The achievements of the Armenian intellectual pedagogues were from the European oneforward. For example, Gregory of Tatarstan (1346-1409), preceded by the British pedagogue, philosopher John Locke (1632 1704), noted that the soul of a child is born with a hard plate or washed parchment, whatever is written on it, they will take it.
At the same time in the matter of forming a person is not ignored as hereditary"Natural" as well as achievable "gracious" features.
 Listing:"We cannot ignore the medieval pedagogical achievements." Գ. Tatatsi's suggestion: "Respect the child's self, be caring, kind,
At the same time, he considered it superfluous to exaggerate tenderness or extreme strictness, to show care, care, love,intransigence, demandingness, backwardness ”(12).
Referring to our days, let us mention that for the effective teaching of Old Armenian, first of all, we clarify the program of teaching Old Armenian, for which we consider it a starting point in high school.The program peculiarities of teaching modern literary Eastern Armenian, without which it is impossible to imagine the teaching of Old Armenian.
We are more than sure that the modern Armenian courseAt the same time, it is necessary to take the teaching of Grabar, creating a program correspondence.
 Thus, the teaching of Old Armenian presupposes, first of all, a basic knowledge of the sound system of the ancient Armenian ևon the rules of reading, then refer to the teaching of grammatical realities.
  Basic knowledge of ancient Armenian within the framework of modern Armenian language is intended to be taught only in the 10th stream of the humanities in the secondary school.in the class on "Grabar writing and pronunciation", "Grabar bilinguals and trilinguals", "Grabar vocabulary" ևabout a dozen practical tasks (8, pp. 10-16).
  This:In addition, according to the program, 34 hours per year are devoted to the teaching of orabar, one hour per week, and teachingThe content is entrusted to the teacher, who, in his discretion, owns itwill make the program due to preferences.
  As for the gift, there are 4 hours a week, of which:The first two are provided for the presentation of the basic knowledge, the next two for the study, and the teaching is carried out by Petros BediryanWith the textbook "Language Ancestors" (see 2).
To increase the effectiveness of learningWe offer to combine the programs of Grabar և modern Armenian.
Thus, because of the modern Armenian language of the 10th grade of high schoolThere is no reference to grammatical material in the program, then the program's common to modern և ancient Armenian's can not ևwas created. needed when teaching Grabar grammatical realities
relied on the knowledge gained in the lower grades.
 In fact,this period we can use the Old Armenian nounfor teaching grammar of number, conjugation and conjugation.
 And already in the first semester of the 11th grade, 24 hours () 1 is allocated to the nounthe repetition of the above grammatical categories, which we can provide in parallel to reinforce the corresponding Grabar realities.
  The same can be done when teaching the system of humility. So, we offer in the 2nd semester of the 11th grade
to refer to the ancient Armenian conjugation system, and from the second half of the first semester of the 11th grade to pass to its repetition andstrengthening, especially in the first half 22 hours: in the second half10 hours for both faceless and welcome horsesexpression and expression.
 In the second semester of the 11th gradeWe suggest referring to the adjective, the year, the pronoun from the parts of the noun, for the repetition and strengthening of which the following:In the 12th grade, the modern Armenian program provides 6 hours,and for the beginning of the 12th grade we have planned the teaching of macabre.
 What?refers to the prepositions, then, considering the functional difficulty of the latter, we suggestto reflect on their teaching throughout the course, starting from the 10th grade, passing each pre-meaning separately, of course, reinforcing it with constant repetition.
  What about?1 Software realities ենք We took the data about the time to Harichavankfrom the modern Armenian language curricula of the altar.
due to their specificity of speech, then we are more preferableconsider them as part of speech to study them in the second grade of the 12th gradein the semester, when the modern Armenian program repeatedly refers to the word connection.
 Thus, let's present the above with a table.   Table 1:GrabarModern Armeniannoun. types,
holov, holovum, numberverb, verb's expressionthe horses. weather and:
Periods: adjective, year,pronoun:macbay, contact grade:I semester of X.II term of XI half of XInoun. types
collection, number:verb faceless horses, verb
seasons and timesnoun. types
track, number (repetition)verbs, verbs for the expression of verbs.seasons and times (repetition) I half of XII XI II II term adjective, year, pronounadjective, year, pronoun(repetition)macabre, preposition, preposition XII II termFor the purpose of teaching Old Armenian և Problems:There are features that deserve attention.
 First of allThe fact is that ancient Armenian is a dead literary language ևIt no longer serves as a means of public communication.
 In this case, the main purpose of teaching is to master the language, not as a means of communication, but as a means of conducting the church rite accurately, reading and understanding the texts.
In fact, if high schoolThe aim of imparting knowledge about Grabar in the humanities stream is to make the mastery of the modern Armenian language easier and more substantiated, then the leading goal in a different altar is different.
To make the teaching of Grabar more purposeful, we suggest choosing practical texts for each gradeFrom the book course to the original music.
  Thus, in the 10th grade, the teaching of the Holy Bible begins with the Gospel. as original
We offer reading նյութ practical exercises materialtake the appropriate passage, the same with careful singingrelated.
  By the way, this methodical invention has been used since the 13th century.In order to make the teaching of grammar more grounded, Hovhannes Yerznkatsi, in writing his textbook, in addition to grammatical interpretations, also used books on history, rhetoric, grammar, philosophy and other sciences, creating a stable interdisciplinary connection.
As now, in the old days no less attention was paidteaching methods.
  Thus. "Knowledge alone is not enough
to have, you need to know how to teach, otherwise it will not work muchև will gain little ”(9, page 70).
Referring to teaching methods, let us first mention that we use and evaluate both modern interactive and modernthe traditional methods of taking the test, the rejection of which, he thinksIt would not be right.
  For example, T. Juharyan, not denying the greatness of innovation
The role and significance in the field of pedagogical development, notewas. "Tradition, if not devoid of antiquity, is important for the advancement of science.
  True traditionalism also plays an important role in the development of methodological and pedagogical thoughtin ”(17, p. 241).
      In this regard, it is necessary to determine which topic by which methodIt is more expedient, easier to teach, and in which case the learning will have a deeper basis.
  Moreover, from ancient times teaching has been carried out with various tricks and methodslectures, individual work, questions, conversations-debates, competition, homework, homework, book work, discussion և etc., which are still relevant today ևTheir role and significance in the modern educational system is undeniable.
Thus, Isaiah Nchetsi, seeing the difficulty of the verb part, attached it to his work "Grammar Analysis".bowing table.
  The method of the table suggested by Nchetsi today:It is very effective, for example, to lower the verbs according to the bases (note:we have simple tenses) can be presented in the form of a table.    Table 2:Current basis:The basis of the past perfectLimited1. present2. past imperfectSubordinate:The next dayImperative:1.Amperative imperativeLimited   1. perfect pastSubordinate:  II tomorrowImperative:1. original (present)2. persuasive (tomorrow) The table shows the conjugation systems of Grabar և modern Armenian based on the method of comparison-comparison.GrabarLimited1. Present:2. past imperfect3. The past is perfectSubordinate:I tomorrow, II tomorrowImperative:1. original (present)2. persuasive (tomorrow)3. Inhibitory imperative      Table 3:Modern ArmenianLimited1. Present:2. past imperfect3. The past is perfect4. Tomorrow5. early. past:
6.performerpresent7. Imperfect pastAghdzakan (tomorrow, past)Hypothetical (tomorrow, past)Compulsory (tomorrow, past)Imperative:1. original (present)2. Inhibitory imperativeThe same can be done, for example, year, pronoun or anyin the case of other words.
As for the latest methods, we consider it effective for teaching Old Armenian in the promotion phase of the CPT system.apply the prism or grouping method at the stage of meaning perceptionVenn diagram մեթոդ methods called interactive sign system,and in the weighing section, the cube method.
 As an example, let's talk about two of the above methods. Wenny
The diagram is a combination of two realities with similarities and differences, for example, comparing modern-Armenian to ancient Armenian realities when teaching clues:can be presented as follows: with a crossing area in the center
In the circles we write Old Armenian, Modern Armenian, then each oneWe mark the characteristic features in the corresponding sections, after which we emphasize the commonalities,for example (direct, transitive,     plaintiff, exclusiveexclusive, practical)Feature with 6 holessexual, tragic, plaintiffFeature with 7 holes(direct, sexual,practical, intransitive)GrabarModern ArmeniancommonalitiesRolling:main meaningsWe must keep in mind that the teaching of Old Armenian implies not onlyreporting grammatical material, other work on the text.
 In this regard, we consider a system of interactive signs expedientcalled the method, which is more expedient to use in the perception of meaningin the stage.
  Thus, while reading the new material, the learner notes what he / she knows (V),news (+), contrary to what he knows (-), incomprehensible realities (?),interesting (), the issues to be discussed (!) with appropriate signs.
 For example, take the lesson XVI. "Page of the Only Begotten of the Father…"
On the page of the Only Begotten of the Father and the light glorified with him, voices were heard in the sandstone.
 Seeing the birth of the great patriarch Grigor, he told with joythe believing king.
 Let us build the tabernacle of light:Light came to us from Armenia to the world (2, p. 54).
The table compiled by the student will look something like this:Table 4:the Father's exceptional eggpluralthe plaintiffhas -s և no ending.sound (f) my voicepage of the past perfect egg!Why?sentence:on fillingnot set fPreposition:holythe tabernacle of lightvoices were heardconnection:in the voiceshould be acceptedas a plaintiffstay in the smaPreliminary:structurespast derbysexually assaulted subjectbig lightto the patriarchGregoryThe words abyss և sandstone can be seen hereibid:synonymsto sound hereis used as:causalverb:It is no secret that in some cases the questions are not asked on timeare forgotten, and thanks to this method it is possible to get the answers to the questions that arose during the reading, to specifyto substantiate what you know, ել to summarize the past material.
Summing up our article, let us mention that we agree with the point of viewthat the educational process is a constantly changing, evolving phenomenon that goes hand in hand with the demands of the time և requires creativityapproach, it is impossible to give exceptional value to any method while ignoring others.
  Each specialist, according to the capacity of the audienceexperience and training, conducts the lesson trying to give the highest possible results.
 After all, pedagogy is exciting from the beginningare effective learning opportunities? Expert searches are inevitable in this case, even very necessary
recommended.
Literature 1. Arakelyan A. G., History of the development of the intellectual culture of the Armenian people, Yerevan, Haypethrat, 1959, 724 pages.
2. Bediryan P. S., Language of Ancestors, S. Etchmiadzin, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin,
2006, 210 pages.
3. Gary W. և others, Modern pedagogical methods, Vocational education և professional development. Handbook for educators and education organizers, Yerevan, IREX,
"Noyan Tapan" printing house, 2005, 404 pages.
4. Gyulbudaghyan SV, Methodology of the Armenian language, Yerevan, Yerevan University Press, 1978, 325 pages.
5. Yezekyan L., Sargsyan A., Sakapetoyan R., Armenian language, Senior textbook11th grade of the general science and mathematics stream of the schoolfor, Yerevan, "Tigran Mets" publishing house, 2009, 223 pages.
6. Yezekyan L., Sargsyan A., Sakapetoyan R., Armenian language, Senior textbookFor the 10th grade of the school's humanities stream, Yerevan, "Macmillan- Armenia ", 2009, 91 pages.
· ÁñÍáõÝ¿áõÃÇõÝÁ, Èáë ²Ý × »ÉÁë," Al your "publishing house, 1987, 387 pages.
8. Famous figures of Armenian culture, V-XVIII centuries, Yerevan, YerevanUniversity Publishing House, 1976, 590 pages.
9. Fathers of the Armenian Church, vol. E., Patriarch Poghos of Adiranapolis, Khrat
Museum (18-19th centuries), Holy Etchmiadzin, "Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin"Publishing House, 2009, 403 pages.
10. History of the Armenian people, Volume III, Yerevan, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, 1976, 1023 pages.
11. Sargsyan A., Armenian language teacher's manual, general natural sciences and mathematics streams of 10-12 grades, Yerevan, "Macmillan -Armenia "publishing house, 2009, 91 pages.
12. Simonyan J., History of Armenian Pedagogy, Yerevan, "Pedagogue"Publishing House, 2006, 263 pages.
13. St. John Chrysostom, Selection of Trees, General Churchfathers, h. C, Holy Etchmiadzin, "Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin" publishing house, 2009, 223 pages.
14. Mkhitar Gosh, Book of Judgment, Yerevan, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences,1975, 642 pages.
15. Vardumyan S., Harutyunyan L., Jaghinyan N., Varella G., Co-author: Abordo E., Modern pedagogical approaches. Theories, methods, assessment, Handbook for teachers and students, Yerevan, IREX, 2003, 404 pages.
16. Ter - Grigoryan A., E., Methodology of the Armenian language, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1980, 563 pages.
17. Juharyan T., Methodology of the Armenian Language, Book 1, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1978, 258 pages.
Information about the author:Hayrapetyan Astghik Hrach - something. scientist candidate, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan
Institute, E-mail.
