One of the priority tasks of pedagogical science is to significantly improve the quality of education by continuing the structural and content components of research and innovation activities.To meet the modern requirements for the quality of education, to organize the educational and cultural process according to age and individual characteristics.
The effectiveness of pedagogical activities is characterizedwith continuous improvement of professional qualities և to a large extentdue to the deep conceptual foundations of the educational processwith shifts.
In the current conditions of pedagogical professional activitybecomes a powerful description of world educational processescompliance, implementation of educational policy in line with geopolitical developments and professionalismDevelop a problem-solving strategy.
The aspects of developing a new concept of education are:Teacher-student interaction, learner valuesthe formation of the system, the means of its implementation and the methods.
In the traditional system of education there are not only subject,pedagogical-methodological, but also educational issues, whichFamous pedagogues, philosophers, psychologists spoke about ևwhich are still unresolved.
The purpose of this article is to present the educational issues that arise especially in the process of adolescent upbringing և to identify pedagogical counselingways to overcome them.
Speaking about the educational issues, let us mention that at present they are of a more acute nature.
 This is due to the fact thatthat in modern conditions the child's childhood takes place in a society characterized by value bankruptcy, lack of clear goal orientations, deepening of social stratification, conflicts in children and adolescents, omissions of family upbringing.
Let's add that the difficulties in pedagogical practicearise mainly because the communicating party, the child, in this case the adolescent, is in the stage of self-knowledge անhas a pronounced need for self-affirmation, and the otherThe pedagogue, on the other hand, always tries to take a dominant position, to subject the child to his instructions and demands.
  They come from herevarious levels of communication that complicate matterstransmission of information and personal communication.
 In many cases, adolescents' aggressive behavior is due to a low level of school discipline.indifference, sometimes tolerance, toleranceby expression.
 Still in his time I. Գ. Pestalozzi noted. "The misfortune of the school is that the superficial, insufficient teaching methods used in it, as well as the whole volume of teaching aids, in no way
are not connected with the սկզբունք views of living principles in the practice of upbringing ”[1, pp. 184-185].
Introducing teen upbringing in modern conditionsThe problems that arise in the work, which have a negative impact on the effectiveness of the educational process, causing stressful situations, let's address them.Discovering the role of pedagogical counseling for overcoming և organization.
Numerous theoretical-practical approaches to pedagogical counseling have been developed abroad, and different models are used for all subjects of pedagogical activity.
According to M. Ն. Pzner, O. Մ. Advice from Zaichenko and others
is formulated as. Special for "consultants և consultants"
A complex relationship organized as a horse, directed as a separatein the activities of a specialist as well as the whole organizationthe solution of emerging problems և the emergence of positive shiftsև [2,page 9].
 Pedagogical counseling is multi-componentmany functions.
 The purpose of our article is to consider pedagogicalThe consulting component that presupposes consultingAssistance in child և work with the family, the content of which is:  • Working with “difficult” adolescents to address issues related to their behavior in the educational process;• Working with parents who have children or teachershave conflicts, such as with children in need of socio-pedagogical support.
Introducing the functions of this consulting component, let's discuss the situations that require such consulting work.1. Situations that occur in some children in the classroomfrom the difficulty of adapting to the staff.
  In such cases it is necessaryto carry out social-pedagogical counseling, which will allow:to overcome the complexes of such children, to raise their self-esteem.
 In case of social-pedagogical counseling, the pedagogue-counselor may use an incentive և directiveinfluence tactics.
 In the case of incentive tacticsThe main function of the counselor will be the positive behavior of the childEncouraging him, inspiring him with self-confidence, assigning him tasks that will contribute to his responsibility ևthe manifestation of the initiative.
  These actions will help the childthe formation of a class connection.
 The directive influence strategy will be used in case the child lacks a positivesocial experience, բաց negative behavioral attitudes prevail,which are usually related to the external environment, socio-pedagogical neglect or unfavorable heredity.
2. In case of conflict between parents and children, the pedagogical counselor will work with the parents.The main goal is the parents' objective perception of the child's problem, his personality, his communication with the child.educational tactics, as well as the educational processis the decision to cooperate with other participants.
 Coordinating the actions of parents և educators may be involved in supporting the family.
 It is desirable for a difficult child to be in the area of ​​responsibility of either party at all times.
  These efforts are necessary because even one "problem"The child can have a significant impact on other school children.
 The main orientation of family counseling is not to get rid of, but to understand և to support the child, to protect his interests.
 There are different models of family counselingsuggested by various researchers, including S. Gordon, N..
The "lighting model" was developed by Dijson.
 According to this model, the pedagogue who advises the family teaches the parents to diagnose the problematic behavior of children, to decideits characteristics և analyze the possible consequences [3, p. 85].
In this case, the educator-counselor can choose the defense strategy that will be useful for parents and childrenduring emerging conflicts.
  A key condition for the success of this tactic is that the consultant will act as a bufferIn that role, there should be authority for both parties.
Regardless of the tactics chosen by each consultantEnsuring unity in the family will be an important indicator of the efficiency of its work.
 The main indicator of unity is value-oriented-material-valueunity, which means the degree to which family relationships develop in which family members are dividedObjectives and values ​​of joint activities.
3. Occurred in the process of teacher-student communicationIn case of controversial situations, the pedagogue-consultant will work with both the teacher and the student.
 The help of the pedagogue-counselor is that through him the teacher understands the reason for the student's behavior, reveals the motives hidden in the context of his words, actions, և prevents the conflict at the stage of its initiation, and if alreadyhas deepened, to find ways to overcome it.
 In such situations it is necessary in the activities used by the pedagogue-consultantto separate the "Collaborative Conversation" model.
  Introducing the model,It should be noted that it includes 2 blocks: psychological and pedagogical.
 The psychological block includes the counselor by counselorEmpathic listening, asking open-ended questions, thoughts and feelingsthe formation.
  The pedagogical block includes the structuring of issues, revealing the position of the consultant, clarifying his role.
The collaborative conversation model is implemented using the following sequential steps.
In the first stage, the teacher introduces the problem to the counselor,Listening to the counselor asks guiding questions that help the teacher to speak clearly and the counselor to better understandThe teacher's personal characteristics, as well as the essence of the problem.
In the second stage, the analysis of the reasons is carried out.who created that problematic situation.
In the third stage, the sequence of tasks that the teacher must perform in order to make changes in his / her working style that contribute to the solution of the problem are discussed.
The fourth stage is the stage of change analysis.
 Analyzed:The changes made as a result of the consultation.
The pedagogue-counselor is the mirror in which the pedagogue issees the situation created during the activity of his / her studentfrom the point of view of a third person, discovers mistakes made by both և tries to interpret the situation impartially.
The need for pedagogical counseling for the student arises when the child has a desire to communicate something.
  According to O. Ս. Gazman: "That
to help a schoolgirl in a difficult situation so that shehe learns to solve his own problems on his own և to express himself in everyday difficulties ”[4, p. 74].
The help of a pedagogue-counselor will be aggressiveBehavior rehabilitation of children, aimed at childrenConflict resolution, correction of deviant behavior, liberation from dangerous habits, addictions, self-realization և self-affirmation.
  American pedagogue և psychologist L. Thorndike notes.
"We need to see change in our upbringing… We's someonewe do not educate unless we bring about change in it ”[5, p. 25].
Ն. Ն. Mikhailova և S. Մ. Youssef is considered a pedagogue
Support as a special pedagogical activity, which is significantly different from teaching and upbringing activities.
According to these authors, the pedagogical support of the child in educational practice "is different strategies of adult activity related to the problem of the child.with.
  These tactics will ensure the safety of the child as he or she gains experience on his or her own.երեխ help the child to overcome the emotional feelings of the problem ևcontribute to the transfer of the problem in the activity according to its solution.
  Pedagogical through appropriate tacticssupport is provided by a child-specific caregiver;developing and forming functions ”[6, p. 108].
Among the main forms of counseling used by a counselor-pedagogue to eliminate child aggression, bullying, should be distinguished as individual,as well as group work.
Individual intervention can be carried out through "instructional", "empirical" models of counseling, which are based onon the analysis and interpretation of the behavior of the participants in the conflict situation, and the group intervention was effectivewith role-playing games in which the behavior is socially acceptablemodeling of horses.
Considering the models of individual counseling, let us mention that:In the "instruction" model, the pedagogue-consultant assumesThe role of the author of the ready-made instruction, but the ready-made instructions are less desirable in the sense that they contradict the principles of pedagogical support of the child.
 With all this in mind, it is advisableThis model should be used only in consultation with children who are unable to analyze their activities ևfrom the ability to overcome difficulties on their own.
 The consultant developing the "empirical" model should analyze the termsthe context in which the situation arose.
  D. Lane
notes. "To understand the causes of child aggression, to understand the development of this process, it is not enough to be limited to the study of the relationship between the disputants, but it is necessary
Develop complex behavioral models of participants that are specificthey influence the formation of aggression ”[7, p. 255].
To this end, the consultant should consider the participantsIndividual features: family experience, schoolfactor նի to carry out the consultation.
Group counseling is carried out through game technology, role-playing games, which is conducted in certain stages.It is performed by the participants during the initial stagediscussion of the situation.
 At the beginning of the next stage, on the assignment of the consultant, the members of the group are given certain roles, which must be presented through game technology.
  In this case, the participants perform the roles that are appropriate in the given situationto their status.
  During the next stage, the roles will be changed.
  The penultimate stage involves the exchange of views by the participants, during which they, under the guidance of a consultant, carry out a process analysis, forming their ownan idea of ​​behavior.
Գ. Niebergal is convinced that the problems presented in the role-playing games provide an opportunity to explain the causes of the problem, the origin of conflicts և the development, leading to emotional feelings [8, p. 15].
Summing up the above, we should mention that the pedagogical counseling will provide a unified pedagogical community in the school.Implementation of work, formation of school-family cooperation և Optimal conditions for the individual development of the childcreation.
  Pedagogical in the current stage of educational reformsCounseling as an innovation will bring about positive changes not only in the professional activities of individual educators, in the development of student behavior, in corrective pedagogy, but will also contribute to the educational process in a more general way.to increase efficiency.
Given the fact that education is evolving nowadaysis a factor that contributes to the greater role of man in societyby developing the values ​​of coexistence, tolerance, cooperation, and, consequently, among the issues in this field, the value of the child is especially important.The formation of the system, in the process of the implementation of which the child is accompanied through pedagogical counseling, the guidance of actions, the elimination of disciplinary deviations, the creation of a new moral-psychological description of him.
Literature 1. Pestalocci I. Mr. Izbr. Ped. soch.
  В 3 т. Т.3 г. М. ed. Acad. ped. science. Education. 1965.
Learning ability. M.
 2006 319 p.
4. Gazman OS Pedagogy of Weddings.
 road to humanistic civilization XXI century // New:6. Михайлова Н. Н., фисфин С. М. Pedagogy of support.
school-methodical position.M.
Information about the author:Zadoyan Anahit Meruzhan - Benjamin secondary. school,
Chemistry-biology teacher, E-mail.
