Armenia is fully integrated into the global economy, regional policy, and global efforts to improve the living conditions of its citizens and to maintain peace.
  Armenian schools and teachers face the same obstacles today.
  Education workers everywhere realize that the old-fashioned way of teaching is still unable to create and develop the knowledge and skills necessary for a citizen to live well in a knowledge-based economy.
 Therefore, both in Armenia and everywhere, new alternative approaches to teaching and learning are needed at school.
The roots of collaborative learning go back to the work of John Dewey, where the author, emphasizing the importance of education, sees it as a learning mechanism that empowers citizens to live in a co-operative society on the principles of cooperation. [6,175]
Collaborative learning is one of the tools tested by teachers to solve teaching problems.
It is very possible to distinguish between traditional group work and collaborative learning.
  Many teachers use group work in their teaching, but few have the skills to integrate the basic elements and methods of collaborative learning into the teaching process.
 That is why collaborative learning is rarely used in the classroom, փոքր small group work at school is more group work than collaborative learning.
"Learning will be collaborative when students work together, in pairs or in small groups, to solve a common problem, to explore a common theme, or to innovate a new idea." [2,18]
Collaborative teaching as an alternative pedagogical approach has gained a great deal of recognition from teachers in many countries.
 Among the factors contributing to its widespread use are: • adapting teaching in the classroom to the individual characteristics of the learner, • being able to achieve multifaceted educational goals at the same time;
The elements of collaborative learning, according to Johnson, are basically five: • positive interdependence, • face-to-face interaction, • individual reporting և responsibility, • interpersonal or small group work skills, • group process development.
Later one of these elements was added.
  Passy Sahlberg views the interactive task as the 6th element of collaborative learning.
"The most valuable feature of group work is the cooperation between the group members."
 The effectiveness of the cooperation depends on the methodically correct activity.
  The teacher should take into account the students' independent opinions, decisions made, the right to communicate freely with each other "[1,17-24].
The use of collaborative learning elements helps to create a new collaborative environment in the classroom, helps the teacher understand the essence and plan the lesson, and creates the conditions for evaluating and evaluating the effectiveness of teaching.
"One of the essential conditions for working with others to get the most out of collaborative creative work is the ability to imagine oneself in place, as understanding the opposite perspective allows students to more easily adapt to the demands of life" [3,145].
Organizing collaborative learning During collaborative learning, each member of the group and the whole class is actively involved in learning, and new knowledge is developed and mastered by the student.
In collaborative learning, it is possible not only to acquire academic knowledge and skills, but also to develop skilled collaborators and active applicants of knowledge through group process development.
Collaboration creates a higher level of self-awareness than competitive or individual learning methods can provide.
 In collaborative situations, individuals tend to interact, to promote each other's success, to form a wide range of interests, to form realistic ideas about each other's abilities, and then to give true feedback.
The role of the teacher in collaborative learning “The job of a teacher is one of the most widely used professions in the society, requiring the greatest ingenuity and being appreciated day by day.
 To be successful today, teachers need new ways to manage and help their children, as well as a deep understanding of the approaches needed to teach children effectively. ”[4,48]
Learning is a complex process that takes place within the learner.
 The teacher can only guide it, create a favorable environment for it, support և give an opportunity to think.
 Collaborative methods expect a change in the role of the teacher, և that role is full of challenges.
The teacher using collaborative training should be patient in guiding the members of the group.
 Groups need enough time to feel free and comfortable with each other.
In the case of both traditional and collaborative learning, the key to success is teacher preparation.
  The teacher should plan not only the content approach, but also the students' actions and assessment.
Collaborative learning methods There are different methods of collaborative learning that have both similarities and differences.
  Below we present a number of methods of collaborative learning.
 These are: students' team progress, mosaic, gallery tour, three keys և one lock, five-minute free speech.
1. Student team progress method.
  This method of collaborative learning was developed by Robert Slavin, a professor at Johns Hopkins University.
  This method stimulates students' learning.
 The fact that the students' progress is evaluated is important here.
  This method is a great incentive for low-achieving students, because even with little progress, they can contribute to the team.
 And middle and high school students should, on the one hand, help their classmates, on the other hand, be able to maintain and improve their previous indicators.
One of the advantages of this method is that it gives an opportunity to evaluate "individual students" and groups.
2. Mosaic (Jigsaw).
 Mosaic is a method of collaborative learning.
 It was developed, tested at the University of Texas by Eliot Aronson գործընկեր գործընկեր գործընկեր գործընկեր գործընկեր գործընկեր գործընկեր,,,,։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
The mosaic can be used in the classroom in different ways.
  Let's present one of them.
  Students can be divided into heterogeneous groups of four or five.
 Give each group a part of the lesson որոշակի some time to work.
  After completing it, the groups present their passage, read, explain the words, write out words of spelling value, make sentences with them, do linguistic work, etc.
  Each group learns one part of the lesson, but as a result they learn the whole lesson, stopping the work, listening carefully to the answers of all the groups.
  It can also have a group of experts - "Jigsaw 2", the phases of which are: • study of the material - gathering information, • work in an expert group, • work in a training group, • final work, • summary.
3. Tours in the gallery.
  This is a kind of "Mosaic" method, the purpose of which is to exchange information, develop ideas, reflect, how to develop skills of listening, working independently, thinking critically, creatively, speaking in a low voice, presenting the result of work.
When working with younger students, groups can be given the same task or task.
 Upon completion of the work, students provide feedback compared to the work of other groups.
4. Three keys և one lock.
 The work can be done in pairs or in groups.
  This method can be used to understand the meaning of lessons that are quite extensive and have a number of specific features related to the same material or phenomenon.
Students are asked to write out three sentences (three keys) that can be used to master the material, to choose one sentence (lock) from the original, which will summarize, generalize what is to be said, thought, and idea.
  For example, "Oh, what is there for you, what is there or not, what is it, what is it, it is Armenian" (Karine Torosyan և others, "Mayreni 4, p. 62").
Since the original is voluminous, we divide it into two parts և choose the possible keys և lock from each.
І Section. Keys: 1. Those who died were late.
 2. Why did they die, Dad?
 3. They were fighting.
The lock: - They fight for the homeland, they die for the homeland, they die for their honor and dignity.
 ІІ Section. The keys: 1. - Father, let me understand, what is the teacher who says that for the sake of the homeland, դա 2. - The flowery land, where father and son sit and miss each other, this The land that gives us bread.
 3. - Everything, everything you see and do not see, is the homeland, what exists or does not exist, what does not exist or does not exist, is Armenian.
The lock: - I looked at the blue-blue sky, our hut, the sand dune, the red-red rocks of the cliff, I took my father's breath, I looked at him, I felt that everything, including my father, is a homeland.
When working with this method, students develop the ability to make choices, to distinguish the main from the secondary, as well as the ability to cooperate, to justify their choice.
5. Five-minute free essay.
  The five-minute free essay method can be used both in the lesson promotion phase and in the reflection phase, depending on the purpose of the lesson և topic.
  We choose a topic, offer to write their thoughts freely for five minutes, after which they stop working, listen to the essay written by a few.
Let us present an example of a lesson with collaborative learning. Lesson Plan - Third GradeLesson Topic - Soghomon Mkrtchyan "The King and the Farmer" [5,8].
First lesson - Program lesson.
Objective - a) Educational - Students will learn to understand, read with an accent, write correctly and correctly, make guesses, analyze and describe.
 In small groups, they will discuss the opinion of the original characters on the same concept, as they will work on the linguistic material, developing collaborative skills.
b) Educational - They will know about dealing with nature, growing trees, caring for them, creating good, in a word, they will understand the role and significance of work.
c) Behavior - They will be tolerant, supportive, disciplined, well-communicated and cooperative.
 Value system - They will appreciate nature, they will know the value of land, tree, shrub, as well as the value of the correct and appropriate word.
Expected results - Will be able to read the dialogues with an accent, will differentiate the words quoted by the author.
They will present the dialogue of the heroes with a role play, explaining the statute.
  Knowledge of word formation will be repeated: root, suffix, simple և complex words.
Learning materials - Pictures of different types of trees, especially oak, cuttings, tree planting, king, parade.
Methods used - "Predictions with base words and phrases", "Diary with double entries", "Explanatory reading", "Three keys, one lock", "Collaborative groups".
The course of the lesson.
 The first stage is promotion.
 At this stage we use the "Predictions with reference words and phrases" method.
  We write the title of the lesson in advance on the board: the words և king, parade, old man, wrinkled forehead, sweat, walnuts, shiv, fruits, treasury, estate, arsenal, vizier, gift ու.
Students are asked to make predictions about the content of the text, to make up a short story, to guess what the planting might have to do with the reward.
 They can work in pairs or small collaborative groups.
After listening to the students' predictions և short stories, we suggest reading the link: “Planting a tree is a very good deed, because the tree itself is a source of good.
 As far as we know, the trees bear fruit at once, but the newly planted tree in this story bore fruit twice a day.
 Were you surprised?
 Let's read… ".
 Give the explanation after reading the emblem, when the students will be familiar with it.
The second stage is meaning.
  At this stage, we select the "Explanatory Reading" և "Duplicate Diary" methods.
Students read the lesson material while explaining the familiar words, phrases և punctuation.
  After reading for the second time, we create the mentioned diary, for which the students divide the paper vertically into two parts.
 On the left, write the impressive passages of the original, and on the right, comment on each section և explain (What is the section about?
 What does it remind you of?
 Why does that part work?
During the verbal work, we propose to explain the composition of the, orthography, lined, muttered, muttered, reward, treasury, gems, arsenal, walnut, rustic words.
 Once ևstudents remember և repeating that words are simple (radical), complex և derivative according to their composition.
There are three language works on page 10, the performance of which can be organized by level training in collaborative groups, divided into three groups.
We assign the first task to the students of the first group.
  They should use the given picture, make derivatives and compound words and write in notebooks.
  The word "ear" is written on the root of the tree in the picture, and on the branches - the foot, the exit, the glow, the taste, the flower, the aroma, the shine, the, the, the inputs and the words.
  The students, helping each other, write the following words in a notebook: arևot, arքelq, arևapayl, arևham, arևatsaghik, etc.
 Those who finish quickly, move on to the next task.
We assign the second task to the students of the second group.
  They must form complex words with the given words.
  The students, exchanging ideas, using the original, use the given words to form the following complex words: parade, lined, farmer, thankful.
We propose the third task to the students of the third group.
They interpret the phrase "Sweat" by telling the content of the episodes, making comparisons between them, explaining the existing punctuation marks.
 The students say that in the first picture the phrase is used in the literal sense (holding the bucket, և sweat drips from the forehead with drops), and in the second և in the third picture, in the figurative sense, it means to work hard, to work hard.
 In one of the pictures, a person is chopping wood, and in the other, with books on the table, he is thinking and writing.
In the end, they conclude, "Whoever works, he will eat."
In the weighing phase we use the "Three keys, one lock" method.
  Students are asked to write three sentences from the original, which must be selected from the lock, leaving the content of the proverb.
At the end we summarize the lesson, և the students read the link "Thus, work is the mother of all good" և comment.
Conclusion. "No interesting novelty appears without cooperation."
James Whitson One of the prerequisites for effective teacher work is mastery of a variety of teaching aids.
  In this sense, knowledge of teaching methods and methods is very important.
 The introduction of collaborative learning in Armenia brought with it great progress in the teaching-learning process.
In addition to pedagogical significance, it also has a public function.
 In Armenia, as in the rest of the world, it is obvious that people need to work in groups, so a variety of collaborative skills are needed to make group work effective.
This work pursues the following goals.
  ability to solve Literature 1. Khachatryan SG, Students' independent-creative work in native language classes / collaborative learning /, "Nakhashavigh", 1. 2003, Yerevan, "Tigran the Great", 64 pages.
2. Khachatryan SG, The application of modern teaching methods, Gyumri, 2006, 96 pages.
3. Hovhannisyan G., Zohrabyan A., Arnaudyan A., Grigoryan K., Davtyan M., Ohanova I., Fundamentals of constructive education և methods, Yerevan, "Tigran Mets" publishing house. 2004, 336 pages.
4. Hovhannisyan A., Harutyunyan K., Khrimyan M., Khachatryan S., Bayatyan N., Alexanyan L., Purukuru V., Collaborative training, Yerevan, "Antares" publishing house, 2006, 123 pages.
5. Sargsyan V. A., Torosyan K. A., Khachatryan H. V., Jilavyan E. Kh., "Mayreni 3", Yerevan, "Macmillan-Armenia" publishing house, 2011, 159 pages.
6. Vardumyan S., Jaghinyan N., Harutyunyan L., Gary Varella, Modern pedagogical approaches, Yerevan, "Noyan Tapan" publishing house, 2005, 402 pages.
Information about the author Argoyan Elmir Apoyan - Master, teacher of Artik N 8 basic school.
E-mail:
 argine.apoyan.1976@mail.ru.
