At the present stage of language development, the enrichment of the word structure is mostly done at the expense of verbs related to the word անց suffix.with templates.
  According to A. Sukiasyan, the word complexity of the language
is one of the most important ways to enrich the composition (8, p. 292), and it is verbalCompounds with a preferred component are a big part of itcapture enriches Armenian vocabulary են enriches new vocabularywith nouns and adjectives.
In this article we present the ways of composing complications based on verbs, the types of bases, their variantshorses, morphological patterns, syntactic-syllabic relations of components և many other things related to verbal basesquestions.
  The study shows that most of the bases participating in the word formation of modern Armenian have passed to us from Old Armenian ևserves to compose new words.
  During the composition of complicationsThe verb component is more common as a constituent basis.
 This:is explained by the fact that the preferred member of the original or real complexity is the second component, and the first component is its supplement.
The facts show that the compound with the preferred verb componentsWords are not particularly productive in forming nouns, since most complex words with such a structure express a significant relationship.
 Below we present the morphological patterns of the parts of the speech, in the composition of which verbal components participate.
1: C + B, A + B, M + B templates are the most viable in the phonological templates of verb bases.
 1. Created as a result of combining C + B template componentsNew words can be nouns or adjectives.
  Here the main meaning of complexity is expressed by the verb, and the noun component, with different meanings and relations, complements it.
"Inside the complexity," writes S. Eloyan - the components consisting of nouns and verbs (semicolons) have such a meaning
relations such as the verb or the subjunctive has with its additions and the subject ”(4, p. 333).
Noun complications are formed with this template as with articulation: astrologer, dentist, poet, cupbearer, lecturer,bookseller, earthquake, tax collector, taxpayer, newsletter, etc., as well as without articulation: instructor, sparkler, egg, host, fisherman, listener, etc.
The parts of the word are denoted by the following letters ‵ c (noun), a (adjective), b (verb), m (maccabee),and the joint with the + sign.
By the way, more adjectives are formed with this template.
 The predominance of the latter is explained by the general features of the action expressed by the bayarmat: nationalist, persecuted, dictator, florist, disciplined, bribe-taker, passenger, honorable, heartbroken, seedless, etc.
2. It is mainly composed in modern Armenian with A + B templateAdjectives are: nonsense, long-lived, light-skinned, short-tempered, quiet-minded, raw-eater, wholesale, delicate, novice, scanty,sweet ուխ etc.
 There are also nouns: intercessor, loudspeaker,friend, antique dealer, liar, helicopter, etc., who can at the same timewere used as adjectives.
3. Adjectives are obtained exclusively with the M + B template, because:The structure contains a characteristic meaning: abundant, fast-flowing,fast-running, fast-moving, sudden, perpetual, perpetual, perpetual, premature, premature, ascending, etc., but they meet ևnouns: progress, firstborn, long-distance, telephone, telemeter, etc.
Noteworthy are date, pronoun, conjunction, conjunction + verb componenttemplates.
  As prof. S. Galstyan, "the last two categories
word groups as parts of vowels that have no material meaning,are not subordinate clauses, therefore realdo not participate in the composition of complications as components (7, p23), and pronouns have little to do with word formation - realIn the structure of complexity they appear only as the first components (1, p. 251).
4. It is very viable in terms of word formation from pronounspronoun, for example, self-sufficient, self-medicated, spontaneous, spontaneous, airplane,dumped, self-born, gravity, self-respecting, self-loving և etc.
  It is clear that the pronoun itself does not express the meaning of the third person, but the action of the action expressed by the second component itself, such as plane = (flying by itself), gravity = (flowing by itself) ևetc.
According to H. According to Barseghyan's dictionary, the number of such formations
with suffixes it is about 650 (5), which are either adjectives or nouns.
It differs little from the pronoun in terms of lexical expressionsits pronoun, which, however, is no longer viable in modern word formation!
Ed. In Aghayan's "Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian" his + verb basis
He met 9 examples, all of which are adjectives: peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar, peculiar (3, p. 1043).
Compositions with other pronouns (whole, all, all, other) in numberare inferior to the above, or here, mainly from the D + B combinationAdjectives are obtained: heretic, alien, alien, pervert, SUV, most pledged, all-gifted, all-built, all-built, all-purpose, all-wise, all-burnt, etc.
5. They are the first component in T + B formationsall the years. Complications from one to nine years prevail, for example, three-weave, three-row, five-limbed, one-piece, one-piece, one-piece, one-born
և etc.
In terms of their quantitative expressions, they are significantly inferior to the templates in which the verb base is a preferred component.
Thus:1. The B + C template mainly forms nouns, which:turning it into a vowel - an indefinite dervish sexual conjugationThey get meaning, for example: passport, desk, observation post, starting point, straitjacket, election campaign, game style, dance hall, competition, examination period, transportation fee, etc. 2. There are very few complications with the B + A templateonly adjectives.
 The root--un (ak) derivative is predominantcompositions with components, or are there adjectives on other grounds?Receptive, respectable, combative, mobile, defensive, sight-seeing, etc.
 There are also nouns: unemployed, coefficient, competitorև etc.
As for the template of derivative descending basis + constituent basis, it should be noted that in modern Armenian the indefinite, the subjunctive և the participle participate in the composition of compound words with this structure, regardless of the derivations, which are parts of nominal speech.
 These formations are the underlying use of seedhave frequency - write, - act, - speak, - think, - sit, - drive,-eat the verbs with which the constituent base is often -dz, -mater, -style, -place, -pain և other bases: writingև, writing paper, writing style,period of work, way of speaking, way of speaking, spoke, way of thinking, way of thinking, sitting down, sitting, salary, sitting place, storytelling, storytelling style, fuel, behavior, etc.
It is obvious from the above examples that the indefinite article is pronouncedComing with the meaning of a sexual consonant, it is manifested in the ingredientssometimes a noun, if the constituent basis is a noun (writing-writing, arable-cultivating land), sometimes with the meaning of a verb, becoming a problematic addition;if the constituent base is verbal (walk-loving - walk-loving, talkative- to talk, to love, to rule - to love to rule) և etc. (6, p. 103).
And the subordinate clause has a dual use in word-formation templates A. as a basis for original or real complexity, eg ritual, stepfather, parent-lover, parent-killer, parent-worshiper, etc.
B. as a basis for the original or real complexity. moreover,
The words in this template can be divided into two groups: words that come from word combinations: viewer, radio listener, radio lover, moviegoer, offender, journalist, և words that come from the indefinite article, manufacturer և etc.
 As can be seen from the examples, the bases expressed in the subjunctive verb have a nominal meaninghave.
The subjunctive has two uses, like the subjunctive derby, the ending of which is the suffix -s, which forms many vowels from both the action-related feature and the past tense.with the meaning of derby (2, p. 194).
 For example, bifurcated, overburdened, overburdened, interested.
It should be noted that if the verb component is in the descendant basiscome with the verb ահ verb իմ բ,,,,,,,,,removes various typological variants (2, p. 251), among which:can be distinguished:  1. made up of pure verbs that match the present tense of simple verbson the basis of: pious, orator, attacker, earth-builder, stone-thrower ևetc, 2. matching the causal verbs of the Old Armenian: cloudy, half-built, rewarding, clever, son-in-law, pointing, self-tutorialև etc.3. Ethnic, self-forgetful, flour-miller, knowledgeable, far-sighted, disciplined, sensitive, coinciding with the past participles of the past perfect.և etc.4. The types of bases that coincide with the unique second face of the original imperative.
 Lay the foundations are more practical: shoulder, mason,legislator, natural, self-given և etc.
Often in the case of word formation or suffixes, when the verb component is the compound component of the compound, the verb basesPhonological phenomena occur.
 For example: i> h: machine gunner - archer, archer - archery, i> zero: blood relative - blood relative, companion - companion,  uy> u: beekeeper - beekeeping, diver - diver,է (ե)> ի: դեակեզ - cadaver, philologist - philology, and> is: benevolent - benevolence, hay - hay,and> v ‵ information-information, dairy-dairy և etc.
Finally, when the compound component of a complexity is expressed in terms of a verb or a verb, such complexities are compounded in word combinations.When converted, the first component gets different rolling meanings. Direct-Armenian meaning: flour mill, disciplined, taxpayer, desperate, heartbroken, heartbroken, homeless, reckless, exhausted։ etc.
Sexual - tragic meaning - genuine sexual - princely,Dimensional, tragic: grounded, centrist, skyscraper, adultև etc.
Exceptional: windy, silent, heartbroken,mountainous, terrestrial, thoughtless, dismissal և etc.
Functional: asphalt, asphalt, armored, clay, fog, carpet, typewriter, flower arrangement,gilded և etc.
Nergoyan meaning: wine drinker, castle dweller, thinker,mountainous, ash-dwelling, dark-dwelling, etc.
Along with the semantic diversity of the Holomմանn paradigm, the components of complexity on a verbal basis are distinguished by a variety of syntactic relations.
The study shows that in modern Armenian quite common nouns (partly also with parts of other words) + complex words composed of verbs based on syntactic connection.When they turn, they express problematic-case relations.
Many can be distinguished in problematic relationshipssemantic groups.a. Complications of the first components of food
are names or items: wine seller, butcher, ticket seller, woodcutter, etc.
b. Complications, the first components of which are the names of various animals: cattle breeder, cow, cow, beekeeper, silkworm breeder, etc.
c. Complications, the first components of which are the names of celestial bodies: cloud, arc, moon, astronaut, etc.
d. Complications, the first components of which are different in art
Concepts related to the fields: duduk player, songwriter,theater lover, pianist, songwriter, songwriter, actor, etc.
It is noticeable that in the list of the above-mentioned complications a significant number are the words expressing a orthogonal relation, for example, truck,verb form, typewriter, biographer, murderer, carnivore, schedule, mason և etc.
Relating to the problem of end, means, disconnectioncomplications express features of objects, persons ևare mainly adjectives. some of them have become nouns.
The noun component of the sowing base in complexity expresses: • The meaning of the tragic syllable (ending problem): national, cloud, sky-sky, sky-high, patriot, monastery, etc. • Exclusive punctuation meaning (disconnection problem): mineless, seatless;Thunderstorm, groundbreaking, dismissed, landless, displaced, heartbroken ևetc,• Meaning of practical rolling stock (problem problem): garbage, forest,salted, asphalted, carpeted, decorated, tiled, misty, typewriter, illustrated, fenced, lovely, etc.
In case relations, the cause is separatedRandom relationship with an abundance of features related to a person's mental and intellectual activity, eg, shameful, fearful,love affair, grief, frequency of use - the local casual relationship. The meanings of the latter can be expressed in different ways, e.g. Claim: astronaut, astronaut, sailor, etc.Trakan: lithograph, destiny, underground, etc.Nergoyan: submerged, inhabited by Armenia, snow-covered, mud-soaked, etc., and with structural features - of timethe case relation, because most of the original or real complications of this structure have passed from the adjectives to the system of nouns: autumn sower, night owl, nocturnal, evening guard,premature և etc.
Problems expressing a problematic relationship can:get -utyun suffix և, according to the noun-noun nature of the suffix, turned into nouns, but the syntactic relation of its components does not change: murderer - murder, slanderer -breeding, dismissal - dismissal, print - printing, displacement - deportation, voiceless - voicelessness, etc.
It should be noted that in many cases it is quite difficult to determine the syntactic relationships of complications, և they are often determinedin relative terms, given the more acceptable complexity ևthe most typical syntactic relationship.
Thus, summarizing the results of the study of word-formation patterns of compounds based on verbs:It can be stated that the verb bases are quite flexible in word formationնոր The new nouns and adjectives formed by them greatly enrich the verbal composition of the Armenian language.
Literature 1. Ս. A. Abrahamyan, Pronouns of Modern Armenian, E., USSR Academy of Sciences Press,
1956, 351 pages.
2. Ս. A. Abrahamyan, The Derbys of the Armenian Language և Their Linguistic Significance, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1953, 441 pages.
3. Ed. B. Aghayan, Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian, vol. 1, Yerevan, "Hayastan" publishing house, 1976, 929 pages.
4. Ed. B. Aghayan, General և Armenian lexicography, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House,
1984, 370 pages.
5. V. D. Arakelyan, A. H. Khachatryan, S. A. Eloyan, Modern Armenian
language, h. 1, Yerevan, 1979, 250 pages.
6. H. Kh. Barseghyan, Armenian orthographic, orthographic, terminological dictionary, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1973, 978 pages.
7. Ս. A. Galstyan, The indefinite derivation is an unchanging word-formation basis, Banber Yerjan University, Yerevan, 2008, 1 (124), 99 pages.
8. Ս. A. Galstyan, The suffix և suffixes in modern Armenian, Yerevan,
YSU Publishing House, 1978, 324 pages.
9. Ա. Մ. Sukiasyan, Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House 1982, 440 pages.
Information about the author:Anahit Julver Muradyan - something. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, after Kh. Abovyan Yerevan State Pedagogical University, E-mail.
