The problem of efficient use of land resources is inseparable from environmental and ecological problems.
 The issues of land conservation and efficient land use in Shirak region have a number of directions.
  The main causes of soil deterioration are soil erosion, rockiness, pollution, physical and geographical external factors.
 Their intensity in many cases depends on the activity of the man, which is expressed in the process of land management.
 Our goal is to propose solutions for rational nature use, land protection, to provide measures for the restoration of lands unsuitable for agricultural use due to human economic activity.
Soil erosion is one of the most common and influential factors in its deterioration.
 In Shirak region, the relatively young surface, small fragmentation, low exposure of root rocks, low slopes, sufficient vegetation have led to the weak expression of natural erosion [5].
  The exceptions are the slopes of the Shirak-Pambak mountain ranges, where the presence of floodplains creates favorable conditions for spatial and linear erosion.
 However, it should be noted that in the regions of Ani, Artik and Akhuryan, in the conditions of irregular and heavy use of lands, the phenomenon of erosion gets a pronounced expression.
Irrigation erosion reaches a certain development in Shirak region դառնումcauses impoverishment of soil nutrient layer.
 In case of moderate և irrational irrigation, along with irrigation erosion, silt fractions increase in the mechanical composition of the soil, page permeability worsens, there is an increase in the rate of water-soluble salts, a decrease in the absorption complex of the soil, a decrease in calcium content.
 All this leads to a decrease in humus content and a decrease in fertility rates.
The most important thing to fight against irrigation erosion is to follow the agro-technical rules of plant cultivation.
  First of all, during irrigation, the given water costs should be maintained in accordance with the slope of the surface.
 On sloping slopes it is necessary to create buffer (neutral) erosion-safe layers with the help of perennial plants in the soils under potatoes, sugar beet and other broad crops [6].
  It is especially expedient to separate them at the bottom of the slope, at the edge of the field.
 After sowing potatoes, it is necessary to make arable plow for wheat cultivation in order to make the soil firm, but sowing grain for 5-6 years in a row can damage the soil again, causing undesirable hardening.
  Soil hardening is also a factor leading to deterioration, which leads to deterioration of soil agrophysical, hydrophysical properties, which ultimately affect its fertility rates.
 Soil consolidation is associated with leaving it under perennial crops for a long time during cultivation, frequent movements of livestock on the surface, and the use of equipment.
  In this case, the main means of struggle is the correct implementation of crop rotation, the selection of appropriate crops.
In general, one of the reasons for soil deterioration is over-wetting and salinization of soils.
  There is such a problem in Shirak on both sides of the Vardaghbyur-Ashotsk road of the Ashotsk plateau.
South of the city of Gyumri, in the lands occupied by an area of ​​about 5000-6000 hectares, the groundwater level reaches a depth of 2 m.
 In terms of over-wetting and salinization, this depth is not dangerous in the climatic conditions of the Shirak plain.
  But here a problem arises. The groundwater south of Gyumri is polluted by the absorption of water flowing from the city, [4] so their use as a source of soil moisture is not allowed.
 In recent years, another problem has arisen in Shirak: the drying of soils in the areas of Arapi-Keti communities is observed, which can lead to desertification.
In Shirak region, the issue of combating land pollution is urgent.
 The source of pollution here is the dangerous dust, sewage, polluted surface flows from the landfills of Gyumri, Artik, Maralik և other settlements ումը the use of many quarries in the area.
As a result of the post-earthquake reconstruction works, the territory of Gyumri has been expanded by about 20 sq. Km, due to which the amount of various harmful substances washed away from the city has increased. 1987 decreased by 8% compared to [5].
 Studies show that pollution levels are gradually increasing, which is due to the deteriorating sanitary condition of the city.
 Man-made pollution is high in the rivers of Gyumriget, Ghorghoba, Cherkezi gorge coming out of the city, especially in summer, when the water is completely used for irrigation, and the impact of irrigation water quality on soil pollution is immediately reflected.
The problems of land protection and the environment in general around the city of Artik are closely related to the tuff industry.
  Only 30% of the 75% waste generated from the extracted rock mass has been recycled.
 15% of the remaining waste was dumped in Gomshadzor-Moghrov valleys.
 Not only in these valleys, but also in the whole area of ​​the city, the vegetation is very poor.
 Such surfaces have become vulnerable to erosion processes.
The rest of the quarries in Pemzashen, Anipemza և region are the cause of soil և environment pollution, which, being pollution centers, are simply abandoned after exploitation, remain unused, contributes to the intensification of land degradation.
 At present, 1512 hectares of land have been violated in Shirak region (according to the data of the agriculture department of Shirak regional administration), which may become a reason for potential landscaping.
  There are such lands in 40 communities of the region, which occupy a particularly large area within the borders of Artik, Harich, Bagravan, Pemzashen and Tufashen communities.
  Rehabilitation of lands abandoned due to the above-mentioned և Other man-made reasons, re-cultivation and inclusion of measures in the field of agricultural production are of great environmental importance [3].
Certain environmental-soil-environmental problems are also posed by external physical and geographical factors: landslides, landslides, rockslides, mudslides, ravines and the associated soil erosion.
 Although they are weak in Shirak, 0.1% of arable land, 0.2% of grasslands and 4.2% of other lands are affected by these factors.
 Explosions during the operation of quarries in the region, the presence of dangerous precipitation on the southern slopes of the Shirak mountain range create dangerous conditions for the railway and highway.
  Landslides are strongly expressed in the ancient areas of Akhuryanget, especially in Spitak 1988. after the earthquake.
 Landslides are observed in the region, also in Ashotsk, with an area of ​​60 hectares.
 Under the influence of external physical and geographical factors, there are possible centers in Ashotsk - 1864 ha և in Akhuryan with 620 ha, which are located mainly on the high points of the region.
  Landslides occur near Vahramaberd, on the Akhuryan plateau, in the Cherkez gorge, in the Vardbagh և "Weeping willows" precincts.
  The landslides near the Jajur tunnel, which spread parallel to the railway and the highway, are especially dangerous.
  Landslides have occurred here, which together with the floods cause great damage to the soil structure, cause soil deterioration.
Preventive measures against landslides, landslides and certain outbreaks of mudslides are associated with a number of land protection, construction works that require financial investment.
The current unsystematic practice of farming greatly contributes to the deterioration of lands in Shirak region.
  The rules of crop rotation, which are considered obligatory in agriculture, are not observed.
  In the region, the soil is often sown under grain crops for 5-6 years in a row.
  Moreover, during that period the agro-technical rules of plant care and soil cultivation are not observed: annual soil subsidence, weed removal, fertilization.
 As a result, either erosion increases or the soil hardens, becoming a fertile field for weeds, and consequently its fertility decreases.
The opposite happens when the field is occupied with intercropping crops for several consecutive years, in which case the soil structure is disturbed and the activity of irrigation erosion increases.
  Regular rotation of crops requiring widespread sowing with row crops provides an opportunity to keep the soil free from hardening, as well as to ensure the normal course of metabolism in the soil.
 From the widely sown crops, alfalfa և corn, which enrich the soil with nitrogen, has a great ability to restore the structure of the soil.
 However, in case of land occupation with these crops, there is an assertion.
The crops mentioned in the crop rotation are the best predecessors of grain crops, and the latter are intercropping crops.
In the general system of land protection and efficient use of Shirak region, the issue of preservation of natural forage fields, pastures, pastures and recovery from the current deteriorating situation has a special significance.
 The pastures in the region occupy a considerable area, which are used by the cattle breeders of other regions of the republic.
  Most of the pastures of Shirak are among the good pastures of the republic [5].
 In this sense, the preservation of plant resources ուս of the mountain pastures of Shirak region should be considered a national issue, emphasizing the originality and biodiversity of the pastures here.
There are several reasons for the deterioration of pastures, which are mainly related to their improper use.
 Studies have shown that pastures are mostly overcrowded.
 The normative number of cattle grazed on a unit area exceeds 1.5-2.0 times in Aragats massif.
 In case of overgrazing, in the pastures, first of all, the animals are not fully fed, then under their shells, expansions appear, which intensify the soil washing.
 The edible herb, of course, becomes the first to be vulnerable և year after year, not having normal reproduction, it becomes poorer and gives way to inedible, sometimes poisonous herbs.
  In this sense, the pastures near the village suffer the most, where the animals start grazing earlier.
 Often even grass sprouts are destroyed, the plants do not have time to fertilize, so their reproduction is not ensured.
 And the inedible grass mass, being to some extent untouchable, appears in favorable conditions առնումbecomes the dominant species.
 The process of deterioration of plant species is visibly reflected especially in the pastures of Aragats, especially on the slopes near the settlements.
The reason for the deterioration of pastures is the uncoordinated, natural use of congestion.
 It is known that in pastures spring starts late and lasts short.
  The soil is released from the snow cover warmly, the growth and development of vegetation begins immediately.
 This coincides with the beginning of summer in lowland pastures, at which time the summer grazing season begins.
Young vegetation is trampled especially under the heads of small cattle, the owners are damaged, the development of vegetation is disturbed.
There is no grazing in the pastures, the calves would be rested, at the same time the vegetation would be strengthened, its development would be ensured, so the pasture productivity would increase.
Effective use of pastures requires care - watering, fertilizing, as well as destruction of inedible grass, which solves the problem of making the grass fully suitable.
In the case of the deterioration of the vegetation of the pastures, in our opinion, we should not ignore two circumstances that seem inconspicuous at first glance, but in reality are essential.
  First, the annual growth of the main roads, especially the secondary ones, which cross the pastures in different directions for the purpose of traffic, which later become ditches, floods and mudslides, and finally, being a precondition for erosion, cause landslides.
 The second important factor is that during the summer grazing, especially in rented areas, tents are set up, and their places often change.
 After changing the accommodation of the tents and animals, the plant coexistence rapidly deteriorates.
  Edible, juicy, tasty grasses are quickly replaced by stem, hard grasses, which have good resistance to adverse conditions.
In order to use the pastures effectively, it is necessary to increase their productivity, which is conditioned first by the increase of the grass mass, then by the theoretical improvement of that coexistence, that is, by the increase of the specific weight of the edible mass.
 It is necessary to strictly define the pastures in terms of ownership, to demand their maintenance and improvement by law.
Conclusion. Thus, the lands of Shirak region are considered to be endowed with high qualities, a natural resource that plays an important role in the economy.
 However, due to improper human economic activity, most of these lands today are either in a very bad condition or are falling out of economic use very quickly.
This article proposes land conservation measures that may be desirable in the current economic climate.
Here, land as a natural resource must be used to its full potential, and its protection and conservation, as a complex part of the environment, must have its place in any development project.
 In order to implement land conservation and land improvement problems in Shirak, it is necessary to implement a scientifically substantiated complex program, organize land monitoring by upward zones, as well as increase the population's awareness on land conservation and land use.
is great in Shirak region.
 The main reason of the worsening and the improvement of Literature 1. Amirjanyan Ժ. A. - On the issue of land degradation in Armenia, Scientific Research Institute of Agrochemistry and Soil Science of the Republic of Armenia, theses, Yerevan, 1998, pp. 3-5.
2. Gabrielyan H. K., Mirimanyan Kh. P., Soil erosion և the struggle against it, Yerevan, 1974, 172 pages.
3. Khoyetsyan A., Hakobyan K., the lands of Shirak region, the ways of their rational use, Hanr. scientist sit dedicated to the tenth anniversary of the earthquake, Gyumri, 1999, pp. 262-264.
4. Martirosyan L., Avetisyan G., Geo-ecological condition of open water basins of Shirak region, Geography-99, Yerevan, 2000, 140 pages.
5. Martirosyan LM, Poghosyan DA, Nahapetyan AG, Valesyan LH, Geography of Agriculture of Shirak region, Yerevan, 2000, 140 pages.
Information about the author Gayane Roules Avetisyan - geographical scientist. Candidate, Assistant, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, E-mail.
