The last quarter of the 20th century and the first years of the 21st century are ArmenianNew historical developments and changes for the peopleIt was years.
  In parallel with world developments, the Armenian peopleThe difficult events in life were conditioned by the independence of the people who lost their statehood centuries agowith the struggle for the right to rediscover that began in '88in February with the Karabakh movement.
The heroic struggle of our freedom-loving people was crowned with the victory in May, but the war that started, in fact, is not over yet ևIn fact, this is the main problem of our newly independent state, which is neededServe the "politics" of the country, the people with their way of lifeand with a moral description.
The Artsakh movement had a pan-Armenian-national scaleև, of course, as in all historical periods it needs its ownwould find echo in fiction.
 BattlefieldDozens of journalists, publicists, and writers addressed the issue; a multidimensional literature was created thatwas the response to the topic.
We are convinced that the literature on this topic is worthyattention և examination as a reflection of social and political life, also as a phenomenon in literature in general.
 Literary articles about this literature are either few or non-existent.
The article is an attempt to reveal and evaluate the Artsakh liberation wardepicting Armenian fiction.
Back in 2004, Szak Arzumanyan wrote in his study "Modern Armenian Novel". "The Armenian artistic movement of the last decade,
sensitively perceived and expressed these significant revolutions, trying to draw parallels between the socio-historical processto include what happened, losses and gains ”[1, p. 6].
During these years, valuable works were created, which deserve serious attention.
 A number of writers, such as Leon Khechoyan, Susanna Harutyunyan, Hovik Vardumyan, Hovhannes Yeranyan, ManukMnatsakanyan, Samvel Beglaryan, Mkrtich Sargsyan, Ara Nazaretyan, Hrachya Saribekyan, Norayr Adalyan և others / witnesseson behalf of / created a literature that is a complete picturegives not only about the Artsakh liberation war or what happened on the battlefield, but also an artistic description of the socio-political life of the time, the socio-economic situation of the country, humanmorals and, in general, the war-torn and post-war Armenian life, which we consider necessary to refer to in the article.
More than 20 years have passed since the Artsakh liberation war, it was createdExtensive literature.
 We are convinced that the literature created on this topic deserves attention և examination as a reflection of social-political life, also as a phenomenon in literature in general.
The literature on this topic is not only a documentary-aesthetic perception of the material, but also contains a wide range of politicalcontext, the way of life and bio-philosophy of the man of the timesharp charges, includes a wide range of characters և their activitiesfield, gives answers to many questions and gives birthnew questions.
No matter how much they claim lately that today's writer does not create"Good" literature և we do not have high-value works continuing the contributions of the past, yet related to the Artsakh liberation warIn the created literature, it becomes quite clear that it is modernMost of the writers have their hands on the pulse of the century and are faithful to fictionand the contributions of creating heroes, they have created, indeed, high literature.
In almost all works, the action unfoldsin the context of the Artsakh events.
  The authors are notavoids speaking in the language of art - the inexperience of statesmen, sometimes incomprehensible actions (SamvelBeglaryan, "Sunset at dawn"), "dark and cold years" of lifedifficulties (Susanna Harutyunyan, "Map without land"water ”), the post-war fears of the border village and those fearsideas of building the future in the atmosphere (Hovhannes Yeranyan,"Ceasefire") or analyze the current domestic situationwith descriptions of the situation and take the combinations to warBetween Artsakh and Armenia "(Vardan Drikyan," Not started and not finishedwar ”), to give in the terrible clashes of war և socio-economicThe will and character of a person of the end of the century who burns in difficult conditions(Mkrtich Sargsyan, "The Armenian of the End of the Century"), to lead the reader to "warTaste ”and complete the strategy with small but eloquent storiesLife (Ara Nazaretyan, "Strategic Stories").
In the vast majority of the examined cases, the authors use autobiographical facts, presenting with diary accuracy the situation on the battlefield at that moment and the mental state of the soldier in the forced war (Leon Khechoyan, "Book S, heavy beetle").
It is due to this circumstance of being "forced" that my disadvantage is thatThe hero of Artsakh literature, no matter how brave and fighting, does not stand out with the psychology of being a winner or invincible.
Many of the authors measured all the paths of the struggle for survival with their feet and rifles during the critical period for Karabakh.They have found the truth of living and creating, they know, they know, they understandThey know what, when and how it happened.
  The military life in these works is depicted as it is, without any additional additionsEmphasizing the heroism of the Armenian freedom fighters, not upside downtypical of fighters who fight to give up their own landby psychology.
"My book is about that hard and difficult retreat, stretchedFrom Getashen to the depths of Martakert.
 Retreat, but what kind of retreat?dramatic, heroic.
 During that difficult retreat, man was born, manHe was dying.
  It was not an escape… My heroes, yes, retreat, butThey do not despair, they bleed, but they do not bleed.
 They are convinced ևThey wait patiently for the moment when a breakthrough will finally enter the battlefield, a breakthrough that is not near the mountains!
 During that long and dignified retreat, their will and faith are tested, their truly heroic essence is revealed, their enlightened faith in their just struggle and tomorrow, in justice. "[2]
"Realizing that the probability of living and dying was fifty-fifty, we went to win ելու to live…" [3, p. 3].
 God bless youFrom the pages of Petrosyan's documentary book "Suicide Squad", this is what one of the suicide survivors of the war, a suicide bomber, says in the sense of the word "victory over death".
In general, the fiction in the pages related to that literatureoften inferior to documentary.
 Maybe because it's hardEvery past war is meant in peacefor surviving survivors, especially artistic reinterpretation.
  Especially for many of them, in factThe war is not over and continues under the name of ceasefire.
  This:live especially with Hovhannes Yeranyan's "Ceasefire"the heroes of the collection of stories.
Authors with artistic incarnations often find themselvesThey show a civic-patriotic attitude towards the Artsakh liberation war or, in general, the Karabakh problem, sometimes assuming the role of a publicist, turning their works into a living response of time and a reflection of difficult days.
"One of the peculiarities of a modern novel is the weaving of public discourse into epic wide canvases, fictionthe merging of elements into publicist genres.
 It is in those worksA number of human and moral problems are especially acute.
  Where sometimes by means of art they are unable to be more direct andto have an influential influence on the transformations of phenomena, to push new thoughts of the event in search of everyday life, therePublic speaking in many aspects of fictionIt is next to it "[1, page 70], - writes S. Arzumanyan.
Especially the literature related to the Artsakh liberation warThis reality is special.
  In this sense, Vardan Drikyan's collection of articles "The Unstarted and Unfinished War" is significant, some of which were witnessed by a participant.The other part is articles of theoretical-analytical nature, written with the courage of the inner life of Artsakh.
Speaking about the literature related to the Artsakh liberation warIt is necessary to stop at the most in modern literatureOne of the issues under discussion is the issue of the hero.
  Who is the hero of our literature? Why is it written specifically about the Artsakh liberation war?The heroic soldier is not outlined in the literature or notProse works glorifying and singing the image of a soldier are written.
Thus. The Artsakh liberation war ended conditionally
With the capture of Shushi on May 9, 1992.
  According to experts, thisThe event decided not only the course of the Artsakh war, but also!predetermined the future fate of newly independent Armenia.
 It seemed like thisThe event should have given new "glorifications" to Armenian literaturebut it did not happen.
 The phenomenon in literary discussionsis reasoned like this. There was a need to look at what happened from a distance ժամանակ with a new, sober eye.
It is still difficult in the literature related to the Artsakh liberation warto dedicate to the occupation of Shushi or the independence of our countryheroic hymns.
 The reader, however, of such pages to dateHe waits, forgetting that the writer is not cut off from realityThe biggest impression after the Artsakh war is forcedin war with difficulty, at the cost of blood and superhuman effortsIt is relative peace.
  To write winning linesOur writers needed the same victorious spirit, which, no matter how painful,but he retreated in the face of the dominance of the enemy, the defense of official Moscow, and the innate treachery of the enemy (in later years, all this was added to the obvious indifference of the authorities and, as a result, the neglected lives of the freedom fighters).
For our Armenians, this was a battle of honor with an internal rebellion that made the impossible possible, to uphold national dignity.with a high awareness and in no case with a clear purpose to leave the historical and sacred homeland to the invaders, which is present in the literature related to the topic.
Create heroes with the psychology of a winner when the participants of the war feel the danger of defeat at any moment, whenIt seems that every Armenian who went to the battlefield is a literary personis the hero, first put in his pocket the death sentence when against the enemyThe only advantage is the belief in the idea called the defense of the homeland, let's face it, it is not easy.
 If the Turkish-Azeris paid tribute to the criminal's appetite with that war, the Armenians of Artsakh defended their right to live freely in their homeland.
The Turk-Azeris took the other, the Armenian defended his own.
On the other hand, the difficulties of the first years of independence were faced by the "writer" of the joy of the liberation of Shushi.
  War:A new chronology began to emerge outside the field, the first years of which went down in history as "dark and cold."
 Statehood:Along with all the difficulties of establishment, the values ​​in the society were changing, the accepted truths were being reinterpreted andThe values ​​of the past were perceived differently.
 On the one hand, the new systemIt was a period of creation, on the other hand, of the destruction of the old.
  Two completely different generations were outlined with their ideas. one:
as a standard-bearer of the struggle, the other as a silent witness of the values ​​of the past.
All this created a psychological barrier for the writer, did not allow him to give himself completely, albeit conditionally, to the joy of victory.
It is difficult to disagree with literary critic Arkmenik Nikoghosyanmonitoring. "And Armenian literature did not adopt the war, at least
the policy of victory, of glorifying, but of saying no to war,not to praise the victory of the soldier-freedom fighter, but his policy of depicting living in his own country as a marginal person after the victory.
  And the Armenian writer portrayed not the joy, but the painthe conquest of territories, but the loss of thousands of wonderful Armenians. "[4]
Artsakh literature is a general "no" to the war, the writers reject the phenomenon in general, using the peace of the Armenian borders in particular.
  Born literature is always a reminderthat victory was achieved at the cost of blood, and that the unfinished war could begin at any moment.
Speaking of Artsakh literature, it is necessary to dwell on the descriptions of one reality closely related to the topic: post-war life in Armenia.
  It seems after independenceIt was supposed to be a rise, a national awakening and unity, but it wasdid not happen.
 The frustration of the masses was greater than thatthe desire of the heroic people to live in their own country with the realization of dignity and national ideology.
 Emigration:The big wave entered the literature with the manifestations of writers losing their faith.
 Disappointment, deserving but not receiving, in the countryFeelings of day-to-day difficulties accompanyto the readers of the fiction of those years.
Looking back on the path of the freedom fighters and the unworthy lives of the guys who fought after independence, Khechoyanwrites. "Boys, under whose feet the Azerbaijani land was howling, now that
The boys are complaining, they are on the street. "[5]
The Armenian army is born page by page in the works related to the artistic chronicle of the Artsakh liberation war.
 The brightest point in almost all cases is the irregular squadis the pride of joining the regular army.
  Has not had an army for centuriesThe writers consider the creation of the Armenian army to be the greatest achievement of the people, sometimes even more than independence.
  The army is sometimes perceivedas a literary character. He is born, he knows his relations with the world, he is proud of his devoted children, he becomes wise, he keeps the enemy in fear and terror and he is proud of what he has done.
  Authors,especially the joy of the freedom-fighting authors is undisguised.
"I love our army the most in this country.
  Look at the history, see that you have not had an army for a century, and now we have one.
 That is pride.
  I think we must constantly give spirit, strengthen our army, it is the only guarantee of our independence, it is my and your pride.despite all the shortcomings "[5] - repeated many times and his workLeon Khechoyan proves it artistically.
Like every war, the Artsakh liberation war also gave birth to its heroes and revealed the devoted children of the nation.
 It seemed:After independence, those heroic children had to speak from the pages of bookswith the new generation.
  It dominates modern literatureThe opinion that a worthy image of a soldier, general, villager has not been created.
 AndThe reason is not at all that the heroes of the Artsakh war are less braveThey were when they won with shotguns armed to the teethto the enemy.
 Armenian men and women who inadvertently became soldiers are heroesBut there is an opinion that the literature that raises the heroic pages of modern history to the level of fiction will still be born.
  MaybeHrant Matosyan was right when he said, referring to the Great GenocideIt was that there are national and cherished topics, which are very difficultbecomes a material of literature.
When talking about modern literature, we should not forgetthat independence made literature somewhat independent, because it is known that the characteristics of each literary period areUnique patterns and features of development,which are related to the political and national, social andwith various moral, human and psychological factors.
  This:In this sense, the reinterpretation of the natural spiritual and cultural values ​​in our country, the changes in the society due to the political transformations had their literary impact.on the process.
 Moreover, these influences not only led to thematic liberalization, but also to a new aesthetic, linguistic thinking.revealed manifestations.
As much as it seems that the documentary material dominates in the literature related to this topic, the fictional one is inferior, on the other hand, the historiography of the Artsakh liberation war is not based only on the study of facts. historical sources each
For the author, they serve not only as a prelude, but also as a guideplay a role in the artisticization of the material.
  That is whyMemories are mostly historical sources in this literature,notes, own diaries or newspapers.
An artistic approach to one's own past can be anchoredon a private historical study և built on a subjective narrative.
  In this case, the question marks (especially so many questions)when dealing with problems), but we often see writersto the description of the same case with the same characters, sometimes to the same eventsthe same analysis and descriptions.
 From this we can assume that:The chronicle of the Artsakh liberation war brings us fictionLiterary prototypes in literature are "fictional", real, etc.in which, more often և or mostly real than fictional.
Naturally, how short the story is between the reader and the readerThe greater the risk of "disbelieving the writer."
  In this senseThe work of a modern writer is difficult. We must always remember that history
editing or "customizing" is not allowed as long asas long as the heroes who created that story live.
 On the other hand:The impression is that writers sometimes had to be historical andto conduct historical studies in order not to miss in their observations or descriptions of historical holes.
For example, sometimes the analyzes of prose writer Mkrtich Sargsyanthey reach far-reaching observations that give the impression of a scientific study of facts.
 Due to the author's knowledge, the Armenian of the end of the century has his position from "Gorbachev's perestroika to the declaration of independent statehood", which are not conclusions or imaginary illusions, but political and historical analyzes.
"… He tries to understand the truth, to look for the present and the future in the aftermath of a revolutionary life.
 Aramazd does not end his inner anxieties with the pessimistic prediction of the apocalypse.
 But the free and unfettered duplication of the original restores the pleasure of the classic novel, occupying the plot with philosophical references, often devoting whole pages to the analysis of phenomena, a fact that the novel stratifies with the publicist imagery of speech ”[6, p. 11].
The artistic description of the war is not only in finding out the "trench truth", especially if the given conflict in the political reality of the time continues to remain more undiscovered than the opposite.
We have already mentioned that the literature on the Artsakh liberation war, in addition to military operations, is also an artistic description of the social and political life of the time.
 There is a feeling of war in the images of civil life due to cause and effect. Everywhere war is an invisible reality or an expected evil. "Yerjan was boiling.
 The theater square was almost not empty.
 People gathered here to "unwind, to be refreshed,To bury the past, to save the future, There were many worries: worrying, unsolvable, unpredictable, the bloodshed in Artsakh, the disaster zoneThe catastrophic situation, the blockade of the republic, the authoritiesinefficiency, հող the wind-blown Soviet system that was collapsing at a visible speed ”[7, p. 81].
Thus, the theme of war has a main address in the modern Armenian prose - the Artsakh liberation war.
 The subject of our examination is fiction, fiction, sometimes inclusive documentary.
  How much do you study the literature on the topic?You come to the conclusion that despite all the criticisms and shortcomings, this literature is heroic literature, the modern page of the Armenian heroic story, where you can look for heroes հերyou do not need The hero of this literature և war is the Armenian man who will die
At that moment, he took the weapon and everything that could have served as a weaponwent to the homeland to defend his right to exist, the hero from usIt is everyone who withstood and endures the war and all the difficulties that followed with the clear realization of not giving up the land, taking care of the homeland.
More than 20 years have passed since the Artsakh war.
 CreatedSerious literature, it is a kind of original chronicle somewhere.
There are not many references to that literature, that is, literary studiesArticles on this literature are either rare or non-existentin general.
 Khechoyan art is an exception.
 Article experience:to identify and evaluate an Armenian depicting the Artsakh liberation warFiction and its peculiarities.
Artsakh War in Armenian Prose.
 General Review:Literature   1. Arzumanyan S., The Modern Armenian Novel, Volume 5, Yerevan, WUA Publishing House,2004, 411 pages.
2. www.hayzinvor.am, Unity, I saw that miracle, interview H.With Vardumyan.
3. Petrosyan A., The Suicide Bombers, Yerevan, "Voskan Yerevan" printing house, 2012, 95 pages.
4. Nikoghosyan A., "The height is ours, there are no boys…", imyerevan.com,Article, May 09, 2013.
5. www.hetq.am, interview with Leon Khechoyan, Our Golden Calf nowThe material is car, money, gold, October 20, 2013.
6. Sarinyan S., Who is the Armenian of the end of the century, article "Literary Homeland"in the newspaper, N 56, 2001, pages 10-11.
7. Sargsyan M., The Armenian of the End of the Century, Yerevan, Hayastan Publishing House, 1999, 416 pages.
Information about the author: Tovmasyan Lilit Aragats - GSPI, Armenian literature, its teaching Chair of Methodology and Journalism, Lecturer, Applicant, E-mail.
