Preface.
  The complete system of professional orientation is perceived as a combination of interconnected, interdependent, complementary components, the cooperation of which is aimed at solving the problem of professional orientation of a person.
This approach allows you to consider professional orientationas an individual constantly interacting with societya system aimed at both a person's professional self-determinationmeeting the needs, as well as providing the active social-professional infrastructure of the society.
Professional interests of children, professionalThe role of family upbringing and socialization in the primary environment in which they grow up plays a big role in the formation of choices, orientations, and initial work skills.
Employers' participation in the organization and implementation of professional orientation activities in high school is also possible.in processes.
Main content.
 Professional child in the familyOrientation, work education issues alwayshave been at the center of pedagogical science interests.
 That:A number of pedagogues have dealt with this issue.
 AS Makarenko mentions in his article "Education at Work". "Parents first
They must remember that their child is a member of the working societyto be, so its significance in that society will dependhow much he is able to participate in public work, how much he is ready for it.
 But it will depend on himwelfare, the material level of life ”[2, pp. 57-58].
  In the familyOf course, it is not possible to give a child a job that we normally qualify for.
  But he is not right. "the mentality of parents that family upbringing can nothave an impact on the child's professional qualifications.
 On the contrary, family upbringing is a priority, a person's futurefor professional choice, also for qualification.
  A. Makarenkowrote "A child who has received the right job upbringing in the family, he will continue his professional training successfully
will hold ”[2, page 54].
Children's professional orientation, interestsIt is a great way to create a bond between the school և family, the child's parents ևactive cooperation.
 Practice shows that parents are usually actively involved in the development of their children's life ագիտական ​​professional programs.
 At the same time, the problems of choosing a profession և education are quite difficult for both students and themfor parents.
 The advice of the latter often does not correspond to the real situation in different sectors of the economy and in the labor marketrequirements.
  In many cases, parents do not know չեն do not objectively assess the real potential, abilities, interests and abilities of their children.
  Parents' wishes ների Schoolchildren's inclinations and opportunities often do not match.
  Very often the motivation of parents to choose a profession for their children becomes the rating of the profession in the given society.
  The family should be able to prevent the child from choosing a profession by chance,: the parents shouldbe able to manage that process.
  The family as an institution of socializationThe participation emphasizes the dual nature of professional orientation as a social-pedagogical issue.
  "Pedagogical experience և scientific research shows that schoolchildren have questions about work self-determinationonly a systemic approach will lead to the effectiveness of professional orientation activities ”[3, pp. 3-4].
  Consider the peculiarities of the work done with parents in the direction of students' professional orientation.
  During the learning period, the child acts as:"object" of the educational process, active, creative subject, who not only passively obeys his family, schoolto the influence of the pedagogical staff, but actively influences the content of the educational process, itson the working style of the subjects.
  It can affect the child's personality in the family ևthe unity of the school's influences, its general logic, so that the same thing is formed in the child towards the same thing:A socially acceptable position that does not contradict the norms of morality.
  It is possible to provide this principle with the parents at schoolactive cooperation, directing bilateral influences,to unite efforts and resolve existing obstacles and contradictionsas a result of the use of pedagogical methods and means.
The process of raising children is carried out by teachers և parents համատեղ joint activity, constructive և purposefulas a result of contacts.
  "Family և school joint activitiesOne of the most important aspects is the goal settingsales աշխատանքի educational work with studentsa unified approach to content enhancement ”[4, p. 268].
  In the system of professional orientation work, it is customary to consider the family from two sides: as a factor aimed at setting the preconditions for students' professional orientation (element of the system of influence on the child's personality), as an object of pedagogical influence of specialists (subject teachers, psychologists, social educators and employees).
 According to the modular system of professional orientation for parentsPedagogical education, work is one of the initial methods of professional orientation of children և is implementedthroughout the child's education in public school.
 The data of the studies on the motivations of choosing the profession of high school students in different regions of the country show that their parents and the relations established in the family have the greatest decisive influence on the issues of students' professional orientation and pursuit of professional interests.
 "Practice shows that it is developing more intensivelyare the students whose parents are able to provide for the familyFavorable psychological atmosphere և serve for childrenas a high social, diligence, kindnessan example of activity ”[4, p. 269].
 In the work aimed at the professional orientation of the students, the parents solve the following problems: Provide favorable conditions and environment for the comprehensive և harmonious development of the child's personality;Նել Introduce children to areas of work ևto educate positively towards work and working peopleattitude, respect, Assist in the selection of an educational institution to continue professional education; Organize a professional orientation group with parents ևIndividual works such as inter-school and classroomwithin the framework of events, as well as at the class levelwith separate families, groups.
Work with parents at the level of inter-school activities is carried out in the following main directions: 1. On professional orientation activitiesProviding information, transfer of psycho-pedagogical knowledge, development of skills for applying the methods of professional orientation work with students.
2. Educational-professional of students at schoolInvolvement of parents in orientation work.
3. Successful examples of solving family upbringing problems;Presentation and dissemination of the best traditions.
  The following activities are carried out with the parents in the direction of the professional orientation of the students at the inter-school level.1. Lectures for parents at schoolaimed at the professional orientation of students with parentsThey are mainly psychopedagogicalorientation.
2. Scientific-practical conferences and meetings for parentsorganization.
  Scientific-practical conferences contribute to the knowledge of parents' psychology, pedagogical knowledge, increase their awareness.
 Here it is assumedActive, proactive participation by parents.
3. An effective way to work with parents is to hold inter-school parent meetings throughout the school year.
  This egg of cooperation is more effective for parents of elementary, elementary, and high school studentsindividually, depending on each educationfor the purpose of education, content, eachage requirements, methods and means of their implementation.
4. "Open Doors Days" in educational institutions.
 Visits of students to various educational institutions, organizations, enterprises, as well as their mutual visits are effective for the purpose of professional orientation.school.
5. Classroom work with parents starting schoolFrom the first day և continues to the children in the secondary schoolthroughout the study.
  The teacher carries out his work both in groups and individually.
 Working horseThe choice is due to the individual psychological of the childrenfeatures, the nature of family relationships, the level of knowledge of parents, childrenwith experience in upbringing, professional interests, level of employment, value system.
   Today, employers are also involved in the fields of general education, vocational education, and educational programs.
 In particular, activities implemented jointly with employers are an integral part of the vocational guidance system in high schools.
 That abilityis conditioned by the labor market in accordance with the peculiarities of the existing market relations, the labor force, the training of specialists in the high school, the professionalby ensuring the participation of representatives of the business environment in the education system.
 In the field of education in general, in particular, the involvement of employers in high school presupposes themDirect participation in planning and development programs, as well as their direct implementation in practice.
  Employers:may be involved in professional orientation in high schoolCoordinating and organizing the work of the schoolin the governing body, participate in the development of curricula,support the implementation of the educational process, approvepartnerships.
  Employers mainly work closely with vocational education institutionsin the following ways: Են are involved in the implementation of the curriculum, which includes:also assessment and quality control of education,Համատեղ conduct trainings together with teachers; provide students with work experience; Invite according to professionslecturers,Համար Created for graduates to move to workopportunities Support with the necessary resources If necessary, carry out "Skills ակայ Missing Skills" analyzes to identify the labor marketDescription »[1, p. 31].
 We are convinced that the involvement of employers in the process of professional orientation ensures mutual benefit, contributes to meeting the needs of partner parties.
  Thus, we come to the following conclusion that: 1. The family is the social institution that has the strongest influencein the professional orientation of the learner that the parents areThey are the first to assess their child's abilities and capabilities.
  So in this case their cooperation with the schoolIt will help the learner to choose the right profession.
2. In high school students' professional orientation, professional choice is also made with employersactivities, visits and collaborations in different directions.
3. Our research shows that family-school-employer cooperation should also be intensified as a professionalan effective way of orientation work.
Literature 1. Hovhannisyan V., In the field of vocational training and educationWays to attract employers.
 - British Embassy/ British Council, 2010.
 -41 pages.
цию учащихся.
 Autoref. dis. ... kand. ped. science. Alma-Ata, Kaz. ped. ун-т им.
recommendations) ”; Omsk.
 Omsk ped. in-t, 1976. 196 p.
4. Harlamov IF, Pedagogy. - M.
 Gardariki, 1999. 520 p.E-mail:
