In Armenian literature H. Many were dedicated to Tumanyan
Valuable works, articles, but a comprehensive revelation of Tumanyan's poetic world, particularly language,have not been the subject of a separate study in the field of evaluationopinions expressed during his lifetime, which reveal not onlyTumanyan's linguistic thinking, but the tendencies of the development of literary-critical thought of the time.
 The issue of qualitative changes in the development of Tumanyan's language is beyond the scope of our study.
Our task is to look at the historical perspective, when and by whomTo propose this or that point of view characterizing the language of the poet's works, to emphasize the views and discoveries that have passed the test of time, which not only clarified the peculiarities of the language, but also to outline the place of the language of Tumanyan's works.and the role in the development of the Eastern Armenian literary language.
It is noteworthy that the first evaluators of the language of Tumanyan's work were the members of the "five", who indirectly becamehis first "critics".
 "In 1887 a circle of acquaintances fell, who:"They found my language vulgar," Tumanyan writes. "They advised me to take it."to use that savage dialect and literary language ... ”[5,421].
  FolkThe young man with a deep sense of language is somewhat behind the advice of others.
 A. Chltchyan writes that over time Tumanyan
He often changed his poems due to dialect influenceto get rid of.
 It is not known: J. Aghayan and P. Proshyan that they were acquainted What was the opinion of Tumanyan's first manuscripts about their language?about.
 "From the side facts, we can conclude that they are absolutelyThe language of the young poet was treated positively "[10,9], - writes S. Melkonyan.
What, 1890? The first collection "Poems" is published.
 The first serious review is published in "Nor-Dar", the author of which, M. Abeghyan, generally highly appreciates the poetthe tongue. "Tumanyan does not know his writing like our other poets
to confuse with unnecessary words և puffy and decorative style ... ”[16].
 Reviewer:emphasizes the begging of the language with the living folk speech. "That language
It breathes the life of the vernacular, just as the material itself is taken from the vernacular.
 It is rare to see in our poemsregular language, but the language of its verses is mostly regular"especially the language of 'Mehri', which has very few irregularities."
Abeghyan values ​​Tumanyan's ability to create images:noticing some "dark phrases".
 However, the critic insightfully emphasizes the features that are typicalin the language of the poet և highly appreciates the path he is following.
    L. Manvelyan, too, positively assessing the poems as unpretentious,
Scenes described in rich and beautiful language, points out somethe use of outdated words.
  "The language is quite regular."in rich words, but there are deviations from the path of our current literary language. For example, he employs such words as "your eyes", "let go", "you", "women", "reached" ... և etc "[14,99].
In the first collection, contemporaries notice and emphasizethe strong, new and special that are typical of a newly discovered poetthe lyre.
 The works and their language are valued in the course of the historical development of Armenian literature, being qualified as a new phenomenon.in the literature.
Later, until 1903. Publication of the collection, in the press, literary
The reviews in the magazines were quite short,sometimes with unfounded, often with contradictory qualifications.
 1896 "I was from Lori
In his review of the poem "Sako", Leon states that provincials sometimes "squeeze the lines written in the authentic literary language".
 Shirvanzade, highly appreciating Tumanyan's language վան style, nevertheless points out the use of dialects, which may be acceptable in prose, but not in verse works.
 "His poems are not obsessive, the melodies are attractive, devoid of uniformity.
  Only he sometimesThe folk dialect is used for evil և many times it is usedwith the help of words that may be alien to the ear of the deafto sound ”[17,257].
 It is obvious that Tumanyan's talent and simplicity of languageand depth assessors allude to some dialect wordsusage as a defect.
1903 does not escape the attention of contemporaries. The 3rd collection "Poems", which was a new level of fiction in all respects.
 H. Lalayan in a letter to Tumanyan
confesses. "I have always felt that our secular language is beautiful, quite rich ... But I felt that our secular literary, the Armenian language itself hid such treasures in it, which are abundant in your poems, but I was not I saw, now I saw ա I was convinced ”[6,298].
 The letter writer is absolutely convinced that "Nor-Dari", "Mshaki", "Luma",The language of "hammer" is not Armenian, as it is far from the real, living language sounding from the mouth of an Armenian, it has no soul.
 In strange, incomprehensible, indigestible wordsThe flooded press does not give anything to the Armenian reader.
  "Your talent is a brilliant jewel," Lalayan writes, "and your tongue is a gold ring.which, as a pleasant frame, enhances the brilliant glow of the gem.
 The language toobringing a poet is language. After all, "the Lord will make the cross powerful" [6,299].
1904 "Mshaki" hm. Speaking in 2, the same "Poems" - 3rd
Leon appreciates Tumanyan's illustrationsThe mastery of weaving beautiful songs in colors only. "They are external
are ornaments, but in the action of the content singing mountainsthe poet remains one-sided, naive. "[12]
 Unlike Leo, Av.Aharonyan in a large-scale article published in "Murch", among othersIt is one of the high-value artistic passages of the poem "Anush"Consider Anush's lament, which is half-mad with grief, which stands out with the words "with such a successful arrangement that even the reading leaves the impression of a song ”[15,176].
Aharonyan also refers to the poem "David of Sassoun" beforedrawing the powerful thought that the priceless treasures of folk artcan only become public property for literary developmentIn this case.
  "P. Tumanyan turning "David of Sassoon" into a literary language is ours
He has rendered a great service to the work of popular reading.
Thanks to him, now our only epic song can be read with pleasureand to understand every Armenian ”[15,184].
  Noticeable for the reviewerThe focus is not on the material, but on the literary elaboration and the horse. Aharonyan, refraining from a detailed examination of the poem, evaluates it from another point of view, comparing the versions of "David of Sassoun" with the relevant passages developed by Tumanyan.
 The reviewer provesthat Tumanyan, deeply understanding the spirit of the original, remaining faithfuldecorate the material with great skill, folk spirit and style andenriches the material.
Unlike Aharonyan, in 1904 He was born on February 15 in "Taraz"
The author of another published review S. Mandinyan praised Tumanyan's "vibrant" pen, the most beautiful of the people
The "mine" - "David of Sassoun" - considers unsuccessful development.
 Making petitions with Pushkin, Mandinyan accuses Tumanyan of remaining faithful to the versions of the epic, of "being enslaved".
  It is noticeable in the poemThe opinion expressed about it lacks comprehensive, in-depth analysis, theoretical and principled substantiation.
Mandinyan pays attention to "Aivazovsky's paintingforward ", considering it a" poetic invention ".
 It seems that the work will be evaluated according to its merits, but the following lines are oneThey even come to prove that at the beginning of the XX century the aesthetic perception of the artistic image was not completely formed.
 Mandinyan states with conviction that the word "stop" "spoils the thing", ignoring the possibility of figurative use of the word - primitivegives explanations.
1904 "Luma" magazine publishes G. Yengibaryan's article.
The reviewer notes that the songs are "a sign of an independent attitude towardsthe folk poem, the language և the style he uses in a talented way "[8,230], and in the case of" David of Sassoun "emphasizesThe mastery with which he created the spirit of the historical period, the ideals and views of the people. "... His language is clear, pure, sweet-sounding, rich in the forms and styles of the vernacular" [8,238].
 Tumanyan saidThe simplicity of the style is noticed by another article writer, Hmayak Hambaryan.
According to the reviewer, the language of the poems is free from discourses.eloquence, but in the case of poems he records the otherLike poets, Tumanyan does not have that powerful and regular language,which is the necessary ornament of the poem.
As we noted above, Tumanyan was sometimes accused of using dialect words.
  1910 Published in "Horizon" "Do not
In the article "Reprimand" M. Ghazaryan considers the use of some dialectal elements ("so", "so") in the "Lusaber" textbook unacceptable առաջարկում offers the compilers to replace them with literary words
 In:In response to the accusation, Tumanyan presents a number of arguments to justify the use of "this, that, that." He first mentions the psychological reason why those words sound more intimate and sincere.
Then it turns out that millions should be considered more acceptable"this, that" used by people than a few hundred, evenThe "this, that" used by thousands of people.
 "I take my materials and language from the people and talk to them," [2,470], Tumanyan writes.
 Time:distance allows us to assert the folkloreTumanyan is really unbeatable in the development of his works.
  It is not accidental that in 1912 In the review related to "Brave Nazar" N. Aghbalyan, highly appreciating the literary elaboration of the fairy tale, considers it unnecessary to refer to Tumanyan's language, writing: "He speaks the Armenian language
is one of the creators. He is a poet, "from head to toe", like Lear, a king, that is, he creates our national thing, which means word "meaning".
  Aghbalyan's critique indirectly points out that Tumanyan's greatest genius is manifested not only in "what",but through "how?"
Thus, Tumanyan was absolutely convinced that he was walkingin a natural way of language development.
 "Then try," he says, "they spoke to your children at home in whatever language you write. You'll see thatIt is false, and you will be disgusted with it.
  What is the use of literature that is incomprehensible to its people?
  Oh, we do not write to be taught in libraries ... ”[4,625].
  Tumanyan was of the opinion that the living and powerful source of the language of literature is the word of the living people.
 But with language issuesSome of those concerned pointed to a different path.
 1910 "Luys" weekly publishes A. Meghryan's "Our children's literature" in Armenian
Language ”article, where the author expresses concern that the writerssome (H. Tumanyan, Av. Isahakyan - AM) use in their writingsThey are Armenian provincial և foreign words, thus disrupting the purity of the native language.
  Meghryan demands to write only in pure Armenian.
  During the debate, Tumanyan proves both literary andLoans in the vernacular have always been և will be. Life also develops due to external influences, so it is impossible to avoid borrowings meaninglessly.
 Borrowing is one of the ways of language development.
 Language is the basis of human cognition, the main means of communication, so it should be accessible to everyone in societymember.
  From that position, Tumanyan justifies the vernacularthe use of colloquial forms in his works.
Why, the appreciation of Tumanyan's art continued?
  1912P. Makintsyan's "Faces" is published in Moscow's "Spring" almanaclarge article.
  The reviewer points to the line from the beginningdescribes Tumanyan's literary face and art. "It simply came to our notice then
style, his modus dicendi, the way of expression - characterizes his literaturethe face.
  Hovh. Tumanyan expresses everything by way of telling,
no matter what the nature of his work is, naturemental life or conversation ... ”[1,249].
 And to tell, to open the inner world and feelings of nature և heroes, Tumanyan is able to "use his language, hisbecause of the perfect language. ”
  Thoroughly studying the poetMakintsyan expresses various, sometimes contradictory opinions, some of which are not examined from a distance.but in the case of language, the article writer is mostly unchangedposition.
 Considering "David of Sassoun" the most successful poem, Makintsyan writes. "Hovh. Tumanyan's heroes speak Armenian to them
The language is smooth, the style is subtle, no intricate comparisons, no dark images. Unadorned-native folk language, clear and loud, like a mountain
the silver-speaking tributary ”[1,299-300].
  It is noteworthy for the same comparisonwe meet Av. Isahakyan in a small article dedicated to "Gikor". "H.
Tumanyan's language is so subtle, at the same time so vivid, like a mountain stream, at the bottom of which shiny patterned sand grains "[7, 131].
 "Makor" considers "Gikor" an exceptional gem.
"And how the appearance, the casual language and the style of the song correspond!- Makintsyan writes, referring to the last episode, when Hambo, wearing Gikor's clothes, returns to the village.
- No chess-fearful exclamation, without beating the chest, without ah and fear, anger, outwardly calm and simple language, the poet speaks "humorous" and "tragic" moments.
 But so be itis not a primitive way of creating. Not only great grace and good taste but also great effort is needed to achieve such perfection
for "[1,310-311].
In the study "Honoring the Past" in the same book, the author:D. Ananun tries to reveal the peculiarities of Tumanyan's poetic world, considering one of the secrets of the charm of art as the power of his word, the skill that the poet uses to understand the essence and depth of the phenomena, without presenting it without spun words.
 "Saro's naughty, plain language"Tells the barley thrower his dream," writes Anonymous.
"Tumanyan presents to your eyes ձեր the soul the images carved with his unblemished pen, leaving you to accept or reject them" [1,125].
Among the opinions voiced about Tumanyan, V. stands out. Teryan
The report "The coming day of Armenian literature".
 Highly appreciating Tumanyan as an artist, a wise and sublime translator of the people's soul, Teryan notes that "he stands on his special path tois full of artistic wonders, but he will remain as if in a single ... "/ 18,72-73 /.
  This idea of ​​Teryan gave rise to disagreements, the comments were mostly superficial, sometimes they were perceiveddirectly.
  1919 In the article dedicated to Tumanyan's 50th anniversary, H. Surkhatyan, delimiting the poet's place in Armenian literature, rejects this opinion.
 He values ​​not only the thematic-ideological side of the works, which educates the young generation, "learns the Armenian language", but also "brought to ideal clarity and clarity"the language of fiction ”[13].
  The impression is that the critic withoutto deny the depth of opinion expressed 5 years ago, denies "unicum"the idea of ​​theory.
 V. According to Partizuni, the hint refers to:
In Tumanyan's language.
 The linguistic principles of the two poetsThey contradict each other, the contemporaries confirm.
 N. Tumanyan tells that in 1916 Teryan's father after a visit in January
said the following. "Vahan is in a lyrical mood, with a mild character
He is a poet.
  He does not use the inexhaustible treasures of the vernacular.
  MinnSay, you lived in Akhalkalaki ... speak your country, something in the language of your peoplesay, give her a breath, bring her style ... I'm not so sure about anything,as in the matter of language.
 That's right- this is a must have, for any Affiliate, promoting any programto write so that the people can read and understand something ”[3,140].
 Ed. Jrbashyan is remarkable
comments on "unicum" theory, rejecting the one-sided explanation that Tumanyan's uniqueness stems onlyto the question of language.
 We see solid evidence of opinion in Report IIin the part.
  Speaking about Tumanyan's language, Teryan is the first to noticeDuring this period, Tumanyan wrote in dialect, but graduallyfiltered, went "to crystallization, preserving the dialect in his languageonly what is not in the literary language, that is, standing in a straight pathon "[18,88].
  Teryan draws parallels with Pushkin. "Today, Tumanyan brought his language to the crystalline clarity that brings it closer
to Pushkin, who should be considered one of his supreme merits "[18,89].
 Teryan considers the famous "es" and "en" of the poet unacceptable and expresses hope that they will soon give way to their place.
It is obvious that no matter how much Teryan was against some dialectal horses, it was the same!He is sure to point out Tumanyan as the brilliant soul of the Armenian peoplea translator, a poet who is aware of national and universal valuesto be unique and unrepeatable.
 It is not accidental that in 1919 among many others
Author of an article published in the "Alik" literary collection of articlesE. Ter-Martirosyan notes that one has been created in Armenian literature
A school that, of course, can be called Tumanyan.
        Thus, the literary criticism of the time is generally highassessed the language of Tumanyan's work, a folk animalthe deep sense of language and spirit, the skill to use it with high art, but did not fully discover its irreplaceable role andThe importance that Tumanyan's language had especially in the development of the artistic language.
 Tumanyan combined the literary language and dialectal forms together, creatively, with a mastery typical of a genius artist, with the conviction that literature is not real literature without a living language. "Language has only one meaning and one meaning - to speak to the heart of the Armenian man, the Armenian people" [2,240].
 The most obvious proof of what has been said is that Tumanyan remains unrivaled among the genius poets of Armenian literature. any topic
Under his pen he appears so simple, but so deep, wiseway. Its secret is, first of all, its simple, understandable to everyone's heart and
It is a native language.
Literature 1. "Spring" literary-critical almanac, book III, Moscow, 1912, 449 pages.
2. Tumanyan H., ELJ, vol. VI, Yerevan, RA NAS, 1994, 670 pages.
3. Tumanyan N., Memoirs and Conversations, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1969, 334 pages.
4. Tumanyan in the Memoirs of Contemporaries, Yerevan, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, 1969,998 pages.
5. Tumanyan, Studies և publications, vol. II, Yerevan,
Published by the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1969, 471 pages.
6. Tumanyan, Studies և publications, vol. V, Yerevan, RA
"Science" publishing house of NAS, 1998, 413 pages.
7. Isahakyan Av., YS, vol. V, Yerevan, "Soviet Writer" publishing house, 1977, 434 pages.
8. "Luma", no. 2, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1904, pp. 228-244.
9. "Horizon", no. 232, 233, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1912.
10. Melkonyan S., Hovh. Tumanyan լեզ The Language of Eastern Armenian Fiction, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1986, 317 pages.
11. "Mshak", hm. 57, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1896.
12. "Mshak", hm. 2, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1904.
13. "Mshak", hm. 40, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1919.
14. "Hammer", no. 1, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1891, pp. 93-100.
15. "Hammer", no. 1, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1904, pp. 169-187.
16. "Nor-Dar", no. 197, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1890.
17. "Taraz", hm. 16, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1896, p. 257.
18. Vahan Teryan, YS, vol. III, Yerevan, "Hayastan" publishing house, 1975, 415 pages.
Information about the author:Eva Zhora Mnatsakanyan - something. scientist Ph.D., Associate Professor, Kh. Abovyan of the Mother Tongue of the Armenian State Pedagogical University Associate Professor of the Chair of Teaching Methods, E-mail.
