It is known that snake bites are often accompanied if not fatal,then with severe damage to various organs, particularly the liver and kidneys.
  That is why snake bites are dangerous not only for the tropics, but also for the inhabitants of developed countries (Warrellal., 2013).
Venomous snakes (Viperidae) have a number of properties that accelerate the passage of toxins to the lymph after a bite.and blood vessels և spread throughout the body and become infecteddifferent organ systems (Panfoli I. et al., 2010; Grazyna F. et al., 2007).
It is known that in case of various poisonings the kidneys are differentThey are more "affected" compared to the organs.
 That's being explainedbecause the kidneys themselves are the blood of harmful substancesUnique cleaning filter.
  The poison of gyurza is no exceptionIt is included in the symptoms of poisoning during exposureRenal insufficiency (Orlov BN et al., 1990).
Therefore, the aim of the presented work was to find out whathas an effect on the Transcaucasian Gyurza (Macrovipera lebetina)obtusa) poison on the structure of the kidney և capillary network.
 The image of the injuries will allow to determine the pathological processes that take place in the nephron during intoxication around it.for further development of antitoxic agents.
Material և methodology. The experiments were performed on laboratory male white rats weighing 200-250 g.
 The experimental animals were divided into two groups, with six animals in each group.
The first group was a control group, the second group was neurovascularPoison 2.5 MCH 50 at a dose of 5 mg / kg was injected by the route.
 1 hour after injectionAfter that, the animals were put to sleep with nembutal (n / o route) 40 mg / kg kidneyswere removed.
 The kidneys were implanted in 5% formalin, furtherThe processing and preparation of the preparations were histochemicalby the method (Chilingaryan GM et al., 1986).
  Kidney slicesThe microscopes were made with digital eyepiece (FMA050)With AmScope UCMOS09000KPB with x 6 և х20 lenses.
Research results. Because the poison of gyurza is typical
Hemotropic poison (Orlov BN et al., 1990), ie it affects the bloodstreamon the system, it was initially assumed that the kidneys also hisThe effect must have been on the Malpighian coil.
 However, the obtained results have a different picture.
 As can be seen from Figure 1, the renal vessels are only partially damaged.
Instead, tissue injuries are observed.
 Compared with animals from the control groupwith preparations on the pictures of poisoned preparationscan be seen in the destruction of tissue.
 The most pronounced decayBowman's capsules were torn, torn, fused, and fused together.
 The fact that the kidney vessels were not damaged by the effects of the anticoagulant poison may be related toWith the structural features of vessels in different organs, it is particularly known that the capillaries of the kidneys have fenestrae (windows) that release high molecular weightmaterials up to 67 kDa (Schmidt R. et al., 1996).
  Because of GyurzaThe most destructive components of the poison: metalloproteinase PI (23 kDa), phospholipase A2 (13-16 kDa monomers և 26-32 kDa application) և others have manylower molecular weights, hence the main components of the poison,Passing freely through the fenestra, they directly affect the podocytes, the basement membrane.
 Decomposition of the Shumlyansky-Bowman capsule under the influence of hemorrhagic poison has been described in a number of other studies (Soe S. et al., 1993; Chaiyabutr N. et.al., 1999).
Figure 1. Kidney microscopy, left to normal, right to venom during the impact.
 Magnification х6 և х20.
Conclusion.
  Thus, from the results obtained, it can be concluded that the poison of the Caucasian Gyurza affects the kidneys.of nephrons, damaging the structure of the Bowman's cavityintegrity, resulting in renal failure.
  As a result, the kidneys are unable to performtheir function, and the venom remains in the tissues, continuing itsdestructive activity.
 Based on the received image, it is necessary to obtainAn antitoxic agent that should be a low molecular weight mobile compound that is rapidly absorbed to protect epithelial cells in a timely manner.
 Taurine, quercetin and similar physiologically active substances may be candidates for this type of substance, and research is underway.
