One of the most important tasks in teaching physics in high school is to teach students the basic laws and principles of physics at a level that will enable them to apply them not only in solving certain physical problems, but also to help them develop methodological thinking.
 If these rules և principles are continuously applied in different sections of the course, the product learner will be perceived more comprehensively and deeply.
One of the basic principles encountered in the school of physics is the principle of independence of movements, which would be more correctly called the principle of repetition of independent movements.
 According to this principle, the movement of a body under certain conditions can be represented as the sum of several (usually two) movements performed independently of each other.
  This principle is one of the links of methodological tricks, the essence of which is that any attempt to present any new's being studied is presented as a reversal of previously known, simple's.
In textbooks [1,2] the impression of the material related to the given topic is such that it is only a question of repetition of movements.
  There is little talk about the independence of these movements.
  What is not to be understood from the physical-mathematical point of view of the description of motion by saying "independence of movements".
From a physical point of view, it means that one of the movements performed at the same time does not affect the other characteristics of the other movement (for example, speed, acceleration).
 It makes it possible to represent the complex movement under study as a sum of simpler movements that have no qualitative or quantitative effect on each other, without compromising the integrity of the movement under study.
From the point of view of mathematical description, the independence of movements makes it possible to write an equation describing each of the component movements based on physical patterns, without "remembering" the existence of the other components of the movement.
It should be noted that the above is not general, although the displacement and velocity of a complex motion can always be represented as the sum of the velocities of simple motions, but the same cannot be said for accelerations.
 The principle of reciprocity or independence of motion occurs only when the computational systems move in parallel with each other.
  For example, if the movable system makes a rotational motion with respect to the immovable, the mentioned principle cannot be used.
           The independence of the movements becomes more obvious և perceptible with the following experience (Fig. 1).
  Consider the simultaneous movements of three balls.
  The first ball is thrown at an angle to the horizon
at the initial speed.
 The second ball is thrown from the same level as the first ball ին 01 v սկզբ on the starter, with an initial velocity of upwards equal to the modulus. The third ball is placed on a smooth horizontal surface և the starter is on the same vertical line as the first.
It is given a horizontal velocity by the modulus, and ies performs an even linear motion.
Fig.1 If we record the positions of all three balls after equal intervals, we will have Fig. The situation depicted in 1 is at any time. a) the first և third balls will be on the same vertical, b) the first և second balls will be on the same horizontal.
(a) It follows from points (b) that the motion of the first sphere is nothing more than the repetition of the motions of the second or third sphere that occur independently of each other.
  In fact, the vertical motion of the first ball thrown at an angle "does not notice" the movement of the same ball in the horizontal direction, vice versa.
In the current course, the student gets acquainted with the principle of independence of movements for the first time in the 10th grade while studying the topic "Equally Accelerated Movement".
 This principle is then applied in 11th grade to solve problems involving the motion of a charged particle in a homogeneous electrostatic field. 202v.
sinvv0102cosvv0103 "Study of the motion of a charged particle in a homogeneous magnetic field".
The principle of independence of movements is in fact a consequence of the classical rule of summation of transitions.
 Therefore, in our opinion, it is desirable to introduce the discussed principle to the student earlier, in the 10th grade, during the study of the topic "Straight Equilibrium Movement".
  The need for it is especially felt in the process of solving some problems related to the topic.
For example. [3] The boat must reach the other shore from point A on one bank of the river (Fig. 2).
 If it takes a vertical direction on the shore, 10 minutes after the start of the movement it will appear at point C of the opposite shore, which is 180 m away from point B (AB is perpendicular to the shore).
 If the boat chooses a direction that forms an angle with the direction AB, it will reach point B in 12.5 minutes.
  The speed of navigation with respect to water is the same in both cases.
1) What is the velocity of the river?
 the sine of the angle.
2) What is 3) What is the speed of the boat in relation to the water?
4) What is the width of the river?
Solve the problem using the principle of independence of motion, according to which in both cases (Fig. 3. a և b) the motion of the boat can be represented by sum 3 as the sum of two simultaneously independent movements, which are: ç.³öv (1), v1tSç.³ö b) in the first case (Fig. 3.a) perpendicular to the shore with a straight line with equal velocity, then in the second case (Fig. 3. b) an angle to the shore with a straight line with equal velocity Therefore, the system of equations from (1) to (4) is solvable and fully meets the requirements of the request.
Experience shows that when a student first masters the principle of independence of motion by two simple examples of the repetition of rectilinear equilibria, then in the case of further complication of repetitive independent motions (uniformly accelerating or evenly circular) no problem arises from either the principle or the new movement.
  For example, when considering the movement of a body only in the field of gravitational force discussed above, or the motion of a charged body in electrically homogeneous electrostatic or magnetic fields.
.1.veçÝ (2), v1..tLçÝ.2.veçÝ090 (3) cosvvÝ.çÝ.³ö.2 (4).
v2Ý.³ö.2tLis presented. The possibility of representing a motion as a superposition of component Literature 1. E. Ghazaryan, A. Kirakosyan, A. Mamyan, S. Mailyan, "Physics-10", Yerevan.
"Edit Print", 2010.-272 pages.
2. E. Ghazaryan, A. Kirakosyan, G. Melikyan, A. Mamyan, S. Mailyan, "Physics-11", Yerevan.
 "Edit Print", 2010.-368 pages.
3. R. B. Alaverdyan, G.G. Melikyan, J.H. Ninoyan, A.V. Petrosyan, Collection of Physical Problems, Yerevan.
 2009.-272 pages.
4. Ե. Ս. Serobyan, V. F. Manukyan, The movement of a charged particle in combined electric-magnetic fields // "Bnaget", 2006, № 1-2, pp. 43-47.
Information about the authors Yervand Sergey Serobyan - Phys.Math. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, GSPI, E-mail.
 eserobyan56@mail.ru Manukyan Vardan Franz - Phys.Math. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, GSPI, E-mail.
