Armenians belong to the unique nations, most of which liveoutside the borders of the homeland, forming a powerful Armenian Diaspora.
The term "Diaspora" (Greek διάσοπορά, "scattered, scattered") describesthe part of the nation (ethnos) that, living outside its historical homeland,formed united ված stable ethnic groups.
 In addition, it is distinguished by the corresponding organized social institutionsby which they guarantee the preservation of their own identity and community1.
  In other words, the Diaspora is a givenThe location of the nation's representatives in different countries, which we followedemigration of the population from one's own country.
 The reasons for the latter can be economic, political, social, etc.
It must be stated that it is "scientific", "social" and "political"The appreciation of the Diaspora is considered to be very oppositefrom positions.
In particular, on the one hand, for any state or nationLiving outside the physical borders of the homeland, but connections with itThe presence of a certain number of retaining compatriots is estimatedA very positive factor, of course, if there is a logical proportion between the numbers of Diaspora compatriots.
  Especially when the problem is considered in modern globalizationunder the prism of the possibilities of current information technologies.
  That is, in today's "shrinking" world, where each otherDistant geographical areas are approached in a virtual sensethe presence of each other, foreign compatriots opportunityallows to be involved in the logic of the development of the world society (transformation of ideas, cultural values)in the form of more active participation in international processes, but at the same time to ensure its own geopolitical independence;1 Sociology.
 Encyclopedia / Cont. А. А. Грицанов, В. Л. Абушенко, Г. М. Евелькин, Г. Н. Соколова, О. В. Tereщenko. - Mn.
 Книжный Дом, 2003.in conditions of geo-economic և geocultural turbulence.
The next dimension of the assessment refers to the objective reality that is realistic for any Diaspora to assimilate over time.The danger is that the fact that they are cut off from the sustainable nutrition of their ethnic-cultural vitality objectively removes the future generations of foreigners from the axis of national identification.
Such a dilemma is manifested in full forcefor the Armenian nation.
  Today, when the number of Armenians is several timesis inferior to the number of compatriots living abroad, there is an objective need to radically re-evaluate the modern logic of Armenia-Diaspora relations և to find two nationsmore effective co-existence and cooperation of sectorsdimension.
At the same time, it completes the domestic scientific circlesThe new social order is being formed for.
 The complexity and multiplicity of the problem open up different aspects of scientific evaluation.
This work is carried out by observing and evaluating Armenia-Diaspora interactions in geography, in particular:from the position of social geography, based on its modernityon the methodological arsenal.
 In our opinion, it will give an opportunityto choose a wider field of view to discuss the problem because:Modern social system of geographical sciencesական The scientific function allows you to consider the problem noonly in the field of worldview, cognitive-informational, cultural significance, but also in the field of science and practice.
The historical-geographical process of the formation of the Armenian DiasporaObserving it can be stated that each historical period is distinguished by its unique nature, which is conditioned by the reasons for leaving both one's own homeland and the Diaspora.with geographical features of community self-organization.
  The fact that there were communities in the Armenian DiasporaIn the early historical past, the initial self-organization of the Armenian nationAt the same time, it is validated in both foreign and domestic bibliography.
 However, the constant movement of our compatriots outside their own country cannot be considered in the logic of ordinary migration processes, where separate, unique reasons are singled out.
 In the case of the Armenian nation, unique factors often mergemultiplying and making the reasons for emigration more influential.
 The main reason is often the absence of Armenian statehood, in which case a foreign residencepressure, not infrequently, the threat of physical existenceto leave our country for our compatriots.
 However, often, in the case of statehood, our compatriots also emigrateddrastically reducing the state-social potential of one's own country,as a result of which the original statehood was lost.
Thus, a divisive situation is created, which is the basis of itThe objective-subjective bases of the formation of the Armenian Diaspora.
 For the analysis of these bases, we separate two planes of observation.• Objective reasons for the formation of the Armenian Diaspora.
 Reasons for this:The group has always been dominant in the absence of statehood, when the imposition of eggs of foreign coexistence in their own country,made it the same for individuals, even for social groups!Spatial bases of self-organization in one's own country or in a foreign one.
The most obvious in this area are the forced migrations organized by foreigners to maintain their physical existence.which, unfortunately, have not been uncommon in our history.
In this case, the view that:The reasons for the loss of statehood վելու deportation from one's own country cannot be considered only on an objective basis.
  In other words, the reasons for statelessness and self-organization in other geographical areas cannot be discussed only in the sphere of objective spatio-temporal factors: unfavorable geographical position, unfavorable course of geopolitical realities of the time,Expansionary ambitions of ethnic foreign elements և etc.
 It is obvious thatThe development of historical events by undesirable logic was predetermined for subjective reasons.
 In particular, in the absence of statehood, the existence of the nation is ensuredaccount of strong kinship ties as:Consequently, the preservation of individual-national identity is a prioritywas considered a collective national coexistence, that is, mandatorya team to live in its own geographical areafrom the idea.
 And in this case, passive adaptation has been achieved to the realities of leaving the homeland, deprivation of the homeland, deportation.
It is clear that all this conveys the problems we are observingis subjective in nature.
  However, it should be borne in mind that:a nation struggling to survive and its sufferings andIn order to make sense of the trials, he would eventually turn to the bio-philosophy of reparation.
 Therefore, in the absence of statehoodWe accept the objective basis for the Diaspora formed due to emigration, deportation and deprivation of the homeland in general.
• The next area of ​​monitoring concerns the Armenian Diasporasubjective reasons for the formation, which were expressed in full forceespecially in the conditions of statehood.
  Own:In the country, deprived of the opportunities for self-realization, our compatriots often state their geographical, socio-politicalin the sense they continued to consider themselves strangers և for their own self-realizationThey looked for other places.
 Of course, in this case, it comes firstThe powerful potential of the Armenian type is being pushed, for the realization of which the independent state has often not been able to provide the necessary environment either.
However, one should not ignore the national mentality formed at the time, influenced by the principles of national bio-philosophy.
 The latter has almost always been built on the individual-collective logics of national biophilosophyon the contradiction.
  In other words, the national gathering identity was often opposed to individual successes, in the case of which the geographical space was pushed to the background.
 As an example, you can:argued two independent Armenians in modern history1 population during the existence of the republics1 The existence of three Armenian republics in the 20th century is often argued in the professional literature: 1918-1920, 1920-1991. և After 1991.
 However, oursthe negative balance of migration.
 In particular, during the two years of the independence of the First Republic (1918-1920) the population of Armenia decreased from 1 million 200 thousand to 720 thousand 1.
 And the SecondDuring the 20 years of the republic's existence (1991-2010) the emigration rates were 700 thousand - 1 million 300 thousand 2.
 It is obvious that the geographical movements of the population in the periods under discussionThe sharp predominance of emigration in 2010 was conditioned by objective political, socio-economic, psychological reasons - war situations, very difficult socio-economic conditions, manifestations of civil injustice and inequality.
 However, oursIn their opinion, the latter are mainly not a reason for emigration, but a setback.
 In other words, emigration sharply reduces the social-civic vitality, the resistance to the problems, due to which the social tension of the society increases.is regular.
  Therefore, in the conditions of statehood,We consider the reasons for the formation of the Diaspora through emigrationWe are subjective.
Accepting the conditionality of the separation of the above-mentioned reasons for the formation of the Armenian Diaspora, nevertheless it is necessaryIt should be noted that they often mutually agreed with each other ըստ, accordingly, they often made the reality of emigration from Armenia.
As a result, today the population of the homeland is several times higherThe existence of a multimillion-dollar Armenian Diaspora is remarkablefalls in a multi-layered manner.
  Of course, the latter is first of all conditioned by the geographical features of the self-organization of the Diaspora.
  However, the same multilayerThe difference between the reasons for leaving the homeland is quite obvious.
  The correct assessment of the latter will allow moreto make effective not only the activities of Diaspora organizations:According to 1920-1991. Soviet Socialist Armenia, which survived during
The republic cannot be considered an independent republic, as it was not an independent subject of international law.
1 L. H. Valesyan, Economic Geography of the Armenian SSR, E., 1981, p. 84.
2 See Migration Presents Challenges and Opportunities for Armenia New Report Says, Yerevan, Armenia,from the point of view of ensuring the unity of the colonies, but also Armenia's policy towards the Diaspora, the starting point of which should bebe an organized repatriation.
Literature 1. Armenian Diaspora Yearbook, RA Ministry of Diaspora, Yerevan, RAMinistry of Diaspora, 2011, 530 pages.
2. L. H. Valesyan, Economic Geography of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan,
Luys Publishing House, 1988, 451 pages.
3. A. H. Nersisyan, "Armenia on the big geopolitical board", Vanadzor, "Sim" publishing house, 2013, 331 pages.
4. E. A. Harutyunyan's collection of articles "Historical-philosophical analysis of national bio-philosophy", "Socio-cultural transformations of a transitional society", Yerevan, "Noyan Tapan"
ed., 2002, pp. 29-51.
6. Sociology.
 Encyclopedia / Cont. A.A. Грицанов, В.Л. Abushenko, G.M. Евелькин, Г. Н. Соколова, О. В. Tereщenko. - Minsk.
 Книжный Дом. 2003. 1312 p.
Information about the author:Nersisyan Armen Hovhannes - work. scientist Ph.D., Associate Professor, GSPI,
Email.
