The pedagogical process is aimed at educating the next generationand the solution of upbringing problems, the discovery and development of students' abilities և personal qualities.
  It hasdynamic nature է is variable.
 The whole pedagogical process consists of this or that pedagogical situation encountered during the pedagogical activity, which is solved, corrected, settled.they need.
 Many situations encountered in the pedagogical process turn into pedagogical problems, prompting educators, students and their parents to analyze the situation.evaluation of the proposed solutions, selection of the best option լավագույն development of an implementation plan.
 It is very possible thatThe teachers should pay attention to any pedagogical situation, show the right approach, give a solution to the problematic situation according to the purpose of the pedagogical process, the nature of the pedagogical situation, the students.age peculiarities և etc.
  Any pedagogical problem encountered in the pedagogical process puts a big stamp on itaffects the further development of learners, especiallyThis effect is very strong and is evident in elementary school.
Most pedagogical situations are problematic.
 We face a pedagogical problem when it is problematicThe pedagogical situation can have several solutions: It is necessary to find the method that will lead in this caseeffective solution of the problem.
The importance of pedagogical problems, their educational andThe issue of educational significance was addressed in such a waypedagogues, such as MA Danilov, LL Dodon, VI Zagvyazinsky, VA Slastyonin, IF Isa and others.
The pedagogical problem, according to famous pedagogues VA Slastyonin, I. F. Isa's meaningful pedagogical situation, which
The goal is the knowledge and transformation of reality [7, pp. 504-505].
Thus, when saying a pedagogical problem, you often understandWe are a pedagogue created by a teacher or studentsthe situation, which needs to be analyzed, corrected, regulatedhe feels.
Different problems are observed and studied in the system of different sciences.
 When we say problem, in many cases we mean:• task or assignment• an issue that needs to be resolved;• set goal, which needs to be achieved, etc.
In the case of the natural sciences, regardless of the circumstances,The answer to the problem is always the same if the problem is solved correctly.
  In case of pedagogical problems, the solution may change.
 The process of solving the problem may change depending on different circumstances, whether it is possible or notwhen, with whom, for what reasons և etc.
Back in the 60s of the last century, the Russian pedagogue LL Dodon, using the role and significance of pedagogical problems,He considered it necessary to solve the pedagogical problemAssess the specific fact, identify the motivations of the pedagogue or students' behavior, point out the pedagogical complexWays to get out of the situation և find a solution to a specific problemthe most correct version [5, page 9].
The process and effectiveness of pedagogical problem solvingIt is greatly influenced by who solves the problem.
 The organization of the pedagogical process, the efficiency, like him!The correct solution of the pedagogical problem largely depends on the pedagoguefrom his professional and personal qualities, teacher pedagogicalfrom mastery.
 The master teacher is always able to find a way out of all the difficult pedagogical situations, to answer all the studentsunexpected questions.
 Teacher with pedagogical skillsis deeply aware of what to do և how to do it to make it happenthe goal pursued վի to ensure a high result.
 Pedagogical communication is very important in a teacher's mastery, which can be considered as a teacher's professional influence on students in order to create easy-to-trust relationships.
Effectiveness in solving pedagogical problems is possibleensure և achieve high results by relying on the following starting pointon the provisions. • Convenience: taking into account the patterns of natural development of children, maintaining their mental and physical healthand strengthens• Cultural convenience: children's education, upbringingand implement development based on cultural values,• Individual-creative approach - meeting the interests and needs of each child of a different naturein creative activity,• Life activities - involving children in solving their own problems and difficulties in real life;• Cooperation: uniting the goals of children and adults;coordination of actions, mutual support and mutual assistance [4, p. 102].
In case of pedagogical problems, the problem cannot be solved immediately. It is a long process consisting of several stages.
  First of all, it is necessary to analyze all the data.
 The primary և possible step in solving a pedagogical problem is to analyze the situation and realize the problem, what is the cause of the situation, when and under what conditions it occurred, whatcharacteristics and relationships are related to the situationstudents and educators, ինչ what is the problem with all this?he stops.
If this step is ignored, it is impossible to fully study the problematic situation and give the right solution to the problem.
The next stage of solving the pedagogical problem is the choice of the solution method, when the pedagogue uses his knowledge and his pedagogical knowledge.from experience selects the appropriate solution to the given problem:analyzing and evaluating the decision made.
  Problem solving methodThe pedagogue can first talk to the student about the choice,If necessary, consult with the child's parentswith other educators who work with or have more experience.
 And:The final stage of solving the pedagogical problem is the implementation of the corresponding solution and the analysis of the results [7, pp. 509-511].
Thus, the solution of pedagogical problems is implementedin the following stages.• Analysis of the pedagogical situation;• Awareness of the problem • Choice of problem solving method;• Implementation of problem solving;• Analysis of results.
Correction and settlement of difficult pedagogical situations,The beginning of a complex process of solving pedagogical problems is setin elementary school, as it is considered children's educationthe beginning of the activity.
Each age stage is characterized by a certain pedagogicalsituations and pedagogical problems arising from those situationsbased on the age characteristics of the learners.
Primary school age is a period of transition when a childAt the same time, it has features characteristic of both pre-school and school.
At this age, the child should be ready not only to acquire knowledge, but also to change the content of his whole life, which in turnbrings some difficulties.
 Junior high school students may have difficulty with schooling that is unusual for a childthe relationship with the regime, the teacher, classmates, family members, as well as the lack of interest and frustration from school and the pedagogical process [2, pp. 84-93].
Typically common to all primary school childrenThere are a number of features.
 Thus, the primary school students. • Irritable, quick-tempered, often reminded of parents' lessons (this:In this case, it is necessary to distract the children from something interestingon the topic, work, give assignments, tasksusing the role of the student)• inquisitive, want to know everything (requires patiencelisten, answer all questions, explain in detail and in an accessible waymaterial),• get tired and bored quickly (it is necessary to keep children in an active role during lessons, constantly changing their work style;including exciting games, competitions, various physical exercises),• are quick to impress and insecure about their own strengths (it is necessary to give assignments taking into account the children's mental andlevel of physical fitness, excluding bad content and finished materials);• mimic adult habits, movement, behavior;speech (it is necessary to keep children away from bad examples, to act and speak thoughtfully, to be a positive example for copying) [1,pp. 114-118].
The above-mentioned age peculiarities often lead to such difficult pedagogical situations, which require immediate solution.
 Their correct solution can have a direct impact on the child's future, his behavior, inner world, worldview, etc.
As a result of the study of pedagogical literatureWe can generalize և separate a number of pedagogical rules, which can significantly affect the efficiency of the pedagogical process.
  The following few rules can be achieved when solving various pedagogical problemsin case of pursuit.• Do not see a negative motive for every bad deedoptimistic, show a humanistic approach because of the negativerelying on it, one can only deepen the complicated conflict situation,• Mediated influence may be more effective than:that direct remarks, threats can be disgusting andcause riots• correctly, competently and reasonably assess the students' personality, excluding overestimation and underestimation, as each of them can leave a negative mark;• Collaborating brings people together to engage in both student-student and student-teacher collaboration;• Pedagogical delicacy and mastery, a little humortheir presence prevents the emergence of conflict situations.
Let us now present an example of some pedagogical problems encountered in elementary school, giving some possible solutions to them.
Problem 1.
• Analysis of the pedagogical situation.
  In the first gradeOne of the students did not attend classes without his mother.
 Mother:He started crying when he was away.
• Awareness of the problem.
  The teacher, realizing the given pedagogythe seriousness of the situation, trying to find a solution as soon as possibleby creating positive motivations for learning in the student ուս by involving him / her in various activities.
• Implementation of problem solving.
  Initially, the teacher invited her mother to classes.
 Then, gradually, using different pretexts, the teacher's student's mother from the classHe sent it out and gave it to the student during that timeThere were interesting assignments to divert attention fromthe absence of a mother.
  So, after a while, the mother startedto wait for the child in the corridor, then in the school yard.
• Results analysis.
 Due to the above approachThe problem was solved and the child was fully involved in pedagogyto the process.
Problem 2.
• Analysis of the pedagogical situation.
  In the second gradeThe teacher noticed that some of the students in her class did not!They learn the lesson, but they do not raise their hands, or they do not askThey answer, or they speak with restraint and fear.
• Awareness of the problem.
  Facing the next pedagogical problemThe teacher tries to solve the situationDevelop by motivating students to be active and independent.
• Implementation of problem solving.
  Teacher to students constantlyinvolved in the field of work in which it was createdrelaxed atmosphere, և children were able to expressthoughts and feelings, feel the role of one's own person in the classroom andcapacity և etc.
• Results analysis.
 After a while the situation improves.
The children's fear disappears, the students realize that it is possibleto freely express thoughts that can even be mistaken or confusedand not be punished, in which case they are left by the teacherpopular and reputable.
Problem 3.
• Analysis of the pedagogical situation.
The third grade teacher notices that the children in her class are not friendly to each otherThey do not help, they do not give their belongings to friends, they do not trust each other.
• Awareness of the problem.
 To solve this problem, the teacher oftenUses collective learning technology to promote student collaboration.
• Implementation of problem solving.
 The teacher deliberately creates a situation where it is necessary to give her own things or give to a friend,Or work together on the same thing, learn with one book, pass onthe pencil և etc.
 He is sometimes the teacher himself to set an exampleHe gives some of his belongings to one of the disciples.
• Results analysis.
 Such work contributed to:The student body will unite and become a collaboratorsupporter.
He may have the presented pedagogical problems. "other solutions, because a pedagogical problem, unlike other problems, such as a mathematical problem, has a solutionHow many methods and different "answers".
In the pedagogical process they meet as above,so many other pedagogical situations that solverequires.
  In addition to the many spontaneous pedagogical situations created in the pedagogical process, teachers և students can also createpedagogical issues, taking into account the teaching of students andtheir potential and impact in the upbringing processstrength.
  Due to problematic pedagogical situationsThe answers to many questions can be found, contributing to the increase of the efficiency of the educational process.
pedagogical situations are composed both by the teacher and the students either.
Literature 1. Krutetsky VA, Fundamentals of Pedagogical Psychology, Yerevan,Luys, 1976, 443 pages.
2. Petrovski AV, Age և pedagogical psychology, textbook for children. inst. for, Yerevan, "Luys", 1977, 398 pages.
3. Bordovska NV, Rean AA Pedagogy.
 Learning. More.- SPb Peter. 2006.-304p.
4. Guslova M.N. Innovative pedagogical technologies.
  Learning. пособие.-М.
5. Dodon L.L. Collection of tasks and management in pedagogy.
 UCPEDGIZ.-1959.6. Подласый И.П. Педагогика начальной школы.
  Learning. for cold. ped. school and:
колледжей.- М .:
 VLADOS.- 2004.- 399 s.7. Slastenin VA, Isaev IF, Shivanov EN Pedagogy.
  Learning. пособие для:
students ped. уч. зав.- М ..
