Artashes Harutyunyan is one of the grateful people of Armenian-Armenian literature, whose literary and social life coincided with Turkishduring the years of the anti-Armenian policy of dictatorship, when it was in bloodEvery attempt to express national and intellectual identity is lost.
During this period of social and political life, the powerful forces of Western Armenian culture were largely displaced.
 His soberArtashes Harutyunyan ruled over the Armenian-Armenian cultural thought with his predictions and impartial literary and publicist articles, keeping the discouraged intellectual life alive.
In 1908-1910 "Azatamart", "Armenian Literature",Artashes Harutyunyan (1873-1915) addresses national-political issues in "Voice of the Fatherland" and "Byzantium" periodicalswith public-speaking articles.
The coup d'etat of the Young Turks and the July Constitution inspired romantic illusions in the Armenians.
  Deported:Many intellectuals took the road back.
 Only twenty days after the Constitution, "The Good of Freedom" was publishedHarutyunyan writes in the article. "My God, what a horrible dream!"
we wake up.
 ... Would we live?
 It was a dumb, criminal martyrdom.
 Must:To write, we must write the history of this thirty-year martyrdom. "[2]
With an internal alarm Art. Harutyunyan predicted that
People's demonstrations and festivities of 1908 took placethey should have given national mourning and destruction և "... the Ottoman Constitution,that with its free-spirited mood it promised possibilityto give away racial characteristics ”[2, p. 793], with a new program of national policy, to commit new crimes.
  Cilicia of 1909The events confirmed the writer's alarms.
Bringing together the historical past of the Armenian people and the brutal presenthe writes. "Without lyric poetry, without rhetorical frustration ... emotionless
We must be able to record seriously the history of mankindArmenian blood is the only one in the red wine glories glorifying the episodesis the most abundantly scrubbed to saturate the bloodstreaminstinctively easy-going grandparents. ”[3]
  Public speaker:lists certain facts. "Jinkiz Khan dyed himself a carnivore with that blood
Tatar ashes and netted beard, Lenktimur anointed his stigma with itThe bile skin of a lame beast. Bugha took baths with Armenian blood, his
to soothe the fury of a tiger with wine and tendernessուլ Abdul Hamid, the most bloodthirsty ներկա the gloomiest of timesand the insidious Corilla, a recurring weevil of its two-faced hybridHe calmed the madness by drinking Armenian blood for thirty years "[2, p. 795].
The July constitution of the Young Turks promised an endto put all the horses of the struggle for survival և "Armenian blood should not run either", "miraculously, the open wound of six hundred years" had to be scarred [3].
 But my article"Expectations are disappearing, because" the Constitution, "Harutyunyan writes," was not a force, it was not a complete victory, but only a promise and a smile. "[3]
 After all, in 95-96. The temporary cessation of bloody massacres, with new vigor and barbarism, "bled again,
He bled to death with an unprecedented amount of terrible bleedingUncertain greens that sprout for. ”[3]
Artashes Harutyunyan demands from the Turkish governmentto put an end to "political, diplomatic or barbaric"All the decisions, which "all while serving to satisfy the same unique and brutal instincts of mortals", are especially poured on the heads of the Armenians.
  The publicist disguises himself as a TurkishThe government's "morality" propaganda reveals the TurksExtreme backwardness of political, economic and cultural development.
 The writer's indignation turns into an outburst of protest. "Why the mob?"
"It breaks, it erases us," he asks and adds.which has become ... an antithesis of morality ... ”[4, page 1].
After relentlessly criticizing the policy pursued by the "Jeon Turks", after three years of experience, A. Harutyunyan comes to it
He concluded that "... except for a series of extravagances, a relatively deceptive freedom", the constitution did not bring any news.
  The search for the causes of reality leads to itto the conclusion that the Turkish state has no edge in joining the progressive countries.
  According to Art. According to Harutyunyan, the constitution
It was called not only to create a yoke of Turkish rulefor the peoples below, but to break the very shackles of the Turks' backwardness.
The publicist accurately described the Turkish nation's hateful behaviorexplanation. it stems from the feelings of national egoism rooted in the violent, savage classes.
Aimed at the annihilation of the national identity of the peoplesThe policy of the Turkish government intensified every outbreak of the national liberation struggle.
 Ottoman governmentpractical policy: national pressure, forced deportation,conversion, intermittent massacres, directed at Armenians, Arabs,the extermination of Greeks, Bulgarians, Serbs, Kurds.
 Art. Harutyunyan said
disguises the policy of the Turkish military-feudal bureaucracy և writes: "Justice not for Armenians, not for Turks, not for Kurds, not for Greeks, not for Palkars, no
for the morning, not for the Arab, but for some feeling, somepassion, which does not count, indiscriminate and absolute Justice for Justice ”[5, p. 248].
As we notice, Harutyunyan is a public defenderto the happiness and well-being of mankind.
And where is civilized Europe, the ombudsman?the preacher of humanity.
  The publicist criticizes the EuropeanThe indifference of the states է is directed to the peoples of the worldthe survey. Is the nobility "who entered the tomb with Tonkishot" doomed to be exterminated from the bloody clutches of the barbarian tribe?
The problem of saving the Armenian.
  "Prosperous and deceitful official Europe, ... we felt the tears of his sometimes crying prostitute, the shed Armenianon his wounded dignity, he adds to his grief with the flowery poison of hypocrisy. "[3]
According to Varuzhan, the writer is a ruthless criticdescribed as "the prostitute diplomacy of European countries"։ wonders how Europe tarnishes its name of progress.
But to our other writers who speak of liberation ideologyHe is convinced that the interests of civilized Europe do not coincide with those of the "Armenians", that "European diplomacy is indifferent to the bloody scene of our martyrdom."
  The Adana disaster forces Harutyunyan to analyze the results of the coup d'etat carried out by the Young Turks.
In 1910 in the pages of "Voice of the Fatherland" in the article "Beneficial pages of Russian revolutionary history", Art. Harutyunyan refers to the internal changes in the political life of tsarist Russia
to the exam.
  He reminds the Armenians of 1879-1880Some episodes of the revolutionary situation in Russia, Tsar Alexander II, Minister of Internal Affairs Count Sipyakin, Pobedanos, "Russian dictator Von Plehvey", CaucasusThe murders of Deputy Prince Golitsyn, Bobrikov, Andre!
As we can see, the publicist who deals with political issues becomes one of the unique thinkers in Western Armenia who defended the idea of ​​revolutionary struggle during the social and political revolutions.
  In the spirit of an honest patriot, Art.Harutyunyan becomes a volunteer of General Andranikto the national liberation wars waged by the detachment.
Due to the strategy developed by Andranik Zoravar, the Turkish army is inflicted great damage by a relatively small number of forces.Commander Yaver Pasha is captured and sent on a disgraceful horseSophia to the Tsar of the Bulgarians [6, p. 75].
The Turks are taking revenge on Artashes HarutyunyanDuring the Balkan War, he took part in the activities in which he was involvedThe aim was to ask the victorious states to enter MalkaraIn the Pulkara border "[7].
Their recapture of the city is happening so fast,that the Harutyunyan family does not have time to cross to Bulgaria.
 Turks:Barbaric revenge creates a nightmare in the city.
"Armed Armenian men pass within the Armenian districtThey were watching from house to house so that the Turks would not retreatto commit a massacre.
 And the Turks tried that.
 Before handing over Malkaran to the Bulgarians, they wanted to massacre the Armenians, but the Armenians were preparedwere ... School director H. Oshakan, poet Artashes Harutyunyan,
His brother, writer Vahan, and even their father, Haji Arti agha, were armedand decided to resist, being sure that the Bulgarian army was thereIn front of the doors of Malkara… »[7].
The deportations and massacres of Armenians had started in the provinces.
"The team of the Armenian intelligentsia was marching to Golgotha" [8].
The Turkish secular movement is the history of the Armenian peopleHe filled the page of his biography with a new "red wine book" (Art. Harutyunyan).
  The great priests of art fell with axes.
  Hundreds of ArmeniansThey were arrested.
  The Armenian world is turning into a vast slaughterhouse.
The crime continues day and night.
Harutyunyan's father to save his imprisoned songoes to Constantinople.
 To Ali Rizan Hussein from Malkar, who became the horror of the ArmeniansHe was the grandson of a dictator called Effendi.
  getting to know ArtinAli Riza immediately arrested him.
 By the order of the former director of the prisons of Constantinople Ibrahim չ, the brutal tortures are resumed.
  Hakob Sargsyan testifies that the writer took it with courageterrible horrors. "Artashes had seen his old father cry, but
He did not even utter a word of supplication to the executioners. "[9]
 They say that in the days of relatively good feeling Art. Harutyunyan spoke enthusiastically about literature.
The moral description of the writer is presented from the memories of contemporaries. "In the most bitter state of suffering, in the moments of suffering, he looked out of the window of the room we found at the women and boys in the outside yard, and his forgotten pains were filled with their pains," writes A. Mubaheachyan.
- How many times did he ask me? "What should I do?"
be their condition when their husbands are exiled.
 These women and childrenthey will starve to death. ”[10]
  Three armed Turkish guards at nightThe two defenseless Armenians are being taken under control, who, to be fair, could not expect anything but death.
"Against death, no matter how you close your eyes, I am my best manI'm sure the joy of the Aryans opened in the midst of your pure blood like gold, and a ribbon of your much-loved Motherlink spirit descended on you.
 AndIn spite of the fact that the crime was to seduce you, your youth became a smile,"Metterlink's smile" [11], writes Hakob Oshakan.
Artashes Harutyunyan did not have the fortune to live a God-given life normally, he became one of the victims of the untold genocide of 1915, sharing the fate of countless Armenians who were martyred in the Turkish massacre.
Art. In the valuable literary pages left by Harutyunyan even today
The progressive position and active citizenship of the theoretician-analyst are reflected in the broad view of the perception and evaluation of the socio-political situation of the time.
 He did not dwell on the prospects of national autonomy promised by the Young Turks, disguised the anti-popular practices of the Ottoman Empire, the young Turks, and the diplomatic manipulations of the imperialist states, presenting his artistic progressive position.and active citizenship.
Literature   1. GAT, Artashes Harutyunyan's archive, case №23, page 14.
2. Harutyunyan A. H., "Good for Freedom", "Archelyan Press", Constantinople,
1908, №34, pp. 793-796.
3. Harutyunyan A. H., "The impenetrable breath", K. Constantinople, "Azatamart"
1909, №11,12.
4. Harutyunyan A. H., "A Missing Miracle", "Armenian Literature",
Smyrna, 1912, №7, pp. 1-5.
5. Harutyunyan A. H., "Beneficial Pages from Russian Revolutionary History",
"Voice of the Fatherland", 1910, №13, page 248.
6. Panikyan O. S., From Death to Life, Yerevan, 1965, 334 pages.
7. GAT, Artashes Harutyunyan's archive, case 63.
8. Parsamyan M. A., Artashes Harutyunyan "His life and work", "Homeland", Boston, 1928, №49, 50.
9. Aghasyan M., "Artashes Harutyunyan", "New Day", Athens, 1930, 20of April.
10. GAT, Artashes Harutyunyan's archive, case -66-68.
11. Oshakan H. H., "Artashes Harutyunyan", "Memories", "Battle", Constantinople, 1919, June 15.
Information about the authors:Anahit G. Nahapetyan - something. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, GSPI
Armenian literature, its teaching methods, journalism Lecturer of the chair.
Marie Varuzhan Soghomonyan - in "№ 7 Basic School" SNCO և in ASUE CollegeTeacher of Armenian language and literature.
