Children are our future.
  Therefore, if there is no high-quality, effective education, there is no future.
 However, on the way to higher education, educators often do not fully realize what is the result of a strong flow of modern information.The child is subjected to psychological and emotional influences.
 With age, these influences increase, and live communication and interaction decrease.
 Considering the issue from this point of view, demandIt is not enough to take into account only the age-individual peculiarities of the children in the process of educating the pedagogues.
 Another approach is needed.
Recently, a special culture has been formed in the field of education to provide some assistance to schoolchildren, which is commonly called pedagogical support.
  From the moment whenThe child starts attending school, enters a new environment, stands up for a new onesocial, educational, psychological "other problems", which:You need a teacher for an easy, purposeful: effective solutionpedagogical support.
  Every problem or problem of the childfor emotional (fear) և active (ignorance of overcoming it)It is a deadlock, for the solution of which the support of a pedagogue is needed.
 Problems that are solved with pedagogical support are related to different areas: education, health, communication,entertainment և etc.
  The pedagogue must first be interestedto solve learners' problems, and secondly, thatAs a result of solving the problems, the child will register personal growth.
For a long time there was a stereotype in pedagogy that only those students who do not need it for one reason or another need pedagogical support and special attention.complies with accepted social norms.
  But nowThe idea of ​​pedagogy prevails in pedagogyEveryone needs support and a unique attitudechildren, regardless of their physical, social or other status.
  Today, modern schools are staffed with professionalswith such a team (social pedagogue, special pedagogue, psychologist ևetc.), one of the functions of which is pedagogical support for studentsimplementation.
Referring to the history of pedagogy, you canWe said that the idea of ​​pedagogical support for students was still based on the principle of natural adaptation of upbringing.at the core.
 It was referred to by Y. A. Komensky, I. H. Pestalozzi, J. J. Russo, K. D. Ushinsky, L. Ն. Tolstoy, J. Dewey, S. Frenen, M .; Montessori, R.
Steiner և others.
  However, the main structural features of the pedagogical support were developed by the correspondent member of the RF Academy of Education, academician OS Gazman.
  Later, his students continued the work in this direction:T. V. Anokhin, V. P. Bederkhanov, N. B. Krylova, N. Ն. Mikhailova, S. D.
Polyakov and others.
O. Ս. Gazman understands pedagogical support
was a preventive և operative help to the child to solve his personalProblems related to physical-psychological health, social-economic status, progress in education, schoolwith the observance of rules, interpersonal communication, vital, professional orientation, etc. [6, 61-68].
There are three main directions of psychological and pedagogical support in the professional literature:• Support as an upbringing (OS Gazman, VP Bondarov, IA Lipsky, MI Rozhkov).
 Support by creating appropriate conditions for the child's self-development.
• Support as protection (SV Dudchik).
  Support:ensuring the safety of the child.
• Support as individualization (EA Alexandrova, MP Bityanova, IB Levitskaya, SK Turchak).
 Support by always fulfilling the child's needs.
Pedagogical support is a long process aimed at the full development of the learner.
 It is a permanent effecton the development of the child's personality, promoting the independence of learners[5,167-172].
  Pedagogical support presupposes the constant presence of the teacher in the student's life, and not only child support.in difficult situations or if there is a problem.
 Pedagogical support does not imply a direct influence of the teacheron the students.
 On the contrary, it is a help in which the learners will overcome the problems they face on their own.
That is, in the case of pedagogical support, such are createdPedagogical conditions և Favorable environment, which will have a beneficial effect on the development of students.
  Unfortunately, this is exactly the misunderstanding of pedagogical support in general education.
While the pedagogical process և interpersonal relationships at school will benefit most from such a systemic approachin case pedagogical support is considered by pedagogues as a "way of life" of pedagogical essence and masterya particle that is manifested not from time to time, from time to time, butas a permanent hidden presence in the learner's life.
Pedagogical support differs from concepts such as care, care, protection.
 It:It is the disguised presence of the teacher in the learner's life, in which case the child can solve his own problems.
 If in a child's lifeLet's compare the problem with the abyss to overcome ithe should at least make a flight, then a pedagogical oneThe support comes out as a solid support for safe accessfor.
 In this case, the pedagogue acts as a trusted personդեպքում Guaranteed in case of possible risk.
 Any positive problem solvingThe result obtained through the activity of the child is observedas a positive experience that changes the attitude of the individualդրական develops positive motivation.
Walking next to the child, together with him, the pedagogue helps him to build his own life with his own advice and example.և to choose the way in which he should walk.
 Choosing that path is the right and responsibility of every child.
The pedagogue should only help to make that choice more conscious [2, 54].
The purpose of pedagogical support is to develop the child's subjective attitude towards life, to help the growing generation in self-determination, self-expression and self-development.
 To achieve all this you need a developed consciousness, will, attention, perseverance,Ability to design և initiative.
• identify the child's problems;• help the child to understand the situation objectively;• help to realize the importance of one's role in solving one's own problems ևThe problems of pedagogical support are:in the accumulation of life experience,• Create conditions where the child will realize the prospects of self-development.
However, the main problem of pedagogical supportCreating a relationship where the learner is responsible for their own problems and difficulties և can alwaysGet help from a teacher when your own abilities are not enough.
 The pedagogue must express his emotionsAttitude towards this or that action performed by him, not forgetting the positive emphasis on the child's personality, regardless of the quality and nature of the action performed by him.
And why is pedagogical support needed?
  His:for the child to be able to successfully assimilate social values ​​and norms, to choose his way of life, to realize it, to discover the outside world, to develop the inner world, to acquire knowledge, to develop abilities and skills.
Support is an activity that is implementedin the following sequence of stages [1].
• Diagnostic phase or identification of learners' potential.
 The pedagogue, by studying the students' personal documents, folders, making observations, analyzes the individual features of the children, the dynamics of development, interpersonalcommunication style և etc.
• Search phase or joint problem identification, observation from the child's point of view.
• Contractual stage or student pedagogical support ևin designing certain ways of their individual development.
• Activity phase or approval of learner activities;encouraging initiative.
  Relevant pedagogical situations (trainings, thematic conversations, games, etc.)modeling և implementation.
• Reflexive phase or evaluation of results և analysis.
Pedagogical support can be provided in different waysdirections:• Assist students in making various decisions;• Assistance in solving various problems• Support in difficult life situations;• Identifying and guiding children at risk;• At work, with children outside of schoolin the system և etc.
As a result of the analysis of practical experience in the study of pedagogical literature, we came to the conclusion that when providing pedagogical support, the pedagogue should: • create appropriate pedagogical conditions, taking into account:Individual characteristics and interests of learners• Be willing to help interact by pushing them to realize ևto solve personal problems on their own,• Do not force the child to behave in this or that behavior, but help him to realize himselfrights, responsibilities and opportunities• Respect the child's free choice և Exercise of independence;• Encourage the child և Teach him to take responsibility for his actions.
The strategy of pedagogical support is to transform the child from a passive role to an active subject.
 The role of a pedagogueThe role is to teach the child any problem. "When standing, think about the following questions:• Why? How did the problem arise?• What results does he expect from the solution? How realistic is it?• What actions should be taken to achieve the desired result?for,• What are the obstacles, how to overcome them?• How will his actions affect the people who:In one way or another they are connected with the created situation, etc.
Pedagogical support is possible only if  when the child agrees to help և support, when the educator relies on the child's existing և potential, When there is faith in the child's abilities, when the educator encourages the child's initiative andindependence when there is cooperation և mutual assistance between the child ի pedagogue և, when the rights and human dignity of the child are respected; when the pedagogue is guided by the "do no harm" principle.
For successful pedagogical support you need to remember oneSome simple but powerful rules [6]: 1. Always accept the child as he is.
2. A child can never be a means to an end for pedagogical purposesto achieve.
3. The pedagogue's self-expression is in the student's creative self-expression.
4. Overcome all difficulties only in moral ways.
5. Keep your Բարձր Your student's dignity high.
6. Never compare one student with another.
  Compare the results with the activities carried out.
7. Trust, but check.
8. Accept the child's right to make mistakes - do not judge him.
9. Be able to admit your mistakes.
10. Protect your child by teaching him to protect himself.
11. If a child is encouraged and encouraged, he learns to be gratefulto be
12. If a child grows up in an honest environment, he learns to befair.
13. If a child grows up in a safe environment, he learnsto believe in people.
14. If a child is constantly criticized, he learns to hate.
15. If a child grows up in hostility, he acquires aggressionlines.
16. If a child is ridiculed, he becomes closed-minded.
17. If a child grows up with constant reprimands, he learnsto live with guilt.
To generalize our studies of professional literature, let us single out the effective pedagogical supportA number of implementation methods.1. Encouragement methods (verbal praise, commendations, awards)և etc.).
2. Methods of punishment (reprimand, harsh treatment, individualconversations և etc.).
3. Methods of self-diagnosis (analyze one's abilities, abilities and behavior).
4. Method of self-assessment (give an adequate assessment of oneself, goals, means used to achieve them).
5. Method of self-organization (independently organize the daily routine,the works carried out և etc.).
6. Self-healing method (self-recovery of physical ևmental forces of frequent change of activities,through creative works).
7. Method of self-determination (creating situations when the child has to make an independent choice և make a decision).
8. Method of self-expression (creating situations when a childmust perform individual tasks for himself).
9. Self-forecasting method (forecasting upcoming events).
10. Communication training method (role-plays, exercises ևetc).
11. Creative search method (solving various problemscreative approach ստեղծագործ creative positive experienceapplication).
12. Gradual progress method (to teach the degree of action, going from easy to difficult, avoidingfrom abrupt flight).
It should also be mentioned that he is a pedagogical supporterThe pedagogue must be endowed with the following abilities:Կարող Ability to avoid interpersonal conflicts;Կարող Ability to deal with interpersonal conflicts effectively; organizational skills, empathy և mutual assistance skills,Կարող Ability to use all opportunities and resources ևetc.
Thus, for the effective implementation of pedagogical support, it is necessary to change or modernize teachersvalue system,master new ways of interacting with learners և interactions, as a result of whichThe child will learn to implement the mechanisms of self-determination, self-expression and self-development.
Summarizing the above, let us mention the potential purpose of educationshould be directed to the child's self-development, to help buildhis own life և worldview, to become an active player in his life.
  Real self-development must lead to necessityexceeding the limits of one's own forces.
  The mission of the pedagogue is to support the child in the difficult task of his self-development.
Literature in the elementary school. M.
 Companionship, 1998, 352 p.in education.
 learn add cold. высш. learn заведений. M.
 Publisher:4. New prices of education.
  toothpaste - support - consultation./ Order Н.Б.Крылова. - M.
 UVC "Innovator", 1996, Vyp. 6, 196p.
education. M.
 TC Sphere, 2003, 160 p.Information about the author:Markosyan Narine Rubik - child. scientist Candidate of Armenian Studies after Kh. Abovyan
 State Pedagogical University, Vocational Education և AppliedLecturer of the Department of Pedagogy E-mail.
