"Political communication is anchored in society."on the ongoing dialogue between political institutions, which develops between different governments, states and peoplesongoing dialogue.
 The latter is constructive or destructiveThe bearer of the consequences is the people.
  In this respect, the present is remarkablethe hypersensitivity of a politicized society to political processes, as well as the awareness of verbal influence և growinginterest in the news that exposes it.
 The urgency of this topic is substantiated by the fact of the politicization of the modern society, the high level of awareness, the critical perception of information.
 This is the first attempt to find out ևto comprehensively practice the possibility of standardization US President B. In Obama's speeches.
The study of political texts brings happiness to the wordPatterns of construction որոշակի Certain frequency of application of means of influence on the audience's individual language stylewithin the framework of features.
 This allows us to talk about verbal influences as predisposing phenomena."Which are constantly referred to by the representatives of this or that national-linguistic-cultural community in their speech, with whom the acquaintanceis considered mandatory in the given community.
  Such a precedentAmong the phenomena are also special names, references, etc. "(Krasny,1998.
52).
 The precedent is a fact with a verbal agreement,which was pre-operated in the verbal activities of members of a certain linguistic and cultural community և serves as an example for the following similar facts (Алефиренко, 2002
10).
It occupies a central place in the communication systemThe verbal strategy followed by the verbal trick.
  The latterrelates to the strategy as the private to the general (see Chernyavskaya, 2006) և acts as a concrete implementation of the strategycommunication step.
  Each strategy assumes a multiplicity of tricks, united under a common strategic goal.
"Verbal trick is a functional unit of sequence of actions that contributes to a localized or global problem.solution under the control of strategy ”(see T. vanDeyek, 1989).
  V.Chernyavskaya identifies verbal-communication trick և verbal tactics (technique) (Chernyavskaya, 2006.
45) by separating"Linguistic" and "non-linguistic" manifestations of speech techniques.
The study of political discourse allows us to make a differenceVarious verbal tricks, the most important of which is standardizationthe trick.
The ability to standardize events և facilitates the stereotyping of events, events և individuals, while differentiating them.features, characteristics։ features.
The trick of standardization is practically implemented in one imageby condensing similar events into an entire class or into a single event.
The purpose of turning an image or reality into a stereotype becomes apparent in various speeches.
 To substantiateLet us consider the relevant examples.Speech on May 6, 2008 in North CarolinaThis long section includes four paragraphs, four sayings, each of which, by the example of that person, typifies the various issues of public concern.
  Speech this:In this section we see the use of a quadruple of the standardization ability.
Each of the sayings begins with the mention of individualswith the joint introduction of a certain article և noun (the woman / the collegestudent / the mother / the man).
 Here the speaker uses induction, referring to private issues, in fact indirectly alluding to the problems of different social strata in hisAwareness և gives them a new sound.
  At first sightIt seems that the speaker fixes indisputable facts and realities, but the listener's attention is not focused on the problems of an individual, but on the one hand, it is done with an actor with similar problems.Generalization of people dissatisfied with the government, on the other hand, is happyThe awareness of the politician is removed.
 He does not hesitate to respond accordingly, expressing a willingness to solve problems, which is expressed at the end of each of the tricks.(That's why I'm running for President).
 At the same time, the formulation of thought through syntactic parallelism becomes a powerful trick,because "the conversion of the interlocutor is called by repeating it often."It ends with the substantiation of the obviousness of that fact ”(Shelestek, 2006).
157).
  Syntactic repetition (epiphora) at the end of each of the tricks completes the transmitted thought և receptivemakes it.
It is noteworthy that the same examples were found in one placein another speech, which testifies to the predisposition of the possibility of standardizationaboutEyes are the structural similarities of the words under examination.The first is the introduction of a typical image of a certain article և nounin relation to (the man / the student), second, the multiple use of the trick in the same context; third, the rhyme of each trick thatwith a message, the repetition of which is introduced into the listener's consciousnessor the idea that the speaker needs is rooted.
Maybe with duplicity և if (if) with a secondary sentence inserted conditionally (anaphora) B. Obama makes serious accusations against his political opponent, hinting at it
the fact that the latter is unaware of the problems of the people, indirectly advising them to first get acquainted with them and then solutionsto search.
This is also a case of multiple use of the typification featurethe passage.In this case, the trick is concluded, according to neurolinguisticsprogramming, relationship (report) with the approval of the audienceև between the stated realities (And it was about all of you), followed by:is the connection ве the conduction (see) (see Grinder, Bandler,1993.
18-19 med. according to Shelestak, 2006.
153), which is manifested by the following formulation: You understand these stories because you or someone you love lived them.
The speaker skillfully tricks the listener into telling his storyconnecting it with the life of the latter կյանքի, thus realizing an emotional influence.
 In many works devoted to the analysis of political discourse, the pronouns I և we, which have been recognized as "politicized" linguistic units, have been examined many times (see Vander Zanden, 1977).
280,med. according to Baghdasaryan, 2011.
103).
  But no less valuable և practically effective means is the launch of the pronoun you.
  So abovein the example given (You understand these stories because you or someone you love:lived them) it becomes obvious that the pronoun you in this context neutralizes the orator's opinion. it becomes the "inner voice" of the listener:
awakening in the latter the recollection of personal life experience.
 At the same time, the use of you relieves the speaker of the need to prove what is being said, emphasizing the speaker's awareness, citingthe speaker's own experience.
  The knowledge of the speaker becomes "persuasive" means in the "hand" of the speaker.
  This reduces the "distance" between the speaker's opinion and the speaker's knowledge, effectively identifying themthem.
  We find similar uses for the pronoun You - GrandIn his speech on November 4 in Park.The typification trick is available in B. In Obama's speech, in the narration of his own biography. In this case, the emphasis is on the president's African-American descent.
"Primary Night Texas and Ohio San Antonio", TX, March 4, 2008).
In this program, Barack Obama subconsciously inspires in his audience the idea that he is alive in the American dream.the embodiment.
 Consider the idea of ​​the American DreamIt is an example of standardization and stereotyping of the way of life.
In fact, the speaker uses the technique of anchoring, which is one of the basic tools of neurolinguistic programming.
 According to J. O'Connor և:
Ջ. Seymour. "Anchors are all that can evoke an emotional state of mind. They are so obvious and widespread that we
we do not notice them ”(O'Connor, Seymour, 2011- http.
//www.psycho.all.ru).
 There are two ways of anchoring. The first is repetition, due to which the combination
is strengthened in the consciousness of the communicator, and the second - rightIt is the right action at the right time that relieves the need for repetition.
  The use of anchors in the studied tricks is appropriate andjustified, and repetition is manifested through the playing of the same characters in different speeches.
The trick under consideration stands out with the unique realization of linguistic tricks.
 In this invention, concurrence is parallelby combining structures, syntactic parallelism, rhetorical question пле addition (pleonazm) (get the chance / find opportunity / have the chance).
Addition is a semantic expression, which is interpreted as a duplication of a semantic element (duplication), severalExistence of linguistic forms that express the same meaningwithin the final part of the speech or text.
 The linguistic expression ևs is considered an addition if there is such a thing in itduplication.
 The supplement helps the recipient to be adequate and completeunderstand the message.
The use of standardization during the election campaigncontributes to the image of the candidate, he is close to his heartmakes the people because the listener is always disposed to ownto hear about problems that are possible through the example of an individualaddressing the issues.
Literature 1. Baghdasaryan MA Political speech as a mutual penetration of linguistic and non-linguistic realities.
 Thing. scientist candidate ast. claim
at.
 Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2010.Petrova. Translated into English. .з. Under the editorship of V.N. Gerasimova. Moscow.
  from:Cognition. Communication. Moscow.
 izd-vo MGU, 1998.-352p.driving. Уч. пособие. Moscow.
 Published by "Flinta" and "Science". 2006.-127s.
space. Пятигорск.
 From Pytigorsk Gos. Un-ta, 2006.-p. 153-164.
7. http:
