The issue of teaching the grammar of the mother tongue in the elementary grades has always been a subject of debate for a long time, linguist-methodologists have expressed contradictory opinions.
 For example, J. Aghayan, criticizing N. Ter-Ghondyan's textbook "The Element of Grammar of the Mother Tongue" (1883), opposed in elementary school
to teach grammar, saying: "Grammar is elementary
There will be a bee in the school, a bee hive, a barrier, an obstaclenatural և regular development of language ”[3, p. 193].
 And the great Armenian linguist M.Abeghyan said. "Of course, the student also learns his / her mother tongue
understands the meaning without grammar, but understandsa kind of instinctive, mixed, separate, and the teaching of grammar makes the understanding of the linguistic forms of the mother tongue and their meaning from instinctive to conscious, from mixed knowledge to connected, complete and generalized ”[1, p. 59].
  It is almost the same opinionto inform the great Russian pedagogue KD Ushinsky. "... the lack of grammar deprives the ability to speak ականconsciousness թող leaves children in a shaky state…" [12, p. 349].
 Famous Armenian grammar scholar Palasanyan, speaking about grammar, living language teachingthe place, role and proportion of the work carried out in the direction ofabout, he said. "From the very beginning, they can't be carried away at the same time,
Learning a living language must precede grammarteaching in order to create the necessary linguistic basis for its comprehensionfor living language is the only solid foundation on which to liveto raise the building of regular education ”[St. Palasanyan, Grammar on the Mother Tongue, A., B., G., 5th type, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1906, page E].
The elementary course of the mother tongue is divided into two sections: language pre-knowledge ական elementary language knowledge.
Both the pre-knowledge and the basic language knowledge passWe are combined with eggs, together with reading.
 It is appropriate to notice prof.A.E. Ter-Grigoryan, saying. "Elementary mother tongue course takes into account students' abilities and comprehension abilities, their language resources when taking grammar materials.
գործ The practical value of the materials to be taught… ”[11, p. 317].
  And the great oneLinguist-Methodist Ar. Bahatryan thought that in elementary school "grammar should not be the purpose of teaching, but he և
should be only a means to an end, that is, a means of literary language with precisionto understand լինելու to be in control of it ”[Ar. Bahatryan, Grammar of Secular Language (Instead of Preface), "Pedagogical Newspaper", 1878,
No. 4, p. 56].
This is what the authors of the current textbooks in the mother tongue meant, who created a unified reading and grammartextbook մի monolithic teaching of reading and grammar material,which made language teaching more effective and purposeful.
 In this case, the children grammar rules andinstead of memorizing definitions, linguistic patternsThey use it independently in their speech, as a result they developtheir thinking, their judgment, which is the goal of "grammar".
Now let's see how the basic language knowledge is distributed in the native language programs, what response they found in the textbooks.
In these combined textbooks (6,7, 8, 9, 10, 13) both "reading skills" and "linguistic knowledge" are used.and programming requirements for basic knowledge.
In the first grade, students study the Armenian phonetic alphabet (alphabet), distinguish vowels and consonants.sounds, to some extent get acquainted with their orthography, which is reinforced in the following grades.
You need to add capital letters to itWhat is in alphabetical order must be nominated in relation to the spelling of the consonants or different in spelling and pronunciationVocabulary teaching in a purely practical way, without regulation.
The current textbooks for the second grade (9, 13) are thematicgrouping principle, which includes primary school studentsmaterials relevant to the worldview և pursue a goalto educate, develop imagination, thinking, speech, the ability to read, to develop independently, self-confidently, spiritually anda physically healthy person.
 Lessons can be added if neededto move, provided that the logic of the linguistic material is not violatedthe sequence.
 In this class there is a repetition, strengthening and teaching of phonetics, orthography, orthography.
  Word composition, in practice simple, complex, derivative words ևteaching their spelling.
Personal, special, ordinary names, synonyms, antonymsrepetition, reinforcement and teaching.
  Reinforcement of sentences, sentences with different structure (subject, attribute, action words) ումը teaching.
New native language textbooks have been in use in the 3rd grade of secondary schools of the Republic of Armenia since 2008(6, 10), as well as the first assistants of the teachers teaching in those textbooks, the methodological guidelines, which have a guiding meaning ևContribute to the teacher's daily creative work.
In the third grade they pass: 1. spelling.
  Mother tongue:One of the key questions in elementary school is teaching orthography.
 In the third grade you have to repeat the previous grammar,words related to phonetic spelling with a significant increase.
 The orthography of double consonants must be changed from phonetic orthography.
 In this class, the list of words that differ in pronunciation with "this writing" should be added, provided that their spelling is taught in a practical way, with frequent repetition and nomination in small groups of words.
2. Psychology.
  3. Syntax.
  To give a general idea of ​​the parts of speech, it is decided what the word can doto be used, what position it may have in a sentence, in what constructive sphere it may be needed.
 To be part of a wordThis property is also called grammatical value, so to determine parts of a word means to determine the grammatical value of words.
  To determine the grammatical value of a word, it is necessary to know the grammatical features of the word, ie what category of concepts it is.expression, what idiological features it has, what syntactic featurescan hold positions.
 For this purpose, the words are first groupedaccording to the parts of speech, that is, according to the main meaning expressed by them, then the morphological and, finally, the syntactic features of each are studied.
Fourth grade textbooks with their content (7, 8) were able to provide combined teaching of mother tongue և reading, using reading texts.
 In this class they pass:Spelling, word formation, lexical meaning, repetition կրկն teaching of literal և figurative meanings, word combinations and phrases.
 Repetition of nouns, adjectives, verbs, their modifications (without using the terms "conjugation" և "bow"), name,teaching the pronoun.
Types of sentences by composition. Teaching simple և complex, according to the purpose of communication (or tone), the use of exclamation marks, accents, hyphens, exclamation marks և question marks.
Let us present an example of a summary lesson of language knowledge.
Topic of the lesson - "Knowledge of parts of speechapplication in practical works. "
Collaborative lessonObjective - 1. They will be able to practice themselves before thatacquired knowledge and skills about parts of speech.
2. The ability to organize collaborative work will be developed.
3. Will form an independent practical step design ևWalking skills.
Learning materials - Images representing subjects,legos, the portrait of the ancestor Hayk, the doll Set, a tree made of cardboard, fruits on which words are written, baskets.
The class is divided into four groups.
 Each group represents a part of a word: noun, adjective, verb, year.
Task 1.Game: "Harvest"On the tree hang fruits, on which words are written.
One student from each group approaches the tree and collects the words that represent the corresponding part of the word.
After the "harvest", everyone takes the words out of their basket, presents the grammatical features.
Task 2.Group I - noun - will make a collage,Group II - verb - will present a pantomime,Group III - adjectives - the portrait will be given typical adjectives,Group IV - they will build a "high-rise building" with legos with a certain number of animals.
Game: Let's help "Pnti Set".
Task 3.Question: "Who came to visit us?"
 We will show after the children's predictionsThe doll with a smoky face and clothes to Pnti Seth և we will ask for their help.
 They will say words and phrases that will help Sethto become a pure boy.
  For example:Group of nouns - soap, water, iron, clothes, brush, paste.
Verb group - to wash, comb, bathe, dress, iron.
Adjective group - dirty, clumsy, clean, neat, beautiful.
Date group - one brush, three buckets of water, two soaps, two meterstowel.
Task 4.They will solve a crossword puzzle, the questions of which are of grammatical nature.
1. How do we determine the face of a verb?
2. How do they say the subject in another way?
3. The name given to all objects of the same type is called…  4. The suffix of the word "landing".
5. The phonetic change of the word "page" / mark the letter /.
6. What is the simple word made of?
7. Part of speech.
8. Auxiliary verb with the second person.
9. Year.
10. Noun - a unit of time.
Crossword:1 խո:ն ա ր:h:and mc:o:յ ա կ ա ն:հա ս ա ր ա կ:q:ի:6 a rm a t7 aThe list:e:m:s:e:k:10 minո պ ե:Task 5.We will show a letter-petition sent by the nouns and adjectives. As a result, we will turn nouns and adjectives into verbs.
Each of them will present a self-made book about the use of parts of speech and their features.
The groups will be evaluated reasonably, presented in advanceusing the group work evaluation criteria scale.
Conclusion. Language material should not be used in elementary school
make a lesson goal, but it should only be a means to an endto achieve, that is, a means of understanding literary language accurately,to build a syntactically correct, connected, fluent word.
This is what the authors of the current textbooks in the mother tongue meant, who created a unified reading and language material.textbook մի monolithic teaching of reading and language material, whichhas made it possible to make language learning more effective and purposeful.
  In this case, the children grammar rules andinstead of memorizing definitions, linguistic patternsThey use it independently in their speech, as a result they developtheir thinking, their judgment, which is the goal of "grammar".
BOOK: 1. Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, Yerevan, "Mitq", publishing house, 1965, 690 pages.
2. Abovyan Kh., Complete collection of works, vol. 5, Yerevan, "Science. academy. " հրատ.,
1950, 508 pages.
3. Aghayan K., Collection of poems, 4th ed., "Haypethrat" Yerevan, 1963, 648 pages.
4. Arnaudyan A., Gyulbudaghyan A., Khachatryan S., Khrimyan S., Petrosyan M.,Professional Development Manual, For Teachers, Institute of Education.Hrat., 2004, 180 pages.
5. Gyulamiryan J., Methodology of elementary teaching of the Armenian language, Yerevan, Zangak-97, 2009, 352 pages.
6. Gyurjinyan D., Hekekyan N., "Mayreni 3", Yerevan, "Edit Print" publishing house, 2011, 160 pages.
7. Gyurjinyan D., Hekekyan N., "Mayreni 4", Yerevan, "Edit Print" publishing house, 2012, 192 pages.
8. Torosyan K., Sargsyan V., Khachatryan H. Chibukhchyan K., "Mayreni 4", Yerevan, "Manmar" publishing house, 2012, 190 pages.
9. Sargsyan V., Torosyan K., Grigoryan S., Khachatryan H. "Mayreni 2", Yerevan, "Manmar" publishing house, 2010, 161 pages.
10. Sargsyan V., Torosyan K., Khachatryan H., Jilavyan E., "Mayreni 3", Yerevan,"Macmillan-Armenia" publishing house, 2011, 160 pages.
11. Ter-Grigoryan AE, Methodology of the Armenian language, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1980, 563 pages.
12. Ushinsky KD, Selected pedagogical works, Yerevan, Luys Publishing House, 1981, 443 pages.
13. Kyurkchyan A., Ter-Grigoryan L., "Mayreni 2", Yerevan, "Edit Print" publishing house, 2010, 168 pages.
Information about the author:Khachatryan Sonic G. - child. scientist Candidate for teaching Armenian language at GSPI
 Associate Professor of the Chair of Methodology, E-mail.
