The topic is topical, because the forms and methods of pedagogical, physical and moral education used 100 years ago in unusual conditions are of great interest in orphanages, they have not lost their freshness, they are very instructive for the current generation.
It is related to the physical, moral, military-patriotic education of the Armenian young generation, the education, health, upbringing and normal development of the orphaned generation that survived the genocide.
The aim of the work is to refer to the means and means of physical education born in unusual conditions and methods in the American orphanages of Alex Paul in 1920-1925.
We have set ourselves the task of using the archive materials to find out Vahan Cheraz's patriotic, orphanage-coaching activity in the American orphanages of Alex-Paul, with which he got a new egg and content in the daily life of the Kazakh post orphanage.
Vahan Cheraz was born in Constantinople in 1886, lived in European countries, such as England and France, but was in love with Armenia.
At the invitation of the Minister of Education and Culture of the First Republic of Armenia Nikol Aghbalyan in 1920. Arriving in Armenia, he started the nationally beneficial work of physical education of the young generation of the newly independent republic.
 Cheraz was well-known not only for his dedication to his work, but also for his professional training - pedagogical, psychological, theoretical and practical knowledge of sports, his courageous and unbreakable character, his natural talent for organizing educational work.
His orphanage activities in the American orphanages of Alex Paul made the Americans speak with open admiration about his organizational, pedagogical, coaching and scout activities.
   And it soon became clear to the Americans that a unique, incomparable, gifted person with his own views and principles had entered the orphanage, which gave new life to the orphanage's dead life.
 The plight of genocide survivors is described by James Burton in his book The Story of the Middle East Relief Mission (1915-1930).
  Here he writes that it is difficult for people living in civilized countries to imagine the groups of thousands of children who never have a smile on their face, who have no desire to play, it was the most natural and terrifying feature of newly found children.
  It was already painful to see their filthy corpses and rashes, but the sight of the children huddled in groups, with no smile or no interest in banishment, was very pitiful.
 The children did not cry or whine or ask for anything, they just sat motionless for days with a desperate expression on their faces, without interest in each other.
  All this testified to the complete absence of a normal childhood.
  This was the situation in the American orphanages of Alex Paul before Cheraz.
 The issue of finding a way out of this paralyzed situation was the biggest problem of the day, Վ Vahan Cheraz was invited, who offered to find a solution by using "character-building" disciplinary mechanisms.
  These included hygiene, exercise, various forms of sports, and a strictly coordinated daily routine.
This system of events was intended to prepare orphans for further social life.
  The whole structure of the system was adapted to ensure as healthy an adult as possible for children without education and discipline.
  The largest in terms of the number of orphanages was Alex-Paul, known as the "City of Orphans" in those years, with about 50,000 orphans, where Vahan Cheraz began his patriotic activity.
 It was as if he had come to the homeland to dry the tears of the orphans, to expel the sagging breasts, to straighten the bent spines, to strengthen the thin thighs and calves.
The high-quality food and clothing provided by the Americans, the excellent physical training performed by Vahan Cherazijankhans, the hard work, the various preventive measures yielded fruitful results, the death rate in the orphanage dropped from 400 in 1921 to 40 in 1922.
 Vahan Cheraz had no personal interests and did not aspire to have them.
"My greatest property is the physical education of Armenian teenagers, in which I will find my mental satisfaction, my national duty," he wrote in one of his letters.
The daily routine of the Alex-Poli Kazach post was as follows: at 6 o'clock in the morning.
At 00, 6.
15 - 6.
45: exercise, water contact, breakfast, school, lectures, reception of bulletin boards և program, program, flag speaking.
 Cheraz performed enanthropometric measurements every 3 months to determine the changes in the weight, height and muscle mass of the trainees.
  The leaders of various sports organizations of the city watched with great admiration the post-sport success of Kazach - from football, athletics to other sports.
He had built a wooden tower to jump near the Akhuryan River and taught the children of Ghorbanots to swim and dive.
  On the initiative of Cheraz in 1921. A football league is formed, consisting of six groups, which have been competing with each other for three years.
The study of Vahan Cheraz's letters, which he sent to K. Constantinople, the central headquarters of Homenetmen, gives us a complete picture of 1920-1925. Alex-Paul, the Kazakh post, the sports activities of the American orphanage, the events held, the patriotic activities.
In one of the letters, Cheraz writes: "My sons are a series of Greek statues.
 Their body և muscle clay is in my hand, I will add, reduce, shape, harden.
  The exercise program that I have been dreaming of for years has become a reality here, every three months my weight will increase by 1,2,3 kg or cm, "weight," breast, "calf".
 Without any doubt, it can be claimed that Vahan Cheraz's pedagogical and coaching activity in 1920-1925. He gave excellent results in Alex-Paul orphanages.
 The young people who used to swear had completely forgotten the past, the pedagogical methods used had completely transformed them.
The creator endowed Cheraz with God-given grace.
  He strongly emphasized the role of education, upbringing, faith, patriotism, order in the preservation of the nation.
 He mentioned that physical education is the problem of the nation's existence.
 The nation is trained, so it will succeed, otherwise defeats are inevitable.
 In Cheraza was a character of great great personality.
 безмотря на то, что1. V. Andreasyan, The Leader of the Armenian Scout, Paris, France, 1946, 312 pages.
2. V. Andreasyan, Vahan Cheraz և his song Armenia, Beirut, San, Literature 1977, 540 pages.
3. Գ. Buta, A. Charchoghlyan, J. Simonyan, History of Physical Culture, part B, Yerevan, Luys, 1958, 470 pages.
4. State Central Archive of the Republic of Armenia F-207, c 1, c. 227 55, F-207, c 1, c. 227 9F-207, c 1, c. 227 20, F-207, c 1, c. 227 22-255. R. Papoyan, Physical Culture in Armenia 1918-1923, Gyumri, "Dpir", 2002, 105 pages.
