Introduction.
  Hail observed in the territory of the republicis one of the main natural disasters of hydropower.
  From hailAnnual agriculture suffers great material damage.
  Enoughindicate the total amount paid for damage caused by disasters85-90% refers to hail.
 According to official calculations,Hail in Armenia reaches 16-20 billion every yearmoney loss.
Ատու Fruits suffer especially from hailstorms in Armenia ևVineyards in bloom, as well as cereals and vegetable crops.
The analysis showed that:even one case of hail per year can destroyAlmost the entire crop of fruits and grapes, causing great damageeconomy.
The intensity and frequency of dangerous weather and climate events have increased in recent decades.
 Therefore, the study of the geographical distribution of hail and its origin, frequency, intensity, development of effective forecasting methods, organization of prevention service, warning are among the current issues.
 However,There are still many shortcomings in this direction, which require complex studies and large financial investments.
Taking into account the above-mentioned, the aim of the work is to discuss, reveal և analyze the patterns of spatial-temporal distribution of hail days in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, according to separate meteorological stations.
Material և method.
 A number of works are dedicated to the study of hail in the territory of the republic.
  In these works, thunderstorm processes are covered and revealedPeculiarities of alpinism contributing to the formation [6], aerosynoptic conditions of hail formation [3-4, 7],Spatial-temporal features of hail distribution [4,8-10], the aerosynoptic conditions determining the development of thunderstorm processes [4,11].
At work as a starting point for researchThe results of the actual observations of the meteorological representation stations operating in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, which are stored in the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations Hydrometeorological Service, were used.
 Mathematical-statistical, geographical, comparison-analysis, correlation methods were used in the work.
Note that the hail is 1-25 mm (in some cases, more than 15 cm)It is an ice ball with a radial structure with a radius.
 It is composed of:from white milky core և consecutive transparent և opaquefrom layers of ice.
 The mass of hail in a separate case can exceed 300 grams.
 The velocity of its grain is directly proportionalto the square root of the radius.
As a rule, the formation and development of hail are conditioned by strong upstream currents reaching speeds of up to 30 m / s.
Hail requires a large amount of cloud water, which:Due to that, the hail falls only during the warm time of the year, at high temperature (15-20 C) near the earth's surface.
  Most of allhail often falls in temperate latitudes, and the largestwith intensity in conversions.
 No hail at cargo latitudesviewed.
Usually, hail is in the place of piles of rain clouds.
  As:As a rule, hail is almost always accompanied by heavy rain, thunderstorms, sometimes strong winds (up to 15 m / s և more), like a storm.
In some cases, along with heavy rainfall, hail is caused by mudslides.
  As a result, it hurts the economycauses not only hail, but also mudslides.
Hail is observed in the territory of the republic during frontal-mass hail processes.
  Intra-mass hail processes are observed in spring առաջին in the first half of summer, when convective currents are developed, և high humidity.
It turned out [4] that the diameter of the hail in the territory of the Republic of Armenia fluctuates in the range of 0.5-6.0 cm.
 Hail grain size is functionalis related to the speed of convective currents. The higher the velocity of the convective currents, the higher the hail
diameter.
The intensity of hail fluctuates in large limits, from a few seconds to 1 hour.
 Hail usually lasts 3-5 daysminute.
 The hail, as a rule, is located on a different surface path, the width of which is often 1-2 km (in some cases up to 10km), length - 10-20 km (in some cases - up to 400 km).
We have not studied the capacity of hail: to placethe schedule.
 It's another subject of study that goes beyond thisfrom the scope of work.
 Only others are presented in this workSome results of studies conducted by the authors.
Thus, it turned out [4] that the hail in the territory of the Republic of Armenia is overwhelmingIt takes 3 to 30 minutes.
  The layer of hail can reach 40 cm ևthicker, and the length of the route is 100-120 km.
 For example, on June 6, 2005, the length of a hailstorm in the Maralik regionreached 100-120 km, and the thickness of the hail layer - 30 cm.
Repeat hail for a few minutes to 15 minutesIt is 70-90% in most of the stations in the Caucasus.
 Usually in 45 minutesThe repetition of hail for up to 1 hour և does not exceed 10%, and in Armenia - 5% [10].
The hail is mostly in the afternoon, in the eveningfrom 1 pm to midnight.
 Moreover, the hail falls at the mentioned timeAbout 75% of cases, the remaining 25% are distributed as overnight15% per hour 10 10% in the first half of the day [10].
The greatest recurrence of hail in the Ararat valley is observed at 1200-1500.
 The recurrence of hail in the basins of Lake Sana և Hrazdan River is equally large at 1200-1500 and 1500-1800.
  The biggest hailstorm in the rest of the countryIt is mainly observed at 1500-1800.
 The next place is occupied by the hourThe period 1800-2100.
 Quite rare hail is observed at 900-1200 hours, and unique cases of hail are observed between 0000-0900.
Results և discussion.
  As a result of studiesIt turned out that a hailstorm was registered in the republicIt is from April to October, sometimes in the remaining months.
 Most hail days are observed in May (with a dry land climate)regions) և in June (regions with relatively humid climate).
During the mentioned months, almost in the whole territory of the republicThis year hail is observed, in other months - at altitudes of more than 2000 m.
 Hail phenomena are observed in high mountainous areasare more frequent, but with less intensity.
The number of hail days in the republic is very disproportionately distributed due to the almanac peculiarities.(Table 1).
 Aragats stands out with a large number of hail days per yearthe mountain mass.
 Thus, the average of hail days in the republicA large annual value is observed at Aragats b / l meteorological station8.2 days (the maximum was registered in 1938 և was 40 days).
 Hail daysThe average annual small value is considered to be low in the republicin the regions վրա on the water surface.
 Thus, in the Ararat valley the latter fluctuates within 1-3 days, in the coastal area of ​​Lake Sanaa - 2-3 days (leaving the lake, it increases), in Meghri - 1-2 days.
The number of days with hail is subject to upward zoningto the laws.
 As the local altitude increases, so does the hailthe number of days.
  However, due to local characteristics,Sometimes a violation of this pattern is observed.
Average տարեկան maximum annual number of hail days 1935-2010 during:
Table 1.Number of days, daysAir. stations:
The nameHigh, maverage most.A close correlation was obtained with local altitude (h) և hailAverage number of days per year (N) and maximum (
) between values.
 It:respectively can be expressed by the following equations:TashirOdzunStepanavanAmasiaFortressThey came downVanadzorGyumriDilijanAparanChambarakShan FARAragats b / lFantaTalinArmavirMartuniArtashatSisianHoneyYear:.
In the first case, the correlation coefficient was:
, second.
  Even better results would be obtained with hailin case:
The dependence of the annual number of days was discussed according to the separated agro-climatic regions.
It is obvious that the number of days with hail changes according to the positions and orientations of the slopes.
 However, it requires specialstudies.
The most active hail of the period under studyActivity Viewed 1936-37, 1939-40, 1942-44, 1947, 1950-51, 1954-55, 1963և In 1965, when in most of the territory of the republic the maximum number of hail days was observed, which is 2-3 times more than the multi-year average.
 Light hail activity was observed in 1980, 1985,1992-94, 2000.
 In those years in a considerable part of the territory of the republicHail was either not observed at all or the recurrence did not exceed 2-3 days during the year.
Studies show that the recurrence of hailin the same place fluctuates quite large.
 For example, in Dilijan, Fanta and other meteorological stations separatelyHail can last for more than 10 days.
 On the other hand, it is possibleThere are years when there is no hail at all.
 Note that:With the increase of the local altitude և the dryness of the climate, there is an increase in the absolute value of the annual width of the hail repetition fluctuations.It is 40 days in Aragats b / l meteorological station.
 This circumstance, no doubt, is conditioned by the nature of the general circulation of the atmosphere of separate years.
It turned out that it is mainly observed in the territory of the republicTrend of decreasing annual number of hail days (Fig. 1).
  A similar pattern is observed in other studies [2, 4].
As already mentioned, hail causes great damage to the economy.
 In terms of natural hazards near the territory of the republic15-17% are affected by hail [1, 9].
 With hailThe declining annual number of days does not mean the damage causedreduction.
  The reason is the damage caused by the hailThe size depends on the size of the hailstones.
 Small intensive hail causes significant damage to agricultural crops.
 Hail with a diameter of 10-15 mm is more dangerous.
 It should be noted that:often even one case of hail during the year canlead to the complete destruction of the cropin case another large number of hail days in another region can cause insignificant damage.
 That, of course, depends on the size of the hail.from its intensity, lineage, as well as plant developmentphase և finally from the hail surface.
r:h, o:
ի:
Years: Fig. 1. Dynamics of change in the annual number of hail days in 1935-2010.
In the process, according to the data of several meteorological stations in Armenia1 - Tashir; 2 - Aparan; 3 - Fanta; 4 - Go down; 5 - Martuni; 6 - Sisian
A large number of hail days are observed in the highlandsin some mountainous areas, where there are almost no agricultural crops.
 However, it should be taken into account that the settlements in the republic are mainly located at altitudes up to 2000 m.
  Hail in higher areascauses little or no damage.
 On the other hand, from the hailExpensive crops are mainly affected, first of all, grapes (up to 1500-1600 m above sea level), certain types of fruits (up to 1900-2000 m above sea level), as well as cereals.crops.
The greatest destruction of grapes and other plants is observed in vegetationin the first stage.
 This is due to the instability of the meteorological conditions of that time, which is a result of convection.
An attempt is made to prevent hail in the republic.
 However, thatThe problem is not completely solved yet.
  Currently in hail-hazardous regions of the republic (Armavir, Aragatsotn, Ararat, Lori marzes)There are 119 anti-hail stations, which protect 9400 hectares of land.
 Although mountainous areas are more dangerous, hailThe damage is less, therefore anti-hail stations are first installed in the areas where intensive cultivation of agricultural crops is carried out.
Conclusions և Recommendations.
 Thus, hail is one of the major hydrothermal disasters, which causes great damageagriculture.
  Almost the whole territory of the republic is dangerous for hail.
  Moreover, caused by hail in mountainous areasThe damage is either non-existent or insignificant.
The number of hail days in both the same and nearby areas varies considerably.
An increase in the number of hail days is observed in the territory of the republic:according to the height of the place.
 Maximum days of hail during the yearThe number is recorded in mountainous and high mountainous areas, where almostThere are no agricultural crops.
 Correlation obtainedCorrelation between the local altitude տարեկան annual number of days with hail և, which was expressed analytically.
 The resulting link can be used to estimate the number of hail days in less studied և unexplored areas.
In the territory of the republic, in general, there is a tendency of decreasing the number of days with hail.
  However, this does not mean hailreduction of the damage caused.
 Therefore, it is necessary to pay special attention to the intensity of hail, as well as its size.
We offer.• Frequency of hail of different intensity and size;Detailed և systematic study and assessment of change dynamics, damage caused;• Development of short-term hail forecasting methods for as small areas as possible;• service organizations լայն the general populationDevelopment of new methods for warning of hail,• Spatial correct distribution of anti-hail stations;• Work with as few anti-hail stations as possibleEnsuring high efficiency,• Comprehensive ությունների comprehensive ուսումնասիր comprehensive study of the physical-geographical features of hail-protected areas;• Development of regulations or methods for influencing clouds through anti-hail stations;• Study of their impact on aircraft crossing the impact zone of anti-hail stations;• Development of new, more effective methods of hail control.
City.
 Spatial-temporal regularities: ¶ ñ ³ Ï ³ Ý á Ã Ã Û ո ւ Ý: 1. Disaster risk management at the local level.
 Educational-methodical manual / H. Matosyan, A. Chilingaryan, H. Saroyan, D. Harutyunyan, S. Shahmuradyan, A. Arakelyan.
 Armenia, Yerevan.
2011, -169 pages.
2. Current state of climate services և Development prospects in Armenia.
  Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Republic of Armenia.
 State Hydrometeorological և Monitoring Service.
 S..
 2013, - 62 pages.
3. Surenyan GH Aerosynoptic conditions of hail origin
In the Ararat valley.
  Basic problems of geography of the South Caucasus and:Faculty of Geography (EGU). Yerevan, March 18-19, 2005 Er.
 from:EGU, 2005, - p. 102-104. - ISBN 5-8084-0624-2.
4. Surenyan GH Synoptic analysis of baric fields forming the weather conditions of the Republic of Armenia.
  Geographical:scientist Candidate's dissertation application.
 S..
2010, - 145 pages.
рологической обсерватории, вып. 3, Er.
 1971, - p. 103 - 112. экологии, энерго- и ресурсосбередения.
 Proceedings of the XXII International:УкрНТЦ «Энергосталь». - Х.
 NTMT, 2014. - p. 210-218.  Information about the authors:Margaryan Varduhi Gurgeni - work. scientist candidate, Yerevan State University, Assistant, E-mail.
 vmargaryan@ysu.am:Simonyan Larisa Mamikon - Hydrometeorological Service of the Ministry of Emergency Situations,Head of the Agro-aeronautics Department of the Meteorological Center.
