At the current stage of the development of the RA economy, one of the most important issues is the activation of the investment process in the country, the solution of which is a precondition for ensuring the stability of the economy and post-economic growth.
  In the current situation, the issue of evaluating the efficiency of investments and adopting investment decisions is very important.
 The timing of the receipt of the invested funds, the prospects for the development of the enterprise depend on the accuracy of such an assessment, the credibility.
 Along with the improvement of market economic conditions, Armenian companies need to introduce modern management methods aimed at increasing their competitiveness - Models.
  The efficiency of investment management is of special importance for the sustainable development of the realization of the long-term goals of the companies.
  Investment projects allow companies to develop new products, upgrade production և improve production processes, create competitive advantages, improve the quality of goods for sale, strengthen their own market position.
  In practice, the extreme complexity of investment decision-making due to the long-term use of capital, the high degree of uncertainty of the results of investment projects, the complex nature of investment processes, raises the issue of limited investment management system to maximize the efficiency of limited financial, human and material resources.
  At the same time, this problem is even more urgent for small and medium-sized enterprises, as they, compared to larger companies, are faced with tougher reserves due to wrong investment decisions and less resources to eliminate them.
  The evaluation of the efficiency of the investment project leads to the determination of the level of its return in absolute և relative terms.
  A number of quantitative and qualitative indicators are used to assess the effectiveness of investment projects.
The following system of correlated indicators is most often used for this purpose: [1] 1. net income (NI), 2. net discounted income (NDI) or, as it is otherwise called, integral result; 3. net present value (NPV), 4. profitability index (PI), 5. Internal rate of return (IRR), 6. payback period (PP), 7. Investment efficiency ratio (ARR).
We have evaluated the effectiveness of the investment program of "Ani" LLC with the above-mentioned indicators.
"Ani" LLC is engaged in the production of bricks and other construction materials.
 The company currently produces 15 product names, which include 10 types of bricks, paints, cement blocks, cell glass and other materials.
"Ani" LLC wants to make investments for the implementation of the business plan by attracting its own external financing means.
The sources of funds needed for the implementation of the business plan are the following: 1. Long-term loans, 2. Own investment.
Long-term loans are intended to attract working capital for the production of equipment.
For long-term loans, 500.5 million AMD with 14% annual interest rate with 5-year repayment period is envisaged.
 The credit means will be directed to the expansion and development of the production of brick and other products.
  As a result of attracting investments, it will be possible to increase sales volumes in the local market, as well as to organize exports.
The company's investments will also be directed to the partial և partial reimbursement of working capital acquisition costs ացման current expenses.
 The amount of the company's own investments is 308 million AMD.
The projected turnover of the company will be sufficient to ensure the repayment of loans, return on external financial resources and profitability.
The return on investment is planned to be realized in five years.
 The repayment period of the borrowed capital is chosen on the principle that the working capital is directed to the gradual increase of production capacities, the replenishment of working capital, the partial satisfaction of the market demand for the product, as a result of which it will be possible to direct the means to the production.
Investment Directions Table 1. Interest rates are calculated on the basis of the loan balance, interest payments are made evenly from the first month, and the loan is repaid 6 months after the loan is disbursed.
During the five years of the planned program, as a result of repayment of borrowed funds, the company will become an effective business management structure on its own, contributing to the creation of new jobs in the community, reducing the unemployment rate and raising the standard of living.
The calculations of the sales volumes of "Ani" company's products are made on the basis of the forecasted sales volumes և the calculated sales prices.
 Expected Sales Revenue Indicators are presented in Table 2 below: Expected Sales Revenue Indicators Table 2. Table 1 1st year 2nd year 3rd year 4th year 5th year Total cost of products produced by the Company includes material costs, direct salary, power supply , gas supply, water supply և other direct costs.
  The calculation of the cost of the product is presented in Table 3: The cost of the product for five years Table 3. NAME Cost: 1st year, 2nd year, 3rd year, 4th year, 5th year. The gross profit for 5 years is 2,586,228,750 AMD. 4%.
Gross Profit for Five YearsTable 4. Gross ProfitGross Profitability% 1-year 2-year 3-year 4 year-year 5 year The net profit and profitability projected by the business plan for the projected five years are presented in Table 5. Table 5. Net profit and profitability for the forecasted five years1 year 2 year 3 year 4 year 5 year ¼ տոկոս% Net profit and profitability increase during the forecast five years due to the gradual increase in production.
Thus, based on the indicators mentioned in the business plan, let's calculate how long the initial investments will return, ie the simple period of return on investment: in year I PP the cash flow was 90,200,000, which is smaller than the initial investment, in year I I II the cash flow was I, In II և III year: 490,700,000 + 481,434,000 = 972,134,000 Investments will return earlier than 3 years (but keep in mind that the simple period of repayment of investments does not take into account currency fluctuations).
Balance = 1-972134000-808500000 / 481434000 = 0.66 It follows that the Payback period is 2.66 years.
     And if we take into account the discount rate of cash, we have to calculate another indicator - DPP (discount period of compensation).
    Before calculating this index, calculate the current value of investments (PV). 708155807 + 265161810 = 973317617> 808500000 This means that the initial investments will return in 4 years.
Assuming that the cash flow is equal for the whole period, we can calculate the balance for the fourth year. Balance = 1-973317617-808500000 / 265161810 = 0.378 As we can see, the investments are repaid in 3.378 years (DPP = 3.378), which is more longer than in the case of a simple compensation period.
Now calculate the net present value of the investment project (NPV).
To do this, we use the current values ​​(PV) already calculated for each year.
 How do we know? According to our calculations, the current values ​​of the project will be equal. For the first year: PV1 = 79122807 For the second year: PV2 = 308077000 For the third year: PV3 = 320956000 For the fourth year: PV4 = 265161810 For the fifth year: PV5 = 290435576 It is effective.
    Calculate the Discount Yield Index (DPI) for this project.
  This indicator proves that investing in the project is effective.
The internal rate of return is the discount rate at which NPV = 0.
 It is impossible to determine the IRR in the form of a formula, the indicator is determined by sampling.
 Let's make the following table. The volume of initial investments in the table is 808.5 million AMD, the discount rate is 14%.
 In this case NPV = 455 million, which is greater than 0, but we need to apply a discount rate in which case the net present value is equal to 0.
  Arbitrarily accept that the discount rate is 30%, in that case NPV = 48.95 million AMD, and if we accept the discount rate 40%, then NPV = -114.59 million AMD.
Then the discount rate, in which case NPV = 0, is in the range of 30 և 40%.
 In this case, we calculate the IRR. That is, IRR = 33%, it is the maximum limit after which the investment program will be unprofitable.
 Until then, it will be profitable for the enterprise to finance the given investment project.
It should be noted that in the evaluation of the investment project, the coefficient of financial dependence should be taken into account, which shows the firm dependence on foreign loans.
  The calculation scheme assumes the ratio of borrowed funds և total assets.
 The higher the index, the larger the share of borrowed funds, which indicates insolvency, high risk and monetary deficit in the enterprise.
The financial dependency ratio mentioned in the organization is equal to 0.619 or 62%.
 This proves that 62% of the credit for the implementation of the business plan are the means, and the remaining 38% are own.
 This is a normal indicator for implementing such a business project, as it is generally accepted that the share of own funds in total assets should exceed 25%.
 And in the organization it is equal to 38%.
  Then the investment project can be implemented.
Conclusion. Investment project performance evaluation indicators, despite their significant practical significance, have significant shortcomings.
  Thus, they are mainly partial; they characterize the economic efficiency of investment projects from one point of view or another.
 Therefore, for a more comprehensive evaluation of projects, it is necessary to consider these indicators as a systemic whole, each component of which tries to fill the gap created by the use of others.
 However, even with the application of all the observed indicators, it is impossible to avoid serious complications.
  Thus, because they are different in nature, their values ​​can create the opposite picture.
 In this case, the problem of giving preference to one of the indicators arises, which, although very often solved in favor of NPV, but in our opinion, this solution is "incomplete" and does not have sufficient justification.
Literature 3. Èãîíèíà, Ë. Ë. "Èíâåñòèöèè ''.
 åá ÷ åá. ïîñîáèå / ïîä ðåä. ä-ðà íêîí. ,ê, ïðîô. Â. À. Ñëåïîâà.– Ì. .
 Ýêîíîìèñòú, 2004. - 478 ñ.6. × åðíîâ Â.À. '' Èíâåñòèöèîííàÿ ñòðàòåãèÿ '. - Ì.:
 ÞÍÈÒÈ-Äàíà, 2003.– 158 ñ. Information about the authors Tamara Simonyan Simonyan - Economics scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, Head of the Chair of Economics, Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute E-mail.
 Tsimonyan62@mail.ru Israeli Khachatur Sargsy - Lecturer of the Chair of Economics, Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute E-mail.
