Special in the conditions of radical social changesIt is important to study the issue of physical education of schoolchildren of different ages and genders.
  Recent years:Many works dedicated to us have been published duringon the issues of physical education of urban schoolchildren of the republic [3, 4 և others].
  At the same time, there is practically no research conducted on the example of students living and studying in rural areas.
It is known that it is natural and climatic in different regionsThe conditions have a certain impact on the learning youthon physical condition.
 Rural are no exception in this respectconditions [6, 7, 10 և others].
 Therefore, the problems of physical education in rural areas should not be carried out autonomously without taking into accountto take into account the territorial-national peculiarities of the external environment.
The task of this work was to study rural ArmeniaThe state of physical development և level of physical training of schoolchildren living in the places.
Three physical development (body height, body weight և chest circumference) եց six motor training were studied: agility (20 m run), muscular strength (wrist dynamometer), jumping (long jump), agility (3x10 m running), balance Ability ("Flamingo" test)և Endurance (500 m run) indicators.
The studies were conducted in 10 rural schools of Armavir region.
 767 students aged 11-15 participated in the experiments.
  The actual numerical material obtained in the work was developed using the methods of mathematical statistics [5] others].
 Rated:The degree of reliability of the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the statistical material.
 The arithmetic mean values ​​(𝑿̅) were calculated,the mean square deviation of a particular combination (), the arithmetic mean error (m).
Reliability of the difference between the two age groupsThe grade was determined using the Student's t-criterion, after whichThe degree of difference probability (P,%) was determined with the help of a special table.
The study found that with ageAll the features of physical development are improved, which is considered a normal phenomenon.
  Thus, boys from 11 to 15 years oldThe body height increases by 25.5 cm, and for girls - by 14.8 cm.
  During the same period, the body weight increased by 19.2 և, respectively15.0 kg.
 Changes in breast circumference indicators by genderare approximately the same և are confirmed by the results of mathematical analysis (Table 1).
Students living and working in rural areasIndicators of physical developmentTable 1:Age:CountBreast: circumference, cmboysBody: height, cmBody: weight, kggirlsUnfortunately, the assessment of the physical condition of children and adolescents living in rural areas of Armenia has not been the subject of special study.
 One can point to only one that happened a quarter of a century agowork [9].
  However, that research was conducted in Armeniain mountainous conditions 8- in adjacent age groups: 8-9, 10-11, 12-13 ևother ages.
 Attempts to combine to some extent received by usThe results, along with the author's materials, provided an opportunity to note that:in research conducted at different times almostThere are no physical differences between rural studentsin development features.
Summarizing the data we receive, we can at the same timeprove that their absolute data on the physical development of boysThe characteristics are higher than those of girls.
 HoweverGirls' characteristics predominate in certain age groups,for example, at the age of 11 at the age of body, at 11 և 13 in body massat the age of.
At the same time, girls in all age groups have an advantage in terms of breast circumference.
 Therefore, it can be concluded thatthat rural conditions to some extent affect the physical developmental characteristics of adolescent schoolchildren.
 What about?At the level of physical education of rural schoolchildren, then there are patterns of age developmentImpact on muscle strength, agility, endurance և otheron the development of abilities.
  But gender differences?They are not the same.
 Thus, from 11 to 15 years old, the boys' speed skills improve by 0.5 seconds, for girls - 0.1 seconds, by the wrist.muscular strength 28.0 և 10.3 kg, respectively, flexibility:40.5 և 8.5 cm, the ability to maintain balance - 10.0 և 8.7seconds, and the durability is 33 և 27 seconds (Fig. 1).
During the observed period, the boys' rapid abilities և jumping ability improved 5 times, and strength abilities - 3 times more compared to girls.
 They are almost one-dimensionalThe indicators of agility, endurance and balance of boys and girls develop.
 Rural 11- to 15-year-old bisexualsFor a more in-depth analysis of schoolchildren's physical condition, we tried to identify accelerated motor skills(accelerators) ներին students with slow (retardant) development.
 Examples are agility, musclestrength ցուցանիշ resistance indices (Fig. 2).
 From here it seems that he is oldAt the same time, the development of mobility skills of rural schoolchildren by gender comparison is generally slowed down.
Thus, with all three motor abilities: agility, muscle strength և endurance, accelerated boys make up 20percent, and girls - 40, in all other cases the growth of indicators is slowed down.
 It is clear that these data need to be strictly taken into accountto undertake pedagogical influences with the aim of improving the process of physical education.
Thus, the obtained factual data make it possible to fully assess the level of physical condition of bisexual adolescents.
 Schoolchildren living in rural areas of the Ararat Valley have uneven physical developmentlevel.
  Retardation processes are predominant here, there are breasts in all age groups of boys and girlsLow circumference, boys 11-14 years of age,girls at the age of 11 և 13.
 In 37.5% of the cases of age-related development of motor abilities, the movements of 12.5% ​​of boys and girls are reliable, and in the case of 65.5 և 87.5%, they are unreliable.
Based on the analysis of the obtained results, it can be concluded that the level of physical training of rural adolescent schoolchildren is not sufficient for physical education.Modern normative requirements of school curricula և can not be met only at the expense of school academic hours.
Figure 1. Rural school readiness indicators 1. boys, 2. girls
The problem is complicated by the fact that the lack of children's sports schools in rural areas does not allowto fully implement the principle of freedom of choice of the sport.
  The otherby low logistics base, relevant sports equipment,Lack of gymnasiums, why not, staff significantly limits the physical education of rural schoolchildrenproblem solving.
 We think that in such conditions, in order to increase the level of students' mobility, it is expedient to conduct additional extracurricular activities in any sport.
  It should be noted that sports orientation is physicalEducation is successfully applied separately from Russiain the secondary schools of the regions [8].
  Such a systemThere are examples of investment in Armenia [1, 2].
agility
muscle strength
durability
Girlsagility
muscle strength
durability
Figure 2. Adolescents' level of motor training1 - accelerators, 2 - retardersThe physicality of urban schoolchildren is proven hereThe effectiveness of the sports orientation of education compared to the traditional one.
 Unfortunately, such a practice does not existin rural schools.
 At the same time, sports provide an opportunity not only to increase physical fitness, but also to improve the health of learners, to involve them.physical culture values ​​to enhance physical culturelevel of education.
 Therefore, rural schoolchildren in our countryrequires increasing the efficiency of the educational processSearching for new pedagogical approaches և testing, which is considered a topical issue.
  Research in this direction continues.
Literature 1. Asatryan VA, Technology of school education of schoolchildren, Yerevan, FCHPI, 2012, 69 pages.
2. Avanesov E. Yu., Ideological bases of physical education in the field of sports, Public. Materials of the 40th conference,
Yerevan, 2013, pp. 49-53.
3. Khachaturyan KS, Flexibility as a human motorAbility մեթոդ its development method, e.g. aten. Abstract,
Yerevan, 2006, 22 pages.
4. Martirosyan AS, Methodology of extracurricular classes in physical culture, Ph.D. aten. Abstract, Yerevan, 2009, 21 pages.
5. Poghosyan MS, Application of statistical methods in the field of physical education and sports training, Yerevan,FCHPI, 2013, 88 pages.
kultьтуры подростка в сельской школе.
 Autoref. dis. к.п.н., М., 1997.-18 с.
who was brought up in conditions of rural localities // Physical education.
  В.О.Т.-2007. Information about the authorsGhazaryan Frunz Gabrieli - child. scientist Doctor, Professor, Physical Vice-rector of the Armenian State Institute of Culture, E-mail.
 Art.ak@rambler.ru:Mukrtchyan Tukhmanuk Liparit, Armenian State Institute of Physical CultureInstitute Applicant, Master, E-mail.
