Geghi reservoir is located in Syunik region, near Geghi village, on the tributary of Geghi on the left bank of Voghjiget.
 The dam of the reservoir is slab-grained, with sand-clay core, it is 70 meters high և 244 meters long, 10 meters in the catarrhal part.
 Cementation works were carried out at a depth of 20-60 meters in order to prevent filtrations in the dam area.
 The total volume of the reservoir is 15 million cubic meters, and the useful volume is 12 million cubic meters, the water mirror occupies an area of ​​50 hectares.
 The number of people living in the settlements from the inner life is 4300.
  The water mirror is located at an altitude of 1402 meters.
According to the current seismic zoning map, the Geghi reservoir is in the 2nd zone (amax = 0.3g with the maximum horizontal movement zone) [1].
The reservoir was designed at the "Armhydroenergy project" institute in 1980 և was built in 1989.
The possible collapse is considered to be the collapse of buildings, structures, roads, bridges and other objects that are in the zone of impact of the fracture wave.
The "Volna 2" program used allows to determine the maximum values ​​of the site water cover parameters: water depth, water cover width, flow velocity, as well as the time of reaching the front of the crack wave, the tail.
 In addition, the maximum volume of water outlet in the perpendicular, the height of the wave (exceeding the water level to the level of domestic flow) and the maximum water cover are determined.
  According to the calculation results, vertical areas are constructed.
To solve the problem, data were used on the hydraulic unit, the location of the reservoir upstream and downstream.
For this purpose, the area is divided into so-called vertical sections, vertical sections in the direction of river flow.
  The necessary parameters are determined in the correspondences, the most important of which are the distance from the perpendicular to the hydraulic unit, the horizontal marks of the place, the distances between them.
  The volume of the reservoir, the width of the reservoir, the depth of the dam near the dam, are considered to be the most important for the reservoir.
 The assumed parameters of the collapse of the hydraulic unit can be considered, which are the degree of collapse of the hydraulic unit ությունը the height of the crack.
 These quantities are determined depending on the location of the hydro object [2].
Necessary data of Geghi reservoir և dam were entered in accordance with the conditions required by the program, և calculations were made for 16 vertical sections of the river, their corresponding schemes were drawn up.
 Due to the volumetric expediency, only 4 of the 16 orthogonal schemes obtained as a result of the work are presented (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Profiles of rectilinear areas Based on the obtained data, a schematic map of possible flooded areas due to the collapse of Geghi reservoir dam was compiled using GIS software package (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Schematic map of the areas flooded due to the collapse of the Geghi reservoir. According to the data received, 659 hectares are subject to flooding.
Figure 2 shows that the entire communities of Kavchut, Andokavan, Syunik, Kapan and Shgharshik will remain under water.
In general, the following conclusion has been made: • As a result of the use of “Volna 2” և GIS software, the profiles of the vertical sections located in Geghi և Voghji rivers have been constructed.
  Based on the received data, the area subject to possible flooding was built, according to which Kavchut և Andokavan communities as a whole, Syunik, Kapan ևShgharshik communities will be submerged, about 10 bridges, 45 km interstate-inter-community roads, structures ընդհանուր arable lands, causing significant arable lands. In the area of ​​659 hectares.
• Based on the results, the probability of buildings, different types, bridges, roads, vehicles, coastal fences (walls) և industrial enterprises being submerged was determined.
• The received data is the basis for planning the necessary large-scale emergency-rescue and other urgent works.
Literature 1. HHSHN. II-6.02-2006 Seismic construction.
 Design norms.
Ministry of Urban Development of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2006,120 pages.
Information about the authors Ani Hambardzum G. Gorgyan - Post-graduate student of YSU, Faculty of Geography and Geology, first-class specialist of the "SSS" agency of the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations.
 E-mail:
 ani_gevorkjan@mail.ru Robert S. Minasyan - Geologist. Doctor, Professor, YSU, Head of the Department of Geophysics, Faculty of Geography and Geology, E-mail.
 minasyan.ysu@rambler.ru Khondkaryan Valeri Sergey - Candidate of Geological and Mineral Sciences, Chief Specialist of the Central Committee of the Ministry of Emergency Situations "SParm" SNCO, Associate Professor of CMA.
E-mail:
 khondkaryan@yahoo.com Antonyan Armen Norik - Head of the SSS Department of the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations, E-mail.
