    One of the main aspects of freshman adaptation is the establishment of permanent and strong social ties in the new environment, new smallForming groups և Involvement in formal and informal groups.
    New:The role distribution in the environment is carried out in a new way, ում in the new system of relations the student has to strengthen himselfits positions.
  As K. Marx rightly pointed out that the development of a person depends on the development of all the individuals with whom he is
is in direct or indirect communication.
 It is in the process փոխ exchange of beliefs, ideas, attitudes, interests, activities, development ևThe system of "subject-subject" relations is revealed / 6, page 7 /.
It is no secret that the student is formed in the student staff,and the favorable psychological atmosphere of the team, the high level of mutual understanding, contributes to the company, trust, mutual help, the development of positive personal qualities, overcoming educational difficulties, and achieving success in learning.
The student team has its peculiarities և differs from the others.a) main type of activity / study /;b) with the same age, educational composition;c) stability of the members; d) with the planning and sequence of educational activities;e) with the general goal, that is, to get a profession.
The purpose of the article is to identify freshmen communicationthe peculiarities of understanding each other in the process, the difficulties of adaptation.
The task is to study freshmen communicationthe sphere, the process of mutual understanding, the difficulties of adaptationovercoming.
The process of understanding each other is a prerequisite for communication և can be called perceptual communication/ understanding / side.
  And what does it mean? from one person to another
We call understanding a social perception.
 This concept was first used by J. Bruner in 1947, when he developed the concept of understanding."New Look", {New Look}. Later soc. groups social perception
were called the processes of understanding "social objects", whichby other people, social groups և social communities {2, page 138}.
Social understanding is possible to know and understand the other person, during which the more complete the person discovers the other person, the more complete the ideas he / she becomes about himself / herself.
Freshmen are gradually becoming more actively involvedin the structure of interpersonal relations of the student group,begin to recognize each other's individual personal qualities, which takes placehas "during communication," during cognitive activities.
  They become calmer and more balanced.
Get to know each other, evaluate abilities, appropriate behaviorDirect communication plays a key role in revealingand communication with other people {2, page 128}.
The means of communication and the content are conditionedthe social functions of the people involved in those relationships, their position in the system of public relations, in this case, student relations.
Communication, as noted by K. Stanislavsky, "is the opposite current."
Each of its stages is a connected action,in which the actions of the participants are united into a wholein which it carries new qualities.
Freshman collaborating, interacting with group members,based on the experience gained during this or that activity,And because different people experience life differently, the opportunities to get to know and understand others are also different.
  And by:According to the data, there is a lot of anxiety, social stress, a certain crisis of communication with peers {2, 135}.
 However, they decrease at the beginning of the second year, as the classmates gradually get to know each other better, alreadyInterspersed contacts, communication styles, mutual understanding and understanding are established in the group.
Interpersonal relationships include 3 components of student interaction.1. behavioral,2. emotional,3. Cognitive.
  Behavioral includes activities արդյուն results of actions,activity styles, actions, facial expressions, gestures, movements ևfinally, the word, that is, everything that expresses the human person ևcan be viewed by other people.
Emotional includes everything related to situations. emotional states due to interpersonal conflicts, etc.
Cognition includes all the mental parts of the person interactingprocesses that involve both the environment and the other person with recognition / 6, page 161 /.
 Knowledge of the socio-psychological features of interpersonal understanding, we are sure will help students moreEasily adapt, build the right relationships, reduce unavoidable conflicts և Improve the learning process.
 To substantiate all that, VSPI Faculty of Physics and Mathematics և2010-12 among the freshmen of the physical education department We conducted research, surveys, discussions, observations, tests, debates և to find out the level of understanding of freshmen
it is low that they are mostly dominated by adequate comprehensiondisruptive emotional stereotypes that exist in the field of communicationSome crisis and social stress, such as a feeling of dissatisfaction associated with the student's involvement in a new social environment.
We offered them to point out the problems and difficultiesThey arise especially at the beginning of the academic year, during the first year due to misunderstanding, non-recognition, competition, opposite goals, motives or other reasons.
We asked the students to point out the ways that will enable them to bypass, mitigate or eliminate the existing problems.
The above conditions the relevance of the article andthe need.
Under the new conditions, freshmen have a false sense of freedom due to working independentlywith the need to organize, to distribute one's own forces correctly.
It is known that everyone can be persuaded to take some actions if they are aimed at satisfying our psychological needs.
 There are 14 basic requirements that can be metare especially two.1. personal strength2. Satisfaction of the "ego" (realization of pride, self-worth),Curiosity, emotional security, belonging to a group, love, being loved, recognition, encouragement from peers, opportunity to create, freedom of private lifeand immunity, material security, high self-esteem, self-esteem, success / 3, pp. 174-175 /.
One of the key factors improving the freshman understanding process is:• mutual trust, because people are always striving to communicate,Establish social relationships with honest, trustworthy people• The ability to overcome the duality and uncertainty of one's own emotional states.
 This is especially true of rigid (non-flexible)students, • The effectiveness of social perception in a freshman group depends on the individual type of group observer-observer;that is, how the group is perceived by the person,• the problem of adaptation;• self-knowledge, recognition and understanding of each other.
 From the beginning of the 2nd year, the above-mentioned problems gradually begindecreased satisfaction in peer relationshipsThe degree begins to increase.
 At that stage, they think of each other as a groupThey know more about it և now they are more interested in it than in the first year.
We considered the communication peculiarities of freshmen և generalizing we can say that: Understanding arises from natural communication անալու understanding each other,in terms of human interaction.
  It depends on the partnerfrom emotions, opinions, attitudes, beliefs, etc.
By influencing the communicating party, the person strivesto transform the ideas he has about himself in the necessary և favorable direction.
Understanding another person is likeMandatory condition of communication, consequently social understandingassumes. self-knowledge, recognition of communication partner, organization of joint activities on the basis of mutual understanding, emotional
Establishment of relations, etc.
  The first discussed in the articleIdentifying the causes of students' social understanding, communication, adaptation psychological difficulties և knowledgewill help students to get to know each other more easily, to communicate, to adapt, which will help not only to improve their educational process, but also to develop their personality.
Literature 1. Андреева Г. М. Социальная ψυхология / М .:
  ed. MGU, 1980. 414 p.   2. Bodalev A. A., Insight and care of man man. M.
  ed.3. Thomson P., Self-taught teacher / SPb.
 Peter, M. 2000. 242p. average soc. learn заведений, under order. И. В. Dubrovino, M.
  Творческий:5. Problem of generalization in psychology, in order. E. Ф. Lomova, M.
