With the adverb բաղադր the temporal differences of the compositions composed of particles are expressed in the form of inclinations թtime particles, and weather differences through weather signs, which in Armenian dialects appear in positional variants.
The particle ku participates in the territorial versions of the border present and past imperfect (Western faction).as well as the composition of the boundary, the hypothetical future and the past tenses of the past.
 It is used with Acne,In the dialects of Ardvin-Tbilisi, in the dialect of Chmshkatsag.
 Audio start:There is a phonetic transition in the verbs, so I stay "I stay,I will stay ", you will stay, you will stay, we will stay, you will stay, you will stay, I willկաղաս, կաղա… (ՀԲԱՆ, Չմշկածագ, 28) 1.
The variables of the participle 2 are caused by a phonetic և consonant change of sound, a decrease in the sound of the initial sound or a drop of the final vowel.
  Thus, in the dialect of 3 Constantinople (Ordu, Trabzon) of the dialect of Asia Minor և of the dialect of HamshenIn the Hamshen dialects, it is the variable gu with the vowel 4kfunction: կիրիմ գու "I write, I will write", կիրիս գու, կըրա գու, կրիկ գու, կրէկgu, kerin gu (HBAN, Trabzon, 99), and the western faction of VanIn the dialect, Khoy-Maragha, Ararat dialects of the Eastern faction, the Karabakh-Shamakh inter-dialect, etc., there is a variant with a phonetic change.I was, I was talking ", he was talking, he was talking, we are talking, you are talking, they are talking (HBAN, Moks,Khalents, 288).
  A phonetic իս when combined with vowel verbsA change (squeezing of h) occurs, as a result of which k operates1 In the article are used collected in the program of the Armenian dialect atlasmaterials stored in Hr. At the Acharyan Language Institute վում are presented under the acronym ABA (materials of the Armenian dialect atlas).
2 Հ. Acharyan mentions 14 modified's in the dialect;
that all of them originated from the beginning (see H. Acharyan, Complete Armenian Grammarlanguage, h. 4, book B, Yerevan, 1961, page 75).
3 We use G. to give the spatial description of temporal horses. Jahukyan said
from the multi-characteristic statistical classification of dialect units, hence theirThe territorial description is presented according to a multi-characteristic classification (see G.Jahukyan, Introduction to Armenian Dialectology, Yerevan, 1972, pp. 132-136).
4 The weather particle Gu, according to H. Acharyan, operates in the dialects of Trabzon և Hamshen (see H. Acharyan, op. Cit., P. 78).
"without the final sound, he would say I would say, I would say," he would say, he would say, we would say,Kasik, Kasin (HBAN, Van, Aghbak, 322).
In the inter-dialects of Shapin-Karahisar, Evdokia, Constantinople characterized by dumb phonetic systems, in the dialects of Marzvan-Amasia, CrimeaNork Nakhichevan, Kharberd-Yerznka, Akni, Arabkir, Sebastia, Hamshen, Edesbia, Tigranakert, MalatanIn the case of the vowel of k, in the case of consonantal verbs, it is also a consequence of the change of the vowel (u>), thus, I write "I write, I will write", gigres,գըգըրէ, գըգըրէնք, գյգըրէք, գըգըրէն.
  Vowel beginning verbs are phoneticIn addition to the above changes, the suffix h is also addedAttribute: Gabrim "I live, I will live", Gabris, Gabri, Gabrink,Gabrik, Gabrin (HBAN, Sebastia, 81).
Operating in Antioch or Northwestgi weather sign (gi sirim "I love, I will love", gi love, gi love, gi love,գի սիրիք, գի սիրին 2) Գ. According to Jahukyan, it arose from koi oy>
with sound transition 3.
 Note that the sound change of oy> is not specific to the mentioned area, therefore it can be assumed that gi originated from g ևby combining sounds. The addition of a vowel could occur
with the syllable of vowels with vowels.
 As mentionedArgument confirming the hypothesis: one can mention Goris's speech, where it isThe variant consists of the verbs in which the verb is present in the vowel: ki kirem "I will write", ki kires, ki kire, ki kirnek, ki kirreq, ki kiren.
 The otherThe verb is attached to the preposition, thus, I stay, I will stay, I will stay, I will stay, we will stay, you will stay (HBAN, Goris, Kornidzor, 105).
In another dialect area (Caesarea, Cilicia, Gamirk) the preposition particle is used, so there is a word "I speak, I will speak", there is a word, there is a word, there is a word, there is a word, there is a word 4.
 In the Cilicia dialect կա There is a Swedish dialect with a consonantև Simultaneous phonetic changes, operates on a speaker1 Հ. Acharyan mentions the participle in the Mush dialect (see H. Acharyan, mentioned work,
page 76).
2 See H. Acharyan, Examination of Artial Dialect, Yerevan, 1953, pp. 164-165.
3 See G. Jahukyan, note work., page 104.
4 Ն. Mkrtchyan, The Newly Discovered Armenian Dialects of Anatolia և Folklore, Yerevan, 2006, p. 84.
in phonetic versions, such as go siim "I love, I will love", goսիյիս, գո սիէ, գո սիյինք, գո սիյէք, գո սիյին (ՀԲԱՆ, Զեյթուն, 110).
Continuous present և past in Western dialectsImperfect meanings are expressed through curved, was, century, has // color, Armenian, Armenian time particles.
 Cor, A. According to Aytyan,
is of Turkish origin.
 He considers it to have originated from yor dz, reasoning that due to the lack of words with e, etc. in Armenian, the Tajik y has become k1.
 H. Acharyan refuses
A. The y> k phonetic transition mentioned by Aytyanyan, as there are many yo, yu և other sounds in the word borrowed from Turkish at the beginning of the word, և
The following hypothesis with the origin of curve. "It simply came to our notice then
There are some horses with you.
 In the Hamshen dialect there is also ունի color.
 This:the latter is naturally composed of the sum of the particles.
 If this is the case, we can assume that it is a curved particle և particle dayfrom the amount.
 Already in the Carno dialect, the… particle is connected to connectjoining together, he gives the crooked horse ”2.
In the dialects of Rodosto արտ Partizak, the dialect of ConstantinopleThe day variable caused by the fall of the initial sound c of the particle operates,Thus, on the next day I "read", on the next day, on the next day…. (HBAN,
Partizak, 284).
In the dialects of Mala, Zefanos in the Hamshen dialect, the meaning of continuous tenses is expressed by the // function of color clocks: berim rengi "I bring", beris rengi, bereIt has color or goodness, I "eat", it has goodness, it has goodness.
 Has the particleI have the vowel expression of the unique 3rd person of the verb 3, and the color egg combined with the consonant verbs, according to H. According to Acharyan, the general present value has arisen by the combination of particles: berim g + has> berim
color 4.
The positional variants of the Armenian time particle operatein the dialects of the Western faction.
 Armenian (Armenian) horse is used Aslan 1 See A. Aydnyan, Exam grammar of secular or modern Armenian language,
Vienna, 1965, page 76.
2 Հ. Acharyan, Complete grammar of the Armenian language, vol. 4, book B, page 108.
3 See A. Gharibyan, Armenian Dialectology, Yerevan, 1953, p. 184.
4 See H. Acharyan, note work, page 108.
In the dialect of Bey քում In the Nicomedia dialect, this is how I "read" Armenian in Gartam, Gartas in Armenian, Garta in Armenian, Gartank in Armenian, Gartak in Armenianհայե, գ գարտան հայե, գուդեյի հայե, գուդէիր հայե Հ (ՀԲԱՆ, Նիկոլոմեդիա, 304).
A. According to Gharibyan, it originated from the connection of the words ha 1.
In the dialects of the dialect of Aramo of Kessab-Sweden, the dialect of Adapazar in the dialect of Kessab, Constantinople, with the decrease of the final syllable of the Armenian prefixThe resulting Armenian variable works in the case of vowel verbs,Thus, I eat Armenian, I "eat", eat Armenian, eat Armenian, eat Armenian, eat Armenian,They eat Armenian (HBAN, Nicomedia, Adapazar, 306), and the consonantal verbs are combined with the positional variant ha, which is followed by the Armenian> ha phonetic transition, so in ha gartum "I read", ha gartus, ha gartu, ha gartunq, ha gartuk , հա գարտուն (ՀԲԱՆ, Կեսաբ, 1).
The variable 2 arose due to the decrease of the initial sound of the clock.
  The latter is used in the dialects of Edesia and Malatya: I kiss "I kiss", I kiss, I kiss, I kiss, we kiss, kissa, it is from gibak or gechnam "I go down", it is gechnas, gechna ya, it is gechnank,Gechnak is, Gechnan is.
The version of A> caused by a phonetic change is availablein the dialect of Arabkir և In the dialect of Serek, this is how gekirim writesI am », gկըkրris, g ,kրre, gկըkրrկըnk, gկkկr ,k, gըkրrինn (HBAN, S Հrek,82).
 H. Acharyan thinks that there is a weather mark in the Arabkir dialect
It comes from here, from you.
3:Meanings of the day after tomorrow (borderline և compulsory)In the spatial versions, the verb pitim և should be used for the expression.
 In the dialects of Araratyan of the Eastern faction (Yerevan, Lori, Shamshadin-Dilijan), Ardvin-Tbilisi,In the dialects of Shaghakh, Havarik, Hadrut of the Karabakh-Shamakhi dialect, in the dialect of Kazakh-Kirovabad there is a sense of vanityexpresses the proper verb or its variables, which, when combinedindefinite derby, they bow.
1 See A. Gharibyan, note work, page 185.
2 See A. Gharibyan, note work, page 186.
3 See H. Acharyan, note work., page 107.
According to H. According to Acharyan, the verb pitim is preserved with a consonant
In the Tbilissi (Tbilisi) dialect (I have to love "I have to love", I have to love, I have to love…), and in the Karabakh dialect it has a pet's horse (I have to love"I will love", I must love, I must love…) 1.
  However, according to the ABAIn the dialects of the materials collected by the program, in the dialect of Karabakh, as in the dialect of Tbilissi, the verb pitim is used with a consonant.Thus, I must write "I will write", I must write Cyril, I must Cyril, we must Cyril,Cyril must be, Cyril must be (HBAN, Karabakh, Talish, 107).
Pitim verb in territorial versions is subject to consonant, phonetic sequences, sounds, endingsանկ Decline of the original syllables.
  Caused by a change of vowel (i>)The fifth version works in Yerjan's dialect, so to workI will work, I will work, I will work, I will work… 2.
The change of the consonant (p> b) is in the Hadrut dialectoperating bidim (grind bidim "I have to salt", grind bidis, grind bidi, grindbidik, aghal bidik, aghal bidin) verb 3, as in the Meghri dialectmetil, matil (p> m) weather signs 4, so matil birim "I will bring",Matil Biris, Matil Biri, Matil Birik, Matil Birik, Matil Birin (HBAN,Meghri, Karchjan, 21).
In the dialects of Goris, Kakavaberd, the verb petima varies with the combination of the auxiliary verb petim տարբեր and the auxiliary verb.is.
 It is noticeable that the mentioned structure, combined with the opposite verbs, has acquired the value of a preposition: "I will write", "I must write",պէտմա կրի, պէտմա կրենք, պէտմա կրէք, պէտմա կրէն (ՀԲԱՆ,Goris, Karahunj, 101).
A number of changes (sound change, composition) are due to the bidima version of the above-mentioned participle used in the dialect of Aznaberd settlement in Nakhichevan: bidima mina "must remain"stay bidima, stay bidima, stay bidima, stay bidima, bidimaremain (HBAN, Aznaberd, 25).
1 See H. Acharyan, note work., page 134.
2 A. Grigoryan, Armenian Dialectology Course, Yerevan, 1957, p. 220.
3 Ա. Poghosyan, The Dialect of Hadrut, Yerevan, 1965, p. 181.
4 See E. Aghayan, The Dialect of Meghri, Yerevan, 1954, p. 198.
In the dialects of Mush, Van, Karin, Sebastia, Aslanbek, Caesarea, CrimeaNor Nakhichevan, Constantinople, Hamshen, Karabakh (Hadrut Shaghakh-Keivan, Karadagh, Dzmar) the variable caused by the declension of the final verb must have been used.
 The version of the letter formed by the change of sound of the particle must be used in Yerevan's dialect, for example, to stay, to stay, to stay, to stay Հ (HBAN, Yerevan, 23), առկա Peta in Shamakh (Saghyan) dialectsThe change is a consequence of the phonetic change, so it should beI will drink "I will drink", I will drink, I will drink.
The bid variable caused by the sound of a particle must be present in the dialects of Sebastia, Aslanbek, Crimea-New Nakhichevan, Constantinople, Karabakh (Hadrut, Shaghakh-Keivan, Karadagh,Dzmar) in speeches, so, bidi khumtsinim "I have to drink", bidikhimtsinis, bidi khumtsinis, bidi khumtsiniks, bidi khumtsiniks, bidi khumtsinin 1.
 In the Hamshen dialect ևs is used the participle of bidi, which:the initial sound is unique in the first person with the symmetry of the frontal inclinationchanges to m, so I will write a mini "I will write", I will write a bidi, a kiri bidi,kerik bidi, kerrek bidi, kerin bidi (HBAN, Trabzon, 99).
 The above-mentioned change does not work in the case of the compulsory past;I wrote ", kreyd bidi, kirre bidi, kirak bidi, kirrek bidi, kerrein bidi(HBAN, Trabzon, 99).
In the unique 1st person of the mentioned periods, according to H. According to Acharyan, the structure of berim idi operates. He explains the emergence of the latter as follows: "… Aparni must be a participle b, joining the first
with the ending m of the face, it became m…, then joining two m, it became one…, later, being influenced by d, it turned into n (eshtomini)… »2.
In the dialects of Kharberd-Yerznka, Marash-Zeytun, Beylan, Evdokia, Malatia, the pid (bid) egg caused by the drop of the final part of the participle must (bidi) is used, so pid udim "must"to eat », pid udes, pid ude (HBAN, Yerznka, 5).
1 See A. Sargsyan, Shaghakh sub-dialect in the environment of Hadrut sub-dialect,
Stepanakert, 2009, page 67.
2 Հ. Acharyan, note work., page 141.
In the dialect of Shapin-Karahisar with the change of pid> pi, in the dialect of Hamshen Ordu, the variable pi is used: pi grem «shouldI will write », pi geres, pi gere….
  It, combined with the vowel verbs,works without ending: pudem "I have to eat", pudes, pudes,pudenk, pudek, puden (HBAN, Shapin-Karahisar, 3).
In the Polish-Armenian dialect, in the ortho dialect, in the dialects of Hajin and Zeytun, the bi-sign formed by the past participlethe particle is used (bi minom "I will stay", bi menos, bi mino, bi minonk,bi mnek, bi mnon), which is again combined with vowel beginning verbsloses the final sound in the vowel: bassem "I will say", bass, bass,բասենք, բասէք, բասեն (ՀԲԱՆ, Հաջըն, 93).
 In the dialects of the Ararat dialect (Lori, Shamshadin-Dilijan), in the Kazakh-Kirovabad dialect, the variant against the declension of the initial verb pitim գործ with the consonant t> d operates, so "I have to sit" against sitting.sit down, sit down, sit down, sit down, sit down 1.
  Compulsory periods with the mentioned composition A. Gharibyan mentions Shamshadin,
In the dialects of Kazakh, Dilijan, in which the adverb is usedconsiders § մն to be a remnant of the forced suffix §t¦-§d¦from the sound և auxiliary verb¦2.
In another dialect area: Akni, Van (Shatakh, Moks, Ozm)in dialects, Kharberd, Adapazar, Van (Aghbaki Bzhgnerd, KhoshabIn Zenis, Krer) dialects, ti (t) is used, which is the second syllable of the prepositional particle.
 It is attached to the consonantal verbs (tlove "I will love", love me, love me, love me, love me, love me).In the case of vowel verbs, only the initial sound is used: tuzim "I will want", tuzis, tuzi, tuzink, tuzek, tuzin3.
In the dialects of Nicomedia, Chmshkatsag, Kharberd-Kharberd dialect of the inter-dialect of Constantinople of the Western faction, in the dialects of Akn, Arabkir, in the dialect of BasenThe variable is used to make deaf voices specific to this areaAccording to the law, this is how I love, I must love, love, love, lovelove, love, love (HBAN, Harput, 6).
1B. Mezhunts, The speech of Shamshadin-Dilijan, Yerevan, 1989, p. 82.
2 See A. Gharibyan, note work, page 208.
3 M. Muradyan, The Dialect of Shatakh, Yerevan, 1962, p. 19.
In the Tigranakert dialect a preposition is used 1,like, I have to sell a leftist, a leftist, a leftist, a leftist, ato the left, to the left.
 A. Haneyan puts forward the following version with the origin of a weather mark. First, the verb dd պիտի was formed from must, as a result of which the vowel beginning verbs had difficulty in pronunciation.
 That:To overcome the problem, d was changed to n (bd> bn).
 Then the last step took place, the partial taking of b by n, by which b changed its sound to m, producing a particle 2.
 Probably a fraction to skipis the same path of development as the mini used in the Trabzon dialectthe participle, followed by the final vowel drop ևHe received an egg as a result of a phonetic change.
Particles expressing the meaning of vanity in a number of dialect units by combining two different componentsare 3.
 Thus, in the dialects of Ozmi ոկ Moks, Sasuni Hazzo of Van dialectI will write (I will write "I will write", I will write, I will write) ևgimdi (gmdi kirm "I will write", gmdi kiris, gimdi kira).) weather signThe particles must be the result of a combination of particles.
 Item:Bidor used in the dialect of Suchava dialectI will write "bidor gris, bidor gris է) the weather must have the componentsIt is a connection after the connection.
In the Kessab-Swedish dialect, the bar part is used.
  According to A. According to Gharibyan, first the variable egg originated from the beech egg, then
By reciprocal-change of sound, my sign is 4, so be itI will write "I will write", I will write, I will write, I will write, we will write, they will write(HBAN, Sweden, 280).
 In the Kessab dialect, there is a parallel use of the verb's, thus, to stay, // to stay, "to stay",բռ մէնաս // մէր մէնաս, բր մընա // միր մէնա… (ՀԲԱՆ, Կեսաբ, 1).
It seems that if the dialects of the Eastern factionin one part (Araratyan (Yerevan, Lori, Shamshadin-Dilijan), ArdvinTbilisi dialects, Karabakh-Shamakhi (Shaghakh, Havarik, Hadrut)1 Issues of use of this particle in other places H. They are uncertain for Acharyan
(H. Acharyan, op. Cit., P. 145).
2 A. Haneyan, The Dialect of Tigranakert, Yerevan, 1978, p. 146.
3 See A. Gharibyan, op. Cit., P. 214.
4 See A. Gharibyan, in the same place.
dialect group, Kazakh-Kirovabad dialect) uses the verb pitim,which, preserving the verbal meaning, he also bows toin the Western faction, as in the other Eastern factionIn that part it has lost its verbal meaning և acquired the value of a participle, and the meaning of the action is expressed by the opposite verb։.
From the comparative examination of the dialect material it becomes clear that:In the regional versions of the Armenian language weather իշ timeparticles operate in many positional variants, which:phonetic changes, beginning or end of the fallor they are a combination of different components.
 Often the aboveThe changes work at the same time.
Literature   1. Aghayan E., The dialect of Meghri, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1954, 407 pages.
2. Acharyan H., Complete grammar in comparison with the Armenian language562 languages, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1961, book B, 543 pages,3. Acharyan H., Examination of Artial dialect, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1953,289 pages.
4. Aydnian A. Exam grammar in secular or modern Armenian
Language, Vienna, print. Mkhitaryan, 1866, 502 pages.
5. Grigoryan A., Armenian dialectology course, Yerevan, YSU, 1957, 543 pages.
6. Haneyan A., The Dialect of Tigranakert, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 1978, 230 pages.
7. Gharibyan A., Armenian dialectology, Yerevan, head of the USSR. Tel. child.
inst. ed., 1953, 457 pages.
8. Mezhunts B., The speech of Shamshadin-Dilijan, Yerevan, YSU Press, 1989,224 pages.
9. Mkrtchyan N., The Newly Discovered Armenian Dialects of Anatolia և Folklore, Yerevan, A. h., 2006, 600 pages.
10. Muradyan M., The dialect of Shatakh, Yerevan, Yerevan University. հրատ., 1962,
227 pages.
11. Poghosyan A., The dialect of Hadrut, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1965, 370 pages.
12. Jahukyan G., Introduction to Armenian Dialectology, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciencesed., 1972, 346 pages.
13. Sargsyan A., Shagakh sub-dialect in the environment of Hadrut sub-dialect, Stepanakert, ArSU publishing house, 2009, 103 pages.
14. Pashayan A., The Swedish dialect, Yerevan, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1964, 391 pages.
Information about the author:Gayane G. Gorgyan - PhD, Associate Professor, Yerjan V. After Brusov University of Linguistics and Social Sciences, Head of the Chair of Armenology,E-mail:
