"Technology" is an integrated, diverse subject, which includes graphics, materials processing technologies, elements of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, radio engineering, basics of economics, clothing modeling, cooking, cooking, construction, finishing, agricultural work, etc.
 Unigraphics play an important role in the "Technology" course.
 In the teaching of the subject "Technology" the interdisciplinary connections between material science, physics, mathematics "other educational subjects" appear in the brightest way.
The implementation of modern requirements for secondary schools raises new issues in the teaching of subjects.
  Revised և Serious changes have been made in school curricula and textbooks.
However, studies show that the teaching methods of most subjects are not sufficient և do not meet the modern requirements for teaching.
We have studied the position of organizing the teaching of "Technology" and "Geometry" subjects in several schools of Yerevan.
  It turns out that the relevant departments of the Pedagogical University should take a serious approach to improving the curriculum of these subjects and provide methodological assistance to the public schools of the republic.
Interdisciplinary connections, which are one of the necessary conditions for learning success, should be given a special place in the learning process.
On Interdisciplinary Relationships Y. Komensky in his work "The Great Didactics" notes that the interconnected teaching of subjects teaches children to discover the connections between the phenomena of the subjects being studied. "To strengthen everything on the basis of reason means to learn everything by pointing out the reasons, that is, not only to show how this or that happens, but also to show why it can not be otherwise.
After all, knowing something means recognizing the thing in its interconnectedness. ”
There are interdisciplinary connections especially between technology, mathematics, geometry, fine arts, physics.
The knowledge, abilities and skills acquired during the teaching of each of these subjects are widely used in the teaching process of the other subjects.
In "Technology" classes, the teaching of the "Graphics" department should be organized in such a way as to improve the students' working abilities, develop technical thinking, design skills, spatial perceptions, creative thinking.
  Most of the graphics in the Graphics course should be organized in an organic connection with the other Technology departments, which will enable learners to develop skills such as understanding the role and meaning of drawings, applying them, and reading skills.
Let's bring an example. Students in "Technology" classes must prepare a "Kitchen Shovel".
  It must be wooden.
 A technological card is being drawn up.
 [3] As we can see, interdisciplinary connections are vividly expressed in the card.
 The learner constructs graphic images.
Such interactions deepen և strengthen the graphic, working, skills, knowledge of the learners.
Students make various details, objects from wood and metals in "Technology" classes and educational workshops.
  The process of making an object consists of the following actions (operations): • reading the drawing of the object to be made, • selecting the dimensions of the preparation (according to the dimensions of the drawing), • processing the material (sawing, drilling, etc.), • checking the dimensions of the prepared object according to the drawing.
By reading the drawing, students form an idea about the spatial structure (construction) of the subject to be prepared.
 In addition, according to the drawing, the student must choose the methods of processing.
 While reading the drawing, the students make a measurement with marking tools on the product (marker, dot marker, marker, etc.).
An analysis of the technological process of making a subject is important when getting acquainted with the sequence of actions of making a subject.
This analysis is performed with the help of technological cards, which contain the processing sequence, drawing, tools used during the work, cutting and measuring tools.
The choice of subjects should be made in such a way that they are not complex in their structure, but correspond to the content of the "Technology" subject program, have educational, practical significance նշանակ application.
[1] It is also useful to prepare a workshop, adjacent laboratories, school supplies, devices, teaching aids, etc.
 It is known that among the main goals of the "Graphics" section, the strongest place belongs to the strengthening of drawing, especially their reading knowledge, abilities and skills.
 Teaching technology is impossible without developing the ability to read drawings.
  This knowledge is implemented during the training of "Graphics" with the use of various examination items and devices.
In order to achieve the mentioned goals, a special place should be given to mastering the skills of working with measuring instruments.
To do this, you must first get acquainted with the basic measuring tools - the tricks of working with them.
 It is useful to have educational posters showing the skills of working with measuring instruments, which show the determination of linear dimensions, inner և outer diameters, distances of hole centers և other dimensions (Fig. 1).
An example of an axono-class of the device is shown.
Lesson material. Stand design երեք preparation of three dimensions of projections.
  The teacher explains the purpose of the lesson.
metric projection (Fig. 2).
        The students, together with the teacher, select the spatial dimensions of the device, according to which they choose the structural dimensions of their details.
 During the lessons the students make sketches of drawings, drawings / Fig.3 /.
 Fig.1 Fig.23. Support (wood material) 2pcs.3 With the drawing made, under the guidance of the teacher, the students prepare the details of the device հավաք assemble with screws on the stand.
Most of the "Technology" classes are based on pre-made drawings.
The learner studies the model drawing of the object to be made, the device.
 Imagines the proposed construction.
 Selects the tools և goes to the preparation of the subject.
It is obvious that this is possible when the learner has sufficient knowledge and skills to read drawings.
Learning to draw drawings is successfully accomplished through exercises that include elements of comparison, transformations, and modeling.
Example of reading drawings by the modeling method shown in Fig. In 4.
 A regular triangular prism is divided into two parts, one of which (the upper part) is divided into five parts.
Fig.4 The two projections of the model consisting of several particles are given / Fig. 5.1 /.
 The students study the projections, imagine the structure of the subject և assemble the model / Fig.5.2/.
Fig. 5 To summarize, it should be noted that the methodological correct organization of "Technology" lessons significantly develops և deepens students' theoretical-practical knowledge, abilities, abilities, skills, spatial perceptions, imagination սովոր thinking.
Literature 1. Hovsepyan S., Aghajanyan M., Barseghyan M., Standard program of "Technology" secondary school, PIU, Yerevan, 2007.
2. Khudoyan GS, Geometric drawing, Yerevan, Author's publishing house, 2009, 82 pages.
3. Harutyunyan A., Hovsepyan S., Avetisyan J., "Technology" practical works.
 Teacher's manual for 5th-7th grades, Yerevan, "Astghik bookstore", 2011.
Information about the author Susanna Zhora Arshakyan - Chair of Drawing, Painting, Sculpture of NCAA.
