The Armenian ethnos (9-10 centuries), living under the rule of foreigners, did not have an independent statehood-political system, with the philosophy of survival acquired a complex of inferiority, moreover, xenophobia.
The ruling political elite, taking into account the foreign interests of such people under religious-ethnic coercion, has tried in every way to spread the way of life, values ​​and language of the dominant ethnos in Armenia at the expense of the national.
 "There is nothing sadder for the human heart," writes M. Nalbandyan, rather than seeing that one nation was falling "under the oppression of severe circumstances and another under national pressure" [1, 259].
  The syndrome of xenophobia, from ancient times to the present day, is manifested in the face of the Armenian ethnos, endangering the ethnic identity of the Armenians.
  Therefore, its scientific coverage is very urgent, especially from a political science point of view.
The process of forming the ethnic identity of the Armenian people from the Aryan anthroposociogen has an early past, more than 5000 years.
Unlike Western European countries, in the Armenian society the nation precedes the creation of the state.
The state (civil) identity of the Armenian people has not yet turned into ethnic identity, because the Armenian is constantly deprived of statehood և does not have a full state mentality.
 The Armenian ethnic borders do not coincide with the state ones.
  Nevertheless, the name Armenia was derived from the Armenian ethnonym (self-name).
 By the way, the current state borders of Turkey do not have their own racial-ethnic territories.
 An Armenian who has centuries of socio-cultural experience, his own language and script in his cradle has lost 90% of his territory.
 Due to the tragedy of the Genocide, the Armenian who was alienated from his homeland spread to other parts of the world, giving birth to the "Armenian Diaspora", being cut off from the national cultural values ​​that preserve the Armenian identity.
The national doctrine developed during the 70 years of Soviet totalitarianism contributed to the Armenian xenophobia.
 The official ideology preferred the all-union interest based on the collective logic of the Soviet people.
  The representative of Ethnos was considered a Soviet citizen of totalitarianism.
The language of interethnic communication, Russian, which was considered "the second native language", was privileged.
  The number of Armenian students in Russian schools in the republic was constantly increasing.
In the USSR, the national culture was ignored, a new united Soviet mentality and way of life was formed.
In a totalitarian system, it was purely national, without the values ​​of the Soviet peoples, racist, xenophobic (Greek xenos foreign os phopos-early, xenophobia).
In the life of the Armenian people, as it did not have state de facto independence, there was a hierarchical subordination to the radical nation.
At the same time, in the Soviet Union, the ideal of the ethnic identity of the Armenian people in some respects coincided with totalitarianism, a fact that increased self-confidence in the existence of physical identity.
The prevailing theory in the country was the theory of nationalism, the rapprochement of nations from Marx, and then the disappearance of nationalism, which considered nationalism intolerable.
  The praise of national cultural values ​​was considered to be outside the provincial mentality, a racist concept of small nations, a self-defense movement.
The content of the culture was socialist, in essence, national.
  The individual, gradually losing his spiritual connection with the traditional, native nation, was denationalized and subjected to ethnic marginalization.
  Then there was a planned, latent assimilation of nations, nations, with the Russian people.
Issues related to the ethno-political sphere in the totalitarian country were covered in color, the supposed achievements of social-ethnic formations were drummed, the real picture of the national processes unfolding in the country was hidden.
1991 The totalitarian country collapsed on August 21, 1945. Nevertheless, the majority of the population of the Republic of Armenia, including the political elite, has a Russian orientation.
  This is the reason for our republic's priority - to integrate into Russia, which in turn causes the West not so much trust in the Armenian authorities.
The Russophilia of our people is argued by the fact that the Russian factor has played a crucial role in the fate of the Armenian people.
 300 years ago, the cornerstone of Russian orientation was laid by Israel Ori.
Today, too, the political orientation has been put on a real ground, turned into a state policy.
The interethnic conflict situation in the South Caucasus, the complicated Armenian-Turkish, Armenian-Azerbaijani relations, has made it imperative for our republic to integrate with Russia.
  The Armenian authorities recently agreed to join the Eurasian Economic Union, which will allow solving many socio-economic issues.
The presence of 2.5 million Armenians in Russia is a contributing factor to the deepening of the Armenian-Russian relations, for whom a favorable socio-environment has been created for the development of national culture.
In modern conditions, no country can ensure its comprehensive development without consolidation, especially "non-powerful countries like Armenia".
  Thus, the Republic of Armenia ranks 78th in the world, 134th in terms of population, 125th in terms of GDP, 84th in terms of population living standards.
The motive contributing to xenophobia is mass emigration from the country, which is conditioned by legal-political, moral-psychological, socio-economic factors.
 The ranks of Diaspora Armenians (6 million) are constantly replenished with immigrants.
  The main reason for migration is social tension.
 The Armenian, disappointed with the native authorities, being deprived of the right to live, leaves the homeland dissatisfied and humiliated.
 As much as G. Nzhdeh warns that "the homeland should be desecrated regardless of its political regime" [3,32], nevertheless the socially protected individual is easily carried away by materialism, geopolitics and becomes an exile.
  In other words, the ethnohilist or ethnic marginal denies the psyche of its own community, regulates its behavior by transnational socio-cultural values ​​and material motives.
The national institutions - the school, the church, the cultural centers - are called to form an ethnic mentality with a common national idea, to inject the Armenian spirit, to save the Armenians from marginalization and assimilation.
 The Armenian contributes to the optimal functioning of the common field of coexistence in the communities through the effective ties of social institutions.
Foreign immigration is stimulated by the immigration of Armenians from different parts of the world - repatriation.
  They bring with them homeland socio-cultural և various civilizational influences.
It should be noted that the alien mentality has been formed over millennia.
 The Armenian people are a nation with a courageous spirit and a desire for freedom, but its unity around the "common idea" has almost always been absent.
 A nation that is not able to unite and govern itself is forced to obey a foreigner.
The lack of a common racist concept or its anti-nationalism to some extent contributed to xenophobia.
The national ideology is an ethnoprotective struggle to preserve the national culture, language, religion, traditions, psychology, self-consciousness.
  The national concept was mainly developed abroad, contradictory ideas were put forward in our national thinking, as the Armenians had a marginal social status in foreign countries (foreign culture, language, way of life, etc.).
Some representatives of our ancient nation, statesmen, intellectuals, find it difficult to give up foreign interests.
  In the process of systemic changes, the members of the Armenian National Movement, not having a comprehensive political doctrine of nation-state creation, devalued the national culture, which is called to support the national ideology.
 The political force that came to power insisted that in the conditions of geopolitics and democracy, national slogans seem to be impossible to unite the whole nation around a single ideology, moreover, "the national ideology was called a false political category."
  If in the conditions of totalitarianism the "Armenian activists" for the sake of "world" և "developed socialism" forgot the Armenian ideology, now the liberal's "globalist" figures are expelling the last traces of the values ​​of the national ideology for the sake of their personal interests [4,334] , writes psychologist A. Nalchajyan.
The current ruling political elite wanted to turn the national ideology into an official concept, as Armenia is homogeneous in its national structure, so no matter how different political perceptions people have, there is still a common ethno-cultural ideal, without which the nation's prospects are uncertain.
  It is an obvious fact that a national sovereign, independent state cannot be deprived of a national ideology.
 The development of an ethno-political doctrine is necessary not only for multi-ethnic states, but also for mono-ethnic countries such as Armenia.
  The sectoral subculture of the Armenian nation is diverse, which requires the development of a sensible ethno-policy, otherwise the identity of the dispersed segments of the Armenian ethnos will be endangered, no matter how strongly the ethno-unifying factors are manifested in a foreign, multi-ethnic environment.
If the most advanced part of the Armenian social-political thought is St. Nazaryants, Gr. Artsruni and others came up with the slogan of Europeanizing public life, then M. Nalbandyan saw the misery of the nation in foreignness.
Let's learn from foreigners, but let's not inoculate the values ​​of the West to national structures, let's "feed" from our own roots.
 "Woe to that tree, woe to the plant," writes the poet, "whose root is incapable of receiving its juice from its bottom" [5,56].
Today, the West is challenging our ethnic identity, our national coexistence with foreign, diverse supranational World ("monde-world)" ideas "," programs "," values ​​".
  The hasty rooting of the educational and scientific models of the West, as well as the rooting of the credit educational program in the high school without the creation of appropriate preconditions, cannot lead to positive results.
Western liberal values ​​do not harm the Armenian ethnic identity when the "institutions of traditional national-social relations" of coexistence, the complete national socio-cultural concept, become a guide for activity.
  It has become urgent to develop programs that reasonably ensure the continuity of education, which will not disrupt the national (Armenian) upbringing.
Tribal religion and Taronism are complementary racial-historical-moral teachings, which consider the eternity of the tribe և the homeland to be the supreme values, moreover, they have nothing in common with foreign doctrines.
 Their mission is to preserve the Armenian identity through the rebirth and reform of racial values.
Thus, with a natural desire to preserve the national identity, the Armenian people turned to nationalism, denied the supranational ideology propagating the "Soviet people", reaffirmed the Armenian monotheistic ideology.
Nationalism is a self-defense struggle against foreign ideological influences, it contributes to the consolidation of social and political forces.
  Xenophobia does not prefer the national factor, its supporters easily share power with foreigners, they are not worried about the nature of political borders.
Nationalism first of all refers to the nation and not to the state, so it is wrong to associate it with the state.
 Underestimation or neglect of nationalism leads to cosmopolitanism, and overestimation leads to national pride and nationalism.
The Armenian is not very nationalistic, he has self-criticized, he has beaten himself, but he has respected others with foreignness, he has taken into account the interests and rights of the ethnic groups living in his country.
In Armenia, xenophobia towards foreigners is manifested at the level of xenophobia.
 It, unlike neighboring Georgia, is due to the ethnic homogeneity of the population, the lack of demographic danger and national self-determination by national minorities.
  Of course, there can be no question of interethnic contradictions, it has moved to the realm of interethnic (within the subnet) contradictions.
 Ethnicity, as a political resource with unique socio-cultural spiritual features or components of identity, promotes state nation-building and deepens democratic processes, prevents xenophobia that undermines tradition.
The era of ideologies (nationalism, nationalism, racism, pan-Islamism, Pan-Turkism, Zionism, etc.) is not over yet.
 The Armenian ideology is the driving force that unites all the layers of the nation for the sake of the national state interest, will prevent the formation of a foreign mentality.
 Otherwise, the Armenian people with a unique culture and psychology are threatened with the loss of ethnic identity.
become an estranger having lost its dependence for centuries. Literature 1. Nalbandyan M., ELS, 6 volumes, vol. 2, Yerevan, Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences Press, 1980, 448 pages .
2. Nersisyan AH, Armenian statehood as the main factor of expression of national geopolitical ideas, Scientific Bulletin, Prak B, 2013, 1, Gyumri, 2013, 167 pages.
3. Nzhdeh G., Sayings, Yerevan, "Nakhichevan" publishing house, 2002, page 96.
4. Nalchajyan A., "Ethnic Psychology" university textbook, Yerevan, "Zangak-97", "Psychologist", 2001, 544 pages.
5. Nalbandyan M., YELJ, 6 volumes, h.1, Yerevan, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1979, 464 pages.
Information about the author Vardan Tachat Hakhverdyan - Philosophical scientist. Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri M. Lecturer at the Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute.
