Syntax is the part of syntax that you studyis the position of the sentence members in relation to each other.
  In order to form a sentence, you need a footnote, a certain tone and a certain arrangement of words.
  The order of arrangement of sentence units is called syntax. ”
 [4, page 263]In the syntax course of the general education school, the topic "Syntax" is not a subject of special study.The issue of members' syntax is addressed in the context of syntactic topics where this linguistic phenomenon is specific.has outside.
The syntax depends on the content of the sentence,structure, congestion, meeting of parts of speech, spelling, composition of the footnote, etc.
Given that the change in sentence syntax is due to a logical emphasis, րանք these are interrelated, so "Syntax" և "Logical"We teach "stress" topics together.
We give an idea of ​​the rotation of the sentence members by drawing the students' attention to the blackboard to the written sentences.
1) After breakfast, Varduhi joins the group of women and girls ևgoes to the seaside to take a bath / HS /.
2) Nan, Zani, Mikich, Mosin were waiting outside the village… / HT /3) The air was filled with the scent of colorful flowers.
4) It was a song like the sun, burning with the evening fire (NO).
After discussing the mentioned sentences, the students find out that the words in the sentence follow each other in a certain order.
  This accepted order of arrangement is called syntax.
The Armenian language has its own rules of syntax.
 Usually subjectis placed before the footnote in "1, 3 sentences", the addition before the addition, and the revealer after the revelation.
 But this is a petrified lawNo, sometimes the usual order of words in the word changesin "2, 4 sentences" without affecting the content.
 Day.,if we change the places of the members of the 3rd sentence, the content is notto change "The air was filled with the scent of colorful flowers."
 "The air was filled with the scent of colorful flowers."
 "The air smells of variegated flowersIt was full. ”
 These changes will result in stylistic versions.
So, there are two types of syntax: straight "ordinary"round.
Subordinate subjunctive և determiner is preceded by subordinate, subordinate follows time, causethe items with which the footnote follows, then the items of the place, the purpose.
  This is the usual syntax.
  Violation of this order,In case of moving any member forward or backward, we will get a tour.
  From thisThe writers use it to create multiple variables of the same sentence for stylistic reasons.
 "Depending on the mastery of the writer who makes a turn, the inverted sentence is endowed with a deep emotional expression.with charge, lyrical breath, variety of tones, weight.
 This or that word of a rotating sentence gets a special weight:due to its stress.
 Ordinary sentence syntaxThe stress of individual members goes unnoticed while in the reversalEach member of the sentence gets a logical emphasis.
  When a flourishing style is needed, the qualitative elements of the sentence are advanced, the rapid changes of actions, the sequences are manifested by the presentation of the footnotes, etc. ”[1, p. 263].
There are several reasons for the surrounding syntax.
 Let's mention them.
1) The main reason is the shift of logical stress.
This or that part of the sentence can be stressed by the speaker, which:because it comes forward, և different sentences are obtainedoptions.
  For example, the bright rays of the bright sun fell in the room in the morning.
The bright rays of the sun fell into the room in the morning.
  Shine bright!The rays fell into the room in the morning!
 The bright rays of the sun fell into the roomin the morning.
2) The poetic rhyme. day.,
Behold, the days of autumn are come;They make fine drops… / ՂА /They came, begging, the subordinates fell for days, drops before the subordinates.
"In prose works, too, sometimes the authors turn their words into poetry.
 He uses that means,For example, Axel Bakunts, whose stories can often be foundof rotation.
  Like Gyulbahar is a widow, at night the moon is shiningwhite, Dembon patriarchal, the reeds swayed, the flags fluttered, etc. ”[4, p. 265].
3) Addition may be the reason for the circular syntax.
The verbs I, which follow the sentence with the accented word, form an additional sentence, which is followed bythat relative clause.
  For example, it was hearts thatThey melted away from his charming appearance.
 It was Lon who could bear it.
4) To avoid the accumulation of compatible "multiple" membersSome of them are taken after the supplement.
For example, a girl like a lampshade, with the eyes of a goddess,    Tuberculous, transparent, body-like dream… / NO /Bloodthirsty cannibals are lazyHe barely became a murderer in a thousand centuries.
 / HT /You will sound, you will sound victorious,My old Armenian language, sweet and heartfelt!
 / AI /With the observed examples, the students interpret the reasons and manifestations of the circular syntax according to the different sentences.members.
As the topic was not discussed in previous classes, soWe lead the teaching from concrete linguistic facts to their recognition, generalization, that is, in an inductive "adverbial" way.
THE SUBJECT OF THE SUBJECT AND SUBJECTIn the usual syntax, the subject is placed before the footnote.
For example, blood drips from a broken heart,And the image has all changed.
 / HT /And the world is bright again.
The country is dear again.
 / WT /And who will be awake at this hour? And what is certain about the world?
 / HT /Naturally, this is followed by the usual syntaxThe footnote is placed after the subordinate.
Theoretical material is revealed from fictionwith selected talking examples.
The subject can also be used in the following, that is, in a circular syntax, when the footnote is used for a special purpose in a sentence.The subject is used at the end of the line, ensuring the rhythm of the verse andrhyme.
 Day., The innumerable gatherings of spring are called,Let's go, my friend, let's fly to the mountain… / HT /People cut down a giant tree… / GE /At their feet comes a fury,Crazy Debed is mad.
 / HT /There was a far corner!Have a fair sleep baby,Happy in a dreamReconciliation and peaceful humanity.
 / HT /THE DECISION OF A DECISION AND A DECISIONIn ordinary syntax, the determinant is placed before the definite, andin a circular composition after him.
Avin had a reputation as a good hunter in the village.
  Berdan's ball hits the barHe was opening a big wound next to the fat one.
 "Ordinary" / AB /My blood color in the homelandThe night fell silent and silent,Where there was so much love,And the scent of a rose, the fire of the heart.
 "Round" / WT /The decisive adverb is composed after the homeland,which emphasizes the bloody state of the homeland, which stems from the mood of the poem, and the light and silent horse accessories came down after the footnote are also emphasized, stressed, because they expressthe mood of the poem.
You must sound, sound victorious,My old Armenian language, sweet and heartfelt.
 / AI /Old Isergil spoke singing, և his voice was crunchy and muffled, clearIt depicted the noise of the forest.
 / MG /It was a blond deer with deep, blue eyes… / AI /Subsequent determinants, if voluminous, are separated from the definite by dumb,from the other parts of the sentence with a comma.
DISTRIBUTOR AND DESCRIBED SPEECHIn the usual syntax, the denominator is set from the denominatorbefore, and in the circular composition, after it և is not divided.
 Day., The ridges of the mountains were dark for a long time, the rays of the sun were outfrom the waters of the mountain blue lake.
 "Ordinary" / WT /And here I burn in your heartThe fire of freedom և right,I'm raising your arm, Like a snake in the desert "Round" / AI /You leaned in pain on his "rotating" woundBandage the bloody breastThen take it on your wingsAnd shed two drops of tears.
 /С.Х./The giver is separated from the giver by a thumb, especially itin the case where there is a determinant between them in the form of a derivation,և This thumb is inserted to prevent semantic confusion.
Day,. Arik looked at the girl with a sad smile, clear
to the eyes.
 / SC /Our works depicting the life of an Armenian poet by a genius poetThey are the encyclopedia of the past life.
THE DISCOVERY OF THE DISCOVERYER AND THE DISCOVERYUsually the discoverer is put after the revealer, after himis divided by a dumb, a comma from the other parts of the sentence.
"In the introduction, the teacher shows that in a couple of casesThe composition has a grammatical value in Armenian.
  One of themis the syntax of explicit-explicit relation.
 In ArmenianThe discoverer always follows, if we make a sentence, it will changeof the revealed ”[3, p. 293].
To be sure, let's bring examples, try an identifier andchange the places of the detected. We will see that the positions are also changing.
Omar Khayyam, the sorrowful poet of Khorasan, from a clay cupHe drank wine.
 If we change, it will be Khorasan's sad poet, OmarKhayyam…Sahak, one of the villagers of Akur, was not afraid of the cold or the ice.
 / AB / One of the villagers of Akur, Sahak…Our famous lyricists: P. Duryan, M. Metsarents, Hovh. Tumanyan և others, will always remain in the heart of our people.
Wasn't it in the rocks that nature hid its treasures?Precious gold veins and diamond crystals.
 / ՎԱ /Then the students have to make sure that only the partial discoverer can be a sentence, intermediate or infinitive with respect to the revealed.
 For example:As the leader of the conspiracy, the famous general Smbat Bagratuni was put before the beasts.
The famous general Smbat Bagratuni was put before the beasts as the leader of the conspiracy.
The famous general Smbat Bagratuni as a conspiratorThey decide to throw it in front of the beasts.
The syntax of verb additions is freer.
 They can:are placed before and after the verb, and if they have a logical emphasis,but must be put forward.
 For example:Our mountains, deep valleys!You will come dimly, Araz,Our hearts, our deep eyes!Squeeze the male, go, Araz… / AI /The man went up arch by arch,Zulu tied a gold belt,The blood fell on the stronghold,Your love fell into my heart.
 /ժող./Following these explanations, we persuade with examples that the circleSyntax is typical of a fictional word, it is not an end in itself,It definitely has stylistic-expressive and aesthetic value.
As we have seen, a sentence consisting of 4-5 words with different word arrangements can have dozens of variants that express different meanings and semantic nuances.
  This is a great wealth of expression that allows the writer to choose the syntactic version that expresses its semanticany nuance.
 Each round must be aesthetically reasoned.
The poetic word is more typical of the circular composition, which:It makes the word emotional, musical, regulates the rhythm, the sound.
There are many grammatical errors in the written, mostly oral speech of our students, so the teaching of grammar has a very practical significance.
  That is why the teaching of all this leadsWe do appropriate exercises կատարում at the end we do strengthening exercises.
1. Reorder the sentence members in a circular syntaxso as to express a concise idea.
In the fall, the falconers crawled and fell from the trees.
b) The branches of the trees had already sprouted.
c) The birds welcomed the arrival of spring.
2. Highlight the main members և identify their syntax.
 The morning noise of the birds was sweet, the gentleness of the masters was sweetThe mountain river murmured sweetly.
 / R /b) Suddenly the silence cut off the noise like a sword.
 The rain was pleasant with its sadness.
 / DD /c Gently walks in the evening tender,The sea stretched out its silk girdle,Fir trees walk sweetly from the shore,The seagulls were dormant in the males, they were silent.
 / AI /3. Make the highlighted determinants posterior և split.
The girl was wearing a fashionable woolen dress.
 / AB /b) Transparent and white, a white cloud was floating calmly in the azure.
 / AB /A little girl was coming from a short distance away in a silk floral dress with golden curls.
 / TV /4. Underline the contributors and the allocated, explain their syntax.
The hooves of his horse did not blur the diamond of the springs, they did nottrampling delicate flowers on the sidewalks.
 The soul of the poetHe constantly listened to the light music of distant stars.
 Pearls sprouted in the lotus sprouts.
 His soul was ablaze with radiant joy.
 / AI /5. Find the determinants և attributes, explain their syntax.
The mountains have long since darkened, and the rays of the sun have risen from the waters of the blue mountain lake.
 / WT /b) It is the sound of newly opening flowers, the sweetest pain of rotating cocoonsthe scream.
c:I would like the future of my country  So bright, so clean,  How bright the smile in your eyes,  And the charm of your face և soul.
 / NO /6. Emphasize direct problems, explain their syntax.
a! Shushanik respected his intelligence and development.
  He does not hate anyone, noHe does not despise anyone, he is ready to respect everyone.
 /Shirv./b:It is so deep in height  The human soul loves the bottomless… / NO /The wind was blowing, and the horse was breaking the cold waves of the mountain air with its broad chest.
դ:Have you heard this enchanting song?  When a sweet sadness burns you,When you hug the stone, bless the water and the soil,When you sob from unspoken luck… / WT /LESSON PLAN:Subject: Armenian languageLesson Topic - Circulation of sentence members.
Teaching the subordinate և subordinate syntax.
Lesson Objective - 1. Students will learn a normal և cyclecomposition.
2. Students will form a circular syntax to analyzeability.
3. Students will develop other personal qualities of learning, expressing thoughts correctly, listening to each other, respecting and tolerating others.
Criteria - a ազմ Write a written word, expressing the thoughts correctlyև observing the rules of syntax, spelling և punctuation.
b) To speak, observing the syntactic, orthographic rules of Armenian, to exclude dialect-foreign language pronunciation.
c) Communicate with peers, juniors and seniors in a polite, respectful manner.
 Value system - a ձ striving to know, love and study the Armenian language.
b) Ability to cooperate, tolerance, respect for the point of view of others.
Methods used - "Training through brainstorming" [6, p. 35], "Discussion in pairs", "Summary in pairs", [6, p. 53], "Reflection on brain attack or brainstorming" [6, p. 35], "Five-line essay" [6, p. 26].
Learning materials - Syntax tables,posters.
Lesson type - New material transfer lesson.
The course of the lesson. Phase I - Until new material is introduced or promoted.
 This:For this stage, we use the "Learning through brainstorming" method.
Students are asked to memorize what they know about the syntaxabout.
  They discuss what they know in pairs and express themselvesopinions.
  Write the voiced opinions in the left corner of the boardor on a poster.
 There are no right or wrong answers.
 With the consent of the class, the opinion expressed by each is written withoutto think that they are wrong, which they will find out later.
Phase II - Reporting or interpretation of new material.
  At this stageWe use the "Discussion in pairs, summary in pairs" method.
 Thus:We instruct them to study for 15 minutes.
 One of the couples reads,the other asks questions, then changes places.
 After the time expiresWhat they did in pairs is explained by two or three pairs in each rowloudly, continuing each other.
 Thus:1. In direct or ordinary syntax, the subject is placed before the footnote.
 For example, that egg of Atom's speech reassured the Apostle a little.
2. The subject does not change its place when the nominal subordinate overlaysIt has a grammatical structure.
 For example, the enemy of my enemyHe is my friend.
3. The subordinate syntax is unchanged when the nominal subordinate node is discounted.
 For example, your sources: crystal calls.
4. The syllable of a subject is a sentence when it is an indefinite verb, andThe footnote is connected with this, here, to mean with words.
  For example, to love means to live the lives of millions of people.
5. It is written after the subject when it should be given to the wordsolemnity, capacity for action when toldsuccessive events.
  For example, one day Harut was very drunkHe fell unconscious in the village, in the middle of the street, the villagers brought him home,They found the right moment to tie him up and take him to Kaghzvan, but only oneHarut woke up and cursed everyone, slapping him furiouslymassacres and breaks the fallen thing.
6. It is written after the subject obligatory footnote, when the author's word is in the direct speech or after the last one և states thatThe direct word belongs to whom.
  For example, what, does Ustan want Armenia?"Go," Maruk asked in surprise.
7. Sometimes subject to avoiding monotonyis written after the first footnote of a sentence with multiple footnotes, followed by the other footnotes.
  Day.,Hambo was going and thinking.
8. In direct syntax, the footnote follows the subject.
  Day.,The sun had already set.
9. If the nominal footnote is without a node, it is always placed after the subordinate.
 For example, he is a lion, I am a lamb.
By observing the samples of fiction, the learners recognize the patterns and manifestations of the circular composition.
 Knowledge will turn into a skill if it is strengthened by training exercises.
  At the end of the work we refer to the opinions voiced during the promotion phase, և the students themselves check what they already know and newwhat he learned.
 If there were wrong thoughts in the initial opinions, they correct them.
Homework - Learn the lesson. The material of the textbook (Hovh. Barseghyan, P. Meytikhanyan, Hayots L., 8th grade, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 84-87), complete the assigned task: write out the fiction
Samples of the subordinate շրջ footnote.
Reflection - Students remember the beginning of the lesson նշում one by one notethe work they did from the beginning to the end of the lesson.
At the end of the lesson, search and logical tasks are performed.
 Nominated:1. In the poetic part, the subject is circled.
 How expressive did the circulating syntax give to the word?
My mother is the door of our hope.My mother is the chapel of our house,Our cradle is my mother,My mother is the castle of our house.
 HSH2. Can we invert the subordinate և footnote given?in the section.
Give reasons.
My mother is small, my mother is poor,My mother is an ordinary mother,My mother in this mother countryNight and strong sun.
 HSH3. By what expressive means is poetry conditioned?the solemnity of the word.
He calls again, he calls incessantlyThe longing for that wonderful land is sleepless,And here are the spreads:My soul flies, flies home.
 HTIt used to be in ancient timesA brave military patriot.
 PAIN!With every second of love I grieve, I say goodbye,I said in my fiery heart, goodbye.
 (WT)Summaries AB - Axel BakuntsAI - Avetik IsahakyanGE - George EminDD - Derenik DemirchyanYES - Yeghishe CharentsPeople - FolkHMS - Hmayak SirasHT - Hovhannes TumanyanXI - Ghazaros AghayanMG - Maxim GorkyShirv - ShirvanzadeSC - Sonik KhachatryanVAN - Vakhtang AnanyanVT - Vahan TeryanVT - Vahan TotoventsR-RaffiLiterature   1. Abrahamyan SG, Arakelyan VD, Kosyan VA, Armenian language II part, Yerevan,Luys Publishing House, 1975, 478 pages.
2. Asatryan ME, Modern Armenian language "Syntax", Yerevan, YSUed., 1987, 365 pages.
3. Gyulbudaghyan SV, Methodology of teaching the Armenian language, Yerevan, "Luys"ed., 2nd ed., 1987, 335 pages.
4. Gyulbudaghyan SV, Modern Armenian language "simple sentence", Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 1988, 288 pages.
5. Ishkhanyan RA, The Syntax of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 1986, page 386.
6. Khachatryan SG, The application of modern methods in school, Gyumri, "Anania Shirakatsi University" publishing house, 2006, 100 pages.
7. Khachatryan SG, Methodology of teaching the Armenian language, Helpto the teacher, Gyumri, "Anania Shirakatsi University" publishing house, 2008, 94 pages.
Information about the author:Zakaryan Susanna Hrant - something. scientist Ph.D., GGPI Armenian language և its teaching Lecturer of the Chair of Methodology, E-mail.
