The cult of the cross is mainly the starting point for Christians.
 The apostle Paul writes about this: "For the word of the cross is foolishness to the lost, but to us who are saved it is the power of God."
 The beliefs of Christian Armenians are conditioned by the worship of the Bible-based cross, according to which many religious words and phrases, phrases and descriptive expressions, comparisons and metaphors, fables and sayings have penetrated the dialect vocabulary.Curses and words of good wishes.
Khach native Armenian word with many word combinations, dialectIt is quite a spacious place with sound modifications and combinationscaptures Hr. In Acharyan's Radical Dictionary, Tent on Lifeguards
to hang a stick, which later became a sign of Christianity, pkhb. sorrow, torment ¦ [2].
It has a wide range of functionalities typical of literary Armeniancross semantic unit (Araratyan, Jugha, Karabakh, Burdur,Tbilissi (Georgia), Karin, Hajin, Hamshen, Malatia, Moks, Mush, Nor Nakhichevan, Shatakh, Ozm, Constantinople, Rodosto, Sebastia, Sweden, Suchava, Van, Aslanbek, Peria և etc.).
Phonetic parallels have been recorded in a number of dialect-speaking places, which are expressed mainly in a vowel աwith the difference of the last word not breathing.
 It is noticeable at the beginning of the wordDeaf throat mainly shows stability in dialects.
 Only Turkish-speaking Armenians have h in front of k, which is explainedin the absence of the consonant խ in literary Turkish.
 The word haç (bark)borrowed from Turkish.
Ա> ա քմային // աօ // էյ // այ // օ ձայնավորական, չ> շ // ճ // ճ շնչեղ with consonant vowel variables, k deaf consonant, also vowelA dialect is recorded with the addition of phonemesin a number of places.
  Swedish's Khtrbek dialect և Kessab dialectkhashk a is added at the end of the word in phonetic synonymsDeafness can be explained by the deafness of the respiratory tract.
 SebastiaIn the dialect version, the vowel is increased.
In other areas we have khaoch (Shatakh), khash (Aslanbek), khach(Mush, Martuni Madina, Bulanukhi Gyabolner, Hamshen, Ashtarak Lernarot), khach (Sasuni Inguznak և Saghdun, Khuti Shen և Taghavank), kheych,he is this khaych (Kabusie) և etc.
in Rakert, Kessab, Beylan, Zeytun, Salmast and elsewhere.
We meet the vowelization of the first vowel (cross) In Artial, in the dialect of Tig Zeytun, the vowel is transferred to the simple vowel, leading to the khechi horse in the sexual syllable.
  In Ayntap և BeylanThe khech sound version is multifaceted; in addition to pointing to a cross, it has "close" 1 Dialectal copies of the article according to the Institute of Language of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenianotes made.
The meaning is igo khechis ("come near me").
 In Aramo, the Khech audio version is "near me"When I make an appointment, he becomes my cross, and "I go to him" (queues for the cross)in the sentence, a cross.
  One can assume this expressionThe meaning is conditioned to cross - to "meet", intersection - "Two"Meeting of paths with literal meanings.
 In the Lori dialect it means to be crucifiedThe meanings of "desirable to meet", "unwanted to meet".
 In this caseThere are cross-root homonyms, the semantic basis of which is commonis the physical image of the cross object առ  It has nothing to do with the crosswith the Christian understanding of the concept.
Khech phonology is also recorded in Haghbat's speech, In the dialect of Tbilissi.
 In Tbilissi (Georgia) it again appears in a multifaceted sense, meaning "icon".
 As can be seen, the reason for the ambiguity of the word cross is the general Christian content of the concepts of cross խ icon.
Khoch phonetic version has a single meaning in Hamshen, but և has a multi-meaning in several dialect areas.
 Thus, in Agulis it means "cross", "church" at the same time, in Zeytun աժամանակ In Akn it is the name of one of the celestial bodies, and in Akhaltsikhe և Yernan he points to the card with the sign of the cross, which the people of Van callThey are spati (we think f + party // game).
 They call it khoch in Van One of the types of grapes.
 Probably the sacramental wine from this grapeThe meaning of the word arose as a result of its use.
In the dialects of Karabakh Ղ Van, the formations with -ik, also increasingly -uk are reduced, respectively:khachik աչ khachluk in the sense of "cross".
The people of Van and Norbayazet add anger to the word cross յ's home determinants, forming the Wrath of the Cross և Home's place names.The House of Cross is the meeting place of the apostles Thaddeus and Bartholomew.
Anger crosses are the khachkars that are located near the monasteries far from the settlements, on the hills adjacent to the fields ևBy faith they become a bulwark against the wrath of God.
"Grots Brots" writes about that. Why is the Cross of Anger said?
because when there is snow or hail, it's not what people do,They consider the wrath of God. և To fight that wrath of Christ
They raise the image of the cross ... in front of the sky և¦ [5].
Cross on the basis of the worship of the material-material symbolThe name Khachatur, which became widespread among Armenians, aroseFrom which the people of Agulis created Khachi և Khachatr, the Ararat dialects - Khachik, Khacho, Khicho, Khechan.
  In the dialect of Gyumushkhane settlement of Giresun, Khachatur is a simple noun:In the sense of "autumn fresh pear".
 One can assume that this is a pearThe species matures on the days of the Feast of the Cross.
One of the dialects of the Western faction is Tigranakert-EasternIn Shamakh there is a cross version with a vowel extension.
 The same version is used in the Mush և Carno dialectsas an oath to confirm what is to be said.
 To witness the cross to the oath of allegianceWe meet in other dialect-speaking places.
 Available in New NakhichevanThe cross // akhach ՝ § the cross is a witness ¦ (= that cross is a witness) the oath.
 When swearing, the people of Mshe simply say the cross, the Armenians of Stanoz - the cross, of Caesarea, ConstantinopleArmenians are a cross.
  What the man from Constantinople said is confirmed by the crusaderin relation.
 As it is noticeable, in this case it was not only provedthe cross, but the part of the sacrament, that is, the symbol of the body of Christ.
In Bavarik we find the cross with a certain և stressful word, that is: "Let the cross be a witness" (for example, "The cross, Shamam, akhri (= at the end) your stone hearttanila yi me kirezman ¦).
 The people of Yerzn have several options for swearing: with a cross-section, with a cross-attachment, an emergency crossin a modified version.
 The people of Van swear to the interlocutor with a real khach khan, the people of Constantinople swear to cross your face with instructions, especially when they consider what the interlocutor said nonsense.
The pavilion holiday dedicated to the Holy Cross, Khachverats, is composed of the word Khach.
  Holy Cross determinant-definite phrase colloquialIn Armenian, phonetic և consonantal sound changes, ras a result of the loss of the vowel becomes sbkhech // spkhech // spkhej // spkhech  (> սըբ + խէչ).
 Geldi Supxeç, yorğanı al, içeri geç is popular among Armenian-Greek-Turkish speakers in Malatia, Evdokia, Caesarea, Ayntap and Turks.(The spy came, take the blanket, go inside) the proverb.
  Following the Holy CrossThe holiday of the Varaga Cross is called Khachin in the words of the people of Marash.
In the Nakhichevan dialect of the Eastern faction, the cross means "September" or "Autumn".
 The origin of the word relatesis the Holy Cross with the Feast of Tabernacles.
  "March's bride,'s cross's!"My daughter (Nakhichevan).
The word khach is composed of na akhach (Akhaltsikhe, Van), khachator (Araratyan, Karabakh), Hazakhach (Karabakh), khachmayr (Marash), khchhanek(Goris), khachpatatuk (Lori), khachhambur (Araratyan, Mush), cross bless// khachokhni (Van, Mush), khachpar (Araratyan, Utik) // khachvor (Agulis),Khachalam (Aries, Salmast, Kyorpalu), Khachalem (Gyumushkhane, Constantinople), Khachalam (Caesarea), Khachkal (Araratyan, Ghazakh, Shirak, Khoy, Van) այլ other religious organizations.
 In the Karabakh dialect, the words khachkal և khachamelik are used in the secular sense, "khachadz" on the door.
It should be added that in the Karabakh dialect the word khachamelik has multiple meaningsAt the same time, as a noun, it means "the cross of Christ".as he's as an adjective - "cross", "cross".
 The same meaning is expressed by Stanoz's cross-polysemous word, which first means "board moving the web's comb", then "cross on the door".Wood!
 It should be noted that dialect dictionaries do not specify whether this is a cross attached to a wooden door or a lock.Cross with an opposite piece of wood.
 In the first case, of course,We would have a deep ritualistic content due to the reality of the five-story house.
 It is known that on the evening before leaving Egypt, after sacrificing animals, God commanded the Jews: §And take a bunch of zopa, թ soak it in the blood in the pelvis և
Spread the blood from the pelvis on the seminal vesicles on it[3]
 The book of Exodus says that God afflicted the Egyptians with no blood mark on their doors.
 It can be assumed that the cross or the cross was placed on the doors by the power of faith, with the expectation of receiving divine pleasure, և has a religious content.
Byurakn Magazine adds cross-rooted formationsHamshen cross - §nig ¦, Swedish cross - ով distinguish by § cross mark,to cross! (Did you cross the door?).
  Crucifixion of Hamshen and Trabzon dialectsThe verbs in the journal are given with the following explanation: ԱկելClose the door, nig
putting (village door sills are wooden, և when horizontallynigui, passing through a vertically placed stick, forms a cross, from whichThis word comes from ¦ [4].
  It is not ruled out that the Swedish dialect may crossto have a "close" explanation.
 We can assume that the Armenians of Cilicia had a custom of crossing the doors of houses.
 That can be explainedby the experience of the Jews.
  It is known that the way of the crusaders passed through Cilicia.
  The Crusaders persecuted dissidents, attacked Muslim settlements and homes, and separated from them, claiming to be Christians.The local Armenians crossed the doors of their houses.
In the religious vocabulary, the cross has been subjected to a literal succession, that is, there has been a loss of the old (secular - HM) meaning of the word § ...replacement of meaning with a new direct meaning ¦ [1].
In a number of formations the word cross appears in its original form:with a secular content.
 The Armenians of Crimea and New Nakhichevan are a customhad not used the cross in secular terms.
 For example, §խաչաձև,The word "cross" was used as a synonym for "cross" (our cross)heaven) expression.
 The "Mass Dove" writes about itThey did it "out of pious fear, not wanting to use the name of the cross on simple things, but to keep the meaning."
The verb to cross the Harput dialect և has secular content:"Cross your arms".
Leaving aside the many words and phrases that have a secular content related to the cross's semantic unit, let us mention thatSometimes there is an interconnectedness of secular և religious content և internal semantic connection.
 Yerevan և Ashtarak of the Ararat dialectThe word khapunj ("bundled spike") is typical of the speeches, which is secularThe religious meaning of the word khachpunj is conditioned by the meaning.
  P. Proshyan writes. §When the field is harvested, the wheat is crucified և brought to the owner as a gift, fruit is taken from him as a gift, this custom has entered և
garden works time. when they finish cultivating a garden,
They bring fruit in that evening and rejoice. the name of this joy
and there is a cross left [7, p. 83].
 The cross unites in some way և!The religious meanings of agapi, ժամ! hour.
 The word cross is synonymousBulanukh Speech Cross ("Cross from wheat stalks")attachment.
Thus, in the territorial versions of Armenian, the word khach appears only in phonetic versions.
 Dialect vocabularyIt is rich in phrases composed of the word cross, descriptive expressions, word combinations, comparisons, metaphors and other formations.
Literature 1. Aghayan E. B., Fundamentals of Linguistics, Yerevan, YSU, 1987, 380 pages.
2. Acharyan H. H., HAB, h. B, Yerevan, YSU, 1971-1979, E-K - 687 pages, pages 333-335.
3. Bible book Old և New Testament, 1997, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin Etchmiadzin և Bible Society of Armenia.
4. "Byurakn", K. Constantinople, 1899, 655 pages.
5. "Grots broc", K. Constantinople, 1874, pp. 117-118.
6. "Mass of the Dove", Theodosia, 1863, p. 202.
7. Proshyan PS, Collection of works, vol. 1, Yerevan, Hayastan Publishing House, 1974, 90 pages.
Information about the author:Mesropyan Haykanush Hovsep - something. scientist candidate, associate professor, Institute of Language of NAS RA, E-mail.
