The uniqueness of the English-Armenian lullabies as original texts of rhetoric is dictated by the fact that the addressee is the child, his world, and the author is the people-parent, mostly women who take care of the child.
 The language of the lullaby text stands out with its emotion and variety of expressive palette.
  Mother:(cradle) և child, child և texts containing praise, praise and admonition, longing and exhortation, blessing and wish. These are the content layers in which the features of the cradle's art are manifested.
 In the texts of the cradles, the supernatural environment is formed,whose characters are magical, supernatural.
 The mother is sincere in what she says, noIt hides feelings, admiration, and frustration from everyday life.
In different historical and cultural contexts, the main function of the cradle is to ensure the baby's sleep, which is carried out by supernatural, gifted or sleepy characters.
  As we have already mentioned, the connection between the child and the mother is mainly expressed in the cradles, of courseThe role of females becomes dominant.
  The narrator factor is used in the text, as it is able to influence the listener (in the case of cradles, the child).
 Both the child and the cradle are observedas active participants in the cradle text.
 The songs that ensure the baby's sleep emphasize the mother-child direct contactand the relationship.
  In every human life, mothers are the first storytellers, sometimes the storytellers.
  The child in the fairy tale morethan it is safe because it grows and grows for the most part supernatural andin a friendly and patronizing atmosphere of donating spirits.
 Sometimes these spiritscan get other names: guardian spirit, child-guarding spirit,guardian spirit.
Often, on the basis of traditional cradles, the mother creates spontaneous, impromptu texts corresponding to her present moment, especially when she has a very intense feeling.
 The child looks likebecomes the cherished person to whom the mother communicatesabout the problem that concerns him, while telling the text of his life.
 The diaper itselfTelling about destiny is an unusual, extraordinary way of communicating,which becomes a special kind of soul for the mother.
In many cradles, it is clear that the mother is applying for a babysitterto the patron images (Holy Mother of God, God, saints, angels) as supernatural forces.
 Let us prove the folklore samples confirming the above.
In the texts of the cradles, the mother sometimes expresses the limitation of her possibilities, therefore she asks the supernatural, supernatural forces to provide welfare, prosperity, and strengthening of the further steps for her child.
 In the content plan of the cradle, he creates an out-of-reality reality with the sub-references of emotions and feelings, using the word units "Heaven" and "garden".
In fact, supernatural characters appear in a supernatural environment, the heroes are in harmony with that environment, their actionsand they are dictated by that very environment.
 The text of the Armenian cradles is heardas a preservative for a child. it is evil, has an evil eye and evil
A magical power to keep the child out of the mind.
²ëïí³Í³Ù³ÛñÝ å³Ñ å³ÑÇ [6, page 55].
The text expresses the idea of ​​prohibition against evil (â³ñË³ ÷ ³Ýã³ñ »ñ¹ Ë³ ÷ ³ÝÇ), at the same time a blessing (²ëïí³Í³Ù³ÛñÝ ³ñ¨¹ å³ÑÇ)The formula մամբ stands out with the incomparable manifestation of the element of folk language thinking (Â¨ë ¹ »µ Ù» ñ »Ù ã³ñ» ñáõ¹).
Thus, the language of the cradle text expresses formulas (wish, blessing, to speak with magical power against evil forces).tendency), which are endowed with supernatural possibilities of wish fulfillment.
 The mother who puts the baby to sleep expresses her most sincere feelings, sacred trembling and bright dreams for the child's futurein a number of cradles, creating an imaginary, fairy-tale world իրfor a child.
 The text of the lullaby represents a unique world.
Usually the mother turns to fairy-tale time, trying to cut herself off from the real world and time.
 Moreover, the depicted world is close to the real, but it is imaginary and unreal.
 Of course, that world is hardis conditional. exists "in time", out of time.
There is no limit to existence in fairy-tale time այ objectification,because time is perceived as an infinite concept.
 In this context, the child is viewed as infinity, infinity, immortalitywith a wreath.
Symbolic characters penetrate the imaginary world created by their mother with their supernatural power.
  Mysticalimages help to create a world where everything is good,full of optimism, shrouded in light.
 In a number of cradles obviouslydepicts fairy-tale characters from the flora and fauna.
  A special role is played by animals, which seemThey are animal-sleeping spirits, accompanying the child to his goodnessin the transitional stages of life.
 Thus:  Day by day, day by day, the deer came,The deer came, the mountains came down.
Bring a sweet sleep to you too.Bring your sea to fill your eyes,Sweet sleep with your sleep, He would satisfy his sweetness with milk [6, p. 56].
The text itself is melodic, a unique softness, a sweet sleep,Sea urchins, sweet milk expressions with accents create the soft and calm atmosphere that is so necessary for a baby to sleep peacefully.
 In other folklore genres, the function of mother is often attributed to deer or deer.
  This:We meet the typical expression of thought in J. Aghayan's fairy tale "The Child of the Forest". Dear child, you are an orphan,Your unfortunate mother was taken prisoner.He's gone, he's lost, he won't come back, He will never breastfeed you again.
He wrapped you in wide arms.He tied it in a swing, saying "nanik".She cried with salty tears,His last "nanny" was crying.Nana, baby, nana!Matsater - tatashor,Retail-cloth,The wind will blow,Pakhre will come, she will breastfeed,Nana, my lamb, nana…Behold, I have come to give you suck,Keep it, keep it like my calf,Pakhra breastfed the child, the child was satisfied and slept [5, pp. 383-384]…As we can see, genre penetration (cradle in a fairy tale)has further enriched the content of the cradle.
From the point of view of the problem that concerns us, the idea of ​​protection from the danger of fairies in English folklore is remarkable.
The fairies appeared as supernatural characters or spiritspoisonous creatures stealing children.
  The idea that in Scotland (և noonly) the fairies stole the baby from the cradle փոխարեն instead of him (fairychangeling) put another child, in our time is already unbelievableseems.
  This same idea is confirmed by the following example. Fairy steals child:
from cradle and leaves fairy substitute [8, р. 45].
 Despite all this, other sourcesThey confirm that fact.
 Ջ. Մ. Barry gives the origin of the fairies
its version. "When a child laughs for the first time, his laughter
is divided into millions of pieces, they are distributed all over the world,this is how fairies appear ”[1, p. 39].
In addition to supernatural characters and supernatural environments, they are well knownsupernatural objects.
  Thus, from the evil eye, from the danger of fairiesIn order to get rid of it, in the English reality, other items of a chest-protective and protective nature were attached to the child's clothes, and in the Armenian language, an eye bead.
The use of a sleeping bead was considered a supernatural means of sleepwe meet more often in Armenian folk tales. A woman put her eyes on him, put a man on her head and fell asleep.
 He slept for a day, brought a woman and took her outHe hurried to sleep, rolled his unsteady, rolled his stone and brought his hat, from abovewhere he put his head on the chin, he put it on the stone [4, p. 349].
  Or Cool, NightingaleThey will beat the seagulls, they are my wine, they will wear the clothes of the calves, they will tie them, they will wear the four-legged robe [4, p. 54].
In the Armenian customary and cultural life, the mother sometimes does not sleepHe uses tricks to reprimand and silence the child. "Sleep or not Sack
Grandpa or Bobo (the name of an imaginary monster that scares children) will come and take it ”[3, p. 381].
  A child who does not sleep in foreign languagesthreatened with the ominous image of an owl.    Willie Winkie is referred to in English life as a sleeping ghostabout.
By the way, there are symbolic images that appear in bothin English or in Armenian cradles (և not only).
 We think that the latter is conditioned by universal psychological patterns of womenwith the commonalities of thinking ուզ emotional world, regardless of ethnicitybelonging.
 The mother's unique appearance towards the child is that the role of the wind interferes with the cradle.
  The wind helps thatThe orphan will be different, the sleep will be closer to the child's eyes.In one of the Armenian cradles, the warm southern wind is swayingև Provides the child with a pleasant sleep state.
 The wind as if of natureelement and pre-element (air) again embodies a supernatural image.You are small, goodbye,The south wind is blowing,Ruri-ruri, ruri, ruri,Let me know, lamb boy.
The upper sheep will suckle you [6, p. 95].
In all cases, at the linguistic level ("south wind") the phrase in one case, in the other case the definition of "golden slumbers" (golden slumbers) become cherished for the mother's emotional state and the childDiscovery of desire.
Smiles await you when you rise.
Thus: You made the puppies cry, Bring sleep to win the eyes. He brought sleep and filled his eyes,  He slept soundly [6, p. 56].
It is obvious that the images of nature are symbolic in the cradles.
 English text mockingbirdIn Armenian, the plug has acquired other functional content,that is, a sleep-inducing property.
  We can say that in the lullaby originals"Inhabitants of nature" appear in the supernatural realm.
  Of courseThe word supernatural has unusual, extraordinary, supernatural meanings [7, p. 429].
Despite all this, it can be said that he created his own inventionIn the world, the mother takes an image of herself բն endows the supernatural:with unusual, extraordinary properties (mention of deer, flounder, vulture, wind in the above-mentioned cribs).
 The meaning and significance of the cradle is that of the childFrom the beginning we give the understanding that nature itself is identified, that is, the child is a part of nature.
 Mom sings these lullabies,with which he seems to entrust his child to the care of mother nature, tryingto ensure his connection with nature, that is, with figurative expressions he envelops the child with filial love for nature.
 AboveThe purpose of the cradles is to show the child nature nature (child-nature), child ևthe unity of the universe (child-earth).
  He is nominated in the cradles. "Perception and feeling of beauty in the harmonious realm of the whole, ևA child's aesthetic function of being like nature.
  The interweaving, combination and harmonization of elements and elements of nature are emphasized by the "English" Armenian lullaby texts.
The description of the other world created by Ororas is describedwith the subtle use of his linguistic means of expression.
 The mother of the soulHe goes through an infinite path of refinement, choosing his mental statefit this or that linguistic unit, the means of depiction.
In general, the border of the real and the unreal in the cradlesis deleted, the interweaving is so spontaneous, so direct,that it is difficult to determine where reality ends and where it beginsthe unreal.
Linguistic reality (lullaby text) expresses the supernatural, the imaginary, the imaginary, respectively.which are always external, out of the ordinaryto the exceptional expression of the mother 's feelings for the child, to whichBoth earthly and heavenly forces are involved.
There are few specimens in English-Armenian lullabies when cradlingthe singer mentions the name of the addressee as giving the child a nameIt was a secret.
  In the early historical context, they were not human namesInstead, they used short expressions.
  Here in the Armenian reality are people instead of a child's nameThey said my beauty, sweetheart or gave the names of the celestial lights:my moon, my star, my shining star, and sometimes the names of animals:Dear cat, dear cat, dear dog.
 Apparently, this phenomenon is possibleexplain with supernatural relations առ beggars.
Our study suggests that lyrical texts are the most commonly used imagerymeans that essentially become a stylistic expression of speechtricks.
 In all cases, the supernatural is related to wordswith magic, with a tendency to go beyond the ordinary meaning of the word հաս to achieve the unusual.
Another telling example is: At the linguistic level, the comparison of Sleep like a lady (or gentleman) as a means of expression-expression, to some extentIt has to do with exaggeration.
 The latter is the highest grade given by the mother to the child.
 The cradle in Armenian cradlesShe praises her child, which is also a supernatural environmentcreates, because in the cradle "a sleeping child can not be king."Nana, my dear king,Dear gold digger,Nana, sacrifice to you,Nana herd you smell [2, page 56].
In our view, repetitive units of cradle texts (same beginning, same end) as well as regular cradle variations are eventuallyThey serve the process of ensuring the child's sleep, creating the illusion of a supernatural environment.
 More emphasis on speech and actionAccelerates the realization of the goal of the cradle.
названия.
  protection spirits, etc. Linguistic-stylistic analysis of the text has:
Armenian lullaby texts. Supernatural beings have different names.
  protective soul,Literature   1. Conference Program և Theses, The Mystery of the Supernatural in a Fairy Tale,Hovh. Tumanyan Museum, Yerevan, 2014, 55 pages.
2. Lalayan E., Works in five volumes, volume 3, "Science" publishing house, Yerevan, 2004, 278 pages.
3. Aghayan E. Explanatory dictionary of modern Armenian.
  Hayastan Publishing House, Yerevan, 1976, 1642 pages.
4. Armenian Folk Tales, Edited by S. Gorgyan S. A., h. XIII, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR    Archaeologist. և ethnography. Institute, Yerevan, 1985, 436 pages.
5. Aghayan J., Works, "Soviet Writer" Publishing House, Yerevan, 1979, 654 pages.
6. Grigoryan R., Armenian Folk Lullaby and Children's Songs, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1970,467 pages.
7. Malkhasiants S., State Publishing House of the Armenian SSR, volume1, Yerevan, 1944, 2409 pages.
10. http:
//www.contemplator.com/ireland/dromore.html:Information about the author: Hasmik Hamlet Matikyan - Armenian Studies in Shirak, NAS RAJunior Researcher of the Center, State Economics of Armenia Lecturer at the Gyumri branch of the university, English language Applicant of the Chair of Teaching Methods, E-mail.
