The formation of a child's personality takes place first of all in the family, անեկան family atmosphere, relationships, upbringingThey have a decisive influence on the harmonious development of the child և mental health.
The child's character, self-consciousness, self-esteem, moral ideas, social attitudes are formed in the family, the child masters the rules of behavior, socialization of the person takes place.
Recently, family relationships have undergone significant changes.
 The number of mobile families consisting of spouses and children has increased.
  The couple in the family has changedfunctions, their value system, attitude towards children, methods of upbringing.
It is very possible to study the changes in family relations, the causes of family conflicts, their impact on the harmonious development of the child's personality.
There are several definitions of "conflict".
 B. Մ. Rebus describes conflict as "incompatible tendencies" in each other's minds.
conflict related to negative emotional emotions ”[4, p. 45].
According to A. V. According to Sergeychuk, "Conflict is a clash of incompatible goals, interests, attitudes, opinions, views of individuals" [5, p. 212].
   Unlike Rebus և Sergeychuk, AM Stolyarenko describes the conflict not as a clash, but as a contradiction. ՏըThe conflict is two
և is a sharp և difficult to resolve contradiction between more people (groups), whichis characterized by conflict, the mutual use of strong means by the opposing parties in order to defeat the other side "[6, p.294].
According to statistics, the main source of family conflictsThe reason is the lack of communication culture, mutual trust, courtesy, attention, kindness, sensitivity.
In fact, conflicts can be caused by psychological incompatibility, sexual problems, misunderstanding of each other's intentions, misinterpretation of behavior, different approaches to morality, debt and responsibilitylack of feeling և etc.
A family is strong when a couple is in a good relationship, when different topics are discussed freely, when the couple has common interests, they are capableThey are condescending զ, the most important thing is when love is the basis of the family.
Emphasizing the role of family և family relations in the harmonious formation of the child's personality, we, through a questionnaire, which was attended by 40 married քների mobile families լայնWe discovered the frequency of conflicts.
As a result of the questionnaire we received the following picture.Diagram 1:Conflict frequency setting ված mobilein familiesIn fact, conflicts are more common in extended familiesThey originate from mobile families.
The family is expanded, where besides the spouses, there are other relatives besides their children.
 [1]The following are the types of family conflicts identified as a result of the study and their main causes.
1. Conflict between a married couple և.
 Conflict in a man-woman relationship can be caused by psychological incompatibility, the "heavy" character of one of the couples, sexual dissatisfaction, infidelity, inconsistency of worldview, value system, inability of a woman to solve everyday problems, financial problems, etc.
The conflict may be due to the crisis of family relations.
 The first crisis appears on the 1st of marriageyear, especially when a child is born in the family, the second in the 3-7th year of marriage, the third in the 17-25th year.
   Marital conflicts often arise because of the physical and psychological incompatibility of couples.
 Psychological compatibility depends on the type of temperament of the spouses ևwith character traits.
 How similar are the spouses?The more they irritate each other, the more they get tired of each other.
A harmonious couple can be, for example, a sanguine husband and a melancholicthe woman.
Physical compatibility is conditioned by the structure of the body of a woman and a man, by the features of the genitals, which are essential in sexual life.
  AlreadyProven sexual dissatisfaction in intimate lifeProblems cause coldness and indifference of men and womenin a relationship.
When starting a family, it is necessary to take into account that the final formation of the male organism takes place at the age of 25,and the final formation of a woman's body at the age of 18-20.
 Except:That is, men's sexual orientation lasts longer thanwomen.
 Therefore, from a biological point of view, it is desirable to form a pairThe man must be older to have sexharmony [2, p. 224] (see Table 1).
Age of female-male sexual harmony Table 1.Gender:Woman:Male:ratio:AgeAnother common occurrence of marital conflictsThe reason is to consider the man as a source of finance only.
 The idea that family members are financially dependent on menThey start to put pressure on him and have a negative effect on his psyche.
 As a result, his connection with his wife and then with his children weakens.
There are also families where it is quite highThe level of conflict, the peace of the family is disturbed, there is tension in interpersonal relations.
 They are: o erotic families where the couple is experiencing anxietyhigh level, sleep disturbance, aggression,o Crisis families where spouses are hostile to each other, do not take into account each other's interests, do not tend to compromise, o Problem families, where as a result of existing problems, difficult living conditions, the family finds itself in an unstable situation.
 Constant quarrels and conflicts definitely affect like marriageon the mental health of both the couple and the child.
As a result of the conflict between the parents, the child can haveFeelings of guilt, believing that he was the cause of the conflict.
 Some:In some cases, the child may feel fear.
 This is observedespecially when the child is witnessing a parental argumentor scenes of violence.
 Such children live in sin and fearIf they feel isolated and restless, they may have nervous, psychosomatic or other illnesses.
It should be noted that for some children the conflict becomes a common occurrence.
 Later, in adulthood, they show the same indifference to the people around them, to the phenomena,They become cold-hearted and have a low level of empathy.
 The parents of these children, being obsessed with finding out about relationships, do not notice that their child acquires negative character traits, commits unacceptable actions, exhibits antisocial behavior.
2. Conflict in parent-child relationships.
  The parent in the familymay have conflicts with children of different ages.
 ReasonIt is the parent's ignorance of the age-psychological peculiarities of the child, the lack of mastery of the upbringing, the failure to understand the child's intentions, to consider him / her always a small, incapable person.
 One:The transition from one stage of age to another is accompanied by a crisis, which is not always the caseIt is going smoothly.
 The crisis can cause tension in relationships, especially at the age of three և in adolescence.
The cause of the three-year crisis is the existing controversyby "satisfying" the child's needs.
  Children of this:In the region they become stubborn, stubborn, do everything they wanton the contrary, they show a negative attitude towards adultsalthough it should be noted that the child's negativity is not manifested towards everyone. It is highly selective and is aimed specifically at those who try to suppress its freedom.
 Adults need to know that the three-year-old crisis is transientindicates that the child is preparing to move on to the next agestage.
 Parents' awareness, their tolerance is weakThey do not allow the temperature in the parent-child relationship to decrease, to create a gap.
A lot of conflicts arise during adolescence, whichis conditioned by the psychological, physical and sexual nature of adolescentswith changes in life.
  Adolescence itself is considered a critical age, at this age it is more importantThese are warm family relationships, mutual trust, respect, and mutual understanding.
 At this age, the problem of "fathers and sons" often arises.
 In one case, a teenager begins to compare his ideas of an "ideal parent" with real parents.There is a huge difference between "ideal" and "real" parents.
In the other case, the teenager, who has started physical development ևprocess of puberty, begins to consider himself մեծ the greatestto demand that he be treated as an adult.
  All teenagers withoutexceptionally, they have that aspiration.
  Parents who continueThey have serious problems treating a teenager like a small child.
In extreme cases, the parent-child relationship is strainedare manifestations of nervousness, depression, violence.
"There are conflicts in the parent-child relationship."because of the wrong upbringing.
  A parent always strives for his childmake it exemplary, flawless by imposing harsh sanctions, rudeby behaving, encouraging little, and sometimes showing cruelty.
 No.Appropriate punishment, parental rudeness, cruelty in a child lead to two extreme manifestations. In the first case, the child grows up
is malicious, aggressive, in the second case, insecure, complicated.
At a young age, a child's aggression is manifested in the fact that:The child starts to take out the doll's eyes, deliberately breaks the toys,tear the flowers, hit the cats and dogs in the yard with a stone.
 Preferred:to play with "aggressive" toys - weapons, pistols, arrows and bows, etc.
Then the child's aggressive tendencies towards the people around him are revealed.
 The child uses physical force against the weak, tries to oppress them, humiliate them, cause pain.
Multiple observations have shown that the authoritarian style of parentschildren grow up depressed, insecure, self-contained, constrained,non-communicative.
 They are not self-confident, they can not do it on their ownmake decisions, organize your own life and work.
3. Conflict in child-child relationships.
 Children:There are several reasons for the conflict in the relationship.
  First:The reason is the lack of attention to the child.
 As a rule, the birth of the second child in the family causes the child to feel rejected and neglected, which can turn into hatred.to a parent as well as to a sibling.
 After the birth of the second childParents should be more attentive to the firstborn and develop a positive attitude towards the newborn.
 It depends only on the parentThe nature of child-child relationships.
Second in the child-child relationship conflictThe reason is that the parent discriminates between children.
 "In Armenian families, it is 'normal' to divide boys and girls between parents."
 Mothers usually love boys by giving them awayprivileges, and fathers treat girls in the same way.
 The child understands and feels the parent from an early ageHe begins to feel disgusted with his brother or sister.
Conflict with other family members.
 If we compare extendedընտանի mobile families, then we will see that in extended familiesConflicts arise that simply cannot arisein mobile families.
It is an accepted tradition in the Armenian reality when a boy gets married, lives with his wife in a paternal family, where, besides his parents, his brothers, sisters and other relatives live.
 The larger the family, the more difficult it is to maintain a friendly atmosphere.
  Studies of many families have shown that:In extended families, the conflict mainly arises between the "mothers-in-law" of the bride.
  They can cause conflictsLiving conditions, financial problems, differences in education level, maternal jealousy, self-affirmation of the brideaspiration, different approaches to child rearing,incompatibility of character, temperament, etc.
 There are conflictsIt arises among other members of the family when the issue of material well-being and inheritance arises.
At first glance, this type of conflict seems to have an impactdo not affect the mental development of the child, but when the child witnessesIt happens when parents argue, insult, discreditone to the other, his mental state also changes.
 Conflict situationmakes the child cold-hearted, uncommunicative, cruel, inattentive, aggressive,rude or insecure, self-contained, depressed and indifferent.
Summarizing the work done, we came to the conclusion that the unhealthy atmosphere of the family, the conflicting relations between the spouses definitely have a negative impact on the child.on.
 The child, who is always in a tense, stressful state, has a "heavy" character, is not able to establish relations with peers, adults, has inadequate, low self-esteem.
Arguments and conflicts are inevitable in any family,so every adult couple should be sober,that is responsible for educating and raising healthy peoplea child.
 That is why the family should:1. Minimize the number of conflicts, and in case of occurrencesolve them quickly,2. Create a peaceful, calm atmosphere in the family's physical ֆիզfor mental development3. Establish neighborly relations with both the child and all family members based on love and respect.
Literature   1. Sedrakyan SA Family psychology. Yes!
 Urartu University, 2010456 pages.
2. Ilyin EP Differential psychophysiology of men and women. СПб.:
 Peter,3. Loban N.A. Conflictology.
 UMC - Minsk.
 Published by MIU, 2008. 471p. 4. Rebus B.M. Psychological foundations of school management. - Stavropol.
 SGPI. 1990.
5. Sergeychuk A.V. Sociology of management. - SPb.
 Business Press, 2002. 240p.6. Stolyrenko A.M. General and professional psychology. - M.
 ЮNITI-DANA, 2003. Information about the author:Mirzoyan Vanane Khachik - care. scientist candidate, assistant,
VSPH, Email.
