The natural boundaries of Mahal crossed the Yernjak River to the east.in the north by the Vayots Dzor mountain range, in the west by the Arpa River, in the south by the border to the Araks River.
 It bordered on the eastAzat-Tsirani, from the north to Daralagyaz mahalles, from the west to Yerevanto the vilayet.
XVII-XVIII centuries There were 33-80 settlements in Darashamb's mahal.
Mahal suffered in 1605. Shah Abbas I (1587-1629)'s deportation, in which dozens of settlements were destroyed, but for several decades
Then a small part of the Armenian population returns and settles in their homelandin the villages.
City of Nakhichevan.
 The city of Nakhichevan was the capital and administrative center of the region of the same name, ruled by Tuman-e Nakhichevanresidence.
  The city is located 8.5 km northwest of the Araks River, on the right bank of the Nakhichevan River, at the foot of Mount Gharachugh.
 The cityThe political life of the Armenian people has played a great role since ancient times.in economic, administrative, social and cultural life.
The Armenian legend connects the place name Nakhichevan with the first place where the ancestor Noah landed.
 Written sources for this legend:We find ancient information about a Jewish historian of the 1st centuryAt Hovsep Plavios. "Nokos (ancestor Noah, H. P.), with his family
When he went out, he offered sacrifices to God and gave a feast to his familywith.
 The Armenians still call that place a place to go down ”[12, p. 54].
 This legend is reflected in medieval Armenian and foreign authorsabout.
  Thus, Ghazar Jahketsi writes: "In 1539 the world was built by Noah
"Nakhijan", the same legend is told by a European traveler,Missionary Nalyan. "After the flood, the former city was Armenian."
Nakhchivan, because the former descendants of Noah's sons or the former settlementfor the sons of Noah were born, that they might not go down into other parts of the world.ի to say that Noah's tomb is there. "
  The name of Nakhichevan was differentAccording to the Jesuit preacher Willodd, according to him, Noah was not measuredThis area և built a city, which is why it was called Nakhchuan[2, pp. 496-497].
In our bibliography V-XIII centuries. The place name Nakhichejan is frequent
Meeting with the names Nakhchavan, Nakhchivan, Nakhchivan.
 ArmenologyThey did not refer to the etymology of the mentioned place names.
 The aboveFrom the toponyms only a leaflet to the etymology of the name NakhchavanGerman Armenologist Hübschmann referred to "Nachich or
Nakhuch ytk. a name + avan = a town of a forerunner or a forerunner ... »[13, p. 385].
 Ours:According to him, the name Nakhchavan was one of the most common names in the colloquium of the Armenian people, such as the names Nakhchuan or Nakhchivan.
 Nakhchavan also meant to go downplace: First, initial, settlement, residence, so usAll names are acceptable and familiar to you.
 The place-name Nakhichevan had different names among foreign peoples: the Greeks called it Nakhchivan, the Arabs - Nash, Neshu, the Persians - Nakhua,Nakhchivan, Nashua, Nagshijahan, the Turks called it Nagshijahan [2,page 497].
Julfa.
  Julfa, one of the oldest settlements in Armenia, XVII century.At the beginning it had 2,000 households or 10,000 Armenians [25, p. 74].
 Interest:During the deportation of Abbas I in 1605, it was completely destroyed and the population was deported to Persia.
  68 years after these events in 1673.According to Chardin, a French traveler who visited Julfa on April 13, 1945, the city had 30 families, all of them Armenian [26, p. 303].
 Julfa place nameIn Armenian historiography, Jugha, Tsogha, Jugha are mentioned, and in the 17th century.From the beginning of Old Julfa (to distinguish it from New Julfa based in Isfahan)for H. P.).
  Foreign historians and travelers called itpage 410].
The people of Jugha used to check the name of their place of residence belowmanner. Ani began to be destroyed and Julfa became more prosperous, which was considered one of her
part or branch, that is, branch-a Jugha [23, p. 173].
 Of course, this does not correspond to the reality, as the name Jugha is first mentioned by the historian Movses Khorenatsi in the 5th century. [22, pp. 84-85].
 According to Ghazar Chahketsi, after the destruction of the city of Ani"Half of the population went to Jugha in disarray ..." [16, p. 633].
  Most likely, part of Ani's population settled after the fall of Aniin Jugha, playing a huge role in the XV-XVII centuries. In economic and cultural life, especially this period coincided with the period of the fall of Ani and the development of Julfa.
  On this occasion, Leonwrites. "A number of side circumstances speak in favor of this tradition.
  First of all, the people of Jugha are completely isolatedThey formed an ethnographic group with their own dialect.
  Not a small thingsays the fact that Jugha did not bring its commercial fame from ancient times, but only after the final destruction of Ani դառնալ became uninhabited (XIII-XIV centuries).
 Finally, one thing that gives the people of Jugha the right to be considered the heirs of Anetsi is his art, which againgives him an island-like figure in the Araks gorge.
 The monuments of that art are the khachkars of Jugha, which represent a bottomless luxury of ornament.
  Such a delicate artistic taste,Such flights of creative imagination could have arisen'sdevelopment of the art whose classical homeland was Shirak ”[8, pp. 236-237].
The city of Jugha was located on the left bank of the Araks River, more than 2 kmlength, from east to west, from Araks to the nearby mountains, 400500 m wide.
  The districts of Jugha, founded between the mountain ranges, also included the coastal plains of the Araks, where the ruins and traces of urban buildings such as a bridge, a caravanserai, the church of Andreordi, a cemetery and other structures could be seen.
 The left bank of the Araks River, where Jugha was founded, is a rather deep and long, narrow gorge, which the people of Jugha called Tsakuta gorge, Tsakut.
  Magharda mountain range in the eastern part of JulfaIt bends to the south, and the Jugha mountain range, the heights of which are calledTapi Mountain, Hazaran, Dzorut Mountains, corner extends north toThe upper stream of Yernjak river.
 Due to this position, a small plain with small hills and mounds appeared in Tsakuta gorge, whereJulfa was spread [3, pp. 5-6].
 Ancient information about Julfabelongs to Movses Khorenatsi. "... Zeris Avans Khram և zughay և:
զ Խոշակունիս ... »[22, էջ 177].
 Among the medieval architectural monuments of Julfa were Amenaprkich Monastery, St. Astvatsatsin, St. Gorg,St. Minas, St. John, St. Jacob, the Most Holy Trinity or the UpperChurches of Katan, Andreordi, Pombloz և city cemetery, which was built in 1648. According to the data, it had 10 thousand well-preserved khachkars,
In 1903-1904 - 5 thousand, in 1929 - 3 thousand, and in 1973 - 2707 [3, pages 24, 34].
 2005The last khachkars of Jugha were barbarically destroyed in December with the permission of the Azerbaijani authorities.
Jughan, a famous city in the Nakhichevan region, plays a huge roleplayed in the economic and cultural life of medieval ArmeniaGaining great fame not only in our homeland, but also within its bordersoutside India to Europe, but unfortunately in 1605 Due to the deportation organized by Shah Abbas I, the developing economic and cultural life of the "God-fearing village" was disrupted and never again!
was not restored.
We will start the description of Darashamb mahal villages from the east,from the settlements located on the right bank of the Yernjak River, gradually moving to the north-west.
  On the right bank of Yernjak river, 500 mAt a distance, the village of Aprakunik or Aprakunis is located [14, pp. 35-36].
 To the earliest mention of the settlementwe meet in 1379 handwritten manuscript. "... No. PE (1379) wrote, i
Geoghs Aprakuniats, to the door of St. Sargis, to the days of Malakia the hermit ... "[6, p. 532].
  The two greatest thinkers of medieval Armenia, Hovhan Vorotnetsi, taught at the school of Aprakunyats Monastery.Grigor Tatatsin.
  1379 Hovhan Vorotnetsi Tat University
He moved to Aprakunyats Monastery և after teaching for two yearsHe re-established himself in Tat, entrusting his genius student Grigor Tatats with the teaching of the school of Aprakuneats Monastery.
 The purpose of the temporary settlement in Nakhichevan was to fight against the Catholic propaganda.
 1 km north-east of Aprakunis to Yernjak riverThe village of Aparaner was located on the right bank.
  XVII century At the beginning of the 19th century, the residence of the leader-bishop of the Armenian Catholics was moved here from the city of Nakhichevan.
 The Catholic Armenian population of Aparan in the 18th halfHe converted to Islam and the settlement was renamed Bananaar [14, pp. 80-81].
Kuznut-Araz was located 4 km south-west of Aparanthe villages [24, p. 152].
The village of Saltagh was located 500 m north of the village of Aparaner.
 This:The settlement was built in the XV-XVI centuries. Aparan was the district of the village, it was built
was on the slabs of the foot of Mount Odzasar, from where it originatedHis name was Sal-i-Tagh, the inhabitants of the latter were Catholic Armenians, who:They later converted to Islam [14, pp. 67-71].
  Yernjak riverThe villages of Jamaldin, Kizilja were located on the left bank, and the villages of Aravsyak upstream [24, pp. 153-158].
On the north-western slope of Mount Odzasar, in the middle course of the Yernjak River, are located the villages of Norashen and Gyaljarajur, the latter dating back to the 19th century.The visible ruins prove that it dates back to the XVII-XVIII centuries. had 700 households
Armenian population [24, pp. 156-157].
  Part of the population of Norashen is CatholicHe was Armenian, the other part was apostolic.
  Archimandrite Aristakes Sedrakianmentions that the name Norashen indicates that it is a newly established settlement,but his observation is incorrect, since the settlement for the first timeis mentioned in 1665. in the manuscript memoir. "... from the land of Yernjakay,
from the village to say Norashen ... ”[20].
  He erred, thinking that NorashenIt is the village of Shahbunis mentioned by J. Chahketsi [14, pp. 82-83].
 However, Shahbunis was located in the upper reaches of the Nakhichevan River, on its right bank.
Khoshkashen was located at the northwestern foot of Odzasar MountainThe village, the majority of whose population was Armenian Catholic.
 XVIII century Armenian in the middle of the village
Part of the population converted to Islam, while others emigrated to Izmir and Europe [2, p. 367].
 We meet the ancient mention of the settlement with Movses Khorenatsi. «... զերիիս ավանցն զԽրամ և:
զՋուղա և զԽոշակունիս ... »[22, էջ 85].
 On the right bank of Yernjak river, Meghratsor rockThe village of Shahkert (Ghazanchi *) was located at the foot of the mountain.
  Her nameշահ was examined as Shah's learner, probably Khas was declared ևHe paid the taxes directly to the Shah's court.
 XVIII century In the middle, the people of Shahkert migrated to Shushi, where they founded the Ghazanchetsots district and the Church of the Holy Savior (Ghazanchetsots) [2, p. 362].
Let us now present his belonging to the Nakhichevan River Basinsettlements located along.
  12 km south-east of the city of Nakhichevan, on the left bank of the Nakhichevan River, was located the famous territoryOne of the settlements is Astapat [7, p. 46].
 About the name AstapatThe following tradition existed among the Armenians of Nakhichevan,451 Bring the bodies of the Armenian commander Vardan Mamikonyan and the soldiers who died with him after the battle of Avarayr
քում In the monastery of this settlement (later called St. Vardan) is Astto cover (in the wall) [4, page 59].
 Astapat is the first in written sourcesIt is even mentioned near Tovma Artsruni when locating the village of Khram."... in the name of Khrami, which is under the monastery of Astapat ..." [5, p. 179].
  1605During the deportation of Shah Abbas I, his entire population moved to Persia.
 Later, a part of the population succeedsto return to his native settlement.
 1736 Abraham of Crete is coming to Astapat
Catholicos and describes the deplorable condition of the village. "And then I went down
The blessed village of Astapat ... գ although at least but deserted, uninhabited, uninhabited, that some poor people found ... ”[1, p. 78].
 XIX century in the beginning
Abbas Mirza, the Persian heir to the throne, displaces the population of Astapat and relocates the newly established village of Tazakeand, 3 km north of the village.(Tazagyugh HP).
  Abasabad fortress is being built on the place of Astapat1827 It was captured by Russian troops in July.
  Nehram, Kosha-Diza, Karakhambegli, Badashkhan Armenians were located around this fortress.գյուղ Villages with mixed Muslim populations [24, p. 132].
3 km south-east of Astapat was the settlement of Shambu gorge, which was located on the site of the historic village of Khram.
 In the sources:until 1650 was known as Darashamb [11, p. 627], and in 1675. Shambu
dzor. "... in the province of Nakhchavan, which is the gorge of Shamb gorge ..." [21, p. 141].
  It was located 8 km south-east of the city of Nakhichevan, on the left bank of the AraksThe village of Gharaghush [7, p. 44], whose Armenian population was Catholic;like fellow believers in the XVIII century. He converted to Islam in the middle of the 19th century.
 4 km west of Nakhichevan city, on the right bank of Nakhichevan river, was the village of Tambat[2, p. 504] (later Tmbul settlement H. P.).
 The earliest evidence of the settlement is found in Movses Khorenatsi. "... to the limit
Goghtan, who are Tambat ... ”[22, p. 85].
 It is located 2 km south-east of Tambatwas the village of Yamkhana.
 The village of Bulgan was located 1 km south of Yamkhan[25, p. 133].
 Yarmja was located 3 km north-west of Nakhichevanthe village.
 On the right bank of the Chahuk River was Shmrtan (later Shakhmahmut)settlement H. P.) the village [7, pp. 45, 58, 62].
 3 km north of Shmrtam, Chahuk riverThe village of Chahuk was located on the left bank.
  It is mentioned in the sources since 1640. "... in the year ROH we started to build the church in Chahka, that:
St. Garabed to Christ John, April 5 (5) day of the Lord of the Resurrection ”[10, p. 789].
 They were located between the villages of Shmrtan and ChahukThe small Muslim villages of Khalili, Uzunoba, Hasan-agha, Kerim-bek-diza, Kuli-bek-diza, Nazarabad.
  3 km north-east of Nakhichevan is the village of Kultapa, 1 km north of NakhichevanMarmarza-diza, Oruch-diza are placed along the left bank of the river.Didvar, Surab, Khalkhali, Salasust, Tirkesh, Shada, Kuradnyok, Okhbun,The villages of Karabakh, Verin Mazra, Kulius.
  10 km from Nakhichevan city8 villages with Muslim and mixed population are located in the north-west, so, 3 km west of Chahuk village is located SustThe village, from which the villages of Nagajir and Khanjap are located to the north.
 On the right bank of the Chahuk River in its upper reaches are located Bzgov, Itkran,Gyarmachatakh, Janikent, on the left bank, Sultan-Bek villages.
 4 km west of Chahuk village is located Khok village, 2 km north-west of itShakhtak և Gharabaklar villages, north-west of them - Hurarkh,Yurchi hirdosar, Tananam villages [24, pp. 136-146].
To the west of Mahal, on the southern slope of the Vayk mountain range:35 km north-west of the city of Nakhichevan, the village of Aznaberd was located [2, p. 505].
 The settlement dates back to the XIX century. The observed ruins prove that
the latter in XVII-XVIII centuries. It had a population of 700 Armenian households [24, pp. 132-133].
 3 km south of Aznaberd was the village of Yaghbin, 2 km east of this: Khartsthe village [9, pp. 10, 64].
 The village of Manl was located 3 km south-west of Kharts.
 It was located downstream of the Shahapunik River, on its left bankShahapunik village.
 The settlement was spread along a rather deep gorge, on the eastern side of which a huge rock was located Shahapunikthe castle [4, p. 271].
 The village of Nors was located 3 km east of Shahapunik.
The village of Otsop, Atsop (later Badamlu settlement H.P.) was located on the right bank of the Shahapunik river.
  The settlement is mentioned for the first time1292 in the memoir of the written manuscript. "... and the letter of God was written in the province of Shahapun, in the monastery which is most blessed մեր
God-fearing village called Otsop ... ”[21, p. 132].
A tributary of the Nakhichevan River on the right bank of the Kuki, south of Kuki MountainThe village of Kuki was located on the slope.
  1471 The memoir of the manuscript testifies: "My book was written by a number of Armenians in the 16th century
horrible in the valley of Shahapuneats in a village called Kuki, under the patronage of St.Thousands of this and St. Katughikeits. Of the Virgin and St. Stepanos and Geghamij
St. Gregory and St. Nshanis and other united Vardanats St. my martyr ... "
[15, p. 148].
  The memoir testifies that Cook in the XV century. quite large
It was a village.
 10 km south of Kuki village on the right bank of Kuki river,The village of Armavashen was located.
 It was located on the right bank of the Kuki River in a gorgeThe village of Akori.
  In the upper reaches of the Nakhichevan River, Bjnagh was locatedthe village town.
  4 km south of Bjnagh, on the left bank of the Nakhichevan River, was the village of Ezatunk.
  2 km south of Bjnagh, to the right of Nakhichevan riverOn the shore was the village of Khndzorak.
 The villages of Gomer, Kajadzor and Babunk are located on the left bank of the Nakhichevan River.
 The village of Tigen was located on the right bank of the Nakhichevan River.
  It was located on the right bank of the Shahbuz RiverThe village of Agarak.
 It is first mentioned in 1604. flourishing manuscript.
"... I tied this book of mine to the capital of Hamit Argsa" (9, p. 135) from the village called Agrak Twin RZG (1604).
 They were located a little further from thisThe villages of Krtn and Taterk [18].
 2 km east of these villages, quite rockyThe village of Karakap was located in the area.
Thus, the mahalla settlements of Darashamb in the Nakhichevan region, which were located on mountain slopes, river banks, valleys ևin the plains, surviving from ancient times to the XVII-XVIII centuries,They were destroyed, abandoned and deserted.
 Most of the villages in Mahali are urbanThey were settlements, ancient Armenian settlements, culture and literaturecenters.
 The impetus for the eviction of Armenians from the settlements of Mahal was the policy of persecution of Armenians by Persia, as a result of which in the XVIII century. In the middle of the 19th century, the mass of the Armenian population resumed with a new impetus
emigration.
  Many of the settlements of Mahal were destroyed, the rest,Deprived of the Armenian population, a small number of Muslim nomads settledWith the tribes, it was abolished, some of the place names were distorted.
Literature   1. Historiography of the Cretan Abraham by Catholicos AbrahamNatr-Shahin from Persia, Vagharshapat, 1870, print. s. Etchmiadzin, 129 pages.
2. Alishan J., Sisak, Venice, 1893, by Mkhitaryan Vans, I. S. Lazarus,
1893, 522 pages.
3. Ayvazyan A., Jugha, E., 1984, "Soviet writer" publishing house, 50 pages.
4. Ayvazyan A., Materials on the Armenian historical monuments of Nakhichevan, PBU, N 2, 1971, pp. 271-277.
5. Ayvazyan A., The historical and architectural monuments of Nakhichevan,E., 1978, "Hayastan" publishing house, 131 pages.
6. A book of adjectives that calls for the desired paradise, composed by LazarusAtsban Vardapet Chahketsyu.
 For the glory of Holy Etchmiadzin, K. Constantinople, 1735,
704 pages.
7. The story of Archimandrite Tovma Artsruni in the house of Artsrunyats, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910, Aghaniants Publishing House, 529 pages.
8. Memoirs of Armenian manuscripts of the 14th century, compiled by L. Khachikyan,
E., 1950, USSR Academy of Sciences Press, 757 pages.
9. Lalayan E., Nakhchivan or Nakhichevan Police District, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1906, Reprinted from Ethnographic Magazine, 70 pages.
10. Leo, Collection of Poems, vol. G, E., 1973, "Hayastan" publishing house, 511 pages.
11. Memoirs of the 17th century of Armenian manuscripts (1601-1620), vol. A, composed by V. Hakobyan, A. Hovhannisyan, E., 1974, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, 828 pages.
12. Memoirs of the 17th century Armenian manuscripts (1621-1640), vol. B, composed by V. Hakobyan, A. Hovhannisyan, E., 1978, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, 940 pages.
13. Memoirs of the 17th century of Armenian manuscripts (1641-1660), vol. C,
made by V. Hakobyan, E., 1984, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, 1015 pages.
14. Ancient Greek sources, A., Josephus Plavios, Dion Cassius, translation from the original, preface աբ footnotes: S. Krkyasharyan, E., 1976, Publishing House of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, 267 pages.
15. The names of the ancient Armenian place, about the historical topography of the Armenian world, with researches, were written by Hübschman, translated by H.Pilezikjian, Mkhit. Ukhten, Vienna, 1907, by Mkhitaryan Vans, I. S.
Lazarus, 450 pages.
16. Antiquities of the Homeland in the province of Yernjak, the work of AristakesRev. Sedrakian, Vagharshapat, 1872, in the printing house of the Holy Catholicos of Etchmiadzin, 176 pages.
17. Hovsepyan G., Khaghbakyank or Proshyank in Armenian history, partC, New York, 1942/43, 305 pages.
18. Matenadaran, manuscript N 4521.
19. Matenadaran, manuscript N 3468.
20. Matenadaran, manuscript N 4497.
21. Matenadaran, manuscript N 148.
22. Smbatyan M., Description from St. Garabed Monastery to Yernjakay and its surroundings, Tpghis, 1904, printing house Movses Vardanyan, 608 pages.
23. The story of our Holy Father Movsis Khorenatsi in Armenian (hereinafter:Movses Khorenatsi), Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910, Aghaniantsi printing house, 430 pages.
24. Vruyr A., ​​Jugha, PBH, N 4, 1967, pp. 170-180.
Information about the author:Hrachya Yerani Panosyan - Candidate of the Institute of History of NAS RA, E-mail:
