The pastures of the alpine-subalpine zone are of special importance for the agriculture of the Republic of Armenia.
 Pasture protection և:It should be taken into account when discussing issues of rational use. "current phenomena of climate change.
  The widespread occurrence of pasture privatization and leasing, irregular, uncontrolled exploitation contribute to their rapid degradation.
 This phenomenon especiallyIt is catastrophic for low-income communities, especially their neighborsin areas [1].
That's why we chose it for our studyLocated on the northwestern slope of Mount Aragats, directly adjacent to the Pemzashen community, in a northwestern position, near the alpine zone20-350 slope, an area of ​​about 2.5 hectares, which in early spring, It serves as a pasture during the breeding season, and then as a road leading to the pasture, that is, a double vulnerable area.
Pemzashen community is considered to be one of the poorest communitiesOne in the Republic of Armenia has only 400 hectares of arable land, 1,200 hectares of pastures, about 100 square meters of agricultural land per capita.
There are about 350 hectares of abandoned quarries in the community.
 High in the communityis the poverty rate?
Pastures adjacent to the village, Aragats slopeThey have different slope positions and slopes.
 In this period there are many basic exposures of slopes.
 The mentioned area, which is the lower border of the Alpine zone, serves as a pasture.
The soil cover is mainly slippery, basically with clay cover, where the slip layer varies between 10-15 cm.
 The climate of the area is temperate continental, with a series of well-expressed seasons.
  Precipitation falls mainly in spring, April and mid-June.
 The summer is very dry, with occasional showers.
 The second precipitation regime intensifies in autumn, in October-November.
 Stable snow coverIt is approved from November to the beginning of April.
  The area is dominated by herbaceous cereals, currently due to irregular overgrazing the share of useful plants has decreased.
 During the last five years, the monitoring of the mentioned area outlined not only the development of vegetation and slope erosion, but also the slope landslide.promoting the following conditions: Violation of the pasture regime in early spring or late springin the fall, especially for small cattle, domesticmovement of animals during the spring active sprouting when:the soil layer is very wet,- Serving as a constant movement of animals, road erosion in the area has intensified, over time turning into furrow.
 At the bottom of the slopes it has already been extended by one meter ևdeeper ravines.
  Deepening of gorges և furtherHeavy rains also contribute to the flooding processThe rains and hailstorms, as a result of which the mudslides became more active.
The preliminary observation of the area was made on 30.06.2010. ASPU
During the educational internship of the Department of Geography, with the direct participation of students.
 Further study was performedthrough periodic observations։ calculations.
    Research methodology.
 Selected area, about 2.5 hectares,It was divided into conventional equal squares with an area of ​​100x100 m.
 Measured in each square of the area with the help of GPS Etexs 20 deviceThe existing և missing areas բ of the vegetation cover were calculated as a percentage relationship.
  The geographical coordinates of the area are givenWGS 84 UTM zone 38 system (Table 1).
Fig. 1 Signaling on site 14.07.2010
Geographical coordinates of the study area                                                                                                               Table 1.Date:Area boundary number numbersGeographical:coordinates:Pillow of the sea
mak.1840.1 m:1849.7 m.  1866.7 m.1892.7 m:1887.6 m:1876.1 m.* First observation: July 14, 2010. The maximum result of the existing և absent areas of vegetation in the separated squares of the area was 78.4% (5 squares) and the minimum was 22.5% (10 squares), according to the preliminary calculation. The total average value of the vegetation of the studied area is 68.2%.
Accordingly, they are presented in the following observationsthe results.
* The second observation was made on August 14, 2010. The maximum result was 61% (2 squares), and the minimum was 12.5% ​​(8 squares), according to the preliminary calculation, the total average value is 48.8%.
* Third observation: September 12, 2010.The maximum result was 52% (2 squares), and the minimum was 2.5% (10 squares), according to the preliminary calculation, the total average value is 32.2%.
* Fourth observation: November 21, 2010 In order to make the spring observations more substantial, 10 additional points were selected to increase the accuracy of the assessment, whichwere marked with numbered wooden poles նրանց their coordinates were recorded (Table 2).
* Fifth observation on 29.05.2011.
Some of the indicators attached for observations are 5 indicators It is not the day of observation by flooding of the land և landslidesfound.
 The other 5 were preserved, according to the comparison of GPS indications, a movement was registered: 3 indicators (numbers 1,5,6) up to 1 m, and 2 (No. 3,10) more than 1 m.
  In parentheses in the tableare the results of the fifth observation.
                       Indications for monitoring                                                coordinates:                                                                                                Table 2.: Ó³ÝÇß »ñ ի:Numbers:Geographical:Coordinates:Բ³ ñÓñ. ÍáíÇ Ù³Ï.
Acquaintance.
 All measurements were made by GARMIN Etrex 20, GPS+ GLONASS receiver, and the observation days and hours are selected in the conditions of the best confrontation of the satellite stations.
In this respect, the accuracy of the measurements is sufficient for the results of the research.
The average portion of the area without vegetation in 2011 was 60-75% previous: 2010 Instead of 50-55%, moreover, there are completely vegetated
excerpts.
Erosion ditches and ravines deepen within a yearon average by 15-20%.
Monitoring field data were processed and mapped.
As a result of the monitoring, the slope has been registered /29.05.2011/Violation of a new 20-50 cm wide soil layer with a length of 52 m.
 This circumstance contributes to the activation of upward slope erosion for a year.
In the region, in the republic, all this started in parallel with the privatization process, or more precisely, with the weakening of state control.
 With the combined action of natural and man-made signals, natural landscapes become more vulnerable year by year, whichA typical example is the observed area.
The field of landscaping of the republic is gradually expanding, the nature and degree of their vulnerability are getting stronger.
  At the same time, new mudslides appear and the old ones expand.
Conclusion• The main reason for the rapid deforestation of the studied area:It is an unregulated grazing regime.
 During one grazing seasonThe average intensity of plant deforestation was 20-25%.
• Slope erosion activity is due to vegetation lossContribute to the movement of livestock to pasture in springand intense autumn precipitation.
• Currently, the area described above is completely degraded, almost vegetation-free from the slope, compared to previous years.with more extensive ravines, eroded area.
One of the best ways to reduce the risk of such natural disasters is to keep the public and the authorities in a constant positionAwareness.
 The phenomenon we observe as slow-growingThe disaster awareness process is effectivewith the following rings.
First, informing the population of the community, involving the school.
  The next level of awareness is the local self-government bodiesbecause the phenomenon can get more large-scale manifestations.
The study of these phenomena is currently included in the Global և Regional Climate Models և Climate Risks [1].
Fig. 2 The current situation of the area on 20.06.2014.
Suggestions. Regulation of movement of pasture animals.
 Develop a plan for planting 25-30 hectares of trees in the above-mentioned areas adjacent to the community.
defined.
  Recommendations for the prevention of disaster risk reduction and public:Literature 1. RA Ministry of Emergency Situations, Armenian Hydrometeorological Monitoring Service, H. Melkonyan,Climate Services, Yerevan, 2012.
Information about the authors:Ashot G. Ajamoghlyan - child. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor
Kh. Abovyan Armenian State Pedagogical University
Head of the Chair of Geography, Labor and Methodology.
Tigran Hovik Babayan- Kh. Armenian State University after Abovyan
Pedagogical University, geography, working methodologyComputer cartographer of the chair.
