Modern education in high school differs in a number of features due to the need for radical changes in the organization and content of education.
 Today, high school students have other requirements and goals, the first of which is professional knowledge in addition to general English.Knowledge of vocabulary related to the fields is a basis for further specialization.
However, the modern English course in high school mainly contributes to the development of general vocabularyNo attention is paid to the development of vocabulary related to specific professional fields.
 Therefore, professional vocabulary, in particular mathematical terms, during the foreign language course in natural sciences and mathematics in RA high schoolstraining is very necessary և purposeful.
In this article, our goal is to develop և present effective strategies for introducing mathematical terms to RAHigh school 10th, 11th և 12th grade science and mathematicsfor stream students.
As you know, learning vocabulary is a complicated processinvolves the use of different methods of word recognitionIntroducing and introducing a new vocabulary, as well as strengthening itwith appropriate exercises.
 Thus, the introduction of the word unit is the first stage of that process.
  As a three-step process, itincludes the introduction of new material, verification of what is understood և preliminarystrengthening. can appear in different proportions of these stages, depending on the complexity, nature of the language material և educational
group features [1; 85].
When introducing a new word, learners need to be introduced to the wordmeaning, horse և use.
 The three sides of the word make up onewhole, և their separation is done only methodicallyfor the purpose of emphasizing all of them in particulardifficulties associated with word acquisition և relevantOvercoming difficulties with explanations and exerciseswith the weather.
  There are difficulties in mastering some wordsusing them և grammatically, for others - phonetically orwith a graphic image.
The work on the word implies termsDevelop the ability to analyze grammatical և word-formation features.
  From this point of view, the necessary information about the word - the word entry, partial, sometimes even the whole transliteration(transcription), belonging to this or that word, separation of word-formation elements, identification of the main grammatical formsThey are also used.
When importing terminological language, there is a need for:1. separate և coordinate the main concepts of the given field;2. To compile thematic word groups of the above-mentioned concepts in native, foreign languages;3. Analyze ընտրել Choose terms for effective memorizationthe most accurate means of inspection,4. Introduce thematic word groups in different schemes, where:The different aspects of this concept are clearly visiblesequence, subordination, etc.5. Vocabulary introduction համար for the initial reinforcement stagescreate special tricks with schematic materials,6. Analyze the meaning of the terms in order to use additional methods of explaining the vocabulary, for example, to find outthe structural model of the term, to identify the internal form of the term, to emphasize the common root, if it is, of course, common to both languages,Emphasize the differences between the terms horse, as he'sto separate the terms close to each other in the language being taught և etc. [3;81].
The following is an example of a comparative analysis of mathematical terms in English, Russian, and Armenian և.
The terms presented in the letter և sound coincide with the two(English և Russian) և in three (English, Russian, Armenian) languages.
Match in English և Russian.algebraarithmeticcubesdiagonalgeometryunderlineparallelverticalpyramidradius:geometry. table:
They match in English, Russian and Armenian.integrallogarithmminus / minusovalparabolplus / plusprismbombWays to discover the meaning of mathematical termsThe choice depends on:from the nature of the word-term,from the fact that he belongs to his active or passive vocabulary,from the level of education.
Non-linguistic methods of word recognition are accepted in the methodologyև Linguistic modes.
  The non-linguistic method includes subject-visual examination, which in turn includes:• showing subjects, pictures, actions, situations և films depicting events;• Demonstration of gestures• Masquerade.
And the linguistic ways are:• Discovering the meaning of a word in a foreign language,• Discovery of meaning in the mother tongue.
In other words, in the first case we are dealing with non-translation,and in the second case, with the translation method.
  In bilingual conditions, along with the mother tongue, the Russian language can be used.
Linguistic modes: non-translation ական translation1. Non-translationalDiscovering the meaning of a word in a foreign language is a non-translational methodև includes:• Definition: discovering the meaning of a word through familiar words;For example:• Listing. for example:
• Synonym. Synonyms used to identify meaning
They should be familiar with the students.
 It is necessary to focus not so much on the similarities, but on the stylistic differences,which also generate synonymsmastery difficultiesFor example:nought - zero, o և etc.
• Antithesis.• Concept guessing through context - general sentencelogical conclusion based on content guessingFor example:In this case, even if the student does not know the meaning of the phrase equally divided, he can guess it from the general context.
During contextual input, the word unit is inserted into a vocabulary whose structure is familiar to the learner.
  The use of contextual input is not particularly difficult.
  In this case, the teacher shows the given word unitDuring oral speech և immediately performs initial reinforcement through individual or group repetition.
 The new word unit should then be in the focus of perception, for which the accent, the display of objects or pictures, is used.Write the gestures as the word unit on the board և in the notebookstake it, underline it, read it and pronounce it twice.
• Discovering the meaning of the word by analyzing the word-formation model.
When discovering the meanings of complex derivative words, the analysis of their word's is considered key.
 When introducing new word-formation models and templates to students, it is expedient to combine the latter with new linguistic material.
  In this case, the resultIt becomes more obvious as the student relates to the word in different expressions and connections.
For example:• Discovery of the word meaning in foreign և mother tongues, especially on the basis of common roots in Russian (vocabularies). example: arithmetic - арифметка, cube - куб, diameter - диаметр,
geometry - geometry և etc.
  The meaning of these words is known to the studentsfrom Russian, it is necessary to pay attention only to the pronunciation ևon the writing.
2. Translation:• Direct translation of the word,• Translation-explanation.
Students are given information on whether or not semantics match, for example, the English word square means square.
 But it also has a squaremeaning, and the word square in Armenian does not have that meaning.
The Armenian word point has the meaning of a mathematical եմատ punctuation mark, but it means an aquatic animal.
 But the English pointThe word does not have that meaning.
 Point: We use the word whale to express the meaning of living water.
In order for learners to use the term correctly, they:should know the specifics of its use, which includes: • the relevance of the term to already known words;• typical structures in which the term is used;• Verbal situations that are specific to the term under studyfor use.
Thus, the method of revealing the meaning of the term lexiconThe choice depends on its nature.
 The pronunciation and spelling of the term, word formation, ambiguity, connectivity, stylistic nuances should be taken into account.
  These are all some difficultieswhile assimilating.
 If the vocabulary unit represents:certain difficulty, it is more expedient to introduce it in complex versions, with an emphasis on the coverage of factors that present difficulties.
Thus, getting acquainted with a new vocabulary means:• Identify difficulties in learning new words related to the wordmeaning, with the use of horses,• specify the purpose of learning words - productive-receptive,• Choose effective word entry and word recognitionmethods• group words by difficulty և type;• Perform pre-strengthening exercises.
Pre-training tricks of the new material are part of the general system of exercises, which is aimed at the given language.the development of verbal skills and abilities of the material.
We present the stages of the strategy for getting acquainted with the mathematical vocabulary in the table below, where separatelyThe goals, tasks and actions of the teacher և student are mentioned [3; 91].
new vocabularyto get acquaintedstages:1. word unitdisplay:2. word unitFeatures:explanation:3. Checking the mastered vocabulary4. Vocabularyreproduction5. Verbal unitinitial reinforcementteacher's goallearner's goaldiscover the meaning of the word նել introduce ithorse and use explain horse իմաստ meaning ևFeatures of use, connectivity check the mastery of the meaning of the word unit Նպատակով For the purpose of memorizationnominate learnersreproduce verballypoints: Ամր Reinforce new word units with word exercises perceive verbalpoints:realize themUsage:the needmaster them և handbring those word units into relevant professional areas երում contextsAbility to use skills and abilitiesstudent:operations1. Guessing the language2. Perception3. Appropriation4. Rememberteacher actionsIntroduction to the word unit1. Contextual input2. Interpretation (definition in a foreign language)3. Translation:4. Providing an environment of visual perception(subject illustration, Power Pointthematic slide show և etc.)5. Semantic syntactic analysis based on synonyms, antonyms և word meaning discovery6. Extraction / application of thematic schemes7. Comparative analysis Explanation of word unit features ձևի: meaningExplanation of  usage և connectivity featuresՆշանակ The meaning of the word unitreviewՎեր Reproduction of a word unitՆախ Preliminary reinforcement of the word unitMastering:1. Perception2. Appropriation3. notes, notes1. Performing relevant tasks, exercises, tests;2. Acquisition of various skills of comprehension and use of given word unitsThus, the introduction of vocabulary, including terminology, is a complex, systematic process that involves a number of functions, depending on how the imported word is used.with structural and semantic features, both for the learnerwith individual language skills, mental and psychological characteristics, which must be taken into account when organizing the learning process.
When teaching mathematical vocabulary, it is necessary to ensure full memorization and mastering of the features of each language unit, as well as the purposeful development of vocabulary skills, because in order to use them in vocabulary, it is necessary to know not only the pronunciation of the word, grammar.snow and structure, the main և secondary meanings, the equivalents of the given meanings in the mother tongue and the language being taught, but the connectivity in the field of usage, sometimes also the place of the given word in the term system.
Thus, linguistic material, in this case mathematicalThe introduction of vocabulary implies the application of differentiated և complex methods and strategies, taking into account the linguistic features of the acquisition of language units, asThe purpose, objectives and content of the training.
Literature 1. Astvatsatryan MG, Methods of teaching foreign languages, Yerevan,Luys Publishing House, 1985, 390 pages.
2. RA Ministry of Education and Science, Senior General EducationSchool Standards և Programs for English High Schoolprograms և standards, Yerevan, Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia, 2009, 224 pages.
3. Poghosyan NV, Principles of choosing English architectural and construction terminology and teaching strategiesusing computer technologies, dissertation,Yerevan, YSLU, 2010, 158 pages.
Information about the author:Naira Vazgen Poghosyan - child. scientist candidate, associate professor, Armenian National University of Architecture and Construction, Yerjan V. State Linguistic and Social Sciences after Brusov
 University, Pedagogy և Language Teaching Associate Professor of the Chair of Methodology, E-mail.
