Disabled in different historical periodsThe attitude towards children was not the same.
  To civilizationalong with the universal human worldview ևshas experienced a unique development.
 People are always afraid again, of what is unknown, of which they do not yet know.
  Man is inclined in lifeto choose what is easy և socially acceptable.
 Independent humanfrom the peculiarities of individual perception, societyIt sets the general standards for its evaluation; people tend to go back to what has already been created.
  Public opinionposition have a chain reaction of propagation, և any new itemrequires maturation to be included in the chain.
 SpecialAt the heart of society's negative attitude towards children in need has always been the view of them as "different", "different", which is the main reason for the fear of equal treatmentis one of the reasons.
  As mentioned by T. Salomyakin. "In every man
We look for criteria by which we differ from others.
 And why are we?He is looking for that weak link in a person.
  Where are they then in life?wealth and diversity ”[3, p. 45].
 Not everything is differentIt means to be flawed or wrong.
 The experience of each human species diversity begins with perceiving them as they are, as they should beFocus on what is not there, but love them as a whole.
According to Vygodsky, the main gap in the education and upbringing of abnormal children is due to the inability of the pedagogue.when he sees his social essence in a defect [1].
 The main problems are not caused due to the underdevelopment of the child, but as a result of the inadequate perception given to them by the society.
 And any restorative, corrective work needs one basicունեն have a primary goal. need-based child development
such a stimulus that will enable the latter to function flexibly in society.
"Every child's potential և strengths must bedecisive for curriculum development, not weaknessessearch.
  We'd better look for the strengths and recognize themshould be different for different children.
 It makes a differencehope, because they are given for development, education and personal realizationopportunities for alternative ways.
 We should be happy for that վ rely on them.
 They are finally real lifeare the particles ”[7, p. 941].
 Each word, definition creates thinking, which determines the essence of further objective activity.
Therefore, the more the definitions tend to rely on the strengths, the more effective the professional activity can be.and the probability of the child's growth and development.
  Human natureThe possibilities for implementation do not have specific boundaries or patterns.
 Just as there is no real limit to the potential for realizing and realizing the potential of a child with special needsThe capabilities and capabilities of the discoverer. Real abilities can only be manifested in the relevant social
In the current situation, this process is bilateralIt has a stimulating and developing meaning.
The full development of each child is realized as a result of the interaction of biological and social processes.
  Regardless of the characteristics of the child's development և the nature of the need,he has a primary need to communicate with his peers and share experienceshas.
  The importance of inclusion should not be underestimated not only for children with insufficient intellect, but for the society as a whole.
  According to the parent of a child with a complex structural disorder, "one day in the team of healthy, positively disposed peersgave the child more development than rehabilitation workone month.
  It is possible that it allowed to open the secret compensatory possibilities of the organism.
  The child became more self-confident,began to actively interact with the world around him. "[4]
The inclusion of children with special needs will not only have a positive effect on their mental facilitation,but for the humanitarian development of healthy children studying with themon the formation of moral norms and values.
 "General, additional ևDevelopment of integration practices in the field of special education andExpansion will allow not only children with special needs to feelfull members of society, but will teach other children to actively empathize, to think about other people, to help.
  Integration:Experiments already show that healthy children do not show negative attitudes to hearing, visual, motor disorderstowards children with other positive, extreme casesare indifference ”[6, pp. 38-41].
 This is evidenced by Gyumri "Children's Home"Made in a specialized orphanage for different age groupsRegular visits of children and positive interactions between themavailability.
According to Vygodsky, the potential development of the childThe level can be increased by more capable couples.
  This confirms the result of the facilitation of children's interaction.
 In:Eventually, the child's mental processes and functions are formeddevelop in the context of social relations, ևThe child achieves greater efficiency in the process of socialization among his peers.
  These theoretical views were confirmed by the observations made in the mentioned orphanage when the group roomsThere was a change in the composition of the children due to the recruitment of more effective children.
 Less functional children discovered their potential more quickly in a short period of time, as the influence of more effective peers had a stimulating effect on their developmental growth.
  EvenSome of the children started walking, who, according to the medical instructions,were unable to walk, progress was made in using walkers,Attempts to stand, walk, and walk on sticks improved the speech of others, the elements of communication, and the children's own initiative in participating in various activities.
 A striking example of modern integration is the Australian Integrative Theater, which features people with poor intelligence.(Restless Dance Company). The basic premise was that people with developmental disabilities become a source of inspiration for every dance
in combination for couples without a disorder [4, p. 13].
As a result of children's cooperation and mutual assistance, many authors have referred to the effectiveness of development.
Katz found that behavioral self-regulation improved when seniorstudents remind juniors of the rules of upbringing[11] When high school children learn new skills, They reinforce their understanding of these skills.
Many proponents of inclusive education argue for inclusionThe results have a positive effect on the academic performance of schoolchildren.
 Moreover, children with special needs are not aloneharms the academic results of classmates, but from a social point of view, the learners benefit by reducing the fear of human differences and increasing the understanding of others.and tolerance.
  Insectological science proves the inseparable connection and interdependence of a child's organic defect with those around him, his communication disorder.The role of improved communication is given to children with mental retardationin the general correction of development [1, pp. 223-224].
 In fact, a special needThe need of a child with a disability becomes a problem due to the assessment given by the environment պայմանավորված due to the attitude և how early the inclusion startsFrom the age of inclusion in kindergartens, the society will grow so muchacceptance of different needs as a human speciesreadiness.
  This is evidenced in American schoolsand our observations in kindergartens, which are partlydetermine the relative effectiveness of inclusion processes.
Generalizing the psychological-pedagogical theoretical bases of inclusive education, one can single out the priority and necessity of its implementation in modern society.
 The inclusion of children with special needs will help increase the academic performance of schoolchildren and their peers.communication joint implementation of leading activitiesas a result of the facilitation of mental development, the application of universal humanitarian law, the creation of equal conditions for education for all, the formation of children fit for society, with realized opportunities;the development of professionals with skills.
Literature   1. Vygotsky L.S. Selected psychological studies. M.
  APN RSFSR,2. Vigotsky L. С. Assembly of compositions.
 In the 6th volume. M.
 1983, T.5, S. 223-224.  3. Inclusive education.
  Problems of perfection education:policies and systems.
 Materials of international conferences. June 19-20, 2008:
года-СПб.
 Izd-vo RGPU im, A. Н. Gertsena, 2008. 215 p. 4. Pedagogical Journal of Karelia.
  edition of the State Education:fiction of worker education ». №2 (25). - Petrozavodsk.
 Verso, 2009. 136 p. 5. Pedagogy and psychology of inclusive education.
  textbook / D. З.
Ахметова, З. Mr. Нигматов, Т. A.Chelnokova, G. В. Споuspova et al. Казань.
 From:adolescents with mental retardation.
 a multiple case study. Education and Training in:
9. Goularte, R. (1995). Multiage classrooms. National Education Associate. Washington.
Eugene.
ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management. 12. Vygotsky, LS (1978). Mind in Society.
  The development of higher Psychological:Information about the author:Yeghiazaryan Satenik Emini - Gyumri M. Nalbandyan
State Pedagogical Institute, Lecturer of the Chair of PsychologyE-mail:
