It has an important place in the processes of modern Armenian literaturecaptures G. The multi-genre literature created by Khanjyan.
  He seemsHe creates equally in the fields of prose and dramaturgy.
 But it seems to be our reality in the writer's playsstudy and analysis are more objective, visible andThey are performed in an expressive artistic environment, and the actors are more impressive and convincing with their human description.
 The dramaturgy of a writer who has passed an effective creative wayIt is modern in its closest relations with its content and variety of artistic tricks and conventionsPatterns of dramaturgy և manifestations of national lifewith.
  In the author's worldviews, aesthetic approachesgives a noticeable existentialist feelinga concept of ideas that reveals in a unique wayto modern national, internal political, moral-psychological phenomenaThe playwright's look and attitude.
  But anyway, G. Khanjyan is hisHe interprets the vital phenomena in the plays of the collection "Theater 301" [1], using the value system rooted in the national culture. տիր from the domains of universal aesthetic ideals.
In one of our articles [2] we showed G. Some Peculiarities of Khanjyan Dramaturgy, Analyzing the Historical Theme "Theater 301" «" Year of Satan "
the plays.
 This article examines the playwright "Theater 301"[1] Other plays depicting modern life in the collection.
 In these plays, the writer has been actively interested in recent decadesThe internal political, moral and psychological shifts that have taken place in our reality during the year under the name of democracyvarious political intrigues, legal and illegal (especially illegal) efforts to succeed in the presidential election.
  Within the capabilities of the genre և:was created using some principles of realistic imagery The comedy "There is no escape from you".
  Radio host Tigran The leader of a party called Galust suggeststheir party is a presidential candidateto register, promising all kinds of financial support.
 Tigran, however, had to act according to his dictation after being elected.
 From the arrivalThe representative of the independent criminal world Scho, in turn, triesAssist Tigran on the condition that he commit a crimedecisions in the interests of the world.
 These unusual offers to Tigran and his wife Tamar become attractive because of the election campaignGalust and Shkho give them a considerable amount of money to participate.
 This:somewhat unbelievable, somewhat probable storythrough exposing the legalities of democratic politicsprinciples in the interests of their party members or the criminal worldto use the manuals of the abusers.
It is noteworthy in the comedy that Tigran reveals his ideas about the events in a unique way, presents "ingenuity", gives a unique interpretation.the opportunity given to him to participate in the election campaign.
 Politics:The cynicism expressed in him in matters, for example, is expressedWhen interpreting the meaning of the concept of "democracy" at his own discretion, which, according to him, means simply "to lead the people."
 Of courseThe information received from those with ties to the upper echelons of power also contributes to the political adventure.
 For example, Shkhon Tigran, representing the criminal worldsays. "Do you think the ministers or the prime minister are in touch with us?"
have not ”[1, p. 254].
Through dialogues, the playwright quite accurately reveals the distortions caused by the collapse of modern political life, especially with the presidential elections.regarding the expectations of unworthy candidates, their sponsors, their bodyguards to occupy high positions.
 This:The last appearance in the play is presented by Galust's bodyguards Sakoand through Karo.
 In addition, if elected president, Tigran (trying to seduce) is visited by homosexuals and prostitutes.Representatives, their place in the future president of the republicto strengthen public life with support.
A remarkable transformation is taking place between Tigran and Tamar.
 The money earned promotes not only ideas about the prospect of a prosperous life but also arrogance and greed for power.
 Tigran's prospect of having power and rights of the President of the Republic is moreinspiration.
  Such a premonition awakens in him, first of all, Feelings of exaggerated self-aggrandizement, exaggerated notions of his abilities and capabilities.
 Here are the judgments he makesin connection with the proposed offer. "Do not think anymore.
 I'm given a chance, և noby these men, no, but by the highest providence, He has ordained,Kings are chosen by the gods.
 I knew from childhood that I was chosenI waited modestly for my hour, knowing that my hour would come.
So, no whining, no regrets ”[1, p. 270].
 Thus, the former radio host, consciously and then arrogantly, based on the above-mentioned proposals, which promise other dubious success.He considers himself fully worthy of being a presidential candidate.
  And:Entering the game, he finds himself in funny tragic situations.
It gets to the point that he, selfishly trying to save himself from the fire that broke out in his apartment with one gas mask, wants to use that catastrophe for his campaign.
  "TIGRAN - On the eve of the electionsfire can play a good role. As they say, there is no evil without good.
In the evening newspapers, radio and television will publish: President Hayk Haykazyan's house was set on fire by unknown people on the eve of the elections, firefighters somehow savedThe life of the candidate և his relatives, the causes of the fire are being investigatedTerrorism is not ruled out "[1, p. 284].
 As for Tigran on the occasion of the fire,Victory, victory, victory cries, the act of desecrating victory over misfortune inadvertently push the public to see his և E. The interior of the famous Panjuni image of Otyan
between essences.
 Intimacy makes both equally disgusting.
 Tigran in the field of comedy, first of all, Brave Nazar,then he is Panjuni's spiritual son.
Within the framework of the artistic reality of comedy, the idea of ​​the existence of a high moral and psychological value in a modern Armenian man was expressed in the image of Tigran's father.
 It turns outThe latter fought during the Artsakh liberation war, was wounded, nowHe is confined to a wheelchair, he is dumb.
 His father hears, understands, but cannot speak.
 He expresses his attitude to the events taking place at home through the language of movements.
 About thatThe playwright informs the reader through remarks.
 The father understoodThe boy accepted the rules of the game to run in the presidential election illegally, and was even blackmailed by Galust, who financed the campaign.to take revenge on him.
 The author condemns his son through a remarkpresents the attitude as follows: "Dad is trying to explain what you are doing, where are you, boy" [1, p. 263].
 Author:There is an obvious intention in the episode when the radio hostTigran Haykazyan reads the following narrative thought, which is again presented in a remark. "The reading of the Book begins:
THING, Chapter C, starting from the line "I built my building like a fool on the sand"[1, p. 264].
  Tigran is indifferent to such a warningis, he says, an old recording.
After all, an authoritarian attitude towards a presidential candidate like Tigran is also expressed by Tamar on the phone with firefightersthrough contemptuous speech, which can be considered the peopleattitude towards an unrecognized candidate.
"This is an assassination attempt," says Tamar. "Terror, my husband is in the presidency."is a candidate.
  What, do you care? ”[1, p. 284].
  Everyone in the comedyThe actor is presented with various unique aesthetic-literary tricks of satire. Humor, irony, satire, and ridicule are used here again.
  The killer mockery in the play is combined with acts of brutal pregnancy, such as Tigran, accusing Galust of murdering a journalist, in an episode of blackmail, Tigran's housein the scene of setting fire և etc.
 The comedy is intertwinedat least the dramatic tension.
  The fiction of all thisThe weaving was done with great skill, due to which "Escape from you"There is no" should be considered one of the best plays of the playwright;The other plays in G. Khanjyan's "Theater 301" collection mostly depict the lives of middle and lower class people.and life.
 To ask sharp social and psychological questionsThe playwright even uses world-famous Austrian writer F. Kafka's novel "Trial" to create "Case NFC-2 "drama.
  Using the Bible for its charactersCharacter names / Joseph, Mary, Paul, Peter, Martha, Mary,Matthew, Simon և etc /, as introducing the anonymous heroesin their profession or positions / Lawyer, Inspector, Investigator,Adviser, Director, Priest, etc. / the author, in fact, by making a generalization, turns the judicial system in the state into an arena of sharp revelations and criticism, where a person is not accused in a civilized way, in general, the world order is not condemned dignity.
  Judgment of an innocent person, bribery, courtThe depiction of various kinds of lawlessness in the system was a unique response to make համ condemn similar phenomena of our reality visible.
Penetrating our public life, present in the destiny of the individuala unique sculpture of the moment, depicting it in a certain developmentG. Khanjyan is endowed with insight.
  He is the personal and of his heroesThe unique national mentality tends to depict bordersin situations.
  Where a person is tested by appearingBetween the realities of the external world at the moment, the ideas and feelings about the eternal moral values ​​that vibrate within him, where there is a desire to establish order in inhuman, absurd relations, as well as a deep distrust of the achievements of science.
 From the point of view of these ideas, let's examine the two-act play "Gordian Knot".
  Here is a unique limited environment - a building with metal mesh windows, then "Underground or large hole in the walls:niches ", where the relations of the acting characters take place andrelations.
 It presents it with artistic conditionalityIt is a small world, which symbolizes the phenomena of the big world and human characters.
  And the actors of the play perform without special names, with their professional, gender, physical characteristics / Boy, Girl, Professor, Mistress, Sanitary A, Sanitary B,Drunkard, Woman, Priest, Miachkan, Poet, Stupid, Voice.
 With such an approachTheir presentation shows that they are generally deprived of or completely deprived of their full human personality.from the possibility of being.
 Everyone serves the director of that institution, who appears in the play only with his voice.
 What? among them, however, there is sympathy for the Boy and the Girl who are not
He wanted to obey slaves like the director of the hospital and the professor.
 They do not betray the Boy who hides from the pursuit of the latterand the Girl.
The way of life of these people gathered in the underground,The life and behavior of the playwright lived in the environment and ours in generalThey have a number of parallels with reality.
 This circumstance increases the cognitive significance of the work.
 The play ultimately condemns the devaluation of human beings, particularly human organsto make the realities of trading against the will, then enslaving the person (regardless of gender) in the modern reality.
 The inevitable condition (which has much in common with our realitywith the difficult social, economic, moral and psychological situation created for those living in it) turns into a Gordian knot.
 CreatedThe writer, not seeing the way out of the situation by seeing in the field of rational approaches / the representative of science, the Professor, in fact,He became the acting director of the hospital, the accomplice and perpetrator of criminal acts /, can not consider tolerable such conditions that humiliate a person and restrict his freedom.
  The real egg of rebellion against the absurdity of irrational reality becomes the natural outburst that takes place in the dumb idiot, who explodes the hospital and the underworld, killing himself in an explosion.in retrospect.
G. Khanjyan the playwright, using the theatrical, stage, dramaturgical conventions, in fact, in every way creates the environment he knows, the human being manifested in the society.heroes who embody his ideas about the characters.
With them, he creates a mosaic image of the post-Soviet years, our society, the present crowd, different human and national groups, groups, individuals, which becomes a typical artistic environment for the expression of his creative, aesthetic and worldview ideas in general.
  Such a picture is presented by the play "The Expressway in the Dark".
 There is no plot, no conventional environmentIt is the train that symbolizes the modern era.
 There are different characters in the play, in different moodspeople who are personified without names.
 The author once again shows the irresistibility of the representatives of our society, some massesand inferiority.
 The great movement and course of national and public lifeIn the author's perception, such a mass of people can notto be found.
  They are within the scope of the play in the last episodeThey get off the train because they are parasites of the time.
From the manifestations of satire in the playwright's modern life and the aesthetic evaluations of plays depicting people!irony prevails.
 It occupies a middle position among the "satire" of humorև Used in combination as needed.
  The ShipwreckThe character of Captain Abgar is obviously ironically created in the comedy.
 Pathetic patriotism, patriotism, leader,With his perceptions of the leader, he has unrealistic ideasis a satirical image of a public figure with.
 To the captain of a real-symbolic ship, appearing in a border situationEventually, all the crew members of his ship, Captain Gokor, leave.Mechanic Tsakan, cook and nurse Shushan, who was in love with the captain.
  The latter are typical of modern manwith pragmatic thinking, accountably.
 They do not share the captain's lofty spirit with national and world values,for they see that his ship and his plan of action are not connected with the real environment and real possibilities.
According to the German existentialist philosopher K. Jaspers, "Human existence has two sides -" existence in the world "- real existence / existence / - freedom, the very essence of man, which is manifestedonly in borderline situations (illness, death, etc.) ”[3, p415].
 Some manifestations of such a worldview are noticeable. "Գ. In Khanjyan's dramas.
  In our opinion, such a bio-philosophy is very effective for artistic thinking in general.
 We have various remarkable expressions of such approachessees the playwright - "Bolero", "Cemetery Choir", "Roadside Theater", "Detention", "Guardians of the Ruins", "Homeless Dogs",In the works of "Pahmtots".
 In the play "Guardians of the Ruins" post-SovietThe features of the years or the early period of independence are presented by the beggars who appeared at the bottom of social life with the image of Sirak, Luso, Matsik, Orpheus, the prostitute Woman, their perceptions and ideas.
  Begging is really for themIt is a borderline situation, because in the past they were people involved in society, with a certain profession, a family.
  For various reasons, they have become so extremein serious condition.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union, the earthquake, the material insecurity in the conditions of new market relations, etc. contributed to it.
  The border situation is getting worse, he saidwith threats, as a result of which they carry out military exercises inappropriate for their age.
 What is remarkable about the play is that, rather than conditional freedom, begging, they nevertheless prefer to be somewhat involved in public life.hence, they even voluntarily come to perform the unusual, uncomfortable and obligatory exercises of the Guard.
  Their human, humanitarian character traits are manifested spontaneously in relation to each other, even through exercises.to the tormented Guard.
 And when, thanks to Orpheus, it turns out that the Guardian allegedly took part in the Karabakh liberation war, moreThey feel sorry for him.
  And so, the Guardian's condition worsensis when the debris left in the body moves during battles.
 The beggars try their best to help him.
 Unable to pay for hospital care when the Guard does not want to see a doctor,Luco says. "Do not be afraid, my dear boy, are we dead? We will work day and night, collect money, give it to the hospital, do not be afraid" [1, p. 230].
 The image of the Guardian was also impressive.
 His strange, rude behavior towards adult beggars is repulsive in advance ևIt causes unfriendly attitude.
 Gradually, when the cause of it is found out to some extent, the attitude of the "beggars", the reader or the audience towards him changes.
  KarabakhThe Yerkrapah who took part in the liberation war had a guard post entrusted to him, where in some circumstances he was involved in a bomb blast.He was injured and even developed some mental disorder.
 In his consciousnessHowever, it was fixed and fixed in every way to protect the guard postthe idea.
 In fact, for the sake of the homeland, he is a human character dedicated to fulfilling the duty entrusted to him, our braveone of the young people who defended his homeland at the cost of his lifeat a trusted checkpoint.
In the play "Roadside Theater" a successful stage trick is presented by a civil servant who died or died during a car accident.and the image of businessman Grigor in an imaginary environment, wherever you say Other heroes also appear in the theatrical performance.
 In this environment is the girl whom Grig-Grigor loved.
 He promisedHe got married, had sex with a girl, and then left.
 The director, in the person of Grigor, who is a civil servant-businessman, constantly exposes the essence of the activities of his class, the falsity and selfishness.
In one of the first episodes, for example, opening the context of Grigor's words, he says: "We are becoming officials for our own protection and
Let's start a business under patronage ”[1, p. 166].
 And Grigory is already directly involved in selfishness and irresponsibility, swearingaccuses the Girl who was deceived and abandoned by him in the past, who, likeIt turns out that he committed suicide.
 In the play he says: "No, selfish
man, you can not remember, I do not want you to remember, you are a user.user, you use, you throw, you use, you throw, what do you remember, man?What is it for you, zero, especially a woman, isn't it? ”[1, p. 169].
 Considering the whole system of conditionality of the play, it can be said that to some extent the incompleteness of the characters, the publicist expressions are due to the illusory, worldly,in a dreamy, unreal environment.
 Here again the absurd and the mythical were merged, combined with the whole.
The structure of the drama "Detention" is mainly depicted in traditional biographies.
 The characters are more vivid hereThe visible manifestations of details about their life, character, psychological structure, moral ideas contribute to them.
 The author has created an episodic episode of Mardo, Nazo, Tina's grandmother, Kuku, the doctor, guided by ordinary aesthetics in general the characters, seeing in the life of these ordinary people և the boredom of the manifestations of everyday life, monotony, մարդու the working man:The spontaneous creative effort in the inner self of a person, the dedication to do a useful work.
  Making plants in the herbarium of plants in Armenia on your own initiative պայմաններում at home, a womanDestroying it because of its disharmonious relationship with her shows that her love for beauty is suppressed by her boring daily life.
 The revelations of the beauty of the working man's soul, the feeling of inner freedom are constantly suppressed in himunder the influence of the harsh realities of life.
In principle, it is almost the same moral and psychological pressurehe feels unexpectedly coming to their house from a psychiatric hospitalTaurus escaped.
  When answering the doctor's questions, it turns out that hisFreedom is constrained by a monotonous, monotonous daily lifelack of interest in high interests, romantic dreamsin people.
  Lack of encouragement to feel such demandshe sees not only in the Mardoyants family, but also in the behavior of the doctor treating him, in his treatment of patients.
 In fact, Taurus is hisis more fully expressed in the border situation created forThe ability to appreciate the feeling and beauty of human freedom, directly, unselfishly and freely with peoplewillingness to communicate.
 His behavior in Mardoyents' house testifies to all that.
 Here he advises Tina to play the interiorForgetting his freedom, he encourages Mardo to go to the herbariumwhile looking at the samples of the collection.
From our literary analysis we can do thisconclusion.
 G. Khanjyan's dramaturgy with its original literary tricks and characters, using the principles of realism, absurdity, myth-use, creates the artistic context of modern life, enriches the field of modern Armenian theater.
Literature 1. Khanjyan G., Theater-301.
 Plays, Yerevan, 2008, 495 pages.
2. Khachikyan G., Some peculiarities of Gurgen Khanjyan dramaturgy // Scientific Bulletin, Gyumri, 2014, Prak B, N1, p.17-25.
Information about the author:Khachikyan Gagik Vahe - something. scientist Doctor, Associate Professor, M. Nalbandyan, Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute, Armenian Literature, Head of the Chair of Journalism, Teaching Methods, E-mail:
