The United States is a world economic "political leader."The analysis of the latter's anti-crisis experience is quite valuableboth theoretically and practically, for further improvement of the state anti-crisis regulation of the economyin the direction.
The legal basis for the anti-crisis settlement of the United States economy was the "American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan", which provided about $ 790 billion for the recovery of the economy (only the real sector of the economy).about the volume of support).
  It was planned under the mentioned programto implement both directly and indirectly on the economya set of effective measures.
In general, the main directions of the anti-crisis regulation of the US economy are:• Support to organizations with problem assetsacquisition և financial support;• stimulating domestic demand;• Stimulation of the labor market,• Development of innovative potential;• Supporting SMEs ստեղծ creating financial incentives for them;• Infrastructure development.
Below are presented the anti-crisis regulation of the economyThe main directions according to the allocations directed to the latter.
The mainstay of US anti-crisis measures directions by allocationsTable 1:N / A The main anti-crisis settlementVolume, billion dollars.directions:Stimulation of domestic demand ային humanResource investmentsHealthcareEducation:Social security, including financial assistance to the unemployed and the vulnerableTax incentives, including:Companies:Population:Investment program financing, thatincluding:Energy infrastructureHousingDevelopment of innovations, including:Energy developmentOther:Total:As can be seen from the above, the priorities of the US anti-crisis policy were the stimulation of domestic demand ներդր investments in human capital, which in total accounted for more than 42% of the allocations for the US economy anti-crisis measures - about 337 billiondollars.
The next major direction of anti-crisis measures is the reduction of the tax burden for the population և organizations, which accounted for about 36% of these allocations.
19.6% of US $ 154.8 billion in anti-crisis spending went to US infrastructure development, including $ 48.7 billion (6.2%) for energy infrastructure development.
 It should be noted that the US government is of great importanceThe development of the energy sector, ensuring the country's energy security, reducing the economy's dependence on energy imports, and the discovery of alternative energy sources, which was reflected in the country's anti-crisis program.
 It is necessaryThe United States accounted for about 22.55% of world energy consumption, which was quite high compared to other countries.
 In the run-up to the global financial crisis, the United States cut back on fuel and energy production in the country instead of expanding it.the import volumes of the latter.
It should be noted that within the framework of anti-crisis regulation, about 13.3% of anti-crisis measures were directed to the financing of infrastructure programs of the economy.
 Those programs included:A number of sectors, in particular, transport, energy, telecommunications, water supply, agricultural infrastructure, etc.
 Moreover, these infrastructure projects would be fully implemented only at the expense of US-made raw materials.
 This clearly speaks to the long-term economic growth of this country's anti-crisis settlement strategyabout being purposeful.
The survey shows that the majority of US government anti-crisis measures (about 80%) were related to fiscal policy, with tax incentives noted.policy measures accounted for 36% of the total package,30% of which referred to the population and 6% to the organizations.
 It should be noted that tax incentives were not intended to eliminate taxes or reduce their rates, but rather to provide indirect incentives, such asare the provision of tax "holidays", depreciation methodschanges, tax refunds, temporary redistribution of tax burden, etc.
  It should be noted that only one third of anti-crisis measures have a direct impacton this or that participant of economic relations.
 These include the expansion of public procurement, direct lending to SMEs, financing of infrastructure, etc.
 CertainMeasures were also taken to overcome the stagnation of the real estate market, where borrowers' bankruptcy risks are still high.They were high.
 In conclusion, it should be noted that about 80% of US anti-crisis measures were related to the general economic policy.more specifically, they were aimed at fiscal policythe regulation of general economic processes, such as the expansion of demand, the promotion of investments, the expansion of the accumulation of fixed capital, etc.
 Total anti-crisis measures20% were selective, ie they were intendedfor specific areas, such as SME soft loans, guarantees, etc.
Referring to the analysis of the effectiveness of the above-mentioned anti-crisis measures, it will be carried out based on the quantitative-qualitative criteria and nature of the latter.
  Thus,An analysis of US macroeconomic indicators shows that already in the fall of 2009 the country had an economysigns of stabilization. GDP was recorded in the third quarter of 2009
Growth of 0.4% or the previous year-on-year reduction of GDPcompared to the previous year it was 0.5%.
 According to the results of 2010, the USAGDP growth was 3.1%, դր GDP as of December 2010The growth was 29% as compared to the same period of the previous yearAccording to the results of the same year, growth was registered in all branches of the real sector of the economy.
 Production of durable goods in 2010 exceeded the production of short-lived goods by 3.5%, andIn 2011, by 9.6%.
 According to the results of 2011, the GDP growth made 4.1%, the production index as of November of that year exceeded the index of the same period of the previous yearBy 19.2%, արդյունք according to the results of that year, the growth of production made 5.2%.
Due to the growth of production, the financial situation of American enterprises also improved. According to the results of 2010, no American
The profit of the financial sector increased by 11.4% as compared to the previous year,and compared to the 4th quarter of 2007 by 17.4%.
As research showed, in 2011 United60% of US GDP growth was provided by consumer spending, 23% -և 11% of investment growth at the expense of net export growth.
  Already in 2011According to the results of the third quarter of 2010, the US GDP index exceededpre-crisis level, exceeding it by 0.2%.
The main increase in US government spending was recorded in 2009, amounting to about 36% of GDP.
 It should be noted that it was at the expense of large state expenditures that it was possible to avoid personal consumptionխիստ It was a strong signal for an increase in investment due to the growth of savings.
  2011:By the end of the year, the public expenditure index decreased to:33% of GDP, which is typical for the American economy.
  2009:Investment in GDP reaches 25% in last quarter - 22% at worst in recession for the index.
The most serious post-crisis problem in the United States was the high level of unemployment, in the fight against which the state anti-crisis measures did not provide significant positive results.
As in 2011, the unemployment rate in the first half of 2012 was at 9.0%, which is lowwas 0.63% higher than the 2010 level, but still remained high!from the natural level of the latter.
  This was explained by the fact that the rates of economic recovery were not yet sufficient for the GDP potential.to reach the level of և unemployment to reduce to a natural level.
  Unemployment is keywas considered an obstacle to the construction sector due to the crisisabrupt reduction, as a result of which a large number of workers were laid off both in that branch and in its infrastructure ևOver the next few years, US economic growth slowedThey did not allow to reduce the unemployment rate until the pre-crisis periodlevel.
 In addition, note that the US economic recovery is not highThe rates were due to insufficient foreign investment, which decreased due to the crisis.
Thus, the analysis of US macroeconomic indicators showsshows that the economic growth in this country started in 2009 after the crisisfrom the second half of 2011, already in 2011The main macroeconomic indicators characterizing the economyThey had reached the pre-crisis level.
  Production Index 2011:was already close to the pre-crisis level of 2007, andGDP exceeded the pre-crisis level by 0.2%.
 It should be noted that 0.184 anti-crisis measures calculated by macro-statisticsThe United States ranked second in the world in terms of efficiencyAfter Great Britain.
As for contributing to the recovery of economic growthThe main short-term events were as follows: • Creation of new jobs. About 2.5 million jobs were created
As of 2011, this process is ongoinghad,• Implementation of infrastructure projects;• Reducing the tax burden on the income of the population խ Stimulating consumer spending;• Reducing the tax burden on business.
One of the anti-crisis measures that can help the economy recover in the medium to long termto separate • Implementation of infrastructure projects;• Investments in human capital;• Financing of innovative projects; As we have already mentioned, the effectiveness of anti-crisis measures is determined by the nature of its main elements.
  Therefore,On the effectiveness of US anti-crisis measuresWe can conclude that the priorities of the US state anti-crisis settlement have been:• Reducing the tax burden on business;• How to directly promote consumer spendingAdequate level of income, both indirectly and by reducing the tax burden on different segments of the population,• Encouraging innovative projects և Financing, both directly through infrastructure projects andIndirectly, investments in science and human capitalby implementation.
In view of the above, anti-crisis measures are mentionedpriorities and directions for their implementationcan be considered strategic, as the latter are aimed at having a long-term positive impact on the economy:Ensuring long-term economic growth through investmentPromotion, development of priority branches, encouragement of innovations, development of production infrastructures.
  Moreover,The directions of the state anti-crisis measures implemented in 2010 were agreed as a strategic one for the development of the countrywith areas such as consumer demand promotion,Development of innovations բարձր Increasing the energy efficiency of the economy as a possible precondition for further sustainable economic growthThe main reasons for the penetration of the crisis into the real sector of the economy.
  All this is evidenced by the US governmentAnti-crisis settlement, aimed at ensuring long-term economic growth.
As for the nature of anti-crisis measures, thenAbout 70% of US anti-crisis measures It was indirect in terms of the impact it had on the subjects of economic relations.
  The latter pursuedmore general economic stimulus goals than specific onesDirective effects on economic entities.
Below will be presented by the US Governmentthe effectiveness of anti-crisis measures in the economyevaluation.
About the effectiveness of the US anti-crisis program can:Judging by the positive dynamics of macroeconomic indicators.
  2009 Real economic growth was observed in the second half of the year
in all sectors of the sector, and in 2010 macroeconomicMost of the indicators were equal to the pre-crisis indicators(Tables 2,3).
        Table 2:Dynamics of macroeconomic indicators of the US economyDynamics of macroeconomic indicators (growth rate,%)Macroeconomicindicator:GDP:Production indicator:Fixed capital:investmentsNon-financial corporate profitsHouseholdsfinal consumptionExport:Import:Net exportUnemploymentQualitative US anti-crisis measuresCriterion:Description:Rating:Table 3:Implementation of a complex of anti-crisis measures aimed at long-term economic growth. financing of infrastructure projects
(anti-crisis package13.3%), including energy - 6.3%, financing of scientific research - basic science - 5.5%, investments in human capital - 32%, financing of the sectors most affected by the crisis, mainly production - construction - 8%.
Anti-crisis measures to support the real sector of the economy (first of all, stimulating aggregate demand բեռ reducing the tax burden) were aimed at eliminating the main causes of the crisis in the economy, which were the reduction of domestic demand և lending volumesthe decline.
Most of the tools selected for anti-crisis measures (69%) were classifiedIndirect methods of state regulation of the economy տնտեսական was endowed with economicsubjects on the general economicwith influences.
  This would stimulate the cleansing of the economy from inefficient participants ևwould improve business conditions.
In connection with anti-crisis measurestightened to reduce risksState:control by adding:Publicity of expenditure of allocated funds և accountability.
Strategy:Causes of the crisiseliminationUsed toolkitDescription:Risk control և:decreasingLet's talk about the main factors limiting the effectiveness of US anti-crisis measuresthe main ones. • Increase of state budget expenditures; • Increasing unemployment to reduce the potential level of GDPas a result, • Insufficient foreign investment as a result of the global recession.
US state crisis managementwere the main risks.• The risk of misuse of funds to reduce whichState control was tightened, • Increasing state intervention in the economy; • Increase in budget deficit.
In order to reduce the risks of state economic regulation, it was envisaged to use the allocationsan unprecedented level of control, which was fixed in the USin the anti-crisis program.
 The latter stipulated that the allocated funds would be distributed according to tenders, auctions, grants, the results of which should be published on the Internet.
 Except:In addition, additional funding was provided to the US Chamber of Controlpowers were given to exercise proper control over financial investments in the economy.
In conclusion, it should be noted that the US anti-crisis measures can be considered effective in terms of financial and economicThe level of economic downturn caused by the crisisthe rates of post-crisis economic recovery.
  It has been more effective than in other world countries, such as the EU, Russia, China and Japan.
  Moreover, in the USAThe recession started earlier, it was deeper than mentionedcountries.
Literature1. Harutyunyan V. L., Sargsyan KS International experience of state anti-crisis policy և its analysis.
 "Science" publishing house of NAS RA, Yerevan, 2014, 175 pages.
2. Harutyunyan V. L., KS KS, Analysis of the effectiveness of anti-crisis policy in the context of the financial and economic crisis // Current problems of socio-economic development in the Republic of Armenia (Republican conference
Materials, Book 2), Institute of Economics after M. Kotanyan, NAS RA, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 5-9.
3. Sargsyan KS, Analysis of measures to support the real sector of the economy in the context of overcoming the financial and economic crisis.
  "Contemporary Development Challenges"ASUE 24TH CONFERENCE, Yerevan, 2014, pp. 406-411.
5. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act / http.
//www.recovery.gov /Information about the author:Karen Samvel Sargsyan - Economics Ph.D., Scientific-Educational of NAS RA International Center, Head of the Chair of Economics and Management,E-mail:
