  The organization of the cultural landscape includes rather complex, often controversial issues related to the improvement, preservation and rational use of the natural environment of human society.
 The cultural landscape has found a more visible embodiment in the rational location of different areas of economic, as well as other, use, which is called territorial organization.
 In this regard, we emphasize the efficient use of land resources, which are of great importance for humanity, with the proper organization of space.
 Especially for low-income countries, such as the Republic of Armenia, the issues of territorial organization of efficient land use in accordance with the purposeful use of land resources and their production potential should be of primary importance.
  The aim of the work is to propose provisions for the organization of the landscape, which will ensure a more rational use of land resources or the right choice of the most optimal options for them - natural areas.
 The latter in case of economic use will be considered as an appropriate type of arable land (agricultural, forest, etc.).
Currently, the landscaping of the area assumes the solution of the following issues: 1) Optimal sorting of farms according to their importance, 2) Creation of their correct quantitative ratio, optimal size, "reciprocal position" of horses, which will ensure the normal functioning of the whole system;
The difficulty of our task is that the rapid growth of nature conservation economy has contradictions.
It is obvious that at first the problem should be viewed from the point of view of landscape science, moving away from a specific social demand [2].
 By accepting this position, the following basic provisions can be formulated with the territorial organization of the landscape: 1. The cultural landscape should not be uniform.
 The stability of the landscape, ecological and aesthetic condition depend on its internal diversity.
 For example, small farms, which are replaced by forests, parks, reservoirs and even swamps, are environmentally friendly, but reduce the possibility of using the equipment.
 In this case, it is more reasonable to adapt agricultural machinery to the nature of the field, and not the other way around.
2. The cultural landscape should not contain anthropogenic uncultivated lands of different origins, piles of waste generated by quarries, and poor soils.
  All of these must be processed.
3. Priority should be given to green cover over all land use.
 The best arable lands should be used for agricultural crops, but at the same time it is necessary to maximize the area occupied by trees by using the re-cultivated lands և low-productivity agricultural arable lands.
4. Mutual coordination must be taken into account in the placement of handrails [1].
 For example, given the importance of forest protection և soil protection, it is possible to provide not only watercourses, canyons, but also watersheds and slopes with forest areas, as vegetation is able to absorb ուտ accumulate washed-out washed-out elements, preventing them from leaking.
  It thus plays the role of a possible biogeochemical barrier.
5. Rational placement of handrails should be accompanied by an increase in their potential due to various reclamation works.
  From this point of view, in the system of ameliorative agro-technical measures, 3 main directions can be distinguished: 5.1 Mechanical means of surface flow regulation (frost plowing, snow storage, lateral plowing, contour plowing, drumming, slope grading).
5.2 Biological methods (forest zones, multi-branch farms with intensive livestock farming, rational crop rotations with alternate "dense shrub vegetation", etc.).
5.3 Chemical methods that have a direct effect on the geochemical cycle, through which it changes (biological efficiency (application of fertilizers), կենս biological processes (use of pesticides և herbicides).
6. Extensive, "adaptable" land use is advisable in many landscapes to maintain the natural balance [1].
  Some experts consider the simplest methods of land use to be ideal, given that, for example, nomadic livestock is more "ecological" in terms of food chain regulation, more effective in terms of nature conservation.
Of course, it is clear that in modern times this method is not realistic, such lands can be considered as a reserve fund for intensive land use.
  However, taking into account specific landscape and geographical conditions, the "adaptive" use of land is economically targeted.
7. In the process of territorial organization of the landscape, it is necessary to review the complete or partial removal of some lands from economic use for environmental, health, cultural, educational, scientific purposes.
The highest protected areas are the reserves.
 They serve as reference earth systems և are considered ideal places for sustainable landscaping.
  Reserves should be closed not only for economic activities, but also for any mass visits; they should be used only for scientific research.
  Each reserve must be surrounded by a buffer zone with a limit mode of use.
Unfortunately, many modern reserves, including those in Armenia, do not correspond to their significance; they are used for tourism, hunting, wild plant procurement, and other purposes.
  8. The "care of landscapes", that is, its external improvement, preservation of high aesthetic qualities, and its formation are of great importance.
 From this point of view, a significant result can be achieved by rational allocation of different arable lands, land recultivation, landscaping and other means.
 Additional events are organized with the help of landscape architecture in connection with the "installation" of other structures in the landscape.
  The ways of implementing the above-mentioned provisions of the organization of the territory are very different; they depend firstly on the natural structure of the landscape, secondly on the social order, thirdly on the "heritage", that is, on what we leave to the next generations.
 In this regard, the recommendations of the landscape expert should be of an alternative nature - include several ways of organizing the area - possible ways of landscaping, land reclamation, etc., so that there is an opportunity to choose a more economically optimal way.
 Although in some cases it is possible to choose an option that will be economically unprofitable, but from the point of view of maintaining the natural balance and restoring it in the future, it is more rational [4].
Landscape specialists now know the theory of cultural landscape նոր the latest methodology of its design.
  One of the modeling processes taking place in agriculture is the use of information technologies in precision agriculture.
  Modern agriculture should be based on the latest computer technologies that will allow more efficient processing and use of information.
  Computer software, including spreadsheets, databases, GIS, and other applications, should be fully utilized in landscaping.
 Conclusion. Thus, the main task is to first և preserve և use the land resource wisely.
  And one of the solutions to this problem is the spatial organization in landscapes, especially in the regions where the lands are subject to wind and water erosion, swampy or super-wet areas.
 All this should include a system of state measures that will ensure the rational use of land, conservation, restoration of land yields, the establishment of optimal arable relations, in which case the landscape will remain unchanged.
Territorial organization should be based on economic, environmental and technical calculations that will provide an environmentally sound landscape that is capable of reproduction.
Literature Information about the author Gayane Roles A. Avetisyan - Candidate of Geographical Sciences, Associate Professor, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State Pedagogical Institute, E-mail.
