One of the priority tasks of pedagogical science is to significantly improve the quality of education by continuously introducing the structural-content components of scientific-research-innovative activity to meet the modern requirements for the quality of education, to organize the educational-cultural process according to the age-individual peculiarities of students.
 There have always been various difficulties in the learning process, conditioned by objective-subjective reasons.
 In the current context, the difficulties in the education system are of a more acute nature, which are expressed in terms of subject, pedagogical, methodological, psychological issues related to the ongoing process of recent educational reforms.
  As a result of all this, the professional activity of a pedagogue becomes more complicated.
  The traditional professional difficulties of a pedagogue are supplemented by new phenomena, which include: 1) the new assessment system, 2) collaborative teaching methods, 3) alternative textbooks, 4) increasing the problems of the upbringing process, 5) the existence of multidisciplinary classes in some community schools.
These phenomena determine the emergence of controversial situations and the importance of the process of guiding educators in such situations.
The purpose of this article is to identify the difficulties encountered in the implementation of the teaching process in multidisciplinary classrooms, to clarify the role and significance of the didactic counseling instructed in the process of overcoming them.
Considering the difficulties that arose during the professional activity of pedagogues, let us mention that back in the 1980s T. Ս. Polyakova developed provisions aimed at overcoming these difficulties.
  In that concept, the notion of "didactic difficulty" was singled out, which was understood as "the teacher's difficulty in the teaching process, ie the psychological state of tension, dissatisfaction with the results in the absence of conditions to overcome the difficulty" [1, p. 13].
It should be added that the process of creating and developing difficulties starts from the moment when the teacher encounters some unexpected obstacle or contradiction during the implementation of the educational activity.
  This process continues to develop when obstacles և contradictions are not overcome in time.
 V. K. Dyachenko distinguishes the following types of contradictions. "1) Coherent, systematic writing of the teaching material by the teacher անհ Inconsistent, irrelevant writing of the material mastered by the participants", 2) Different abilities of students միակ between the only pace of learning ", 3) Collective nature of the individual nature of teaching" teaching in the classroom " , pp. 43-44].
Introducing the process of creating difficulties, let us refer to the problematic situations that arise during the implementation of the lesson process in multidisciplinary classrooms.
  It should be noted that orphanages are the classes where children of different age groups go through the cognitive process together; they study different educational materials at the same time.
  The study of the teaching process in multidisciplinary classes shows that the subjects of that process, the learners և the pedagogues, encounter material, pedagogical-methodological դժվար psychological difficulties, which are complex, interdependent, inextricably linked.
 Subjective difficulties are usually associated with realities conditioned by objective-subjective factors, such as the understanding of concepts, definitions, the consolidation of knowledge, the practical application of theoretical knowledge, and so on.
 Some of the material difficulties arise due to not mastering the previous topics over time, the other part is connected with the acquisition of new ideas, the emergence of new concepts.
The material difficulty is manifested due to the overcrowding of the classroom, in particular in the multidisciplinary classrooms, it is manifested by the difficulties that arise during the transfer of different educational materials to different age groups.
These complications are due to a number of factors, which can include time constraints, students' focus, the child's socio-psychological adjustment, insufficient learning motivation, incomplete discipline, and other factors.
 Speaking of time constraints, it should be said that the stress of time constraints is the strongest, which affects the implementation of the child's cognitive process.
  The mechanism of many basic learning skills is such that speed only hinders its development.
 In this respect, B. Bloom notes: "Teaching time should be determined according to the student's abilities.
  No student can study new material until he has mastered the basic necessary material ”[3, p. 102].
 This idea is also emphasized by the Armenian pedagogue S. Mandinyan, noting, "it is more desirable to go less, but in such a way that what happened is well-founded.
 It is necessary to explain again and again, to explain to the students, on the condition of adding something new to their consciousness, rather than rushing, equating the result with nothing ”[4, p. 524].
  Referring to the opinions of different pedagogues, it should be noted that when organizing lessons in multi-faceted classes, the teaching time is limited, as a result of which the educational material is not fully understood by the child.
 This reality, which can lead not only to a decline in progress, education, teacher, negative attitude towards school, but also to nervous illness, stress or depression.
Considering the importance of focusing students, it should be noted that in multidisciplinary classrooms, it becomes a determinant of the effectiveness of the teaching process, in the sense that the classroom consists of representatives of different age groups who study materials with different content, which in many cases leads to distraction.
 As a result, the design, organization, and implementation of the lesson become more difficult. They require the greatest effort from the educator, not only to correctly determine the didactic, developmental, educational goals of the class, but also to ensure that students of all ages focus on the material they have studied.
  In order to do all this accurately, educators must have the flexibility, the ability to make quick decisions, the situational thinking, which, it must be said, is not typical of all educators.
Referring to the difficulties caused by the child's social-psychological adaptation, it is necessary to keep in mind that it plays a decisive role in the development of the child's low progress.
 It should be added that this phenomenon, as a rule, is more pronounced in multidisciplinary classrooms, where it manifests itself in the form of intra-group groupings, tension and interpersonal conflicts among children.
Speaking about the incomplete establishment of discipline, it is not superfluous to mention that in his time Ya. A. Komensky noted. "A school without discipline is the same as a mill without water" [5, p. 104].
  Continuing the idea, let us add that in multidisciplinary classrooms, the provision of discipline during the teaching process is not carried out to the required extent, which in itself leads to a decrease in the efficiency of teaching.
 Discussing the controversial situations that have arisen during the pedagogical professional activity, we should mention that they condition the need to develop and test such methods and ways that help the teacher, which on the one hand will reduce the risk factors in solving pedagogical problems, on the other hand will promote creative problems in pedagogical situations. promoting the teacher's innovative activities.
Today, general education, as a developing system, needs the support of professional consultants in various fields, who are authorized to provide organizational, pedagogical, administrative, educational and other support.
 Introducing the difficulties in the teaching process in multidisciplinary classes, let's talk about the ways to overcome those difficulties.
 In such situations, a new pedagogical technology - "Pedagogical Counseling" can help the teacher.
 At present, many theoretical-practical approaches to pedagogical counseling have been developed, different models are used for all subjects of pedagogical activity.
According to M. Ն. Pzner, O. Մ. According to Zaichenko և others, consulting is formulated as a "complex, specialized relationship between consultants and consultants, aimed at solving the problems arising from the activities of both the individual and the organization as a whole, creating positive shifts" [4, p. 9].
  Pedagogical counseling has a number of components, of which in this article we will refer only to the didactic component, which is aimed at overcoming the difficulties that arise in the teaching process.
The purpose of didactic counseling is to increase the teacher's didactic awareness, to help the teacher to overcome the difficulties encountered during his / her teaching activities.
  In the professional literature, didactic awareness is described as "the teacher's ability to solve problems that arise in the learning process in accordance with professional knowledge, skills, experience, in other words, as the ability to make connections between knowledge" situations "[6, p. 264].
From the point of view of our research problem, the following conditions are used, especially with the effective implementation of didactic counseling: 1) getting acquainted with the experience of advanced pedagogues, 2) developing the teacher's ability to reflect, 3) assisting the teacher in developing his / her position.
The components of didactic advice are: 1. consultant-consultant, communication between them, 2. Professional knowledge միջոց means of organizing the process of their mastery - analysis and evaluation of difficult situations, 3. The result of the consultation, which O. According to Alekhina, "it is the rational combination of the knowledge and pedagogical situations of the employees of the data organization" [7, p. 74].
Didactic counseling consists of a number of stages, in each of which the pedagogical professional difficulty is presented step by step, the conditions and factors causing it are studied directly (in class) or indirectly (video) and the consequences are analyzed.
The background will be revealed by developing the teacher's ability to reflect.
At the last stage of the consultation, the consultant offers an individual problem-solving and problem-solving program.
 It is not imposed on the pedagogue, but the counselor acts in the role of a special "mirror", with the help of which the pedagogue watches his activities from the side, with self-discretion he is able to find his mistakes, to organize the lesson process in a new way.
  In other words, feedback is made between the pedagogue-counselor և the pedagogue,, which helps the pedagogue's self-expression.
Didactic counseling allows the pedagogue to orient himself / herself in the existing didactic concepts, to answer independently the following questions: what to teach, how to teach, when, what methods to use.
As a result, the pedagogue models his activity.
 As O. mentions. A. Anisimov, "by modeling his own functions, they are abstracted, which is accompanied by their simplification.
 Reality is more diverse than theory, formulas, thus making it more difficult to understand.
 Simplification through models helps to orient in a theoretically complex material. this is the value of modeling ”[8, pp. 137-138].
Introducing the theory of didactic counseling, it should be noted that it was piloted in the schools we studied, including the fifth and sixth multidisciplinary grades of Benjamin Secondary School.
  Classes were held, the directions of the teaching process were specified, during the organization of which there was a greater need for support and advice.
 The time allocated to certain stages of the lesson, layered teaching, disciplinary issues, including the focus of attention of individual students were singled out from them.
 The lessons were followed by a didactic consultation with teachers, during which they were introduced to a certain model of class process organization.
 According to this model, during the lesson, the middle school students would receive a written card assignment from the teacher (which the teacher had to have in advance according to the lesson preparation plan / program), during which the teacher would work orally with the other grade students.
 Upon completion, the e-mails are changed. The teacher would work with the first graders through oral surveys, and with the second graders through written assignments.
 As for the transfer of the new material, the teacher, at his / her discretion, can transfer the new material of the class when he / she has assigned a card task to the other class.
 In conclusion, it should be noted that due to the didactic counseling, the difficult situations of the teaching process were overcome in the multidisciplinary classes.
  It should be added that the implementation of process didactic counseling will ensure the continuous education and professional development of pedagogues, in particular, the development and implementation of new approaches to solving problems in teaching in multidisciplinary classrooms, as well as the creation of necessary conditions for their implementation.
 As a result of didactic counseling, the teaching process will acquire a new pedagogical-psychological meaning, it will be clarified, the difficulties existing in that process will be overcome.
  There will be a creative re-formation of the pedagogical thinking of the pedagogues, as a result of which they will design their own activity in the direction of organizing the didactic process.
Literature կ è ւ íàþùåã ó òå èòåëÿ, Ì.
 Äçä. “Ïåäàãîãèêà”.
 1983. 128 ñ. 2. Äüÿ ÷ åíêî Â. Ê. Íîâàÿ äèäàêòèêà, Ì.
 Äçä. “Íàðîäíîå îáðàçîâàíèå”, 3. Modern pedagogical approaches, theories, methods, assessment, manual for teachers and students, Yerevan, "Noyan Tapan" publishing house, 2003, 404 pages.
4. Shavarshyan A. Մ. Armenian pedagogues, Yerevan, book A, 1958, 621 pages.
5. Modern pedagogical approaches, theories, methods, evaluation manual for teachers and students, Yerevan, "Noyan Tapan" publishing house, 2003, 404 pages.
ïåðâîáûòíîì îáùåñòâå äî êîíöà XXâ.
 Ó ÷ åáíîå ïîñîáèå äëÿ ïåäàãîãè2-å èçä., Èñïð. è äîï. Ì.:
 ÒÖ «Ñôåðà», 2001. 512 ñ.Ñëàñòåíèíà è È. À. Êîëåñíèêîâîé, Ó ÷ åáíîå ïîñîáèå.
 Ì.:
 Äçä-âî Öåíòð10. Àíèñèìîâ Î. Ñ. Ìåòîäîëîãèÿ.
  Ôóíêöèÿ, ñóùíîñòü ñòàíîâëåíèå. Ì.:
Information about the author Zahoyan Anahit Meruzhan - Benjamin secondary. School, Chemistry and Biology Teacher, E-mail.
