The purpose of this article is to analyze the Javakhk plateauThe recreational potential of the relief within the borders of the Republic of Armenia for the development of different types of tourism and recreation.
Geomorphological recreational resources are a combination of horsepower.
 Moreover, all the elements of the relief can be differentheight, origin և development history.
 At the same time, geomorphological recreational resources can have scientific, medical-biological-aesthetic value, which is a good precondition for the development of recreation, particularly tourism.
Full use of geomorphological recreational resourcesfor they must have certain features. be attractive, affordable, well-researched.
  Have high excursion features,diverse landscapes նեն stand out for their stability [4].
Another feature of geomorphological resources is themExistence is everywhere (relief is everywhere).
 With this in mindThe fact is that the recreational use of geomorphological resources can not be restricted.
  Relief:can be used as a recreational resource if it allowstechnological suitability.
The results of the research.
 The plateau of Javakhk is spreadingin the north of the republic, occupying an area of ​​480 km2.
  From north to south within the borders of the Republic of Armenia, the maximum length in the direction of Legli-Karakhach mountain pass reaches 19 km.
 From west to east the width of the plateau in the direction of Sizavet-Szaberd (Caracalla) is 25 km.
The plateau is a young volcanic area,which was finally formed at the end of the Middle Quarter.
The volcanic activity here has created dome-like structures, which are mainly composed of andesitic lavas.
 GeneralThe Javakhk plateau stands out in the territory of the Republic of Armenia with its mild relief, which is favorable for pedestrian tourist routes.
 His:One of the main features is the relatively flat relief of the watershed, where several dome-like peaks rise (Legli 3156, Achkasar 3196, Gharanakh 3038, etc.).
 These peaks are not inaccessible և can be a destination for hiking trails.
They can be an object of tourist interestGlacial relief horses preserved on the plateau.
  Due to glacial activity at the top of the plateauGlacial circuses were formed.
 They are especially goodexpressed in the northern regions, in the upper reaches of the river valleys opening to the west (Chakhkalget, Sarigyugh) and east (Arkajur, Sjaberd).
  The valley of the Sjaberd River, which extends east of the plateau, can be especially interesting for tourists.on the slope (12 km).
Table 1:Morphometric indicators of the relief of the Javakhk plateauevaluation.
Recreation:type:SkiingsportSki:sport (discipline:routes:for)Hiking(order:routes:for)WalkingRelief:indicator:Height:(p.m., m)Fragmentation:depth (m)Slopes:inclination (°)Height:(p.m., m)Fragmentation:depth (m)Slopes:inclination (°)Height:(p.m., m)Fragmentation:depth (m)Slopes:inclination (°)Height:(p.m., m)Fragmentation:depth (m)Slopes:inclination (°)Degree of favorablenessFavorableRelativelyNo.favorablefavorableAbove 3000.More than 250Less than 250Less than 10,    Greater than 20Above 3000.Up to 100:250 և moreMore than 6:Above 3000.More than 500Up to 300More than 15Up to 5:Above 3000.More than 10:The upper part of the river valley is one of the glacier circusesis a chain that is an important tourist attraction for geotourism loversfor.
 Similar valleys extend west of the plateauin the upper reaches of the river valleys formed on the slopes.
The rivers starting from the Javakhk plateau in the middle streams flow mainly through the valleys developed by glaciers, with trogons.
 The latter are well preserved, especially on the eastern slopes of the plateau(S'aberd, Arkajur, etc.).
In general, the Javakhk plateau stands out in reliefdue to the abundance of flattened horses, which is due to glaciersby extraction activities.
  The top, partly western slopes of the plateau are covered with extrusion surfaces, and in the north the glacially treated catarrh is better preserved.belt [6].
In the highest part of the plateau, which is located on the Armenian-Georgian state border, in addition to the glacial relief, hanging valleys have formed, which descend sharply to the main river.
 Typical hanging valleys extend above the Chakhkal չ Achkadzor riversin the stream.
Recreational opportunities for the relief of the Javakhk plateauIn order to evaluate it as an element of relief assessment, we calculated two main morphometric indicators of the relief: slope slope խոր depth of division.
 As an evaluation indicator, you can:The position of the slopes should be used, but the limited volume of the article does not allow it to be included in the assessmentthe mentioned index.
Recreational assessment of relief morphometric indicatorsWe have compiled a special table for the reliefQualitative և score evaluation of indicators.
The rating system presented in the table refers to:Four types of recreation, the development of which in the Javakhk plateauis more realistic in the area.
 The study area has favorable climatic conditions for alpine skiing.
  Snow cover untilThe altitude of 2000 m is 140 days, which ensures the economic efficiency of the recreational complex [7].
They are more favorable for alpine skiing2500 m heights, which occupy the edge parts of the plateau.
  These altitudes cover 223.0 km2, which is:46.4% of the total area of ​​the plateau.
  Comparing the map of hypsometric zones with the map of the depth of fragmentation becomes obvious.that the most favorable indicators of the depth of fragmentation with the favorable height are available on the slopes of the east-south-east position of the Javakhk plateau, where the density of fragmentationreaches 250-280 m.
The third indicator of relief is the slopefor heights, has the following image. The slopes of the east-south-east slopes are in the range of 18-30 °, which is:
is assessed as relatively favorable.
 Achkadzor և Slopes in Sjaberd river valleys are 25-33 °, which is unfavorablefor alpine skiing (see Table 1).
 The slope index is more favorable in the westհամար for south-western slopes, where the slopes are up to և18 °.
The combination of the three indicators shows that the relief of the Javakhk plateau at an altitude of 2500 m is favorable for the development of alpine skiing.
Favorable depth relief indices (100-250 m) predominate in the western part of the plateau.on slopes where slopes are favorable from 1 ° to 6 °.
Weak slopes are typical of the ահ Ashotsk concavein the contact zone, which is covered with lake և fluvioglacial sediments, weakIt is a sloping plain.
In addition to resting winter horses, the Javakhk plateau has favorable conditions for organizing summer recreation.
 For hiking (regular) routes, taking into account the depth index (300-500 m), the eastern slopes are more favorable.
Dalidagh (3046), Karanakh, Chomcha (2804)The depth index fluctuates in the range of 300-350 m, which is the best for the organization of this type of rest.
  The slope index (5-15 °) becomes more favorable up to 2200 m.
 These slopes predominate on the western slopes.
The relief of the Javakhk plateau provides an opportunity to organize a walking rest.
 It is more expedient to take walks in the lowlands, up to 2500 m,which, as already mentioned above, occupies 46.4% of the plateau.
 This:Karakhach mountain pass (2273 m) stands out in terms of:is located south of the plateau.
  The slopes spread here are weakly divided. The depth of division is 80-150 m, which is the best indicator
for a walk.
The slope of the slopes in the area of ​​the mountain pass itself is 3-5 °, and on the south-western slopes in the Zuygaghbyur-Hartashen section - 4-8 °, which is also favorable for pedestrian routes.
Conclusions.
  Based on researchThree morphometric indicators of relief were compared.
 According to that, it became obvious that.a) Almost half of the territory of Javakhk plateau (46.4%) is at favorable altitudes for recreation (up to 2500 m).
b) Morphometric indicators of the plateau relief are favorableRecreation for both winter and summer horsesfor.
c) Organization of skiing (disciplinary) այլ other forms of recreationThe eastern slopes of the plateau are more favorable for it.
 For non-regular recreation it is advisable to use the southSlightly sloping south-western slopes with small slopes.
Literature in conditional global and regional changes.
 Thesis. Doc. Conf. (Moscow5. Geomorphology of the Armenian SSR.
 Publishing house of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan, 1986, page 57.
6. In the same place, page 120.
7. Martirosyan LM For the development of winter recreation
Principles of assessment of natural conditions in Ashotsk regionև Mapping methods.
 GSPI Scientific Bulletin, Volume A, №1,2013 pp. 139-141.
Information about the author:Martirosyan Leon Movses - Candidate of Geographical Sciences, Associate ProfessorHead of Gyumri child. Head of the Department of Geography of the Institute.
E-mail:
