The concept of "structure" was first proposedIP By Gerasimov [9].
 G.S. Ganeshin և Others understand the term "structure" as "different types of taxonomic relief"
due to endogenous relief factorstectonic movements, structures, volcanic processes, magmatic processes, etc. ", at the same time noting that"… asAs a rule, they are not purely internal eggs, because from the moment of their emergence they are subject to the influence of external processes ”[5, pp. 87-88].
According to the above definition, by the framework of this work, by structure we do not mean the elements of modern relief,other buried or partially exposed geological structures that form mountain ranges of modern relief elements;intermountain depressions և etc., the core or geological substrate.
Based on the above, it is not difficult to conclude that the discovery of such structural inequalities canbe expedient, in particular, in the search for sites that are structurally promising minerals.
  They testify to that accordinglynumerous scientific works on the subject [6,7,10,12].
From a scientific point of view, the assessment of the latest tectonic movements as the boundaries of the development of the geological process in the deep horizons of the earth is of great interest by the approach of comparative structural analysis.
  At the same timeDiscovery of the connections between the crystal base and the structural elements of the sedimentary layer will lead to the study areaEarth-crystalline foundation in the formation of modern reliefrole evaluation.
  Summarizing the above, let us mention him!that the term "structure" used by us, by its very definition, refers more to the structure of the sediment layerThe elements are not so applicable to the surface of the crystalline base of the earth, so we will define the latter as structural elements of the surface of the crystalline base of the earth.
  At the same time, we will accept that the connections revealed as a result of the research are of a structural nature.
The purpose of this article is to identify comparative analysisThe crystalline base of the earth in the northern fold zone of Armenia ևStructural connections between the sediment layer.
 For this purpose, complex geophysical-geological data were used.
 Data:The geophysical part is the new gravitationally modified model of the surface of the crystalline base of the territory of Armenia, obtained according to the values ​​of the real densities of rocks [1], and the geological partcompiles the morphometric analyzes of the modern relief of the study area, carried out with the appropriate methodology, which is presented in detail in our previous works[13,14].
  Selection of geophysical geological datais due to the fact that the former are the most expedient in the study of the deep structure of the earth, and the latter - in the modern relief of the surface, at the same time They are distinguished by a high degree of comparability, which determines the complex wide application of these two directions.
Figure 1. Sedimentary earthquake in the northern corrugated zone of ArmeniaComplex map of intrusive bodies of layer structures - complexwith attractive ֆ morphometric data Symbols - 1. Supra-basin of the Saint-Amasia ophiolite zone ևBase rocks, 2. Aparan-Arzakan crystal base exposed areas, 3.Granitoids of Alaverdi-Berd intrusion zone, quartz diorites,Plagiogranites, 4. Oligocene granitoids (Pambak intrusions group), 5.Chalk-shaped quartz monzonites, granites, granodiorites, diorites(Pambak intrusions group), 6. Pseudolecytic, nepheline և basicsyenites (group of cotton intrusions), 7. Isolongers, 8. Crystalline basesurface isohypses, 9. Complex geological sections.
Thus, the above geophysical-geological dataAs a result of the combination, a complex map of the crystalline base և sedimentary layer structures of the earth's study area was obtained, supplemented by data on the distribution of intrusive bodies in the area [8], which is presented in Figure 1.
 Intrusive in the articleInformation on the disorganization of bodies is taken from the relevant works [2,11].
Identification of structural connections between the above layersComplex structural-geological profiling methods were used for this purpose, a total of 7 sections were made, 4 of which intersect the structural-tectonic zones.length and width of 3, which are schematically representedshown in Figure 2.
As can be seen from the section diagram, in the study area, there are generally direct structural links between the sedimentary layer of the earth և the crystal base structures և.
 These connections are expressed by almost complete spatial coincidences of the raised and lowered areas of the mentioned two layers.
 Areas where the surface of the crystal base is located below sea level, the values ​​of the isolonger field ևsThey are characterized by low values, up to 1.0-1.2 km on average, which is clearly expressed in both Figure 1 and Figure 2.
 At the same time there are areas where you can seeinverse structural connections.
 These connections are mainlycome with high values ​​of isolonger field քի crystalline baseby placing at relatively greater depths of the surface.
It is noteworthy that in almost all sites characterized by inverse structural connections, intrusions of different composition are widespread.bodies.
Figure 2. Schematic of structural-geological geological profilesConventional signs. 1.- Earth crystal base
surface, 2.- Isolonger surface, 3.- Intrusive bodies.
Roman numerals indicate the serial numbers of the sections.
In particular, on section II, which was carried out in the direction of Bavra-Amasia-Gyumri, inverse structural connections are observed in the Amasia section, which is known as Saint-Amasia.is the northwestern continuation of the ophiolite zone.
  IntrusiveThe bodies are represented by peridodites, dunites and gabbro of super-basic and basic composition.
 Superstructure of the ophiolite zoneThe effect of intrusive rocks on the composition is also observed in section I-IIIwhich stretches in the direction of Bavra-Dilijan-Chambarak և continuingto the south-east, it also includes the Shan mountain range, which:Inverse structural connections are observed within the boundaries.
They are distinguished by structural inverse connectionsalso վրա on the I-II section the middle part of the Bavra-Aparan zone և on the VI-VI section on the Aparan-Dilijan և sections to the east of it.
 Pambak Group played a great role in establishing structural infrastructure feedback in Bavra-Aparan և Aparan-Dilijan zonesintrusive bodies represented by oligocene-sized granitoids (Aparan-Dilijan zone)) chalk-shaped quartz monzonites and granites (Bavra-Aparan zone).
  What about?To the site east of Dilijan, it is the area of ​​intrusions forming the Berd group of the Alaverdi-Berd intrusion zone.where the intrusive bodies are represented by granitoids, quartz diorites, plagiogranites.
 Charentsavan-Chambarak on the II-II section stands out with similar connections ChambarakThe precinct, which was also reflected in section I-III.
  IV-IV:On the section, which has a Tashir-Ijan-Berd stretch, inverse structural connections have been established within the Tashir-Ijan zone, where the intrusions forming the Alaverdi group are spread, which are comparable to the intrusions of the Berd group.
 The last VV section extends in the direction of Amasia-Alaverdi-Noyemberyan; it stands out with the establishment of inverse structural connections in its extreme western parts, the reason being the firstIn this case, the intrusions of the superstructure of the Amasia site, andin the second case, the medium-acid composition of the Alaverdi groupintrusions.
Summary. Different structural-geological sections
As a result of the analysis carried out by means of theThere are both direct and reverse equipmentsconnections.
Structural bonds of direct nature, in our opinion, are mainly due to tectonic processes, in particular, in one case due to the folding of the surface of the sediment layer due to the folding of the surface of the crystalline layer, in the other case due to vertical displacement of individual sediments.or by lowering.
 On the structure of the peripheral layers of the EarthThe impact of deep-seated disorders has been discussed in the work of foreign researchers [3,4,15].
  In particular, MP Billings
separates the so-called cracking folds, which occur with an initial horizontal distributiondue to the folding of the layers, when the vertical displacement is carried out by fracture sites, or bending folds, which are formed as a result of the folding of the site by horizontal compression.
As part of our research between the above two layersshould not be used to justify direct structural linksexclude none of the above folding types as they are being studiedThe area is distinguished by its active geodynamics, first of all by the intensity of the latest tectonic, mostly block movements, and from the regional point of view by the location of tectonic plates in the border collision zone.
Thus, within the northern fold zone of ArmeniaThe presence of direct structural connections generally indicates that in areas with similar connectionsthe sedimentary layer of the earth, as well as modern reliefThe formation of geology is largely due to the earthwith structural inequalities of the surface of the crystal base ևis hereditary.
Structural inverse connections are observed mainly in the areas of propagation of intrusive bodies of different composition.
 Based on the classical geotectonic notions of the intrusive body implantation process [3], it can be generalized that the intrusive body implantation is a sedimentary earth.in the layer leads to the violation of the latter and in particular to a certain increase, which is typical especially for the intrusive bodies like batolitans of granite composition, which are widely spread especially in the Alaverdi-Berd intrusive zone.
 On the other hand, the propagation of intrusive bodies greatly affects the values ​​of geophysical and primarily gravitational fields, causing local minimizations or maximizations of that field due to the difference in density with the surrounding rocks of intrusive rocks, which in turn greatly affectson the values ​​of the gravitational model of the surface of the earth's crystal base.
Literature 2. Aslanyan AT Regional geology of Armenia. Yerevan.
 Айпетрат, 1958, 430 с.3. Belousov VV Geotectonics. M.
 Ed. Moscow University, 1976, 334 p.
4. Billings M.N. Structural geology. M.
 Ed. Foreign Literature, 1949,
gorny side. M.
 Science, 1975, 275 p.  and morphosculpture). M.
 Science, 1967, 332 p. M.
 Nedra, 1979, 219 p.  researches. M.
 Nedra, 1970, 296 p.geophysical methods. Kiev.
 Science Duma, 1986, 167 p.Information about the author:Rudolf S. Sargsyan - Gyumri M. Nalbandyan State:
Pedagogical Institute E-mail.
