Aryan wisdom says: "Give a man a fish, and he will be satisfied one day."
  Teach a man to fish; he will be full for the rest of his life. '
Any pedagogical technology contains means by which the activities of learners are activated and intensified, but there are technologies in which these means are the expressions of the main idea, the guarantors of effectiveness.
  These include preventive-perspective / Lysenkova /, game, problem, programmed, individual և other technologies.
 In this study, we tried to present the peculiarities of interactive game technologies, because due to the demands of modernity, they are in great demand today, making the learning process more active, effective and interesting.
In the practice of teaching, especially in recent decades, technologies based on game modeling have been widely used.
 These technologies are distinguished by their diversity, efficiency, and are in great demand in our time.
  A. studied pedagogical interactive game technologies. P. Panfilova [4], A. Մ. Gurchich [2], S.A. Mukhina, A. A. Solovyova [3] և others.
Game training implies solutions to various problems related to professional activities, human relationships, personal difficulties.
The possibilities of interactive game technologies are quite wide.
a. They allow to cover a wide range of issues.
b. They correspond to the logic of the activity.
c. Contribute to the greater involvement of the participants in the educational process, push them to impromptu activity.
d. Stereotypes are overcome more easily, self-esteem is corrected.
e. They provide an opportunity to make comprehensive analyzes, comments, and to interpret the obtained results.
f. Contribute to the expression of all the qualities of a person, individual positive և negative abilities և etc.
In addition, the goals of game technology are aligned with the practical needs of learners.
Play, combined with work-teaching, is a kind of activity not only for children but also for adults.
 Gurich thinks that situations and situations, a certain form of activity, social experience are taken into account in the game, and as a result the control of one's own behavior is improved [2, p. 9].
In life, play activities perform a number of functions: - fun (causes pleasure, encouragement, arouses interest), - self-affirmation, - therapeutic (overcoming game difficulties that coincide with life difficulties), - predictive (one can recognize oneself in the game, to show their own hidden forces) - correctional-rehabilitative / in game practice the personal qualities change, the socialization of the person takes place /.
Mukhina writes that the game is always played voluntarily, includes elements of competition, gives pleasure to the participants, helps them to establish themselves [3, p. 25].
The game has been used since ancient times as a teaching method, a means of transferring experience from the older generation to the next generation.
 In a modern school, play activities are carried out in the following cases: - as an independent technology, - as a component of pedagogical technology, - as a way of organizing a lesson.
In order to properly evaluate the place and role of game technologies, educators must be well aware of the functions of the game.
 The effectiveness of didactic games depends first of all on their systematic use, then also on the purposefulness of the game programs and the ability to combine them with didactic exercises.
Children ողները learners in general are easily involved in the field of play activities և the more diverse it becomes, the more attractive it becomes.
 Game activities include games ժexercises that develop the ability to identify the nature of objects, their characteristics, to compare and contrast them.
 Games also allow to distinguish the real phenomena from the unreal, develop self-control, reaction speed, musical listening, etc. / 1, 32 /.
At a younger age, children create their world with the help of games, guided by a bright imagination.
  In high school age, games are aimed at stabilizing a person, revealing his virtues.
   The technology of all business games consists of several stages.1. Preparatory.
  This stage includes the development of the scenario, the determination of the purpose of the training, the substantiation of the problem, the development of a practical game plan, the description of the actors, etc.
2. Enter the game.
  The names of the participants, the game conditions, the names of the experts, the main goal are announced, the choice of situations is substantiated.
  Criteria, rules and provisions are proposed.
3. The game process.
 As soon as the game starts, no one has the right to interfere or change anything.
  Only the player has the right to control or regulate the actions of the participants, if they deviate from the main goal or deviate from the rules of the game.
4. Analysis of game results և evaluation.
 Experts express themselves, exchange opinions, and the participants of the game can defend և clarify their actions.
 In the final stage, the teacher notes the achievements and the results of the game, the "mistakes made", and summarizes the final result of the lesson.
There are several types of interactive game technologies: practical, imitation, functional and role-playing.
Practical games entered the school from the lives of adults.
They are used in the process of mastering new material և develop creative abilities.
  The game gives an opportunity to understand և to study the educational material from different angles.
Imitation games imitate the activities of an organization or production.
 Cases can be imitated, specific types of people's activities (business meeting, plan discussion, conversation, etc.).
Functional games help to develop specific functions, such as public speaking skills, campaigning skills, essay writing skills, and more.
  Such games are organized in real conditions.
Role-playing games develop behavioral rules, specific personality functions and abilities.
Scenarios are developed for such games, the roles of each participant are separated.
Various communication trainings stand out for their effectiveness in professional training, the main purpose of which is to develop students' verbal and non-verbal competencies, interactive knowledge, abilities and skills.
 In these trainings, the organization of communication becomes the main means of rehabilitation.
One of such trainings is "Video training" (video training).
 This is the name given to the trainings that are based on videos.
 Videos are used for educational purposes in two ways: • showing ready-made videos, • using video during a game task, showing and discussing it.
The educational goal of video training is to develop constructive behavior ևcommunication skills.
Watching ready-made videos helps to solve the following problems: • awareness, • problem solving, • capacity building.
Watching videos for informational purposes is used as a means of summarizing a large amount of information, it is also a convenient way to show constructive, effective activity, the desired manifestations of behavior.
The other way to use video training is to play interactive games.
  Learners stage or present small situations, situations that may arise in business relationships or interpersonal relationships.
 All this is filmed with a camera.
 Then, under the supervision of the pedagogue, the viewing of the filmed material is organized, which is accompanied by analyzes and discussions.
 This training allows you to directly reflect on your own experience, use it as an educational material that is discussed, analyzed, transformed during the training.
Such trainings A. P. Panfilova [4, p. 125] does not recommend holding it at the beginning of the educational process, as it may cause caution, restraint, voice changes, excitement, tension, etc. in some participants.
The skilled pedagogue must notice all the negatives in time and take the necessary measures.
  To reduce negative tendencies, it is recommended to use the camera during the second or third interactive lesson, when the participants adapt to the presence of the camera.
  When planning a video recording, keep in mind that it usually changes your perception of yourself and your actions.
  Taking all this into account, it is recommended to reserve the right of the first speech at the beginning of the discussion to the person or persons who appeared in the shot.
  This will allow the participant or participants to express based on what they have seen the observations and remarks that they have noticed that they would like to hear from others.
Of course, we should not forget that it is always necessary to finish the training with an optimistic, positive note.
One of the psychological phenomena in human interaction is that all people respond more to the beginning of information, to the end, moreover, the beginning makes a first impression, arouses interest, and the end, as a rule, remains in the memory.
  The training should help the learner, who sees himself on the screen, to perform restorative-corrective functions.
Video training gives everyone the opportunity to analyze their own image, facial expressions, movements, reactions, position.
 Naturally, it is necessary to remember that it is necessary to pay attention to both the revealed shortcomings and omissions, as well as the advantages and manifestations of professionalism.
Thus, the study shows that it is necessary to pay attention to interactive technologies, to know their types, peculiarities, advantages and disadvantages, because as a result of modern social developments, serious changes are taking place in all spheres of life and science, especially pedagogy. The effectiveness of the work is largely due to the interest in the educational material, which can be achieved through interactive learning.
  As a result of our research, we have come to the conclusion that even in higher education, interactive technologies can be introduced, especially in seminars; video training can be successfully used to develop and improve the professional qualities of a future pedagogue.
Literature 1. Bespalko VP We have pedagogical technologies. M.
 Pedagogy. 1989.education. M.
 2008.4. Panfilova A. P. Innovative pedagogical technologies, M.
 2011.Information about the authorGusorgyan Lusine Vahram - b. c. Lecturer of GSPI Pedagogy և Chair of Social Work, E-mail.
