Armenia is the only country in the world where chess is a compulsory subject in public schools.
 That initiative has already given its result. Armenia, with a population of only three million, is a chess superpower.
The entry of a chess subject into the school is conditioned by the huge interest and worship of our people in chess, as well as by the traditions of victories.
  On the other hand, chess develops a child's logic.
2011 In Armenia, chess became a compulsory subject for second and third grades.
 This chess initiative is aimed not only at the search for young talents, but also at the development of children's general mental abilities.
The purpose of teaching "Chess" is to develop creative thinking among children.
 Chess develops different abilities in a person, the ability to make decisions, develop strategies, logical thinking և responsibility.
 For children aged 7, 8 և 9, learning through games is more effective and useful, and chess is already a game that trains many parts of the brain.
  Chess develops my children's creative thinking, comparative analytical skills, and contributes to their personality development.
Chess combines the desire and will to win on the one hand, Janvrep attention to detail on the other hand.
  It teaches a culture of thought and long-term calculation.
 It obliges to deeply respect the playmate.
  Finally, chess is a common language և culture for millions of people.
 Chess is one of the best means of dialogue between cultures and civilizations.
Children who play chess are distinguished by flexibility of thought, ability to create, ability to analyze, flexible "solid logic", in addition, they are able to orient themselves quickly in difficult situations.
 They learn to win or lose at an early age.
The idea of ​​justice is formed in them.
 In addition to developing a person's mental capacity, chess also promotes imagination and trains memory.
 Those who play chess are more patient.
The introduction of chess in pursuit of the goal of training a chess player at school.
 It develops children's thinking և intellect, a number of psychological qualities, such as will, cooperation, the desire to fight, not to give up, teaches to be able to sit over time.
  Chess gives an opportunity to concentrate the child's mind through play.
 Chess is a fair game and gives everyone a sense of justice, the ability to create. The right logic.
 It instills cold judgment, patience in everyone, teaches to win, but at the same time be ready for defeat.
A child or young person playing chess is much more organized and quick to orient himself in different situations.
 It is not possible that some of the students will become chess players, it is possible that they will have these qualities.
Chess cultivates purposefulness, discipline and system in a person.
 Develops children's logic, memory, imagination and will, rational thinking ability.
The age of 6-7 is considered the best for the development of memory, attention և thinking processes, ավար the pedagogue has a unique opportunity to influence the development of all these processes with the help of chess [7].
Psychology is an integral part of chess.
  The strongest chess players in the world pay special attention to psychological training.
There are several reasons why chess became so popular among children.
  An example of this is the event we witnessed in Gyumri schools.
Teachers of other subjects are enthusiastic about the subject of chess, stating that the students of the latter are better prepared than their subjects.
  The game is fascinating.
  It develops such qualities in the child without which it is difficult to develop in modern life: intelligence and analytical abilities, will and attention, memory and non-standard thinking, striving for victory and healthy self-respect.
We conducted several psychological tests and questionnaires with the students of 2nd, 3rd and 4th grades in Gyumri schools # 7, 9 և 11.
  4th graders are not taught chess (control group).
 The chosen methods are aimed at finding out the children's intellectual abilities, the qualitative features of cognitive processes: the efficiency of attention, the volume of mechanical memory, observation.
 We used the methods of observation and interview.
 The methods used are: Attention efficiency study tests, which are designed to assess the characteristics of attention, distribution, movement, observation test, mechanical memory test, Raven color matrix test, which examines the formation of synthesis and synthesis processes, the level of mental development in children. 4th grade), assessing the level of school anxiety with the Phillips questionnaire [8].
  The latter allows the study of the level of school-related anxiety in the elementary and middle school age.
The results of research allow us to conclude that children who play chess have positive changes in the development of cognitive processes, such as attention and memory.
  As a result, they, as a rule, study well in school, are prudent and persistent.
  They have high self-esteem, their level of anxiety is low, they do not lose themselves in the face of any difficulty, they are able to find the optimal solution to the problem.
Not everyone knows about the interconnectedness of chess և information technology [10].
 Young players, as a rule, become wonderful programmers.
  This proves that chess has a universal developmental effect on children's mental abilities [1].
 Whatever profession the child chooses, chess will leave a mark on the intelligence developed in his life.
 Through our Raven matrices, it was found out that the 3rd grade students, who have been playing chess for the second year in a row, show high rates of mental processes compared to the 4th grade students.
 18 students of III-b grade of school # 11 were examined 20 20 students of IV-a grade.
 The results of the research showed that despite the age difference, for this age group highly developed IQ scores (scored 8-10 points) show 9 students from the 3rd grade, 7 students from the 4th grade.
The results are presented in the form of a table and a graph.
 The graph shows the test results in points on the horizontal axis, and the number of students surveyed on the vertical axis.
Table 1 Survey results according to Raven matrices 10 points8-9 points6-7 points4-5 points2-3 points0-1points 3rd lesson.4th grade / researched / researched 10v21-30v31-40v41-50v51-60over 60sGraph 1 to develop logical thinking.
 Chess plays an essential role in the process of self-development.
10 points 8-9 points 6-7 points 4-5 points 2-3 points 0-1 points
3rd class.
4th class.
According to some parents, this age is too early to start playing chess.
  In this regard, we consider it necessary to state that one of the concepts of developmental psychology, sensitivity, refers to sensitivity to certain influences.
  Thus, for example, the greatest sensitivity to languages ​​is in children aged 2-3 years, 5-year-olds learn to read easier and better than children of other ages.
 Children absorb impressions and knowledge like a sponge, but do not always show the results immediately.
Therefore, the sensitive age for starting chess is chosen by exceeding the relevant levels of intelligence.
However, not all children who are obsessed with chess become champions.
 For this reason, for most, the second reason for early acquaintance with chess may be to raise a versatile, harmoniously developed young person.
In summary, we can say that chess solves many problems at the same time: • Cognitive: expands the child's horizons, teaches to think, remember, compare, generalize, predict the results of one's own activities, orient oneself to the plane, which, at least, can be natural sciences For that, it develops ingenuity, logical thinking.
  Mechanical memory tests were performed on 2nd 2 3rd graders, և it turned out that 3rd graders, who have already passed chess courses for a year, show great results in memory tests.
 Below we present the results of the mechanical memory test in the form of a table.
  The graph shows the test results in points on the horizontal axis (the number of memorized numbers), and the number of students surveyed on the vertical axis.
Mechanical memory test results Table 21-2 No.3-4 No.5-7 No.8 և more Total: 3rd grade. 2nd grade. / Researched / researched 16 years.
8 և:
more:
   Schedule 23rd lesson.
2nd class.
Let's add the results of the observation test.
  21 students of 45 և IV բ grade II բ, b դաս classes of school # 9 participated in the research.
 The results of the research showed that the 2nd grade students showed a high score (56%) compared to the control group (39%).
 Below we present the observance test results in the form of a table-graph.
  The graph shows the test results in points on the horizontal axis (number of pictures), the number of students being examined on the vertical axis.
Obsessiveness test results 2nd lesson. / 7-8 years / 4th grade / 9-10 years / / researched / researched Table 314-18 pictures 20-24 pictures 26 pictures 30 pictures Total: 21 students 45 students Graph 32nd class. / 7-8 years /
4th grade./9-1th year /
picture:
picture:
picture:
picture:
• Educational problem. Develops purposefulness, resilience, willpower, perseverance, endurance, as well as attention and concentration.
  A child playing chess becomes a self-critic, learns to think independently, make decisions, fight to the end, not to be depressed by failures.
  Introduce the results of the Attention Effectiveness Study Test.
 The research was conducted with 20 students of III-b grade of school # 7.
  The results in the form of a table and a graph.
  The graph shows the test results in points on the horizontal axis (the number of marks), and the number of students examined on the vertical axis.
Attention Effectiveness Test ResultsTable 4200-300 marks300-400 marks400-500 marks 600 ամենը more marksTotal: 3rd grade.4th grade / researched / researched 20 years 21 years 600 years 00 more
sign:
sign:
sign:
Schedule 43rd lesson.
4th class.
• Aesthetic problem. It enriches the child's inner world, develops the imagination, teaches to enjoy beautiful combinations.
• Correction problem. Helps hyperactive children to become calm and balanced, teaches them to focus on one activity.
 Helps to control one's anxiety and anxiety.
 The results of the research showed that the students of the 3rd grade, who have been playing chess for a year, show a low level of general anxiety compared to the students of the 2nd grade.
  We present the results of the school alarm level assessment using the Phillips questionnaire.
 The study was attended by 24 students of the 7th grade of school No. 7, 20 students of the 2nd grade of school No. 11, 35 students of the 3rd grade of school # 7.
 The results in the form of a table-graph.
 The graph shows the test results on the horizontal axis, the high scores of the alarm scales, and the number of students surveyed on the vertical axis, calculated as percentages.
Results of school anxiety level assessment Lesson 2: Lesson 3 Table 5 Medium general anxiety Frustration of succeeding in testing Fear of self-expression Fear of self-expression Fear of not living up to expectations in relationships with teachers Schedule 52
3rd lesson
Man has defeats and failures throughout his life.
  There are big and small defeats.
  But without them, it is absolutely impossible to spend even one day in any field of activity.
  It is a very important circumstance to lose with honor, to be able to lose.
  In this case, the principle of "pleasure cannot be terrible" applies.
  You have to learn to enjoy chess, after all, it is just a game.
 When a child does something with pleasure, nervousness, fear ված excitement are automatically excluded.
 Living interest in the issue provides motivation for improvement.
Those who always feel obliged to be victorious usually do not reach great heights.
 These children are subconsciously convinced that if they succeed, the whole world will laugh at them.
 They are afraid of losing, that fear prevents them from being fully realized.
 It is necessary to take certain measures so that chess lessons do not become a boring activity for these children.
 Victories at the same time can not bring complete satisfaction.
It is necessary to accept defeat, no matter how humiliating it may be.
 It is necessary to constantly improve oneself.
 After the defeat it is necessary to analyze the reasons for it, not to repeat the mistakes found.
  This process should be carried out with the child with interest and creativity.
  This is the key factor of improvement.
 Without this, mistakes and defeats can be repeated.
  When a child learns not to repeat the previous mistake the next time and thus succeed, it will give him great encouragement.
We need to learn to come out of defeat worthily.
 In this case, everything changes.
  Here the child learns to maintain self-control, high self-esteem, to gather all the forces for the future, to have a positive attitude towards the opponents.
Children are different.
  They react differently to failure, that is why the psychological readiness of children ացումը the development of individual traits become urgent.
By playing chess, children acquire the habit of not being depressed, hoping for favorable changes, diligently continuing the search for opportunities.
  The game provides an opportunity to develop the ability to find a way out of these difficulties.
  Even modest success in chess can increase self-confidence and inattention can lead to losses.
develops a series of psychological peculiarities.
 таких как память, Attention, volition, psychological features such as.
 memory, attention, willpower, cooperation, the pursuit Literature 1. Davtyan T., Learning to play chess 4, Yerevan.
 Shaghik, 1995, 144 pages.
2. Davtyan T., We are learning to play chess 3, Yerevan.
 Shaghik, 1995, 144 pages.
3. Gasparyan S., Encyclopedia of Chess, Yerevan.
 Areg, 2006, 188 pages.
foot chess chess child д young school age.
 dis. ... kand. ped.nauk / Anisheva Varvara Evgenyevna; РГАФК. M.
 2002. 163 p. in the process of training chess games.
 Dis. ... kand. psychologist. science.
 19.00.07. M.
дология, practice.
 Учебное пособие, М.`
 Flint.
 Science, 2003. 768 p.8. Karelin A. More Encyclopaedic Psychological Tests.
 Моксмо, 2007. Часть 1. Изд.
 Russian Chess House, 2012. 128 s.igraphic abilities of young schoolchildren.
 dis. ... kand. ped. science.
 13.00.04 / Poloudin Vitaly Alexandrovich; РГУФК. M.
 2007. 192 с.мышления.
 History, methodology, scientific research and introduction. -Germany.
 LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, 2012. 280 p. Information about the author Karine Aram Sahakyan - care. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor, Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute, Head of the Chair of Psychology, E-mail.
