Medical geography is a frontier science between geography "medicine", which is why it is so diverse.
 It studies the nature of the natural and socio-economic factors of the environment that affect human health in order to maintain human health and prevent disease.
 Science has great practical significance, therefore, in addition to theoreticalknowledge that students are required to have to apply itskills.
The purpose of this methodological article is medical-geographicalis the presentation of different approaches to practical work, as the stability of knowledge depends not onlytheoretically, but practically-practically, and they are a handIt is brought by doing practical work.
 These jobs require university textbooks or a courselectures, maps, statistical materials, drawing and cartographic accessories.
       Practically every job should have a purpose,Problems, methods used, implementation options - by all meansBasic materials corresponding to the given topic.
  There is a discussion in the lecture package of the "Medical Geography" courseTheoretical materials on all topics.
  Getting acquainted with them, the studentshould be able to.• coordinate information about the given event, element;• Assess and explain the impact on human health separatelythe nature of the factors, elements, features,• Compare the factors affecting human health, mapresults,• Describe the medical-geographical conditions of the area.
The practical work is done according to the following rules:• The student must complete the practical work;• The work is done in a separate notebook, which remains in the chair;• The work is done in one lesson.
     The "Medical Geography" course is taught differentlystudents receiving specialties, respectively, eachis developed separately for conducting practical workapproach.
 Various practical activities for this courseThere are approaches, for example, G. Osipenko [3, pp. 17-18] on each topic
raises questions to clarify the material, fill in the tables, place the material on the outline map without textanalysis, ie the student simply places the areas of spread of the disease.
     The article offers options for complex practical work for students of different specialties.
It is very important for the "Geography" profession to discover the territorial differences of the phenomena, the interconnections between the elements, therefore, practical work is needed.should give such direction.
Let's discuss the health significance of one of the elements of the natural environment.
Practical work 1:Topic: The health significance of climateThe purpose of the work.• find out the interconnected effect of weather elements on the organism;• Determine the EE of several settlements (effective temperature);• Describe the medical and climatic conditions of the settlements in question;• apply medical-geographical research methods.
Necessary accessories.text material relevant to the topic,notebook,sketchy map,drawing accessories.
Job type: practicalWork process.provide students with details about the work.The text work is done in a notebook, the page in the given settlements is determined, and the practical work is done in the outline map.
Students are provided with climate as a starting pointtwo weather elements of settlements in different zones:Air temperature և relative humidity data, pResolution (according to A. Missenard). [1]                               PA = t-0.4 (t-10) (1-f / 100) (1)where t is the air temperature C °, f is the relative humidity%.
The advantage of this indicator is that it can be applied year roundto describe both hot and cold conditions.
Based on this, they are provided with average summer and winter temperaturesand relative humidity indices; և the scale for assessing human heat sensitivity and load [2].
The work includes three key issues. 1. apply the mathematical method, calculate the page,2. Place the settlements on the outline map, make certain analyzes about their geographical location;3. Compare the comfort level of the given settlementsfor man.
The student must be able to work effectively and correctly with the given starting materials.
 First, the table is filled in the notebook as follows:Table 1. Effective temperature: EJ in settlementsAir:Air relativehumidity f`%summer / winterResidence:ParisTemperature:summer /winterPage: C °:summer /winterHumanHuman overloadsummer / wintercondition:summer / winterhot / coolMexico City:moderatewarm / moderately warmSydney22.2 / 12.9 hot / size Oymyakonwhich is hotcool / extremely coldcomfortable /comfortablecomfortable /comfortablecomfortable /comfortablecomfortable /freezing highprobability:The student enters the data in Table 1 into Equation (1), calculates the page ամ summer և winter ում and compares the results obtained with thatwith the indicator scale (Table 2) [2].
Table 2. Human Sensitivity Depending on Effectivetemperature - the size of the pageheathotmoderatecoolmoderatea lotheat  Heavy loadComfortablehotcomfortablecomfortablecomfortablewhich:Page:Feeling:condition:Page:Feeling:coldvery coldextremeExtremely coldOverloadmoderatefrostbitehigh riskcoldvery strongfrostbitehigh:probability:After filling in Table 1, the settlements are placed on the outline map.
  The purpose of this work is for the studentdoing cartographic work around a phenomenon that interests himis to obtain information related to the location of the object.
  For himIt turns out in which climatic zone the given object is located, what kindThere are conditions, in what geographical position - sea, inland,to be able to compile a medical-geographical descriptionapply them, explain the conditions of human habitation.
 The student conclusions that allow are very important in this analysismake comparisons while acquiring new knowledgeThey are a source.
The performed works are handed over for inspection.
For the specialty "Service" it is possible that the students know the peculiarities of the resettlement, lifestyle and work activity of the population of the given area.
They are of medical-geographical interest. "food, the national cuisine, which is often conditioned bythe spread of many foodborne illnesses.
Practical work 2:Topic: The health significance of foodThe purpose of the work.• Find out the role of food in maintaining human health• Find out the nature of foodborne illness ևspread,• Introduce the peculiarities of food geographical distribution;• compile and give collections of several national cuisinesmedical-geographical description• apply medical-geographical research methods.
Necessary accessories.text material relevant to the topic,notebook,sketchy map,drawing accessories.
Job type: practicalWork process.provide students with details about the work.The work is done in a notebook, answering the nominationquestions.
1. What are the requirements for food?
2. What effect do the structure of food have on the human body?composition.
3. What is the relationship between food կլ wild climates և?
The next stage of the work is done on the outline map.
Place on the map.1. "Nutrition types" (wheat, corn, rice, millet sorghum):using medical geography lectures2. Develop symbols for the presented zones.
Work with a collection of national cuisine, which is compiled with the prior instruction given by the students.
The performed works are handed over for inspection.
      The above practical work option has a number of advantages.1. The student answers the questions only if he / she fully masters the teaching material; 2. he formulates the answer himself, choosing the problems that are important for him from his point of view; 3. The student has the opportunity to do a little research work. to collect materials that will make his collection different
from others, to make a choice in the matter of national cuisines.
The nature of the practical work of medical geography for the specialty "Pharmaceutical Chemistry" և the requirements are somewhat different.
 Let's discuss one option.Practical work 3:Topic: The health significance of plantsThe purpose of the work.• Find out the health benefits of different types of plants;• Identify food, poisonous, allergenic plants և herbsgroups և give their health significance,• Get acquainted with the distribution of herbs in Armenia.
Necessary accessories.text material relevant to the topic,notebook,"National Atlas of Armenia", Yerevan, 2007, page 80drawing accessories.
Job type: practicalWork process.provide students with details about the work.1. work with lecture material,2. work with atlas maps,3. work with plant collections.
Due to the first job, the student completes the following assignments in the notebook:1. Separate plants according to fields of application: herbs;Edible plants, ornamental plants,2. Fill in the table.
Table 3. Health significance of plantsPlantsHerbs:Poisonous plantsDiseased plantsThe nameImpact:Distribution:The second work is done "National Atlas of Armenia", E.2007, page 80 with a map of "Useful wild plants".
 Students do screening work, either by individual regions or byof separate plant species.
 They make notes about their prevalence in the notebook.
The task of compiling plant collections is assignedstudents in advance.
  They choose the plants, post themdried specimens, write information about the distribution, therapeutic significance պատմության history of use.
  This work helps future professionals to strengthen and enrich their knowledge of herbal medicine.
The performed works are handed over for inspection.
Conclusion. 1. Practical works of the medical geography course ևMethodological instructions for implementation are presented for the first time, 2. Practical works, in addition to medical-geographical theoretical knowledge, also include cartographic, mathematical, biological knowledge;3. An appropriate version of the practical work is offered for each profession;4. Practical work enhances the teaching of the courseefficiency,5. This method of practical work can be applied in other higher educational institutions of the republic.
Literature 2. Isaev A. А. Локологическая климатология. M.
 2001. 456 С.3. Osipenko G. Л. Medical geography and ecology.
 praktческое руковод Author Info:Valesyan Anahit Parg - work. scientist candidate, Gyumri M. Nalbandyan said State Pedagogical Institute, Assistant, E-mail:
