1. Introduction.
 A number of mathematical, physical, technicalլուծ Solving problems of other nature requires basic functionscalculation of values ​​for different values ​​of the variable.
  That'sThus, in the Middle Ages, tables of values ​​of trigonometric functions were created, as well as formulas for calculating the approximate values ​​of some functions.
  Later also the calculation of the values ​​of the elementary functions և similar tablesThe creation was a stimulus for the development of mathematics and its applications.
  For this purpose, the theory of series, chain fractions, orthogonal polynomials, etc. were widely used.elementary functions were represented by ներկայաց were determined by themvalues.
 They were created in anticipation of the development of the latest technologiesVarious algorithms written for calculating the values ​​of elementary functions, block diagrams BASIC, PASCAL, FORTRAN, C և other programmingin languages ​​that made it possible to calculate these values ​​very quickly through calculators such as Strela, BSM-6, M-2, M3, Ural, M-220, EC, as well as Nairi and Hrazdan type calculators.
 In recent years, computer mathematics kits have been created by relevant specialists, which are a powerful tool for various mathematicalproblem solving, in particular, the values ​​of elementary functionsfor counting.
 These computer kits are available for both professionals and anyone with computer skills.
 Similar packages are MAPLE, MATHEMATICA,MATLAB, MACSYMA այլ other computer packages.
  In particular, MAPLE package for solving various mathematical problemsIt is a powerful and flexible tool.
 The more than 2000 commands of the package allow solving problems in algebra, mathematical analysis, differential equations, and a number of other areas, in particular:calculate the values ​​of elementary functions for different values ​​of a variable.
  Working with the MAPLE package is up to the userthe computer enters mathematical expressions և commands through operators, and the package executes instantlyհրաման Those commands give the answer.
  Working with the packageIt is done through dialogue.
  Entered phrases և:commands are stored in a single document, allowing:to see the progress of the actions performed by the user.
    MAPLE:The interface of the package is similar to the interface of any editorial system, which allows a programmer by professionNon-specialist professionals to take advantage of the package[3,4].
 Along with all this, it also contains modern highlevel programming languages.
The first part of this work presents the whole polynomialOne of the main methods of calculating values ​​is the well diagram, and the second part presents information related to computerWith the MAPLE package, with the accuracy you want on a personal computeryou can calculate the values ​​of the whole polynomial, make an interpolation,build graphs of functions և etc.
2. Calculate the value of the whole polynomial using the well scheme.
Consider: with real coefficientsdegreethen the whole polynomial [1,2].Suppose it is necessary to calculate (1) the value of the whole polynomial  to:for.(2) To calculate the value, proceed as follows: Introduce (2)
in the following form.Counting one by onequantities, we will find, that is, (1) the value of the polynomial
in.
In practice, the steps described above are performedthrough the following scheme called the Horn Scheme.For example.
 Using the wells scheme, count So    the value of a multiplein.
), ..., 2,1 (nkakn:
122110nnnnnaxaxaxaxaxPx.
122110nnnnnaaaaaP.
... 13210nnaaaaaaP123312201100 ... ,,,, nnnnbabbabbabbababPbnx0a1a2ana 00ba110bab221bab) (1Pbabnnn12435423456xxxxxxxP2x.
1232P:Note that:  quantities are  multiple  caused by dividing on a bisectorCoefficient of coefficient [1].
 Really, let's ask where: and as a result of division    for the rest, BezuhiAccording to the theorem, we will have:.
By placing (6) in (5) և opening the parentheses, we will have:Comparing (1) և (8) relations և equalizingThe coefficients in front of the members of the degree, we will get:     of the same!We will have from (9) to և (4).which։ had to be proved.
 Thus, the scheme of the wells allows itdecide without dividing the whole polynomial caused by dividing on a bisector the factor և the remainder.
For example.
 Find out using the Wells scheme 1210, ... ,,, bnbbbbxPxxQ, nxxQxP12110nnnxxxQn ) (Pn.
... 1212121010nnnnnnnxxxxxPx.
, ... ,,, 112121210100nnnnnnaaaaa ,, ... ,,, 1121121221011000nnnnnnnnbbababababa ՄանxPxxQ polynomial  on the bicepsThe factor resulting from dividing և the remainder.
So.
It should be noted that in terms of the speed of calculating the values ​​of the whole polynomial, the well scheme is the most rational of all the other methods.
 3. Calculate the value of the whole polynomial by computer MAPLEthrough the package.
Any function in the MAPLE computer package, in particular the whole polynomial, can be represented in several ways [3,4].
          Season 1.
 The whole polynomial can be represented.
=) through the operator, as a result of which that polynomial is assigned a name.
 In the next step, by giving specific values ​​to the variable, the value of the polynomial of the variable will be instantly determined by the same operator.for a given value.
For example.
  Count:valuein.
  multi-member   Season 2.
  The multiple can be represented by the so-calledthrough a functional operator.
 In this case it is used again (.
=) the operator, after which, unlike the previous case, in round bracketsThe variable is indicated as shown below.
20123722345xxxxxxP2x104234xxxxxQ0r12435423456xxxxxxxP2x Example:
 Count:valuein.
    multiple members   3rd season.
 The polynomial can also be represented unapply (expr, x1,x2,…) via the command where is represented instead of exprthe polynomial, and the variables instead of x1, x2,։.
For example.
 Count:valuein.
    multiple members   In each example discussed, the answer is a solutionwithin seconds.
Note that the MAPLE computer package also has the abilityThe exact plot of a given polynomial instantly constructed by the command plot (p (x), x = a..b), where p (x) is the polynomial in question and a..b isis the range where the graph is to be constructed.
For example.
 Build:schedule:in the range. multi-member   The graph of a polynomial can be constructed in the given rangethrough interpolation when several values ​​of a polynomial are knownat points in that range.
  According to those key points և in those pointsTwo lists of values ​​obtained by the polynomial are created. initially X:
list for nodes, then list Y for thatfor the values ​​obtained by the polynomial at the node points.
 followingThe command interp (X, Y, x) is interpolated where xis the interpolation variable.
And the resulting interpolated polynomial graph is already possiblemust be constructed using the above plot (p (x), x = a..b) command.
Comparing the graph constructed in this way with the one constructed aboveWith an accurate schedule, we make sure they are quite differentfrom each other (Graph 1 shows the exact graph of the function, and2 - interpolated polynomial graph).
In order to reduce this difference, it is necessary to increase the number of nodes և and then perform interpolation.
Constructing a graph of a polynomial multiplied in this way ևcomparing it to its exact graph և interpolated in the previous caseWith a multiplicative graph, we will already have the following imageGraph 1 represents the exact graph of the function, Graph 2 represents the firstin this case the graph of the interpolated polynomial, and in the second case by 3interpolated polynomial graph).4. ConclusionThus, in this methodological work, the main method of calculating the value of the whole polynomial is briefly presented: Horner'sscheme, կոնկրետ concrete examples are considered.
 Then, from the point of view of calculating the values ​​of all polynomials, the possibilities of the computer MAPLE package are presented, their application in particular.when looking at examples.
 The high efficiency of the package is shownin terms of simplicity of commands ժամանակ time spent on calculations.
 If necessary, the construction of both the exact and the approximated graph of the given polynomial is within the possibilities of the package, when the specific values ​​of the polynomial are determined at different points of the observed range, interpolation is performed by the formulas included in the package.
It is also planned to present similar methodological works related to non-algebraic basic elementaryby calculating the values ​​of the functions.
вычисления значеня a whole polynomial.
  scheme Gornera. Based on this scheme:
Literature 1. Demidovich BP, Maron I.A. Basic math calculators. M.
  Ed.Exercise of elementary functions. M.
 Ed. "Physmatism". 1963. 246 p.
E-mail:
 lmargaryan@gspi.am:E-mail:
