7 plant species registered in the RA Red Book were found and described.
The usual artificial pine forest planted in the spring of 1977 was studied.
Preface. The flora of Armenia is rich and original, but many areas have not been fully studied yet.
 Our research refers to one of those areas, whose flora is being studied for the first time.
The flora of the alpine-near-alpine areas in the upper reaches of the Chichkhan River was selected as the research material.
The diversity of flowering plants was mainly studied, and special attention was paid to the identification and description of endangered species registered in the RA Red Book.
The urgency of such research is conditioned by the state programs for the development of various branches of the economy, in particular tourism (ecotourism).
Material դը method. The method of scientific inventory was used during the research work.
 With the help of this method, the diversity of plant species growing in the Chichkhan valley և their distribution among different disciplinary groupsև was studied.
 Plant species have been collected, herbariums have been prepared.
 Plant species have been identified using the scientific literature.
 Armenian-Latin names of plants are given according to R. Ւ. Ghazaryan, 1981 [2].
The study area is located at an altitude of about 2500 meters above sea level in the alpine-near-alpine zone.
  It is a deep river valley with an asymmetrical structure.
 From the right bank of the valley it presents a considerable slope of the north-eastern position (15-200), in some places steep slopes, as a result of which they are quite moist and well vegetated.
 On the coastal slopes, small formations of poplar or aspen (Populus tremula) have been preserved in some places, which, in our opinion, are remnants of a disassembled range.
 It can be assumed that the reasons for adoption are anthropogenic.
 We do not have clear information about the formations that existed before.
  It is believed that the aspen forests occupied almost the entire northern slope of the Shirakilern range from the Akhuryan gorge to the Chichkhan estuary until the 18th century.
 This view is supported by both the post-forest lands preserved on the mountain slopes and the analysis of some toponyms.
Unlike the right bank slope of the river valley, the left bank slope is more sloping, has a south-western position, due to which it is less dry, weakly divided.
  Xerothermal formations are predominant here, in which rare plant species have been preserved.
For field studies we carried out on-road extraction.
  The total length of the first route was 7 km.
  It includes the Bashgyugh-Getik reservoir section.
  With the help of GPSMAP 76 (versatile navigator) device 1.
At the base of the 50,000-scale map, the locations of the rare ատես Red Book plant species on the route were placed, resulting in a large-scale geospatial map.
 Extraction was carried out by the same method on 3 routes: (Kakavagyugh - Dzorashen - Trchkan waterfall (5 km), Trchkan waterfall - Upstream of Trchkan river (5 km), Trchkan waterfall - Shirakamut (8 km)).
The results of the research. As a result of the research, about 135 plant species belonging to 31 families were described in the studied area.
 Such a large variety of plants is typical of alpine-alpine zones.
  Such diversity of flora is conditioned by the unique geographical position of Armenia, climatic and geological factors.
Table 1 shows the distribution of the flora representatives of Sarapat community in the upper reaches of the Chichkhan River and its surrounding area by families.
encountered in the upper stream of the river buyserientaniknere Chichkhan and their types tvakanakeAghyusak 1.Entanikneri Name Armenian Akkanazginer Aytsaterevazginer (Tsakhakerasazginer) Anparukazginer siliquastrum (titernatsaghkavorner) Bardatsaghkavorner (astghatsaghkazgineri) Gaghtrikazginer Gnarbukazginer Gortnukazginer Dashtavlukazginer (cereals) Yeghinjazginer Zangakazginer Telukazginer crucifer (cabbage) Khlatsaghkazginer Kholordzazginer Khuleghinjazginer (shrtnatsaghkavorner) Poppies Asparagus Asparagus AcaciaFamily nameLatinNumber of species Irrigated buckwheat Buckwheat Umbrellas Carnivorous Lily of the valley Herbaceous pine Pineapple Blossom Rosaceae
Type:
Type:
Type:
Type:
Type:
10 types
Type:
Scheme 1. The most common families քանակ number of their species The area, which is ecologically clean (there are no various gaseous emissions of air pollution, accumulated garbage dumps, heavy metal or chemical waste), is rich in herbs used in folk medicine.
  Among them are the five-limbed lion (Leonorus cardiaca L.), the bitter wormwood (Artemisia absinthium L.), the creeper (Thymus serpyllum L.), the porous hypericum (Hypericum perforatum L.), the large, carnivorous, small ox tongue L. Plantago lanceolataL., Plantago minor L.), sandy deciduous tree (Helichrysum pintocalix D. Sons.), Fragrant chamomile (Matricaria discoideae DC.), Alfalfa (Verbascumthapsiforme Schrap.), Alpine sagebrush (Cephalaria p alpina).
7 plant species registered in the RA Red Book were also found in the area [3].
 The vegetation of the latter begins in March-April, when the grazing of the animals has not started yet.
 This allows these plants to finish pollination և to ensure normal growth.
 It should be noted that most of these 7 species listed in the Red Book grow in rocky, rocky areas, where the animals do not graze.
  In our opinion, the reduction of plant areas in the mentioned area also contributes to the preservation of the diversity of flora.
The names and categories of plant species registered in the RA Red Book are given in Table 2.
upper Chichkhan River area encountered, the red-listed species in Table 2 № Chinese anvanumeLatinerenanvanumeRuserenanvanumeHH Red grkumgrantsmankategorianVtangvats tesakVtangvats tesakKritikakan condition tesakVtangvats sort Касатик Дмитрия Adverse threatening condition mottesakVtangvats species endangered species Gas chrvats Trashushanhayastanyan Khlopuz GroyteriHirikatrpatakanHirik D. VoznaglkhikTurnefori small pieces VardakakachFlorenskuUsumnasirvats area protected eShiraki in Aspen only The natural forest, which is unique in the whole Armenian Highland.
  This poplar forest existed until the Quaternary glaciation.
 The forest spreads on the banks of Tichkan waterfall և Chichkhan river.
 There are fragments of forest near the adjacent villages of Dzorashen, Sarapat, Bashgyugh, on the northern slopes of the mountains.
 Among the shrubs found in the forest are the common gerbil (Viburnum lantata L.), the rosewood (Roza canina L.) (Cotoneasterintegerrinus Medik.), The common birch (Rubus idaeus L.), etc.
 Most of the latter are on the edge of the forest.
Some of these forests are located quite far from residential areas, which allows for more or less normal growth.
 The forests are relict nature.
During our research, we also studied the artificial pine forest (Pinus sylvestris L.) planted in the spring of 1977.
 The pine forest is located on the right bank of the Chichkhan river, near the villages of Salut, Bashgyugh, Pokr Sariar, Kakavasar, Sarapat և Dzorashen villages.
 Both the river and the surrounding area of ​​the forest are quite rich in flora.
 Common oak, red currant (Ribesrubrum L.), deciduous shrub, shrub, common deciduous shrub, common spruce (Sorbus aucuparia L.) and small oak (Quercusrobur L.) trees are found on the upper edge of the ordinary pine forest.
 In some parts, artificial pines are accompanied by small islands of aspen.
 Trees of artificially grown willow (Salicaceae) are found in the area, which spread on the river bank.
 There are willow (Salix fragilis L.), goat (Salix caprea L.) etc.
          These tree species manage to complete their vegetation during the summer.
 They meet approximately at noon. At an altitude of 2300-2500 m.
 It should be noted that there is a relatively slow annual growth of "pine, oak" and "aroseni".
 The conditions are favorable for the increase of the number of young trees, as the grazing of animals in those areas is insignificant, which allows the young trees to grow safely.
It should be noted that the strict control of deforestation by the forestry of the area greatly contributes to ensuring the growth of the forest.
The grass cover of the forest is mainly represented by buckthorns, field lizards, teluks, mosses, etc.
 In the vicinity of the forest there is a large variety of complex flowers, lilies, umbrellas, carnations, roses and other families.
Conclusion. Based on the results of field studies, as well as the analysis of literature, it can be concluded that the Chichkhan River valley is distinguished by great biodiversity.
The natural landscapes of the river valley can be divided into two groups: relatively wet (left slopes of the river valley) and dry (right slopes of the river valley).
  In general, the natural vegetation has been preserved well, only in relatively low-slope areas, that is, it has been significantly altered or transformed into agricultural arable lands.
Such a high rate of biodiversity provides an opportunity for the development of ecotourism in the middle stream of Chichkhan.
Suggestion. Due to the unique microclimatic conditions of the studied area, the Chichkhan valley is significantly different from the rest of the Ashotsk region, so it is necessary to conduct additional phytogeographical research, which will be a good precondition for the development of recreational resources.
 After such research, the area can be turned into a sanctuary, solving a local environmental problem.
Literature 1. Flora of Armenia. 1-7 tt., Er.
 From. AN Arm. ССР. 1954-1980.2. Ghazaryan RS Armenian-Latin-Russian-English-French-German Dictionary of Plant Names - Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 1981, 180 pages.
3. Red Book of Plants of the Republic of Armenia.
  S..
 Zangak Publishing House, 2010.
 592 pages.
4. Martirosyan L. Biodiversity of "Gorshaberd" sanctuary on some issues of water conservation // Materials of the Republican Scientific Session of GSPI.
 Gyumri.
 Eldorodo Publishing House, 2012.
 Pages 148-152.
Information about the authors, Asya Karleni Martirosyan - bi. Master, Dzorashen secondary school teacher, E-mail.
 asya.martirosyan15@mail.ru Anush Styopa Khachatryan - life. scientist Ph.D., Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Chair of Biology, Ecology and their Teaching Methods, GSPI, E-mail.
 anush.s.khachatryan@gmail.com Emma Rafiki Suvaryan - GSPI Chair of Biology, Ecology and their teaching methodsAngin Felix Grigoryan - life. scientist PhD, Associate Professor, GSPI Chair of Biology, Ecology Their teaching methods, E-mail.
