In the article, the examination is performed according to the structural factor of different words, differentiating the analytical complexities of adjective // ​​macabre.
The grammatical meanings of such words are backwardsthe historical development of the idiom.
  The semantic structure of a word can change over time if the word is used in another subjector in the role of a play.
 In that case, the word acquires a new meaning, "moreoverthat new meaning may extend to the already existing meaning of the wordcan be combined with the meaning of the word, at the same timeto exist, can replace him և etc. ”[1].
Changes in this type of vocabulary can affect wordson the verbal mass value. In this case, either their verbal meaning changes or they include other value or values.
If more than one grammatical meaning is present in the semantic structure of words, then such words are considered as lexical miscellaneous words, and the grammatical reality is considered lexical misalignment [2].
Speech difference includes both materialthe sphere of meaningful words as well as the words of the servant.
Interesting in terms of materially meaningful wordsThe adjectives // macbay's valuable words are a reality.
 Words of this kind play a dual role, performing special positions on the adjective և macabre at the syntactic level.
In the Armenian reality, the words combining adjective // ​​macabre values ​​were considered adjectives, which, retaining their main lexical meaning եր grammatical features, acquirednew function: macabre application [3].
As noted in the linguistic literature, such words can have both determinative and subjunctive functions, as well as case functions.
The adjective // ​​macabay's's's's's's's's's համար համար բ մակ մակ բ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
  "Փոխանց Speech transmission goes a long way է implies a transition period when the word asThe adjective և as macabre can have parallel verbal values.
  And not only in Eastern Armenian, but also in different stages of the Armenian languageSome of the most commonly used adjectives are underlined beyond wordsmacabre meaning….
 Moreover, some of them have more macabre verbal value than the adjective… "[5].
It is natural that the adjective // ​​macbay's's's's's's's's wordsdue to the initial verbal mass value, are divided into twogroup of words of adjective և macabre origin.
In this article we will examine these words not by originsource or derivative speech patterns, but according to the structural factor of long words, differentiating analytical complexities.
Analytical complications, which are characterized by speechThey are duplicate or nominal relations.
Recurrent complicationsSpeech-to-mass variability in analytical complicationsThe words that are duplicate are distinguished.
 Repeat:Complications are manifestations of one of the oldest means of word formation, word repetition, which undergoes semantic development throughout the history of language.
 Verbal nuances cancause the components to double in complexity, graduallymoving away from the original meanings, they acquire a new meaning.
  However, this new meaning is more or less related to their original meaning.
Among the recurring complications, we single out the compounds whose components are used separately.
 It is noticeable that such compounds are soundless formations.
Unvoiced duplicate complications, which express verbal disparity, are formed into noun adjectives.by repetition.
1) Some of the complications of noun repetition are long-lastingdoes matter adjectives "take on the meaning of diversity, plurality", as if they are a sequence of things of the same
shows "[6].
 Repetitives are usually made up of nouns that express a collective, such as group, flock,ball, bunch, as they have the meaning of quantity և volume: handful, thread և etc.
 That:The words are: group-group, herd-herd, ball-ball, thread-thread, hand-hand, bunch և etc.
     Consider these difficulties in the field of syntactic application.
Hmmt.handful - handful of tears (adjective)
a handful - a handful (MKB)    group - group of girls (adjective)
group - group search (mkb.)flock - flock of birds (adjective)
flock - not flock (mkb.)          Roll - Round Doughs (Adjective)
gund - gund darsel (mkb.) strand - strand hair (ac.)        thread - thread white (mcb.)
bouquet - bouquet of flowers (adjective)
bunch - tie a bunch (mcb.)   Hmmt. A handful - a. a lot, abundant.
 Mother and daughter fall under the dull rays inside the windowThere are many tears (VT, 570).
 m. abundantly, abundantly. Or sweeping
The slices of snow sift through the roofs, Open sash, scatter in droves(PS, D, 116).
Bunch - bunch - a. sort-sort. The clinking of glasses should be mixed with… Bunch-bunch of Tsaghkots songs (PS, D, 116).
 m. in groups, in bunches. And:
The fragrant flame of candles and candles is flowing, Bouquet like a flowerswells, bright and yellow like a flower (PS, D, 95).
2) Complications of adjective repetition as adjectives"They intensify the meaning of adjectives by adding it to action."repetition "[7].
Such complications are the following adjectives: high,very, sad, hot, sharp, big, new, long, heavy, cold և etc.
Complications with such adjectives are high,very-very, sad-sad, hot-hot, sharp-sharp, big-big, new-new, long-lasting, heavy-heavy, cold-cold և etc.
The macabre value of words in this category is due to the macabre meaning of the root components (adjectives)with capacity, such as speaking loudly խոսել speaking loudly, dressing warmlyհագ dress warmly, write a lot գրել write a lot, sit sad և sad-sadto sit [8].
Consider the variability of such complications at the syntactic level.
thin - thin fingers (ad.)
thin - thin spin (mcb.)  heavy - heavy stones (ac.)    heavy - hard to move (mcb.)
high - high mountains (adj.)
sing loudly (mkb.)
many - many books (ad.)
write a lot (mkb.) sad - sad look (adjective)
sad - sad to sit (mkb.)new - new clothes (adjective)
new - new to wear (mcb.) long - long wood (ad.)     long - long story (mkb.)
cold - cold food (adjective)
cold - eat cold (mkb.)     Hmmt. Hot - a. hot, just taken from the fire. (Iritzkin) He took hot lavash, flower lavash from the tonir and spread it, the sweet smell of new bread
and took the oath (AI, 1, 27).
 m. 1. very hot. "By the way, the king has sent me a hot bath!"
(HC, 3, 170).
 2. Passionate, excited, furious. They speak warmly (HT, 6, 38).
Big-big - a. 1. sharp-sharp, beyond its power. Hey, you devil, do you want more?
to deceive, to close my eyes with big words (HT, 2, 99).
 2. Large, huge. AND:
Immediately all the dailies of my world shout… Big-bigin letters (PS, D, 303).
 m. boasting, arrogantly. Both are stubborn
and proudly, they boasted and argued fiercely (HT, 1, 288).
Speech-like: ած.// մկբ. Some duplicate complications, the second component of which is altered sound, also reveal a difference.
With such complications, the meaning of the word is "taken away"is an object with its similarities, its accessories or a property of itswith similar or close properties. "[9]
Unvoiced duplicates express only plurality, and mutated complications extend to the originalmeaning by giving it additional nuances, such as minimal, short, severe, etc. [10].
 Such complications are subjectin the role of complementing words are shown in the role of adjective, in the role of verb complement:Macbeth's verbal value.
Among those words are telik-melik, sur-mour, coil-molor, sweet-honey, thin-marak, parap-sarap, susik-pusik և etc.
Consider the lexical difference of these words in the syntactic sphere.
thread - melik movement (adjective)
thread - melik move (mcb.) {
False story entry (adjective)
to tell a lie (mkb.)        winding road
to go astray (mkb.)            sweet-honey tongue (adjective)  sweet - soft talk (mkb.)
Thin-thin path (adj.)
thin - thin stretch (mcb.)     susik - pusik girl (adjective)       susik - pusik worked (mkb.)
Hmmt. Idleness - a. idle The shepherd's gampr is playful and thoughtful, and the idle gentleman's dog is lazy and capricious (HT, 3, 126).
m. without work, idle. I'm tired of sitting idle like this
(HT, 3, 127).
Susik-pusik -a. silent and silent, modest, taciturn. He was so shy
Ara, Self-contained and whispering, The dream is the opposite… (PS, G, 59).
m. without making a sound, by default. His wife also got lost next to him,
Who knows what hole he found (HT, 1, 341).
Thus, a double that shows the vernacular differenceComplications are divided into two groups. complications that are drawn
անհ Complications, the second component of which is a complication of a translucent egg.
Unvoiced duplicates are made up of either nouns or with the repetition of adjectives, and the components of the modified soundare adjectives.
Nominal relationsExpresses some of the nominal relative complicationsspeech mass: ած .// մկբ. exchange rate.
  These are the words that: are composed of adjective components.
 It is noticeable that ած .// մկբ. Variability is expressed by those composed of qualitative adjective components.
  Moreover, these formations have the peculiarities that:each of the components of relative complexity as a separateverbal unit, shows ats.//mkb. longevity.
         Among such relative complications are: homeless, homeless, sad, long-slender, half-dressed, rough-faced, obedient, etc. [11].
As adjectives, these words have a strong meaning,They are characterized by the feature of the case of a horse.
Hmmt. homeless (child, wander),
sadness (thoughts, go),long-thin (story, talk),half-baked (work, do),rough (attitude, treat), obedient (servant, to serve).
Nominal relative complications can occur and(sometimes և) connected, again preserving dichotomous verbal values, such as homeless, sad, long-thin, happy andcheerful, rough and rough, half-baked, obedient, etc.
Prove relevant original examples.
Happy and cheerful - a. happy, fun, pleasant. And with noise, happy and
With a cheerful shout… a large crowd floods the bride's Villagein-laws' house (PS, D, 112).
 m. very happy, with joy. (Varos) double
He worked diligently, happily and cheerfully at home and at the door (AI, JBB).
Sadness - a. very sad, sad. Dear Mother, I am divorced,
sad, I do not sleep (AI, A, 33).
 m. very sadly, sadly. this:
Always striking the ruthless conscience of the rock-rock of the world, you go to Sadness, Araz (AI, A, 119).
Thus, adjective // ​​macabay's verbal mass value is expressed by the relative complexities that consist of adjective components, with those components relative to each other.are synonymous, on the other hand, each of them,Taken separately, it is characterized by speech-mass diversity.
At the same time, in terms of speech, at.//mkb. showing versatility
Analytical complexities are divided into two groups: duplicate relations և nominal relations.
Summary:ASH-Al. Shirvanzade
AI-Av. Isahakyan
DD-D. Demirchyan
ԵՉ- Ե. Charents
HT- Hovh. Tumanyan
ՆԶ- Ն. Zaryan
PS-P. Եւակ:
SZ-St. Zoryan
Literature 1. Aghayan Ed., General և Armenian lexicography, Luys Publishing House, Yerevan,1984, p. 101.
2. Khachatryan L., Shifts in the grammatical meaning of words, "Luys"ed., Yerevan, 1985, pp. 32-33.
3. Modern Armenian language, h.2, Publishing house of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, Yerevan, 1975, pp. 136-138.
4. Jahukyan G., Fundamentals of Modern Armenian Theory, Armenian SSRGA Publishing House, Yerevan, 1974, pp. 526-527.
5. Kyurkchyan A., The Maccabees of the Armenian Language, "Edit Print" publishing house, Yerevan, 2011, p. 118.
6. Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, "Mitq" publishing house, Yerevan, 1965, page 180.
7. Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, "Mitq" publishing house, Yerevan, 1965, page 181.
8. Margaryan Al., Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan Universityհրատ., Եր., 1990, էջ 56.
9. Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, "Mitq" publishing house, Yerevan, 1965, page 182.
10. Sukiasyan A., Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan Universityհրատ., Եր., 1982, էջ 273.
11. Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, "Mitq" publishing house, Yerevan, 1965, pp. 82-84,Aghayan Ed., General և Armenian lexicography, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR,Yerevan, 1984, p. 227.
