  The influence of financial institutions on the development of the economy has made the study of the issue one of the most important directions of economic research.
 The efficiency of each country's economy directly depends on the level of development of its financial system.
  Due to this circumstance, the establishment of financial intermediation institutions and the formation of mechanisms ensuring their efficiency became the main direction of changes in almost all countries that have passed liberal economic relations.
 One of the most important factors in the development of the financial system is the regulation and control of the financial system.
  The emerging financial world is confronted with new risks, the prevention of which պահ keeping financial systems free from possible crises largely depends on effective regulation և control.
 New mechanisms are being developed to increase the effectiveness of regulation and control.
 Naturally, such a process will start in the Republic of Armenia.
  However, due to various reasons of objective and subjective nature, the system formed in the republic today does not yet have the level of development that meets the requirements of a market economy.
  The main goal of the state policy for the development of the financial market is the effective regulation of the financial market.
 When the financial market regulation is maintained at the proper level, investors will be aware of the stability and economic benefits of their investments.
 In such a case, the crisis and the risks are more evenly distributed in the economy.
 Depending on the characteristics of the financial system, three models of financial market regulation are distinguished in international practice.1. For each segment of the financial market, control is exercised by a separate body.
 This model is used in the USA, Spain, Cyprus, Portugal, Finland, Romania, Lithuania, Luxembourg, and partially in Italy.
With the help of this version of the financial market regulation, it is very easy to "effectively regulate certain segments of the financial market, depending on the specifics of their activities, but it is not always possible to reach an agreement between all bodies."
 In the last ten years, some European countries, such as Belgium, Slovakia, Poland, have abandoned this model.
2. According to the other model of control over the financial market regulation, the corresponding responsibilities are divided between the two authorities.
 This variant is used in Canada and the Netherlands.
3. Concentration of financial market regulation functions in the hands of a single body - a mega-regulator.
  The model is used in Germany, Denmark, Estonia, Malta, Austria, Switzerland, Japan, and since 2006, the Central Bank of Armenia has been a mega-regulator և responsible for financial stability [4].
Table 1. Characteristics of some segments of the financial market supervisory bodies united European yerkrnerum.ErkirKargavoroghAvstriamarmni anvanumeDaniaEstoniaSteghtsmantaretive of .1988 .1999 t.Latvia in t.LyuksemburgMalta 2002 1998 1999 2002 t.Finansakan verahskoghutyanolorte Bankayinhamakarg, system, business, stock market, financial hastatutyunnerBankayingortsuneutyun apahovagrakanochbankayin, stock market, financial hastatutyunnerBankayingortsuneutyun apahovagrakanochbankayin Securities market, insurance and non-banking financial institutionsBanking, securities market, insurance and non-banking financial institutionsBankary securities market activity, system, system, activity, Banking securities market,apahovagrakanochbankayin financial hastatutyunnerhamakarg, Germany 2002 t.Norvegia 1986 t.MetsBritania 1997 t.SlovakiaShvedia in 1990 t.hamakarg 2002, system, system, Bankayingortsuneutyun stock market, apahovagrakanochbankayin financial hastatutyunnergortsuneutyun, Bankayinarzhetghteri market apahovagrakanochbankayin financial hastatutyunnerBankayingortsuneutyun stock market, apahovagrakanochbankayin financial hastatutyunnerArzhetghteri market, insurance hamakargBankayingortsuneutyun stock market, Insurance and non-banking financial institutions, Western European countries will be the first to move to the Common Regulation system.Insurance and Non-Banking Financial Institutions Activities, Banking Securities Market, Insurance and Non-Banking Financial Institutions Banking, Securities Market, Insurance and Non-Banking Financial InstitutionsSecurity Market, Insurance SystemInsurance and Non-Banking Financial Institutions Activities, Banking Securities Market, Insurance and Non-Banking Financial Institutions Banking, Securities Market, Insurance and Non-Banking Financial InstitutionsSecurity Market, Insurance SystemThe countries of Western Europe will be the first to move to a common settlement system.The countries of Western Europe will be the first to move to a common settlement system.
 The main reasons for the transition to the model of unified regulation in those countries were the need for effective control over financial institutions, the effect of scale, financial crises.
  In some countries of Eastern Europe և in the former USSR, the transition to a common financial regulation system took place later, in the 1990s. starting from the second half.
  The need for the latter was due to the sufficient effective control of the new financial intermediaries created as a result of market transformation.
 According to the World Bank, in 1999-2011. Financial regulatory systems of 106 countries were studied during the year, թիվը the number of countries in which the responsibility for controlling different parts of the financial market (banking system, insurance market, securities market) is reserved for one body has increased from 13 to 36.
 At the same time, the number of countries where one exercises control over different segments of the financial market (banks, insurance companies, banks, investment funds, insurance companies, investment funds) has increased from 20 to 25 [3].
Ensuring financial stability is one of the priority tasks of the central banks of a number of countries.
 This is due to the fact that low inflation, unemployment, high economic growth, as problems of monetary and other state bodies, can not be provided in modern economies without the mediation of a developed, stable financial system.
Examining the various regulatory models, it can be noted that they work very well in different financial markets and countries with a political structure.
  It is absolutely impossible to confirm that the same model is the only unspoken truth for all countries.
 We can single out a number of advantages of the unified financial market regulation system (megregulator). It provides an opportunity to more effectively assess և prevent risk distribution across different sectors of the financial sector ֆինանսական, assess the impact of real և potential shocks on the financial market; The mega-regulator can develop a more effective risk policy that fully affects individual entities that are not part of it, as well as develop appropriate approaches to monitoring financial services; The existence of a mega-regulator leads to the agreement of the regulatory bodies, allows to avoid duplication of control functions; use of common approaches, methods և methods, enables the provision of unified information 5. Increases the responsibility of the regulator during decision-making, 6. Ensures savings of state resources, consolidation of human resources, cooperation, reduction of the volume of financial reports.
It should be understood that a single oversight body can expand its activities to a certain extent, after which it is necessary to look for an opportunity to delegate powers.
  In the case of a unified regulation and control of the financial market, it is sometimes difficult to find a balance between the various goals of the settlement. "
  By differentiating between goals, one regulator may not be able to have a clear idea of ​​the "rational leader" by giving an adequate distinction between different institutions.
  Instead of improving accountability, it may be reduced because it is difficult to develop a single oversight for a number of tasks.
 In many cases, different goals can lead to conflict.
  In the case of a joint regulatory body, a control monopoly is in fact created, which can lead to so-called monopoly inefficiencies, which implies an increase in average costs due to poor management.
  And in the case of monopoly control, it is more inflexible և bureaucratic than in the case of separate specialized control.
Another problem is the constant increase in the functions of the joint body, which can occur when many politicians demand that the body perform functions that deviate from the main, the main.
 For example, in some Scandinavian countries, a joint body is required to oversee real estate brokers, although this is not their primary function, and in the United Kingdom, the regulator oversees mortgages to encourage competition in the financial services industry.
The tasks and objectives set by the Joint Regulatory Authority should be clearly defined by the legislature, as well as the determination of their relative priorities, so that the efficiency of the mega-regulator does not diminish.
The regulation of different segments of the financial market must be harmonious in order for the scale effect to work in the economy.
Some researchers believe that there should be competition between financial regulators, as one regulator may unreasonably tighten regulatory procedures.
 Otherwise, the antitrust regulation of this body, which has certain precedents in international practice, is used.
In case of problems, each financial institution expects appropriate assistance from the financial market regulator.
 It turns out that in the case of a mega-regulator, the risk is borne by one body.
The financial system of the Republic of Armenia is also not free from various risks, which differ in their peculiarities from the risks in the financial systems of the developed countries of the world, taking into account the peculiarities of the transition economy, particularly our economy.
  On the way to the establishment of the financial system, the republic has faced a number of problems, some of which need to be settled.
 The financial system of our country is still in the process of formation.
 Although there is an established and developing banking system in the country, the other spheres of the financial system are still in the maturing stage.
 That is, in this context, the regulation of the financial system should lead to the development of the latter.
In the conditions of the banking, insurance, securities market development, improvement of the payment and settlement system, the policy of ensuring the stability of the RA financial system, the Central Bank must continue the reforms aimed at the regulation and improvement of control.
 The goals of the crisis management policy, the basic principles, as well as the scope of cooperation between the individual units involved in the crisis management process and the public awareness approaches will be defined.
The preconditions for the establishment of a unified settlement and control system in the Republic of Armenia were: 1. The need to reduce the risks in the financial system, 2. Dissemination of best practices, 3. Activation of underdeveloped market segments, 4. Establishment of equal requirements for all participants of the system, 5. Reduction of regulatory and control costs, 6. Facilitate the elimination of differences in the developmental levels of other participants.
As a result of the study of financial market regulation models, it can be said that the introduction of a unified system for current financial systems is considered the best model of regulatory control, as the introduction of the system can reduce financial risks, strengthen financial market cooperation, increase financial market development, create financial market participants. equal և free competition conditions, ensure the reliability and security of investments, efficient use of administrative resources.
The efficiency of each country's economy directly depends on the level of development of its financial system.
  The main goal of the state policy for the development of the financial market is the effective regulation of the financial market.
 Examining the various models of settlement, it can be especially noted that they work very well in different financial markets and countries with a political structure.
  Many countries around the world now see the solution to the problems of financial market regulation and control system through the introduction of a unified system of financial system regulation and control, taking into account its advantages.
Literature 1. Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Introduction of a Unified System of Financial Regulation և Control", adopted on 08.12.2005.
2. Mnatsakanyan HG, Hakobyan AZ Finance և financial system.
Yes!
 Educational-methodical manual.
 2005.
 88 pages.
3. Arzumanyan D., The problems of the development of the financial system of the Republic of Armenia // Finance և Economy.
 2014 April, N 4, pp. 20-22.
4. www. cba.am CB official website, CB strategy.
рынков. M.
