Genocide, its direct or indirect fictionEchoes are always present not only in modern Armenian literaturein works that bring their own specific local material and meaningartistic peculiarities, but gaining a noticeable weight in world literature by being directly related tohuman problems, becoming a special arena where many philosophical questions find their expression, in particular the crisis of humanity, its consumptionalready at the beginning of the 20th century.
  The crime, if it does not find its just retribution,becomes continuous and continuous, that is why that past suddenly emerges in our present և we suddenly appearIn the same Gordian knot of problems as at the beginning of the century, "the whole underwater part of the glacier" is re-used, which was initially neglected.or be forgotten.
In general, every war in art leaves its stable orbit of violent death, low-quality evil and cruelty (especially to the most helpless part of the people - the elderly, women and children), and with the inexhaustible manifestations of humanity.why the reflections of the Armenian tragedy are endless and artistically ambiguous.
  During the first Russian revolution, stillIn 1906, Hovh. Tumanyan writes Phil. Vardazaryan. "It simply came to our notice then
ugly, so greedy, so unjust, monstrous fight, what a Turkish-ArmenianIt is unlikely to have happened.
 Maybe in prehistoric times, when some peoplethey ate each other ”/ 1,15 /.
 Nominating changing and departing timesnew ethical issues, the reader's awareness is growing,The literary market today is enriched by the works of various writers, who:They are eloquent proof that the great tragedies experienced by the Armenians are far from ending or localizing.
 In our work we have presented foreign literature, mainly recentlySome of the published samples, which referred to the Great Genocide, comprehensive revelation of the truth and humanitarian questionswith a desire to deepen.
 Suddenly stateless in the focus of all these worksis the fate of an entire nation and individuals, sooner or later the inappropriate indulgence of international diplomacyIt will rise again before humanity, as the Spanish writer Gonzalo Guarch testifies in his book "White Mountain", referring to the ancient roots of the Middle East problem.
 Most of these novels are based on facts, documents (Guarch, Aylisli, Vonnegut, Yalcin, etc.), very often,as in Guarch, for example, it is reminiscent of a literary montage with an artistic-documentary basis, and sometimes, rising from a naked fact,becomes the generalization of the whole historical period due to the modern way of life և historically wise distance, but still not managing to acquire a significant artistic value… Great writers of the worldThe same honest thoughts and emotions are born near him, inevitably making them blood relatives of the great family of mankind.
 We want toSpecial mention should be made of the great Russian writer Sergei Gorodetsky, who was the firstturned to our pain, weighed the unfortunate scale of European "humanitarian" diplomacy at different stages of the Armenian question.
 He was the first Hovh. Together with Tumanyan, he noticed the universality of the Armenian problem, about which the expert Demirchyan would write later.
 In the poem "My Armenian Brothers" Gorodetsky wrote: "There is so much to love you" / 2, 41 /.
  Correspondent of "Russian Word" in Tbilissi (Georgia) in the spring of 1916Gorodetsky, preparing to leave for Van, to the local governorUnder his leadership, at first he simply believed that "it is a war for the toast and honor of the Russian people" / 2,270 /.
 A fruitful meeting with Hovh. From now on, with Tumanyan, it becomes the turning point of his whole life.
When saying goodbye to his young friend, he urges you to take care of the children, he adds. "Do not forget the Kurdish children.
 They are as unreal as ours ”/ 2, 281 /.
  They become the reaction of what they see and hearnot only in the 10s of the Russian writer. poems and articles, etc.
He planned the writing of the three-part epic "Argelian Viper" (later "Shamiram Gardens"), from which only the novel "Bright Red Storm" was published in 1928.
  The writer referred to the novel "Shamiram Gardens" aliveThe last complete version of the song was released in 1970. It was discovered and published by Irma Safrazbekyan first in the magazine "Literary Armenia", then only recently, in 2010, in the book "The Last Scream".
 This surprisingly modern song is distinguished not only by the poetic perceptions of life, in spite of everything he has to talk about,with extreme emotional saturation, monologue,but with a rich contextual interpretation, leading to the need to protect universal values, the idea of ​​brotherhood of mankind.
 Yeghishe Charents and Sergey Gorodetsky have been separated for only 13 years, but the perceptions and assessments of what happened allow us to find remarkable parallels between Charents' "Dantean myth" and "Shamiram Gardens". Both artists loved that land, which was already "inhabited" by the dead, yet "full of fairy tales and undisturbed beauties."
 Nothe feeling of irreversible loss. since the first return
Gorodetsky will write in the article "Destroyed Paradise" (1916) published later."The memory of the suffering that a person causes is horribleto man.
 And not in war.
 Suffering is not terrible in war.
 Unbearableis when you think of the hundreds of thousands of peaceful, defenseless peopleIt is the hands of people who have been subjected to brutal torture, the subtle beatings of body and soul. The feeling of being at the scene of massacre and destruction can be compared to nothing but the power of grief and pain.
 Irreparable evil, indelible shame,helpless anger for the insult inflicted on the human soul. here it is
the first feelings that Turkey evokes "/ 2.52 /.
 On July 18, with the next retreat of the Russian troops, the Van ostracism ends.
 We would not be wrong to say that Gorodetsky was the first writer to rebel the unjust behavior of the great powers, including Russian diplomacyIn his novel, he emphasized the carefree and indifferent position of his own people.which was expressed by the orders of unjustified retreats, to the delight of the colonizer, while the active part of the Russian army across the Euphrates helped the British… With a certain dramaThe pages are written that tell about the double-faced policy pursued by Tsarism. "The Russian command distributed weapons."
to the enemy Kurds to exterminate its allied Armenians.
 The philanthropic writerdelves into the psychological problems that follow the genocide. "Fatigue and sorrow drove all the forces out of them, everyone
abilities.
 They (the survivors) were lost aliveand among the dead!
 They did not know anything now, they could not, they could notwant "/ 2,458 /.
  Armenians after inhuman sufferingHe appeared in the "whirlwind of immortality," uprooted, "out of existence."
In the second half of the twentieth century, a new branch of science was formed in a number of countries around the world, the study of genocide, one of the immediate consequences of which was that it became stronger in foreign literature.interest in the Armenian Genocide.
  On the other hand, take timeThe great powers need to "remember" Armenianto solve its own problems, as it happened in June 1987 to block Turkey's entry into the Council of Europe.
 The last twowere translated into Armenian by American Kurt Vonnegut for decades.Spaniards Maria Anglada, Gonzalo Guarchi, Jose Guriaran,Erich Hilsenrat, a German Jew, Kemal Yalçըn, a Turk, Orhan Pamuk, and Akram Aylisli, an Azeri (the latter has the song "Stone Dreams").The eloquent subtitle "Novel Requiem") գործ The works of others.
    In those works,As a rule, what happened to Armenians is seen as a human fallOne of the expressions of the overthrow process, which is constantly "enriched" by new facts of its demoralization and retreat.
  From here:the universal value of such works that the world is well aware ofwriters.
 The existence of an individual, social groups is endangered,as real life is moving away from humanitarian ideals,Violence, cruelty, և human beings are openly encouragedthreatens to become a zombie, which manifests itself in the emptiness of his eyes, in complete indifference to everything.
 The Turks are trying to examine this reality in the value system of man and humanitywriter Orhan Pamuk, doing it imperceptibly, without sharp accents,but not forgetting for a moment that he was "impoverished and faded," "middle class."The environment of moderate need ”The lost beauty and prosperity of Kars were conditioned first of all by the presence of Armenians.
  Here it issuch a "imperceptible" remark. "There were people here
They have lived since the time of the Armenian state, they still have 1000 yearsSome of the monasteries built before stand in all their splendorto this day "/ 3,27 /.
  Thus, Armenian continues to run through the pages of the novelTopic: "Lonely, abandoned and uninhabited old houses like ghosts"in the form of dumb witnesses of the mastery of Armenian blacksmiths, "Ani Ghostthrough the city. "
  And one of the crowd asks the Azeri journalist a question. "Where are they?"
The millions of Armenians of Kars և Anatolia "/ 3,264 /.
 The writer's focus is on arbitrariness, the fanaticism and backwardness of his compatriots.
 This is evidenced by the origins of the novel, one of which:referred to by Browning, proclaimed: "All our attention is focused on the dangerous extremes of the universe."
 Seemingly insignificant householdThe detail here can be a matter of life and death.
  Previous:The mayor was killed because an illegally built balcony collapsed.
 It is noteworthy that the central character of the novel is Kerim orThere are just 12 years of political exile in Germany,Or he has never been involved in politics.
  Everyone who comes to townWho is obliged to report to the police station according to 1940? 90% of the provincial media is provided by the governor and the security department, reporting
about events that have not yet happened.
 Terrible itThe murders and suicides in the city are notThey do not surprise anyone, they happen for no apparent reason,և as if self-evident phenomena that have entered everyday life ևhas become an integral part of everyday life.
  There are some of his poemsHe called it "a place where there is no Allah."
 Kars generalizes the countryMany cities are miserable, frustrated, failed, desperatebetrayed people, whose face is the eternal seal of defeat.
Somewhere in the novel, the Marquez novel "Autumn of the Ancestor" is playedthe political scenario, which, by the way, had artistic repercussionsin different literatures of the world, proving the allegory typical of modern public administration systems, anti-popularcontent, "theatrical revolutions".
 The writer is convinced."Our miserable life has no role in the history of mankind.
 … And:we will remain members of an insignificant group drowning in their petty, senseless quarrels, biting each other's throatsbecause of what women will wear on their heads. the roads will be opened, և
"The theatrical revolution" will end "/ 3, 272 /.
He is the translator of the works of Chekhov, Shukshin, Aytmatov and MarquezAkram Aylisli was the basis of his novel "Stone Dreams" in 1988-90. It is a reference to the Armenian-Azerbaijani "coexistence", the Armenian massacres in Sumgait and Baku, adding to the deep-rooted traces of the massacres of the Armenians of Nakhichevan at the beginning of the last century.
 The novel was masterfully translated from the Russian original by Artak Vardanyan.
 In an interview with the British "Independent" newspaper, the writer said that his book is about "reconciliation".
 In another interview, the writer says that for yearsThe decision to publish this book was prompted by RamilThe incident with Safarov, so typical of two neighboring nations:the relationship that has been fixed for decades.
  "It simply came to our notice thenThe reaction and the extent of the enmity between the Armenians and the AzerisI decided to publish this unknowingly deliberately inflamed maniamy novel ", he writes / 4,5 /.
  We think the novel is serious, impartial andIt is one of the brave deeds dedicated to the memory of the compatriots, the Armenians of Agulis, who "left an irreparable pain leaving them".
 The microcosm of the writer is Agulis, who was "forcibly converted and expelled from Armenia."
  Writer doneMore than 2 decades after the horrific crimes, he repents"As if following the biblical wisdom that confession of truth liberates itself" (4: 8-9).
 All the characters in the novel are unhappy in their own way, from the executioners to the victims.
 The stigma of curse and misfortune is forever imprinted in the souls of those people and their descendants.and on the fronts, guided by blind hatred and bigotry, violated the centuries-old universal laws of coexistence and religious tolerance.
  The decapitated corpse of an Armenian old man to defend Saday Sadighli, who was severely beatenNavarish Karabakhli, who was taken to the hospital, is reminded, according to the author,The saddest page in the history of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. with every Armenian who was tortured and killed in a giant city
They were tortured and killed.
 In this atmosphere of permissiveness and crime, "any man, if his, can be easily wiped off the face of the earth."Nobody is standing behind him "/ 4, 30 /.
 Unfortunately, the human being is very easyThe doctor, who returned from Moscow, managed to change his attitude towards the "religion, the homeland, and the Prophet himself" within 3 years.of personal tragedy.
 It is typical that Aylisli sees the fall of a person in general. People, Armenians or Azeris, walk around with other fanatical crowds, herds.
"And given the full right to speak, to shout, to glorifyIt was only to those crowds.
  It was strange that these creaturesThe number of words uttered was equal to the number of words that,probably used by the ancients during hunting "/ 4,63-64 /.
 Actor Sadai, who had no one in his family since he lost consciousnessHe had at least a drop of Armenian blood in his thoughts or his ownAulis: He is in Aylis, or he is getting ready to take the road to Etchmiadzinto repent լինելու to convert.
 Dr. Abasali is also a follower of high universal values, whose likes and dislikes have nothing to do with either Armenians or Muslims. "It simply came to our notice then
a truly unique honesty of my fidelity to the truthhe was out "/ 4, 94 /.
  He is based on his long-standing remarksHe was convinced that the memory of the killed Armenians could not restto give to the Turks living in their houses. "In the families of others who:
They ransacked an Armenian house, there are mentally ill people.
 Մարդ No man in Aylis,who at that time intended to reform his life through violence against Armenians, still has no peace "/ 4, 85-86 /.
 It is noteworthy that another, written in a completely different spirit and style, Elif աֆafak's "Istanbul's friend"In the novel / 2006 /, plot nodes also bring the inevitablethe idea of ​​retribution, while its central hero, Mustafa,He was estranged from his family, trying to get rid of the nightmares of the past.
The image of Agulis and his natives is drawn with great inspiration,people who have never stopped building their miraculous churches,from writing their books, from worshiping their God, from one of His heroesThe author writes that true love knows no boundaries. "That
Love is a pure mirror, where only kindness and mercy are reflected ”/ 4, 70 /.
 The novel "Stone Dreams" was written with such high love and devotion.
Thus, modern fiction activelyundertake a great mission. witnessed the destruction of high culture,
It seems to counterbalance the very foundations of human existence, with a tendency to reveal eternal truths, eternal values.
 Sometimes the political saturation inherent in these works begins to work to the detriment of their artistic aspects, as seen in Guarch's novels (The Armenian Will, White Mountain).
 This is appropriateIn this case, remember Stendhal's remark that Orhan Pamuk refers to."Politics in literature sounds as rough as a gun fired during a concert, but that's whatwe can not ignore… »/ 3, 9 /.
A tendency is becoming more and more common, according to which ArmeniansThe genocide, more than ever, begs for the distorted nature of the human being, allows us to recognize ourselves as valued "from the outside."
What happened can not be ignored, as it remains "unhealedthe "wound", which "enriches" the newness of human demoralization and retreatwith facts.
 Unpunished and unpunished crime is continuous… Hence its universal significance, which is well realized by the writers of the world; The existence of every individual, of society is endangered,
It's time to stop, because the exploding mine is right next to us.
 And:On the other hand, man is threatened by the catastrophe of becoming a zombie, which is manifested by the emptiness of his eyes, complete indifference to everything.
  The modern novel, addressing the reinterpretation of the past,it becomes even more complex and ambiguous, as the consumption of humanistic civilization, the impossibility of human understanding even within the same ethnic boundaries, is obvious.
 The distance of decades does not dampen the pain of losses, և nowadays it becomes more and more urgent to strive to express the necessary things seriously. The past suddenly emerges in our present, և humanity often finds itself in the same magical framework of questions.
Literature 1. Tumanyan H., To Philip Vardazaryan // Complete collection of works,h. 10, Yerevan, Science of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia, 1999, pp. 14-16.
2. Gorodetsky S., The Last Scream, Yerevan, "Edit Print", 2010, 591 pages.
3. Pamuk Orhan, Snow, Yerevan, "Antares" hr., 2006, 406 pages.
4. Aylisli Akram, Stone Dreams, Yerevan, "Graber", 2013, 192 pages.
Information about the author:Anahit G. Hakobyan - PhD, GGPI Foreign Literature Associate Professor, E-mail.
