The modern educational system makes the student socio-politicalsubject of processes that closely associates with a "national citizen"շահ "The interests of a" free citizen ".
At the present stage of the establishment of the "New World Order", many values ​​of Western liberalism penetrate the sphere of the Armenian realityև significantly changes the socio-cultural perceptions of Armenians.
 At the same time, complex systemic changes, democratic and integration processes are taking place in Armenia, particularly in Armenia.membership in the EEU.
 Besides, there is the issue of international recognition of NKR independence.
 That's why it's so urgent right nowThe rational formation of the ethno-political culture of the Armenian student, which is weakwill give him not only an understanding of complex socio-political processes, but also. "Develop rational approaches to solving complex problems from an impartial scientific standpoint.
The aim of the research is to reveal the essence of the ethno-political culture of the Armenian students, their peculiarities, the ways and means of its formation.
The target of the research is university students, and the subject is:the point of view of its ethno-political culture.
The following issues were raised at work.1. Identify the negative factors influencing the student's ethno-political culture;2. Cover the interaction of democratic institutions, ethnocultural components, the distinction between civic and national identity;3. Explain the formation of student ethno-political culture in the context of educational reforms.
The components of the ethno-political culture of the modern student are:self-consciousness, language, religion, customs and traditions, national mentality, mentality, moral norms, political knowledge and values, political behavior, life experience, political orientation.
 These are the reasons for the nature and level of political activity, especially when they becomeconviction.
 The student, as a representative of the Armenian ethnos, has not only a unique individual mentality, but also ethnic collective value orientations, so he is responsible for his behavior.for actions.
 G. Nzhdeh is a council with local moralityIt enables the young people to be constantly in touch with the eternal values ​​of the race, and to direct the worldview "to the goals of their nation and state, their happiness has only one justification - to serve it for the happiness of their race" [1, p. 151].
 The blood-kinship qualities and lifestyle of the parents first of all influence the formation of the ethno-political culture of the generations.
 In addition, they inherit and appropriate themselvesThe collective features of the nation: warmth, intelligence, hospitality, diligence, nationalism, xenophobia, family worship.
The Armenian student, entering into interconnection with other ethnicities,understands the uniqueness of his personality, belongingto a certain ethnosocium.
  Therefore, the self-expression of the individual is socialIt is impossible in these processes without national self-consciousness.
Ethnicity has been crucial for Armenians as they are a cultural center in the absence of their own state, in the form ofculture, church, family, national ties, preserved nationalidentity.
The current social environment, the student audience is changingThe biological genes of the young man give "us" a cultural orientation that is less "mobile and changeable than political and economic" [2, p. 90].
Alienated from political life, clear goal and politicalA young man without behavior cannot be actively involved in politicsvariegated processes.
  The task of the lecturer is to prepare video-practical skills մասնագետ specialists with moral features:for building a future civil society.
  Lecturer:the word "before the word of the lips, are outbursts of the heart" [3, p. 9].
At present, the students' loss of trust in political institutions is noticeable, which explains their passive desire to join parties and NGOs.
 Students:He is not particularly active in the presidency, the National Assembly,During the local elections, due to the use of PR (electoral fraud), as the voter is not able to express his will,as a result of which illegitimate statesmen appear.
The leader who came to power with the technology of the Republic of Armenia is unlikely to fulfill the promises of the people, to carry out pro-Armenian activities.Loses confidence և Increases resentment and fear.
  Corruption, social tensions, convergence of statesmen with oligarchs, and the disintegration of parties contribute to the decline of the legitimacy of the authorities in authoritarian states.pressure on non-pro-government opposition partiesmoney laundering, activation of criminal elements, electoral fraud.
All this negatively affects the student's political behaviorformation, appreciation of values.
  He is alienating himself from the homeland due to social exclusion.
  A person leaves his native country, stops worshiping that geographical, socio-cultural area, where he has been deprived of various rights:from the perspective of participating in socio-political, cultural life.
 Patriotism becomes an abstract feeling towards a country,which left him defenseless.
The fact that a student is alienated from political life is also conditioned by his objective influence on political solutions.with impossibility.
The student terminates his / her responsibilities and rightsfrom being a perceptive subject when the lecturer silences his critiqueThe word և condemns conformism, naturalism և self-isolation.
  In that case, the student's mentality, in Dostoevsky's words, is not opposed to "moral feelings in the blood."
If the older generation clings to previous stereotypes, it is difficultadapting to new socio-cultural values, then the youth, being a more receptive institutional group, adapts more quickly to the new living conditions, is fanatically inclined to acceptThe cultural values ​​typical of the West, especially liberalism.
 Students reinterpret old valuesto new values.
The modern student is in the field of fragmented, conflicting value systems, where there is both a liberal culture and a traditional culture.values.
The student, not having a rich life experience, assimilates some false values ​​under the influence of chaotic political situations, andmoral norms do not find their full embodiment, therefore in itA pessimistic, rejecting mood arises.
  The more knowledgeable students assimilate the Western information technology civilization, the more they understand our national spirit.the problems of preserving the qualitative features of culture.
The hasty establishment of Western educational models in our schools has led to socio-cultural distortions, ethnic distortion, and loss of identity.
 Western liberal values ​​do not harm the Armenian ethnic identity if it is a guide to actionbecome the "institutions of traditional national-social relations" of coexistence և the complete socio-cultural concept.
The marginalization of social-educational institutions, the devaluation of national ideas, the penetration of foreign views greatly aggravate inter-ethnic contradictions between different social strata.
Alien to the national mentality and mentality of a reasonable studentbourgeois consumer society, homosexuality,the destructive tendencies of anti-national religious և globalization.
The Armenian socio-environment, the current social relations are the result of the formation of the student's unique behavior.
 Therefore, by:In our polls, 24% of our students are not against "brain drain"countries where people with high intellectual capacity are goodRemuneration.
  The problem of preserving the ethnic identity is served abroad, the homeland is moving to a more important domestic sphere - the nationallanguage, manners, traditional family relationships, religion,historical memory.
The image of a rational-legal leader who is guided has a positive effect on the formation of a student's political culture.Carries out purposeful activities under state law իրավfor the benefit of the people.
There is still no civilization in Armenia typical of civilized democraciesa culture that promotes free political activity.
  Ethnocultural components often oppose the establishment of democratic institutions.
  It is required to carry out active ideological and purposeful work in educational institutions in the diverse ethnocultural groups with subcultures, as an ethnic whole, mitigating their unique socio-culturaldifferences.
Without a sense of national dignity, the student is morally bankrupt.
  It is not the ethnocentric attitude that is injected into the Armenian student, but nationalism.
  "Nationalism is aristocratic, as it is conditioned not only by the preservation of the purity of one's own race, but also by the fact that it lays the foundation of the structure of society.The principle of supremacy of national interests - state, class andtowards religious principles ”[4, p. 103].
Nationalism excludes the humiliation of foreigners, attempts to prefer a radical nation, ethnic clashes.
It grows with the inner aspirations of the Armenian student's self-consciousnessthe tendency of self-identification with one's own nation.
  Being a citizen of an independent national state is a powerful factor of ethnic identification.
Armenian student brings national identity to the forefront today, not civic identity, especially due to historical circumstancesDue to the historical Homeland and the state of the Armenian people,They do not coincide in terms of content.
 Present Armenia, unfortunatelyIt is barely one twelfth of our historical Homeland.
The state is subject to the political management of the societyThe political demands of the time, and the homeland is a deep feelingwith reference to the call of blood, is out of the realm of political time.
 The state thinking of the Armenians is not great, as it has lost its independence for about 10 centuries.
How much the Armenian student identifies himself with inner pride of his own ethnos as having a common origin and mental structureWith a unique social-psychological group, the group goals և norms of its nation are not alien.
 A nation will be strong if it has a significant majority of individuals with positive ethnic identity.
 The modern pro-student education model is aimed at ensuring an effective student learning outcome that allows the student towill give an understanding of the nature of political phenomena, will orient one politicalIn the complex whirlwind of situations, analyze urgent political issues և offer rational solutions to political conflicts.
Otherwise the student becomes his responsibilities and rightsan entity that actively participates in the reforms of the country.
Modern educational reforms have made the university closerThe student-lecturer, student-dean relations, the direct participation of students in the managerial life, and the assessment of their knowledge have become transparent.
  The result is great in the classroom, where the student-lecturer relationship becomes direct, a warm and healthy moral and psychological atmosphere is created.
High school educational (authoritarian) oldmoves from a model to a student-centered education system that allowsto make the student a subject of the educational process.
Students are involved through interactive methodsin practical work, developing analytical-investigative thinking.
 The student freely expresses his / her point of view with a critical approach, listens attentively to the classmate expressing an inner opinion, enters into a dialogue.
  Question and greatly contributes to itthe organization of the institute of response.
  The student fulfills his role of a political subject not only through the student council, NGOs, having certain problems և competencies, but also individually as a citizen և individuality, with his characteristic worldview, beliefs, temperament և practice.
  StudentThe council begins to become the student's "ear, eye և voice".
Contributes to the formation of students' ethno-political culturecultural training, which particularly enriches ethno-cultural knowledge և develops social-psychological entrepreneurship.
No matter how hard the West tries to support us in reforming the education system, it is still unable to solve it in principle.our national educational issues.
 The point is that the topics with social-ethnic content have decreased a lot in the curricula,The comprehensive approach to Armenian upbringing.
 In similar conditions, some students think that the farther we go from the national, the closer we will get to the universal.
H. Shiraz, condemning that approach, expressed the idea of ​​moving from the national to the universal with great power of talent.
Right, my nation, with your vaccineLet me sit in the boat of my song,Let it sail to MasisI go out to the seas of the world [5, page 36].
Only such an approach will allow to associate a "national citizen"The interests of the "free citizen" [6, p. 46], to overcome the gap between them.
Every nation becomes universal only in the way of perfection.
 Closed in the national case, it is impossible to stand asA full nation state.
The universal և national interests are always: ingeniousto be combined in our identity.
 The ability to creatively assimilate foreign values ​​has been one of the foundations of our vitalityWe have survived for centuries.
 But blind faith in a strangerundermines the Armenian spirit.
 The interests of an independent Armenian state are imperativeTo organize the university education in such a way as to preserve the national image of the student, to form a full-fledged citizen of a democratic society.
  And that will be possible if it is brought from the WestThe concept of "civil society" will be creatively mastered and adapted to our national one.
Thus, such an educational institution should operate in a mono-ethnic ArmeniaA system that will combine all modern means in the educational process and will shape the student's ethno-political culture.
The latter has two sides, theoretical and practical.
 It will allow the preservation of ethnic identity in the conditions of globalization, excludingethnocentrism, cultural self-isolation, assimilation of positive experience in interethnic contacts.
Literature 1. Nzhdeh G., Selected, Yerevan, "Hayastan" publishing house, 2001, 405 pages.
2. Shirinyan L., The New World Order և Armenia, Yerevan, "Lusakn" Publishing House,2006, 208 pages.
3. Nzhdeh G., Sayings, Yerevan, "Nakhichevan" publishing house, 2002, 96 pages.
5. Shiraz H., Collection of poems in 5 volumes, Yerevan, "Soviet writer" publishing house, vol. 2, 1982,352 pages.
6. Harutyunyan E., National Identity մշակ Culture of Life (special course. Educational manual), Yerevan, "Macmillan-Armeni" Publishing House, 2004, 152 pages.
Information about the author:Hakhverdyan Vardan Tachat - philosophical scientist. Candidate, Associate Professor, Lecturer at Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute after M. Nalbandyan.
