It is known that the sciences studying the population were mainly formed in the initial period of the development of capitalist relations, that is, in the XVII century. at the beginning.
  The authorities of the European colonial states were more interested in seizing the wealth of the transatlantic regions - labor, and for that it was necessary to excel in ethnic composition, culture, employment, social and production relations.
 The formation and development of ethnological, anthropological sciences were conditioned by the colonial policy.
 Based on the logic of colonization, XIX century. Ethnography or ethnography has been taught in European universities in Russia.
 The course covered the distribution, reproduction, employment of the world's ethnic groups, revealed the process of ethnocultural and linguistic development.
 Due to the economic, political, and scientific interests of Russia, France, Germany, and the United States, the methodology of research in ethnographic sciences was different, because, unlike Russia, the colonies of England and France were scattered and located in the overseas territories.
 Under such circumstances, greater efforts were required from Great Britain to control the colonies, and one of the main preconditions for achieving this was an excellent knowledge of the ethnic groups living in the colonies.
  The application of the well-known geopolitical provision "Divide and Conquer" enabled the British government to rule the ethnic groups living in its colonies.
Ethno-geography, occupying a frontier position in the system of sciences, studies the reproduction, distribution, resettlement, displacement և composition of ethnic communities in the world, regions, states և settlements.
  The only environment for the development of ethnographic sciences was universities and other educational institutions.
  Ethnography or ethnography developed from the beginning.
  XVII-XVIII centuries Ethnology has been taught at well-known European universities: Sorbonne, Bologna, Berlin, Oxford and other universities.
 The term ethnography was first coined by the French scholar Jean-Jacques Amper in his monograph De l'histoire de la poésie (1830) [7, p. 5].
 At the initial stage of development, ethno-geography was formed in the system of ethnological sciences.
  In contrast to ethnography, ethnography was formed later.
Some scholars consider ethno-geography to be a branch of ethnography, while others consider it to be a branch of geography.
  The third group of specialists considers ethno-geography as a frontier branch of science, which was formed at the junction of ethnography, demography and population geography [6, p. 13].
Ethno-geography, as an independent branch of science, is connected with ethnography, ethnography, ecology, psychology, sociology, demography, population geography and other scientific branches.
  One of them is ethnic anthropology, which studies the anthropological or physical development of ethnoses և ethnogenetic issues.
  In England և in the USA in the XIX century. end of the century և XX century. At the beginning, physical and cultural anthropology was formed.
It studies the spheres of culture that are the result of the physical and caring activity of human society.
 That is, the object of study of these branches of science is man, with his biological-social features [1, p. 12].
 Closely related to ethno-geography, ethnosociology studies the social problems of the development and activities of ethnic communities.
 It pays attention to the identity of ethnic groups, self-organization և interethnic relations.
 Ethnology is a science that studies the origin of ethnoses (ethnogenesis), historical evolution (ethnic history), ethnic commonalities "differences, as well as ethnic processes in different historical periods, and ethno-geography studies the reproduction, composition, displacements of ethnic communities."
  The object of study of both ethnography and ethnography is ethnoses.
 The sciences studying the world's ethnos pay attention to: • the self-consciousness of ethnic communities.
 Ethnosociology deals with that.
• Ethnoculture studies the traditional "modern culture, way of life, customs" of ethnos.
• Ethnic languages ​​և dialects study ethnolinguistics.
• From the directions of ethno-geography, ethno-demography studies the reproduction of ethnos, demographic conditions, marriages, family composition.
• Ethnopsychology studies the mentality, character, psychology of ethnos.
• Social anthropology studies the և social structure և structure of ethnos.
In addition to ethno-demography, the directions of ethno-geography are ethnotoponomics (studies ethnonyms), ethnoecology, ethno-political geography.
  Ethnoecology deals with the study of different ethnic groups, the quality of the living environment և the use of nature.
  Ethno-political geography studies the social and political life of different ethnic communities.
Ethno-geography is more closely connected with ethnography.
 Ethnography (French: ethnographie, Greek: έθνος—
netew + yράφω— I write) studies the material and cultural culture of the ethnos.
 In Western scientific circles, the term "ethnography" is used in conjunction with ethnography.
 In Russian scientific literature, the term "ethnography" is sometimes used interchangeably with "ethnography".
  In the Anglo-Saxon countries, ethnography is classified as an anthropological science and is called "cultural anthropology".
  The Germans use the term "ethnography" (volkerkunde).
The term ethno-geography was first introduced into science by the Bolshevik revolutionary, ethnographer and linguist. Bogoraz-Tan.
 One of his famous monographs is "The Spread of Culture on Earth. Основы этнодемографии "(1928), where the ethno-geographical zoning was carried out for the first time.
 In the 1930s he taught ethnography at Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) State University.
  It is worth mentioning that the Chair of Anthropology and Anthropology of the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics of St. Petersburg University was opened in 1887. E. Led by Petty.
 Ethno-geographical studies are carried out in educational and scientific institutions by various scientific foundations, in state scientific institutions, in scientific and social organizations.
  One of the most important methods of ethno-geographical research is the use of sources, in particular the population censuses and censuses conducted in the Russian Empire in the 19th century, most of which date back to the 20th century.
  The first to use this method was the head of the Russian geographical company P.P. Semyonov Tian Shyansky.
Ethno-geographical research uses source sources, folklore-archeological materials, scientific literature, monographs, articles, field ethno-geographical materials, official, statistical, census data and census data.
  In ethno-geographical studies, partial համ special methods are used.
  Of the general methods, cartographic, historical, comparative-analytical, statistical, etc. are used, and of the partial methods, ethno-geographical survey, conversation, and monitoring methods.
Field research has a special place in ethno-geography.
 This method enables the scientist to gather information about the material culture, reproduction, movement, and resettlement of ethnic groups.
  The structure of ethno-geographical research methods is presented in Figure 1.
The structure of ethno-geographical research methods.
Figure 1 Methods of ethno-geographical research
folklore, use of sources
comparative method
Archaeological materials
statistical method
structural, systemic, cartographic
In the conditions of the development of capitalism, the methodological scientific basis of ethnographic-ethno-geographical studies was laid in Germany from European countries.
 F. was great in that. Hegel's (1770-1831) philosophical teaching of "absolute idealism" or "objective idealism", which accepted the primacy of the spirit or idea, the idea of ​​և the secondary of matter [2, p. 444].
  Ethno-geography in Germany has developed in the system of ethnographic sciences.
 One of the founders of ethnography, one of the diffusion theorists F. It is Ratzel (1844-1904).
  One of his famous monographs is the work "Ethnography".
 He was a bearer of nationalist ideas, a member of the Pan-German Union party, and from the 1880s taught geography at Munich State University [3, p. 504].
In France, ethnography was originally called ethnography.
 The focus of French ethnographic and ethno-geographical studies was the study of the traditional occupation, ethnic composition, structure and interethnic relations of the population of the colonized countries.
  Paris ethnographic society in 1839 established ethnography as an independent branch of science, and in the XX century. At the beginning he renamed it ethnography.
 Ethnography has been taught in almost all social sciences departments of French universities.
In England, the science of ethnos was developed in the system of anthropological sciences.
  The English School of Anthropology studied the ethno-demographic and ethno-geographical processes of the population of the colonized countries.
  Anthropology The scientific direction "social anthropology" has been formed in the system of science, which is the same ethnology.
 Anthropology as a science was formed in the XIX century. in the middle.
 One of the founders of anthropology is P. Broca.
 He taught at the Sorbonne University School of Medicine from 1860-70.
 In 1858 he founded the Paris Anthropological Society, and in 1868 the Anthropological Research Laboratory, and in 1875 the Anthropological School.
 Similar anthropological institutions were established in London (1863), Moscow (1864), Madrid (1865), Berlin and elsewhere.
 XIX century A number of directions emerged in the West that sought to substantiate the idea of ​​racial inequality.
In the USA, ethnology is called "physical anthropology" և It was considered one of the directions of anthropology.
  Physical anthropology studies the racial composition, distribution, and characteristics of ethnic groups.
  One of the directions of physical anthropology is ethnic anthropology [8, p. 350].
 This subject is taught in the faculties of medicine, history and natural geography of the universities of European countries.
 XX century In the second half of the twentieth century, the study of the culture of the world's ethnic communities in anthropology became more active, as a result of which the scientific branch of "cultural anthropology" was formed.
In Russia, the study of ethnic groups began in the XVIII century. from the second half.
 XIX century In the first half, Russian scientists KM Ber, NN Nadezhdin, K.D. Kavelin developed the concept of the development of Russian ethnography, where more attention was paid to the study of the composition and culture of the world's ethnic communities.
The founders of the Russian ethnographic school are N.N. Miklukho-McLay և D. Anuchin.
In the USSR, ethnography was a highly ideological science, focusing mainly on the class structure of the world's ethnic societies and inter-ethnic class relations.
  In the Soviet scientific life, the ties between geography and ethnography were strengthened, as a result, in the 1920s, the scientific branch of ethno-geography was formed, which is located at the junction of ethnography and population geography.
In the methodology of ethno-geographical research, Yu. Bromley (dualistic) և L. The theories put forward by Gumilyov (ethnogenesis).
 Anthropological studies had a certain influence on the development of Soviet ethno-geography.
  In 1919 the Chair of Anthropology was established at Moscow University, in 1922 - the Institute of Anthropology.
 Soviet anthropology was characterized by planned work և development of common methods.
  D. had a great contribution to the development of Chetno-geography of Soviet anthropology. Ն. Anuchin, V. V. Bunak, G. F. Debets, V. V. Ginsburg, M. Գ. Lane, M .; F. Nesturch, W. P. Alexen, V. Bogorastan, Yu. Bromley, L. Gumilyov և others.
Ethno-geographical and ethnographic studies were carried out at the Lomonosov Moscow State University. Ն. At the Anuchin Institute of Anthropology, at the Academy of Sciences of the Union Republics, at the universities of Leningrad, Ki, Tbilisi, Tartu and other cities.
The globalization and unification processes of the modern world contribute to the activation of ethno-geographical studies.
 In this regard, the subject of ethno-geography is taught in higher educational institutions.
 Numerous teaching manuals are published to promote the teaching of ethno-geography.
  One of the well-known teaching methods of modern ethno-geography is A. Ն. The work of Asauli Tsurishner "Ethnogeographical factors of globalization and regionalization of the world" (St. Petersburg, 2010).
  In that manual, attention was paid to the changes in the ethno-geographical processes of the population in the world, in the regions, their impact on the application of the regional-global ethno-demographic policy.
 A special place is given to the ethno-demographic-qualitative changes of the world's population, to interethnic conflicts.
  A. taught in Russian universities. Ն. Yamskov "Ethnogeography and geography of religion" (2008), և N.V. Alpatov, "Ethnogeography and Geography of Religion" (2008) teaching manuals, where attention is paid to the change in the national composition and structure of the world's population.
  It is worth mentioning that before 1991 Ethno-geography was not taught in the universities of the USSR, including the Armenian SSR [4, page 3].
 The theoretical problems of ethno-geography and ethnography were referred to by S. I. Brooke, VI Kozlov, V. I. Levin և others.
 In Russia in 2009 published by E. "Ethnogeography" of the Church [5, p. 6], and in 2005 A. Lobshanidze և Others' methodological manuals "Ethnogeography and geography of religions".
Now we will present the curriculum of teaching ethno-geography in the universities of the Russian Federation with a table.
  Ethno-geography is taught mainly in the faculties of geography.
 Thus, the subject of "Ethnography, Ethno-Geography" is taught in the "Hotel Affairs" department of the Kazan (Central Volga) State Federal University.
  Table 2 shows that the ethno-geography taught in universities is accompanied by the geography of religion.
  The content of the courses, competencies, research methods are almost indistinguishable from each other.
Ethno-geography and ethnography in Armenia were developed mainly in the system of Russian-Soviet ethno-geographical schools.
  The first anthropological-ethno-geographical researches in our republic were carried out in the second half of the XIX century ին at the beginning of XX.
  The first to deal with the problems of Armenian anthropology was As. Altunyan (with Shantr) in 1882. և Making measurements in 1884, the results of which were published in 1907 by Dr. V. Minasyan.
 He tried to prove that the anthropological type of the population of the Armenian Highlands is close to the Alpine, and the Armenians are the descendants of the Hittites.
  J. Alishan ("Shirak", "Ayrarat", "Sisakan" monographs) addressed the ethno-geographical problems of Armenia), P. Abelyan ("The population of Armenia in the pre-Soviet-Soviet regions"), St. Lisitsyan, G. Vantsyan, A. Haksthausen, S. Karapetyan, V. Temurchyan, D. Vardumyan, A. Odabashyan և others.
 Diaspora Armenian scientists are noteworthy. Hatsuni, A. Alpoyajyan և's other contributions.
Table 1 RF և Curricula of ethno-geography taught in RA universities In parallel with the collection of ethnographic-ethno-geographical materials during the Soviet years, attention was paid to the reproduction of different nationalities living in our republic.
 Both senior (E. Lalayan, Kh. Samvelyan, S. Lisitsyan, St. Lisitsyan) and representatives of the new generation (V. Bdoyan, K. Melik-Pashayan) contribute to the development of the ethno-geography of the Armenian Soviet ethnography.
Huge ethnographic and ethno-geographical material is contained in various diaries and yearbooks published by Diaspora Armenian patriotic unions.
 Ethnographic-ethno-geographical studies in Armenia are carried out mainly at the Institute of Archeology, Ethnography and the Institute of History of Armenia.
Ethno-geographical studies in newly independent Armenia are limited to the borders of our republic and the region.
 It should be noted that the works refer to different periods.
 In this regard, we can mention the two-volume work "National Minorities of the Republic of Armenia" published by the "Vostan" ethnocultural research institute of the Institute of Archeology and Ethnography of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia. Edited by Mkrtumyan, H. Sargsyan "Population of Eastern Armenia XIX- started XXv." (2002).
Thus, ethno-geography, as an independent branch of science, was formed in the node of ethnography, demography, population geography.
  The deepening of ethno-geographical studies led to the development of new directions, ethno-demography and ethnotoponomics.
 Currently, the scientific discipline of ethno-geography is taught in many universities of Russia, and in Armenia only in the chair of geography and teaching at the Faculty of Natural Sciences and Geography of Gyumri State Pedagogical Institute.
 Based on the ethno-geographical, ethno-demographic processes taking place in the modern world, the geopolitical changes conditioned by them, we think it is necessary that ethno-geography be taught in the faculties and departments of the history of our republic, universities and geography.
Literature 1. Harutyunyan S., Literary Essays, Yerevan, 2010, "Science" Publishing House, p. 264.
2. Philosophical Dictionary, Yerevan, 1973, Haypethrat, page 657.
3. Isaev B.A. Geopolitics.
  Chrestomathy, St. Petersburg.
  2012. ed. Юнита4. Kazmina OI, Puchkov P.I. Basics of Ethnodemography, M.Sc.
 1994. Ed. "Science" teaching-methodological possibilities. Ed. "Academy", M.
 2005. 480 p.8. Хрисанфова Е. N., Perevozchikov I. В. Anthropology. M.
 2005. Ed. Science, 9. Political science.
  Dictionary-lawyer. Сост. prof. half. science Sanjarevva. 2000. http:
//dic.academic.ru/.матике. СПб.
 Russian National Library. 2011. 136 p. Information about the author Artajes G. Boyajyan - hist. scientist Candidate, Assistant of the Chair of Geography of GSPI, E-mail.
