Teaching և upbringing processes are dialecticalThey have common features in unity, they are conditionedby the logic of the educational process.
 Training:It is considered the main and main means of upbringing.
  There is no education without education և there is no education that does not educate(J. Herbert).
 The educational function of education was substantiated by A.Disterverg, philosophers G. Hegel, I. Kant և others based on
direction of upbringing և the ratio of teaching and upbringing.
  Discussing the issue of the effectiveness of a well-targeted educational process, we conclude:The choice of method during the activity as a key means of achieving the set goal, due to which actions are taken, situations are created, problems are solved.
Education is a publicly organized, pedagogically essential process that is essentialfeatures are due to the reciprocity of the processto carry out the mental and personal development of the child,with the aim of establishing an effective rate of development, ensuring a certain level of education.
  "When defining teaching, one should pay special attention to the question 'how to teach?', As the efficiency of the whole teaching process is in a positive sense.agrees with the teaching methods that answer that questionin theory ”(5, p. 105).
Education is one of the main concepts of pedagogical science, it is decisive in almost all pedagogical understandings, as a consciously organized activity of a person, it also has essential features.
 They are conditioned by purposefulness and planning, organization, processreciprocity, positive behaviors in society,on the fact of assimilation of qualities based on the demand of the given society,from the patterns of personal development, individual features, current political, economic, social, culturalconditions, available means and opportunities.
The choice of methods of the educational processdepends on a number of criteria: educational generalgoals, time and conditions required for implementation, teacher's work, etc.
 Method selection և applicationThe problem is multifaceted and multifactorial.
 The teacher, who has his own way of working, uses the method, guided by his own values, feelings, moods, expectations and expectations.
  Very often the method is used as a rule that is determined in advance, it is neededshould be implemented regardless of everything, because it is for everyone և everyonemust be acceptable to the party.
  In the case of such coercion, which:once controlled, such selection and application of methods,We think it cannot be considered effective.
  “The teacher, knowing herinternal needs, will create a unique, independent way of activity "(1,page 612).
 Moreover, prominent Armenian pedagogue G. Edilyan thought that was all
a teacher has to have his own method, force him to do it,which does not come from his inner needs is never desirable (1).
  The role of the learner, who is endowed with heredity, exclusivity, has individual features, carries the influences and influences of the social environment, is no less important in the choice of the method.
 We think that the relationship between the method of the educational process and the child's personality should be considered in this wholeon the basis of the paradigm of a learner-centered approach.
Every educational process has sensory-observational, intellectual capacity-building, moral qualities, willpower, education and upbringing, all of which can և ensure the development of the child's personality.
  Method selection:The main issue in the case is their interconnectedness, which canto ensure effective, harmonious, influential relationships with oneselfsocial environment և society.
 This means that the goals of upbringing summarize the development of a person's "self", the ideas and approaches to make a person a citizen, integrate him into public life, work and teach a person to live.
The method in the context of our discussion is educationalIt is a set of cognitive principles, means, approaches, and tricks that regulate the activity of the objects of the process, subjects, in the choice of which the structure, content and content of the textbooks also have a special place.
The choice of method also determines the effectiveness of the learner's self-learning and self-discipline processes, which may enable him / her in the future.to stand out in society according to the personal high he has acquiredto choose his method of living in terms of qualities, attitudes, principles of activity գործունեության in terms of their effectiveness.
In modern pedagogical science there is a methodThe need for a more in-depth study of the selection criteria, because the more correctly the method of implementation of the pedagogical process is chosen, the more effective the process is, the individual actions are regulated, clear and reliable.
  Proper selection and application of reasoned և meaningful methods, trickscan be considered as a necessary condition for the effectiveness of the educational process.
Literature 1. Compiled and edited by prof. AM Shavarshyan, Armenian pedagogues 19th-20th
դդ. /1920/, Book B, Yerevan, 1961, Haypetusmankhrat, 1961, 775 pages.
2. Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia, volume 7, Yerevan, 1981, 719 pages.
3. Ghuyumchyan G. E., Pedagogy. In two books, Book 1, Yerevan, "Zangak
97 », 2005, 464 pages.
4. Konstantinov NA, Medinsky EN, Shabaa MF, PedagogyHistory, Textbook for pedagogical institutes,Luys, 1972, 367 pages.
5. Manukyan S., General pedagogy, new course,textbook, Second revised edition, Yerevan,"Zangak 97", 560 pages.
6. Petrosyan HH, Modern pedagogical technologies, Author.հրատ., Եր., 2012, 564 էջ.
Information about the author:Ghukasyan Lusik Henrik - m. c. Associate Professor, GSPI Pedagogy և Chair of Social Work, E-mail.
