The raising of this issue by us was mainly conditionedwith the nonsense of Azeri "historiography" as if it were ArmenianStatehood in this area (South Caucasus) was created artificially by external forces (meaning the Russian Empire)Due to the active support, the province of Nakhichevan, which is an inseparable part of its territory, became part of the "ancient state formations of Azerbaijan" in administrative-territorial terms.
While writing the article, we will talk about "Nakhchavan province" and "Nakhchavan city" in parallel.
Nakhichevan, according to "Geography", was the 34th province of the Vaspurakan province of Great Armenia, 1220 km2. area [4, page 7].
  The province of Nakhichevan was located in the middle course of the Araks River, on its left bank.
The first historical information about Nakhichevan is givenUrartian cuneiform sources.
 It refers to King Menua (K.a. 810-786) An inscription left on the rocks of the slope of Odzasar mountain,
which was discovered by geologist V. A. Igumenov in 1988.
 In that protocolIt is reported in: "1. Ishpuine tells Sardurord by the power of the Chaldeans, 2. Minua Ishpuinord conquered the land of Artsine (city), Ish (city) [land] (conquered).
 3. The land of Artsikume (city) (occupied), Ayaniane (city)He conquered the land, killed (people), expelled.
 4. On his return he founded KhaldeThe monument is on Bulua- (mountain).
 He established order.
 5. Objects to this Khaldelet-be sacrificed: (one) bull (let-be sacrificed) to the lord of Khalde-his superior:Boulevard- (on the mountain) -up "[14, pp. 57-58].
From the data of the above-mentioned protocol of Nakhichevan it turns out that:still during the joint reign of Ishpuini and MenuaDuring one of their raids, they crossed the left bank of the Araks, southeast of the Ararat Valley, near the city of Jugha [11, p. 210].
The oldest of the Armenian chroniclers from the administrative-political point of viewMovses gives very valuable information about Nakhichevan provinceKhorenatsi, saying that Q.A. VI century Tigran Yervandyan. "And Anoush is the first
My wife, the daughter of Ashdak, who was still a teenager, and many other captives, more than a handful, settled on the great mountain of the East (Great)Masis) to the border of Goghtan, which are Tambat, Voskioghay, Dazhgoinq, ևThe others are on the banks of the river, one of which is Vranjunik, up to the fortress of Nakhjavan. եր զերիիս ավանցն Խրամ և զՋուղայ և զԽոշակունիս.
And on the other side of the river is the whole field, the head of which is Azhdanak"Tsno is the stronghold of Nakhchivan" [18, pp. 84-85].
  From the above-mentioned information provided by the historian, it can be assumed that starting from the VI century BC, NakhichevanThe province was a royal domain of the Armenian court.
 Movses KhorenatsiAnother source of information states that the estates of the Mardpetuni, which were part of the senior ministerial houses of ancient Armenia,'s jurisdiction, were spread "from Atrpatakan to Tsakhsh և Nakhchavan" [18, p. 105].
  This information provided by the historian provides a basisto conclude that in ancient times Nakhichevan did not join the Mardpetakan,another administrative unit, Syunik in the world [10, pp. 381-382].
In the 1st century, the Armenian court separated the province of Nakhichevan from Syunik for unknown reasons and included it in the Mardpetakan.
 As mentioned by B.Harutyunyan. "It is logical to think that such an administrative change was intended to separate the royal domains from the hereditary domains of the Syunik princes" [10, p. 382].
 And since the House of Lords, which ruled over the royal treasury [12, p. 64], in turn controlled the royal domainswas a body, so the court found it expedient to attach it to Nakhichevanthe province.
 Most likely, until the fall of the Arshakuni throne in 428, the city and province of Nakhichevan remained as a royal domain.are under the jurisdiction of the Mardpetuni.
"After the fall of the Arshakunys, he legally disappears."The ruling house of the Mardpetuni, and the royal house belonging to themThe estates, including the province of Nakhichevan, with the city of the same name, passto the Artsrunis [21, pp. 319-320].
 The city and province of Nakhichevan to the latterremained in the hereditary domains until the VIII century. beginnings when:
Due to the administrative-political situation in Armenia, it passedto the Arabs, becoming the residence of the Arab police deputies.
During the caliphate, most Arab historians and geographers divided Armenia into four parts.
  According to this administrative division, Nakhichevan (Nashavan), Vaspurakan (Basfurajan), Dvin (Dabil), Shirak (Siraj), Tayk (Tayr), Bagrand (Baghravand) were part of the third Armenia [13, pp. 16-17].
  Here:It is noteworthy that Nakhichevan is mentionedApart from Vaspurakan, a circumstance that allows us to assume that:The city of Nakhichevan with its province of the same name was taken out by the ArtsrunisFrom the hereditary domains, it became an administrative unit subordinate to the Arabs.
 It remained under Arab rule until the 9th century. the middle.
  Nakhichevan interested the Arabs in its position both as a province of military and economic significance and as an administrative-political unit.
Judging by the IX century. From the information provided by the historian Tovma Artsruni [5, p. 404], in 705. Arab General Kashm (Kasim) ousted Nakhichevan after burning Armenian ministers in Nakhichevan and Khrami churches
From Vaspurakan, as it had already become the residence of the deputies of the Arab police of Armenia. "And the order taken by Mahmet was unjust, it was ordered by someone named Kasmo, who was his new commander in the side of the city of Nakhchivan" [16, pp. 32-33].
 T. Hakobyan mentions. "It simply came to our notice then
In the 16th century, Nakhichevan did not firmly belong to any of the ministerial houses bordering Syunik and Artsrunyats, but was a bone of contention.[8, p. 35].
  In our opinion, hardly like thatThe above-mentioned ministerial houses were exhausted after the blowThey could enter into an active struggle for control of Nakhichevan.
It is possible to think that IX c. in the middle of Arab rule
Along with the weakening, the princes of Syunyats ascended the throne, expanding themselvesThe areas to the south, up to the Araks River, occupy the province of Nakhichevanand the city, [22, p. 183].
 The fact that the latter were in the domain of the Syunik princes is confirmed by the following report by Tovma Artsruni, whichAccording to him, after the death of Prince Derenik of Vaspurakan (886) three of himThe sons divide Vaspurakan into տիր none of themNakhichevan is not mentioned. "... բար Distinguish the good found
Giving my world three parts to Ashot, as you said before, be carefulby other means of the first power of the world, till!Yamur of Nakhchavan ”[5, p. 374].
However, the province of Nakhchivan and the city were in the hands of the Syunik princesremained until the 10th century. the beginnings.
 According to Shapuh Bagratuni's "Historiography", King Smbat I, expanding the BagratuniIt occupies Partav, Syunik, Nakhichevan, Yernjak, Vagharshavan, Basen, Apahunik, Hark և Taron [15, p. 50].
Thus, Nakhichevan province with its city again became a royal domain, which explained Smbat I, Nakhichevan somesometimes in exchange for services to the Artsrunis, sometimes to the Syuniksthe circumstance.
 It is at this time that a great controversy arises around the city of Nakhichevan among the "princes of Artsrunyats" of Syunik, the occasion of whichIn 905, after the death of Ashot Artsruni, some of King Smbat I, NakhichevanIn return for the services was to present it to Prince Smbat of Syunik.
The city of Nakhichevan did not remain in Syunik for a long timein the hands of the princes, because after the assassination of King Smbat I.became the residence of Nsir, the viceroy of Amira Yusuf of Atrpatakan [17,page 143].
In fact, after the invasions of the ruler of Atrpatakan, Nakhichevan was administratively and territorially separated from Syunik.to the Arabs, where an emirate was formed [20, p. 125].
Thus, Nakhichevan has the supreme ownership of the landIt did not belong to any of the Armenian ministerial houses.
  Royal throneAfter the loss, even if the city of Nakhichevan passed through its province to the ruling houses of Artsrunyats or Syunyats, for a very short time,because of its administrative-political և military-strategic significanceIt was so big that foreign invaders kept it in their dominanceunder.
X d. 70s Armenian Shah Ashh III Voghormatsin succeeded
to establish sovereignty in Nakhichevan.
 We have received the proclamation of Ashot III the Merciful on the donation of estates to the monastery of St. Stepanos Nakhavka not far from Nakhichevan, the letter of the institution of Catholicos Khachik to King Ashot III on the donation of estates to the monastery of Nakhavkaև The gift of Hripsime, daughter of Ashot III, to the same monastery. "NO
(976) Tumaris Aramian ... An irreversible high command of our subject ևYou have established a lot, which was determined by our ancestors, our holy patriarch, our Lord Nersis, the grandson of our holy Enlightener, first of all.magnificent և famous capital Nakhchivan… Azat և Giran, Jugha ևhis monastery, Astapat անք his monastery, Shamb և his monastery, Jaghat place և his monastery,Create your own monastery… ”[1, pp. 2-11].
 As this document proves, in 976Ashot III comes to the monastery of St. Stepanos Nakhavka in Magharda with his armyThe Merciful donates Nakhichevan and large estates from other surrounding provinces to the monastery.
 This fact can not be interpreted other than from Dvinto annex the valley of the Araks south to the Bagratid kingdomor at least the reality of subjugating him [9, p. 116].
It can be assumed that Nakhichevan with other royal domainsIn 1045, after the fall of the Armenian statehood, it came under the rule of Byzantium.
This administrative-political situation was rather short.
  1063The Seljuk sultan Alpaslan captured the city of Nakhichevan, making it his residence.
 It was transformed during the Seljuk ruleIt is a powerful administrative-political center, where an emirate is formed.
 The power of the Emir of Nakhichevan extended to Southeastern Armenia and Atrpatakan [3, pp. 217-218].
 Seljuk ruleThe period in Nakhichevan ends in the XII century. in the middle, after which the city and
The province passed to the Eltkuzyan Atabekyan of Atrpatakan, becomingOne of its most important military and administrative strongholds is the fact that it has reached a high position in Atrpatakan.Yelikum Orbelyan as "agent of these parties, military leader", domainsHe received it in the city of Nakhichevan and its environs.
  The latter with its provincebecame the hereditary domain and seat of the Orbelian ruling house [17,pp. 8, 280-288].
XII century The recently liberated Northeastern Armenia was divided
Among the Zakaryans!
  The city of Nakhichevan and its environs fell to himIvane Atabekin [6, p. 154].
 Nakhichevan did not stay in the Zakaryans for a long time.
 1225 The provinces of Armenia were hit hard
The interest of Khorezm from Jalal ad Din.
 Among other provinces of Armenia, Nakhichevan is also destroyed [2, p. 499].
 Then Jalal al-DinHe settled in Atrpatakan, making the city of Nakhichevan his residence [19, p. 52].
 The latter remained in the hands of Jalal-ad-Din for a short time.
At the request of the inhabitants of the city, they applied to Malik al-Ashraf's deputy (deputy) Hajib Husam al-Din, who was sitting in Khlat."The point is that Jalal ad-Din had a bad attitude towards the people,"The army was also looting," writes Ibn al-Asir [3, p. 334].
These administrative-political changes were maintained until 1236,when the Mongols, conquering all of Northeastern Armenia, did something newadministrative divisions.
 Nakhichevan, together with Georgia and Northeastern Armenia, was part of the vilayet of Georgia, the center of which was Tbilissi (Georgia).
Soon the fourth tuman was formed in North-Eastern Armenia, which:The government of Syunik also included Nakhichevan (Vaspurakan)Nakhchavan և Goghtn Provinces - H. P.).
 However, Syunik soon seceded from the vilayet of Georgia, becoming a tuman directly subordinate to the Mongol khans [7, pp. 356-358].
 XIV century With the recent administrative division of LenkTemur, Nakhichevan formed one administrative unit with Armenia and South Atrpatakan, which
The ruler was called the Emir.
 The residence of the latter is the city of Tabrizwas [7, pp. 358-361].
 The state created by Lenk-Temur had a short life.
 After his death, that vast state collapsed very quickly, andThe nomadic tribes of Kara-Koyunlu և Akkoyunlu established their rule in Armenia.
 XV century During the reign of the above-mentioned nomadic tribes, the Tuman-e Nakhichan administrative unit was gradually formed, which included a larger area than the Nakhchavan province of the "Geography" (Goght province of Vaspurakan province,
as well as Tsghuk, Chahuk, Yernjak և Vayots Dzor provinces of Syunik province - H. P.).
Thus, Nakhichevan, with its unique administrative significance, has played a major role throughout Armenian history as an independentin the conditions of statehood, as well as in its absence.
  It has been of great administrative and political significance in Greater Armenia since ancient timesOne of the provinces, which never lost its administrative and political significance during the period under study, as an organic part of Greater Armenia, is one of the inseparable components of the homeland of the Armenian people.
Literature   1. Abrahamyan H., Estate deeds և archival documents on other economic transactions, Yerevan, 1941, USSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 191 ¿ç.
2. Alishan G., Sisak, Venice, by Mkhitaryan Vans, I. S. Lazarus, 1893, 522 pages.
3. Arabic sources, Ibn al-Asir, translation from the original, preface և footnotes: A. Ter-Ghondyan, Yerevan, 1981, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR
հրատ., 443 էջ.
4. Yeremyan S., Armenia according to the "Geography", Yerevan, 1963, USSR Academy of Sciencesed., 155 pages.
5. The story of Archimandrite Tovma Artsruni in the house of Artsrunyats, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910, Aghaniants Publishing House, 529 pages.
6. History of Gandzaketsi, Rev. Kirakos, Armenian, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1909Electric Printing House Day. Ն. From Aghaniantsi Pol, 420 pages.
7. Hakobyan T., Historical Geography of Armenia, Yerevan, 1968, "Mitq" publishing house, 508 pages.
8. Hakobyan T., The Kingdom of Syunik, Yerevan, 1966, "Mitq" publishing house, 220 pages.
9. History of the Armenian people, acad. հրատ., հ. G, Yerevan, 1976, 1031 pages.
10. Harutyunyan B., The system of administrative-political division of Great ArmeniaAccording to "Geography", part A, Yerevan, 2001, YSU Publishing House, 403 pages.
11. Harutyunyan N., New Readings և Comments on Nakhichevanin cuneiform, PBU, 2000, N 2, pp. 196-212.
12. Manandyan H., Feudalism in Ancient Armenia, Yerevan, 1934, YSU Publishing House, 336 pages.
13. Nalbandyan H., Arab sources in the neighboring countries of Armeniaabout, Yerevan, 1965, USSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 258 pages.
14. The Nakhichevan issue in Moscow in 1921. March 16 Russian-Turkish
Agreement, Conference materials, Yerevan, 2001, "Nakhichevan" publishing house, 202 pages.
15. Historiography of Shapho Bagratuni, Etchmiadzin, 1921, Mother printing houseSee of Holy Etchmiadzin, 96 pages.
16. History of the Armenian Archimandrite Ghevonda, St. Petersburg, 1887
printing house I. Ն. Skorokhodov, 201 pages.
17. History of Bishop Stepanos of Syunik House of Sisak, Moscow, in the Oriental Languages ​​of the printing house, 1861, 386 pages.
18. History of our Holy Father Movsis Khorenatsi Armenian, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1910,Aghaniantsi printing house, 430 pages.
19. Georgian sources about Armenians Հայաստանի, translated. L. MeliksetBek, h. B, Yerevan, 1936, Melkonyan Foundation Publishing House, 170 pages.
20. Utmazyan H., Syunik IX-X centuries, Yerevan, 1958, YSU Publishing House, 380 pages.
Information about the author:Hrachya Yerani Panosyan - Candidate of the Institute of History of NAS RA,E-mail:
