The multi-genre work of well-known writer Gurgen KhanjyanIt has long attracted the attention of modern Armenian literary critics.
His stories, novels, novels, plays are of interest to themS. Sarinyan [14, pp. 308-318], D. Gasparyan [4, pp. 365-376], Z. Avetisyan [3, pp. 191-202] were studied from the perspectives of professional issues. Kalantaryan [16,
pp. 137-160], A. Avanesyan [2], S. Margaryan [12, pp. 180-189, 207-218], H. Saribekyan [13, pp. 322-327], S. Abrahamyan [1] և others.
 RepublicWe have several articles in the scientific-literary press [7,8,9,10]to publish about the writer's plays.
In this article we have focused our attention on G. Khanjyan's plays
In some of the works in the new collection [6] national lifeto revisit the problems in the artistic system of playsև to make sense of the author's unique artistic approacheson.
 In plays with modern themes, the playwright is more and moreis closer to the realistic principles of depicting reality.
And the existential and psychoanalytic ways of creating characters in some plays reveal the unique aspects of the character of the actors.
 In addition, plays with a modern theme are richwith vital content, new and complex human relationships,The characters are often embodied as typical characters, who are individualized by their psychology, life experience, destinies, linguistic and stylistic features of speech.
 And:In describing the actors by their words G. Khanjyan's high mastery proves that he is better than the prototypes of his heroes
to study.
 If some of them are not typical, then the author was able to see people in a given social statusCharacteristic traits in character և actions due to whichthey have become real and convincing, "possible" and "probable", as, according to Aristotle, the literary image in general should be [4, p.163-164].
Of course, there are certain connections between the writer's fiction "plays".
  Literary critic Z. Avetisyan, for example, describingThe main peculiarity of the writer's prose, he writes. "The bureaucratic apparatus that governs the modern world brings nothing but man
from an illegal reality that is in no way subject to reasonlogic.
 This is the vital but not cheerful reality of the works of the well-known prose writer Gurgen Khanjyan, whichis reflected in almost all of his works ¦ ¦ [3, p191].
  Often depicting such a reality typical of a writer's proseWe meet him in the artistic environment of his plays.
  However, in some plays the author injects optimism,a stable current.
  In facing the difficulties of lifeThey are characters who tend to live a traditional and normal human life.
 Therefore, G. Life is more colorful in the artistic sphere of Khanjyan's plays.
  Without pinning hopes on the statewith the initiatives put forward by the author showsthat at least some individuals try to cope with the harsh realities of lifeThey are caring for others, and one of the young men is transformed by the feeling of love.
From the point of view of the above ideas, let us consider բերիOrber"Family", "This house was another house", "Dance of the Insane",The plays "Kyrgyz Poetry".
 Let's start with the first.
  The playwright is uniquepreference, often considering the phenomena of social polarization characteristic for new times, is often in his playsIt depicts people in the lower echelons of society who survive by begging.
 Such are almost all the characters in the play "The Orphan Family", except for Harut, and for everyoneThe general thing is that they are currently orphans, regardless of ageare.
 According to the playwright, at Harut's request, beggars Ohan, Knar, eighty-year-old Iskuhi living alone, prostitute Astghik, and finally little Norik gather at his house.
 Harut clarifies the unusualness of the situation.
 He is a builder, he earns well, but he does not have a family և here by internal demand,At the behest of the soul, he wants them to be in his house with all the members of the Armenian, traditional family (father, mother, grandmother, wife,child) to have a new family.
 The playwright underlined the genre peculiarity of the play with a subtitle that it is a "dramatic comedy".
 The comedy here is that people with different destinies in the past, due to their age and circumstances, onlyThey find themselves under the same roof as Harut, which, despite the unusualness, eventually becomes desirable for them as well.
 But they are differentThey have a past, Ohan even assumes that he is of gypsy originhas.
  The lyre was an opera singer, Astghik is a prostituteto be trafficked by a man she sympathized with.
 Iskuhi was a teacher, married twice, butNow he is alone.
 The experience of coexistence of people with such a past,are not their personal, everyday, customary preferencescan not give rise to jokes, humor, irony.
 The satire in the playThe author presented the characters' speech, dialogue, everydaywith a sitting show.
Because the play is based on G. Khanjyan, like him in generalmodern dramaturgy situation ման word constructionIn that way, the drama was expressed in the charactersthrough substantial dialogues.
 To the above-mentioned actorsStories about the past reveal the dramatic consequences of the lives of orphaned and deprived people.
  In addition to themthrough destinies, it becomes the eyes of modern reality,Catastrophic economic collapse of the early period of independence in ArmeniaThe consequences in the destinies of gifted people.
 It is mainly during those difficult years for our country that the above-mentioned people deviate a littleor from a very normal way of life, appears at the bottom of life, becomesbeggar, prostitute, homeless.
 What? to everyone in this life
In the period of the author, due to the preferences of his existential worldview, he brings to a unique border situation, whichIt also reveals a number of aspects of their essence.
The dramatic is intertwined with the comedy from the moment whenHarut informs them of his intention.
  People who follow the traditions of national traditions and normal family life in advancehypothesis, hypothetically seem to accept the offer,They try to get into their roles.
 Of course, man strives to create stability in his life, to achieve a certain relative harmony.
 Harut is trying to create such harmony.
 There is no obvious dramatic clash between the characters.
 But the offer is not easyacceptance at once, as each of them, nevertheless,He has come a long way in his life.
  In Knar and OhanThe life of beggars has even evoked a unique sense of individual freedom; they even think that family responsibilities can limit their former freedom.
And Astghik, considering her hard past experience, kindly thinks that she will not have a child, she will make Harut unhappy, she wants to refuse the offer to marry him.
 Iskuhi is the oldest նելով In the role offered by Harut, she tries to take care of everyone with strong character traitswith the typical behavior of the family grandmother.
  What? author of all major
He gradually develops sympathy for the characters.
 Such an attempt at unification, at least, seems unstable, which keeps the dramatic tension until the end.
 It always seems that some motive, some reason can easily undermine themconditional consolidation.
 Here it is worth reminding L-Z. The following observation with Surmelyan. ՀաճախAnd often more in the clash of opposing forces
We achieve a dramatic result when the reader's sympathy is almostIt is almost equally distributed between the conflicting partiesThey are treated equally.
 The reader is also not surewhom he will support, "both sides claim his sympathy" [15,page 153].
  In this play, of course, there are no conflicting parties, each on his ownMaking a decision can be a relatively harmonious relationshipto be involved in.
 It's just that the dilemma of compatibility or incompatibility of some of their characters maintains dramatic tension during the play.
In the artistic environment created by the intertwining of drama and comedy, the realization of Harut's dream to create a family with a horse depicted in the play ends with little orphan Norikwith an episode of a birthday celebration.
 Such a solution to the proposed topic is an expression of the author's good wish.
 The playwright tries to prove that only biological, blood-related directIt is not through ties that a family is formed.
 The trials and tribulations of lifeformed by the centuries-old tradition of having a family to resistfeeling and inner need for family tiesBeing in is an exceptional value for an individual, especially for an Armenian.
 Therefore:they should be preserved even in the version depicted in the playWe must also accept the obvious reality presented in the playThe "family", of course, has preconditions for internal instability.
However, preconditions for instability can also be found in normal families.
 In both cases there is a complete digestive tractMake a concerted effort to maintain a close relationship with one another.
The complexities of human relations in our reality and the psychological complexes of individuals G. Khanjyan is theatricalreveals especially ordinary using literary tricksby և artistically breaking down հանգ the nodes of the intertwined relationships of family members.
 State-public order established during the years of independence in the Republic,relative to economic difficulties, former national statusNew noticeable shifts in the environment caused by the collapse of stabilityThey take place in Armenian families.
 In particular, more and moreThe number of people going abroad for work (or forever) is increasing, and new versions of the destinies of the Armenian family members are emerging, as well as new literary types.
 From this point of view, "ES" is remarkableThe place of the house was another house.
  The central image, through Hayk's subconscious, using memory, fantasy, and mythical elements, presents the Armenian family of the period of independence.The fate of the members with the author's ingenuity and imagery in the construction of dramaturgical speech.
  Capacitive dialogues with ghost characters of Hayk and his dead relativesreveal their past, the essence of human relations,Moral and psychological description, emotional, blood relatives, instinctive, unconscious andconscious perceptions.
  In all this there is evil in the familya combination of good manifestations in which psychoanalyticThe role of cognition plays a significant role in the writer's discoveriesattracts.
  Psychology discussed in the theory of psychoanalysisPerceptions of complexes [8, pp. 240-276] are uniquemanifested in adolescence when presenting his mother and sister's sexual inclinations towards Hayk.
 Such deviations from the traditional values ​​and stereotypes of national morality appear in the field of memories awakened by the subconscious of the main character, through the confessions of his relatives.
His parents, grandparents, sister, uncle died due to the difficult economic conditions in the country during the years of independence, and some (sister, uncle) due to mental disorders.
Hayk found himself in the United States, trying to help the rest of Armeniato the relatives, but the little help was not significant.
The ghosts of the relatives born from his memory, presenting themselves with their good and bad sides, accuse him of leaving them,for not fully helping them.
 Hayk tries to justify himself, emphasizing that they were not saints either.
 But his American wife calls from the United States, and it turns out from their conversation that Hayk has money in the bank, which only he can use.
 And he came to Armenia,to sell his father's house ostensibly to pay off debts.
  Haykistinginess, which in turn, in the first years of independence, cold, hungerAt the same time, he causes the destruction of his relatives, causing a moral and psychological crisis in his inner world.
  The symbolic presence of a human being makes one think in Haykabout instinctive, animalistic, selfish prejudice.
  Self-perception, opposition andThere is a contradiction in caring for the familywith feelings of failure to fulfill a moral obligation to a family strengthened by social experience and national traditions.
Not overcoming these contradictory feelings and not finding a way out of itIn order to get rid of the delusions, according to the author's idea, all this pushes him to commit suicide.
Գ. Khanjyan prefers not to create in his works
images with uploaded merits and demerits.
  In the field of his worldview and aesthetics, in his theatrical works, including:In this play, people, individuals performas artistic figures based on their life experience, which:have a unique idea of ​​their strengths and weaknessesas their truth about life and their relationship with it.
  They justify their life to HaykHayk, his parents, who appeared in the United States and tasted the contradictions of freedom and imprisonment, in his turn justifies himself as someone who demands world recognition, self-affirmation and self-establishment to the extent of his abilities.
  But the pursuit of self-justificationHe does not save Hayk from destruction because he had to be taken into account. "the truth of others (relatives in this play), to have a sense of responsibility for the fate of their own.
 And the voluntary or involuntary neglect of blood relations cannot but cause a moral-psychological crisis in the soul of an Armenian, an individual who grew up in the environment of traditional family ties, in general.
 Maybe Haykmastered the real, supposedly pragmatic American thinkingThe prototype would not have committed suicide like him.
 It seems that the playwright is hisintervened in the idea of ​​the play just punished him,because Hayk's excuses for not supporting his relatives seem unconvincing to the author. After all, Hayk still found time
to come to Armenia to sell the house.
 But anyway, in our opinion, Hayk's suicide proves his advantages over other members of the family.
  Hayk's personal in their destructionIt is the sense of moral responsibility that ultimately drives him to do so subconsciously.
The burden of guilt in the death of his family members is not only on Haykaggravated because, as it turns out, his father և mother were selfish people.
 They connected the solution of the problem of getting the family out of a difficult situation only with Hayk.
 While, for example, healthy in hotelsThe father, who had fun with different women, with great success, if he wished, he could also think about the worries of the family during those years.Find a way out of the situation.
 In these other plays by G. Khanjyan, the complexities of human relations are often discussed and artistically depicted in the range of psychological dilemmas between individual freedom and responsibility.
  Revealing the flaws and merits of his heroes andDemonstrating at the level of psychoanalytic observations, the playwright in any case continues to present his attitude towards them from the point of view of nationally and universally acceptable standards of morality.
In the drama "Dance of the Insane" the complexity of family members' relationships is manifested in different proportionsand social and moral issues.
 IndependenceSmbat, the father of the family, provided a prosperous life for the family due to his abilities, initiative and business.for.
 However, he is not as perfect as his peers, he was often entertained, he had mistresses.
 And when things went wrong, he reached the door of despair, he tried not only with his letter, but also with his relatives.to his children, Karine and Karen, and to share his property with Arsen, the son of an immoral woman from Tbilissi (Georgia).
 But here are the ungrateful children (Karine and Karen) out of desperation for their fatherAfter an unsuccessful suicide attempt, not everyone tries to support Smbat, who is mentally depressed.
  On the contrary, in order to get the money they left in the letter and the property of the house, the sister and brother do everything for their dear father once.to get to the door of premature death, even to kill:throwing him coldly from the bridge.
  Earned by his fatherKarine and Karen, who live by means of means, have become selfish, selfish, lazy,incapable of doing any work.
 It becomes a big problem for themTo regulate the meaningless life with paternal money.
 Such a thought!makes them accountable, with some mental fluctuationscriminal-murderers.
G. Khanjyan strives for the perspective of modern youthto link a civilized culture rooted in national and universal cultureto live by traditions and moral values.
 He has this visionpresents through the use of both dramatic and comedic literary tricks expressed in his plays.
  Here it isGurgenkhanjyan had a unique idea of ​​creating "KyartuakanPoem-comedy.
  Gagik, the son of the owner of a large supermarket, is a typical bearer of Kyrgyz culture in Armenia.His friend Sisak was under his influence.
 The author presents them with a Kyrgyz vocabulary, way of thinking, behavior.
  To themThis behavior is ridiculed by the neighbor's daughter Mane, with whom Gagik is in love.
 The latter seems to be a developed boy, national, traditionalHe is valued, but thanks to his father's means he escapes from the armybecause of which Mane is ridiculed and ridiculedfrom.
  It becomes a source of satirical criticism in generalA number of aspects typical of boys with Kyrgyz ideas:showing a way of thinking, a way of life, and the frivolity of such people, concerned only with their personal well-being and interests, like, for example, Gago's supposedly national, traditional lovepreference conditioned by their interests ("accuracy").
 Its like thatthe mismatch of ideas through true nationalism, particularly patriotism, by serving the homeland in the armyAfter proving it, Mane mocks again.
 Kyartu Gago's arrogance, thus, the opportunity to live well thanks to his father, to get rid of bribery through acquaintances in the armyis. § GAGO- I would come… But the carpet should have been eaten, right?
Can you imagine me in the army, they give orders, shout at me… Me, thisto the boy… I will go crazy, brother, I will hit Sagh on the head, my character is ugly, gidas¦ [6, p.350].
 Meanwhile, Kyartu Siso, whose father does not have such opportunities,He is ready to leave the army with the help of Gago's fatherto perform "low-quality" work.
 What? The author's insightful observation reveals the ostentation of the Kyrgyz behavior.
The bankruptcy of being different from the others, however, the lack of seriousness and conditionality of all that.
    The basis of such behavior and thinking, however, are the boys of more or less knowledgeable people and some friends associated with them in terms of age, self-defense logic and instincts, artistic taste preferences. They listen to rabbis' music, speak in slang, wear clothes, have
general ideas of everyday life և etc.
  On that basisRelationships and circumstances, like everything in life, changein time and due to circumstances.
This is the factor of love feeling that plays a role on Gago's Kyrgyz behavior.
 He is in love with Mane and sometimes!He traveled to Eastern countries for a year to avoid serving in the armybut he could not forget the girl.
  In some circumstances, he has even defended Mane in the past.
  The feelings towards the girl left a deep imprint in Gagik's soul.
 Mane's mockeryand criticism of Gago and his friend's Kyrgyz behavior ultimately have a positive effect on Gago.
 He:He gradually changes his behavior, trying to become more and more Kyrgyzrefuse jargon.
 Even to win Manet's sympathyMane's friend Aram, Sisak, is taking care of himHe takes food to his grandmother.
 More. In order to be worthy of Mane, Gago decides to go to the army anyway.
 "GAGOHA, I am not automatically, voluntarily."
 I'm going to stand at the border for you to be here"Go to a quiet university and study," [6, p. 401], he tells Mane.
In real life, maybe Gago և Mane could have done it differentlyPrototypes of boys and girls are prototypes.
But և so we can not deprive the author of the right to orient his young heroes in life through artistic means.
Especially since the Kyrgyz type is found mainly among young people, who are often unstable due to their age.They have preferences, they get attracted to the unusual very quickly, they like to be different from others in some way, likeThey soon give up something they loved in the pastfrom addictions.
  In such a moral and psychological context, real,The feeling of spontaneous love can play a transformative role.
 With this circumstance in mind, the playwright himselfThe feeling of love for Gagik in the created artistic realitygave an opportunity to transform in the field.
 Hence the comedyIt is entitled "Kyartu poem", where the role of the feeling of love in the transformation of young Gagik's thinking was used.
 Because, if he's a play belonging to the comedy genre!"Poem" is the decisive influence of lyricism, the feeling of loveThe role and significance of having Mane came to the foreIn the realm of Gago's inner world orientations.
Thus, G. Khanjyan's above-mentioned plays reflected ours
the sides with gloomy and bright oases of complex human relationships of that period.
  Artistic depiction of lifeSome manifestations of realistic, existential, psychoanalytic principles in the system have been combined with life and individual reformAbout the playwright's humanitarian, nationally beneficial attitude andExpressions of goodwill.
Literature 1. Abrahamyan S., Original text, Yerevan, "Vard Hrat" publishing house, 2010, 388 pages.
2. Avanesyan A., Modern Armenian Dramaturgy / 1991-2008 /, Yerevan, "Literaryetalon "publishing house, 2011, 252 pages.
3. Avetisyan Z., Psychology of Literary Creativity, Yerevan, YSUed., 2011, 240 pages.
4. Aristotle. Poetics, Yerevan, "Haypethrat" publishing house, 1955, 255 pages.
5. Gasparyan D., Heavenly Lily, Yerevan, "Zangak-97" publishing house, 2004, 760 pages.
6. Khanjyan G., Artavazd-Shidar, Plays, Yerevan, "Antares" publishing house, 2015,672 pages.
7. Khachikyan G. Some peculiarities of Gurgen Khanjyan dramaturgy // Scientific Bulletin, 2014, Prak B, No. 1, Pages 17-26.
8. Khachikyan G. The artistic background of modernity Gurgen
In Khanjyan Dramaturgy // Scientific Bulletin, 2015, Prak B, No.1, pp. 10-21.
9. Khachikyan G. Reflections on Gurgen Khanjyan's "Artavazd-Shidar" drama, Nork, 2015, No. 4, pp. 146-152.
10. Khachikyan G. The oligarch և his environment Gurgen Khanjyan's "Armageddon" in the play // Nork, 2016, No. 2, pp. 144-150.
11. Psychoanalysis, textbook, Yerevan, "ARVA PRESS"ed., 2007, 368 pages.
12. Margaryan S. Literary parallels, Yerevan, WUA Publishing House, 2009, 248 pages.
13. Saribekyan H. Gurgen Khanjyan's novel "Hospital" for independence
in context // Literaryliterature:District:Journal, 2012, No. 13/13 /, pp. 322-326.
Armenian:14. Sarinyan S. Two Centuries of Armenian Literature, Book 4, Yerevan,
Tigran Mets Publishing House, 2004, 636 pages.
15. Surmelyan Leon-Zaven. Prose technique, size և madness, Yerևan,
"Science" Publishing House of NAS RA, 2008, 334 pages.
16. Kalantaryan Ts. Outlines of modern Armenian literature, Yerevan, "Zangak 97" publishing house, 2006, 208 pages.
Information about the author:Gagik Vahe Khachikyan - Yerevan State University, Armenian literature, its teaching Head of the Chair of Methodology and Journalism, b. c. d., associate professor, E-mail:
