The position of the problem.
  Atmospheric precipitation is climaticare one of the elements that are the main source of soil moisture.
  They:characterize the water regime of the given area, water balance, riverThe in-house distribution of the flow determines the yield of agricultural crops.
  On the other hand, as a rule, atmosphericPrecipitation is one of the meteorological elementsThe local features of the spatial-temporal distribution are more typical.
 Therefore, especially in the context of global climate changeKnowledge of spatial distribution of precipitation և change, creation of an effective management system are strongly used.
Given the above, as too much precipitationThe role and significance of the water-scarce area of ​​the Ararat concavityManagement of irrigation of agricultural cropsIn planning and regulating the efficient use of water resources, we aim to discuss the important agricultural region of the republic, the Ararat depression.Atmospheric precipitation change dynamics և managementissues.
  For this purpose, they were nominated and solvedThe following tasks: 1) recruit և cultivate the study areathe results of actual observations of atmospheric precipitation; 2) identify, analyze և assess the change in precipitation in the regionPatterns of dynamics և Spatial features, 3) Identify effective atmospheric precipitation in the regionև Maintenance issues, 4) Develop a changeWays to prevent negative consequences.
The study area is represented by mountain ranges andSurrounded by plateaus, 2.5-3.0 km deep, isolatedPhysico-geographical region with its unique natural processes and water-heating regime.
 Within the borders of the concavity there are 4 physical-geographical sub-regions: Ararat plain, Geghama plateauWestern slope, Kotayk-Yeghvard plateaus, south of Aragatsslope [3].
Material և methodology.
  In order to solve the set problemsRelevant studies, printed works, decisions of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, reports served as a theoretical and informational basis in the work.development programs, projects, work plans, national reports.
 As a starting point, the work used multi-year factual observations of atmospheric precipitation of meteorological stations of the MES Hydrometeorological Service of the studied area. data (1935-2014) as well as climate newsletters [2].
  The results of the observations, both in observation booklets, worksheets, yearbooks, as well as in digital versions.are stored in the main warehouse of the Hydromet service.
In general, many researchers have studied the atmospheric precipitation in the territory of the republic [4-11].
However, so far, as a comprehensive, comprehensive work in the form of a monograph, G.A. By Alexandryan
1971 [8]
 The author discusses in detail in that work և presents the annual precipitation within the territory of the republic,seasonal և monthly number of քանակ spatial factors և spatialpatterns of distribution, identifies և analyzes their modefeatures depending on the difficult terrain և circulation conditions.
 However, it should be noted that precipitation studies are almost absent in the area of ​​the Ararat concave.
  Thus,Synoptic features of intrusive precipitation and thunderstorms in the Ararat Valley were analyzed by A.S. Torosyan և G.H. By Surenyan (AS Torosyan, GH Surenyan, 2006).
Atmospheric precipitation instrument in the study areaObservations have been made since 1885 (Yerevan "Erebuni",Yer! "Seminary").
  But constant և systematic observationsThey have been performed only since the mid-1930s.
The maximum number of observations (about 60 meteorological stations և observation points) was made in the first half of the 60s of the 20th century.
Currently (2016) there are 14 meteorological stations in the areaև 3 observation points (Table 1).
 It should be noted that in terms of meteorological observations, the region is one of the middle appropriated areas of the republic.
By the way, 3 of the meteorological stations (Aragats b / l, Amberd ևAnonymous) is located at an altitude of about 2000 m above sea level.
 However, in the range of 2150-3200 m altitude, there are no meteorological observations, which can be negative.to reflect on the results of climate studies.
 Therefore, it is necessary to fill that gap by restoring to those heightsexisting stations or operating new ones.
As a methodological basis, geographical, mathematical-statistical, export, comparison were used in the work.methods of comparison, analysis, correlation.
Results և discussion.
  Atmospheric precipitation at workThe issues of change were discussed and studied separatelythe results of actual observations of meteorological stationsboth descriptive months (January-July) and annualwith cuts.
 Taking into account the climatic peculiarities of the region կիրառ the practical significance of precipitation, the latterSeparately discussed for hot or vegetation (IV-X), hot (VIIVIII), cold (XI-III), water-rich (IV-VI) regions.
Salt. 1 summarizes the instrumental precipitation instrumentation of the meteorological stations և observation points of the study area տարած
Actual average values ​​of the monitoring period, separated by:periods.
Table 1. Atmospheric precipitation of Ararat concavityvalues ​​(mm) by characteristic periodsAir. Stations:
JanuaryJulyAragats b / lTalinAmberdYeghvardTowerYerevan "Arabkir" Happy "agro"ArmavirYerjan "Zvartnots"TaronikEtchmiadzin railway stationRanch danceArtashatUrtsadzorAnonymous leakAraratIn our work we have tried to identify and evaluateChange of precipitation in 1935-2014 For descriptive months,
annual, hot, cold and hot periods of the year, as well as the water-rich seasonwith cuts.
 Studies have shown that both annual and descriptive months (I, VII) andIn terms of characteristic periods (IV-X, XI-III, VII-VIII, IV-VI) no dynamics of regular change in the amount of precipitation is observed.
However, it can be said that in the study area the prevailing annual precipitation և տարեկան is the amount of cold period of the year.tendency to decrease, and the number of hot and hot seasons of the year, the number of water-rich seasons - an increasing tendency.
  As for January-July precipitationthe dynamics of quantity change, then note that in this case possibleIt is not necessary to single out a more or less clearly expressed regular change according to meteorological stations.
 At different meteorological stations, there is a change in the amount of precipitationdifferent tendencies, that is, both decreasing and increasing tendencies.
Therefore, in our opinion, the issues of revealing the patterns, economic assessment and management of the change of precipitation changes in the Ararat concavity should be discussed not on a monthly basis, but on an annual basis.
Fig. Figure 1 shows the dynamics of change in atmospheric precipitation for the Yerevan "agro" meteorological station.
It is true that altitudes of up to 1600 m are observed in the regionduring the hot and humid periods of the year, as well as during the rainy seasontendency to increase the number.
 However, this does not mean concavityHumidification ական artificial irrigation issues for that areaThey get a solution.
 The reason is that at these times of the yearThere is a significant loss of precipitation due to high evaporation,in surface roughness կողմից by vegetation - precipitationwith storage.
  On the other hand, river flow is formed in the territory of the Republic of Armeniamainly at altitudes above 1800 m, and in that zone it is observedonly a tendency to decrease the amount of precipitation.
m:
m:
r:
e:
n:
m:
ւ:
o:
ղ:
e:
t:
n:
ի:
a
t:
r:
o:
l:
o:
n:
թ:
M:
յ:
Years:Fig. 1. Dynamics of change in atmospheric precipitation
At the "Agro" meteorological station Therefore, atmospheric precipitation should be developed in the region:as a climatic resource, the dynamics of changea management system that is back to the above.
  Above all, it is necessary to properly manage և use the water resources obtained from atmospheric precipitation.
 That is, it must be stored highTemporary, permanent small streams in the zone, especially in the water-rich season, for later irrigation (during the dry season of the year)in order to use, as it և needs to be stored և storedHeavy precipitation during the cold period of the year.
Thus, as a result of such a change in atmospheric precipitationViolation of the balance of the natural ecosystem will be observed, in particular, aridization of climatic conditions, land degradation,Biodiversity violation.
  Therefore, it is necessary to assess precipitation change with an ecosystem approach, according to individual physical-geographical regions or river basins, to work out in accordance with the mitigation and adaptation measures.programs, taking into account the local characteristics of any area.
It should be noted that despite the numerous works carried out to assess the change of atmospheric precipitation in the territory of the republic, there are still many unresolved problems and omissions in that sphere, which require great efforts and financial investments.
  Therefore, it is expedient to continue in the territory of the republicSystematic and comprehensive studies of precipitation change, providing an ecosystem approach և develop themfurther predictions using new models.
Conclusions և Recommendations.
As a result of the research, we came to the following conclusions and recommendations:Atmospheric precipitation is classified as meteorological elementsthe most typical of which is the local spatial distributionfeatures;: Atmospheric precipitation of the study area is characterizedAccording to the patterns of intra-year distribution, maximum precipitationThe number is observed in April-May, the minimum number is July-Augustmonths; Precipitation decreases regularlyfrom the regions to the south of Aragatsthe slopes.
  Precipitation:Maximum annual number, including in the republic,is observed in Aragats b / l meteorological station (988 mm), minimumQuantity (166 mm) at the Taronic air's observational point;Է Negatively affects the results of studiesthe fact that the study area is meteorologicalstations և observation points are mainly concentrated up to 1200 mheights. Only at the altitudes of 1300-2000 m
2 is.
  And in the range of 2150-3200 m heights are absentmeteorological observations;Up to 1600 m altitude is mainly observed precipitationannual, vegetation, hot և water-rich growing seasons, andThe number of cold periods of the year is decreasing.
  Starting from 1600 m:there is only a tendency to decrease the amount of precipitation;No January-July precipitation is observed in the study areaRegular change of quantity according to meteorological stations.Atmospheric atmospheric stations are observed in different air stationsDifferent trends in precipitation change, ie howdecreasing and increasing tendencies;Պայմաններում In the conditions of maintaining such a process of change of precipitation,There will probably be an increase in the climate of the region,Intensive land degradation.
It is necessary, precipitation systematic և complex scientific studiesEnsuring continuity of new programs and technologiesinvestment;Ապահով Ensuring homogeneity, continuity of series of observations և reliability; Ական Improving the information system; Ության Vulnerability of ecosystems due to changes in precipitationevaluation;Պահ maintenance of solid precipitation և accumulation;Փոքր small canals of highlands և wet river water storage, it will be low during the dry seasonfor irrigation of relatively dry areas;Ելու Implementation of legal-organizational, institutional, technical measures to adapt the economy to the new natural conditions in order to mitigate the effects of changes in atmospheric precipitation;Ապահով Provide training process both nationally and internationallyAt the regional and global levels բարձր raising the qualification of observer-specialists, organizing regular trainings.
Literature 1. Torosyan AS, Surenyan GH, Peculiarities of intra-mass precipitation in the Ararat valley.
 Geographical:Science in Armenia / present և future (conference materials dedicated to the 70th anniversary of the ANC).
 Yerevan, Yerevan University ed., 2006, p
195-202.
2. Climate Bulletin / Emergency of the Republic of ArmeniaMinistry of Situations, State Hydrometeorological Հայաստանի Monitoring Service of Armenia "Haypethydromet", Yerevan, Lusabats, 2013. Part II.
  Humidity, atmospheric precipitation ևsnow cover, 172 pages.
3. Physical geography of the Armenian SSR, Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, Yerevan,1971, 470 pages.
4. Margaryan V. G., Spatial-temporal precipitation
Regularities of changes in RA, Agroscience, № 7-8,Yerevan, 2007, pp. 365-369.
5. Margaryan V. G., Spatial-temporal atmospheric humidity
The patterns of distribution in the RA.
  Geographical science. Candidate's dissertation application, Yerevan, 2008, 167 pages.
6. Margaryan V. G., Vardanyan T. G., Assessment of atmospheric precipitation of Syunik region և Regularities of spatial-temporal distribution, YSU Scientific Bulletin, № 2, Geology և Geography, Yerevan, Yerevan University. ed., 2013, pp. 19-27.
7. Nersesyan A. G., Climate of Armenia, Yerevan, 1964, 304 pages.
9. Baghdasaryan A.B. Climate of the Armenian SSR. - Er.
 Published by AN ArmSSR. 1958. 146 p. Information about the author:Margaryan Varduhi Gurgeni - YSU, work. scientist candidate, E-mail:
