The aim of the article is to interpret the interactions of the formation of national identity and national geopolitical ideas from the position of modern methodology of social geography.
 It is obvious that these concepts, with their complexity and multi-layeredness, first force us to interpret the modern aspects of the scientific understanding of the concepts separately, after which it will only be possible to discover the interrelationships of the latter.and interactions.
  Accordingly, we can formulate in the articlelogical subordination of research problems to be separated.• In the context of scientific theories, discuss the essence of the concept of "national identity", modern aspects of interpretation, taking as a starting point the identification of Armenians.geographical bases• Analyze the scientific content of the concept of "national geopolitical ideas", taking as a starting point the activities of actors determining the potential of Armenian geopolitics; • Identify the interrelationships between the formation of national identity and geopolitical perceptions, based on the need to clarify national priorities.
For the solution of the problems we have chosen as a point of view the social geography - spatial, systemic, spatial-temporal research approaches.
 And their special complexity obliges to use both symmetrical methods of analysis, comparison, theoretical generalization, as well as specific geographical, comparative-geographical, balance, geographical scientific description methods.
Interpretation of the problem of national identity is a modern theoryis one of the key և complex research questions.
 However, stable traditions of problem solving have not yet been established in domestic scientific circles.
 This is primarily due to the fact that in the scientific school inherited from the Soviet regime, objective ևunder the influence of subjective factors, they were absent from our ethnic identityrelated research.
  An attempt was made after independenceTo fill this gap, but due to the lack of a solid scientific basis, publications on national identity, with a few exceptions, were often unprofessional, sometimeswith pathetic formulations.
 It is noteworthy that we have a national identityPathetic overestimation goes hand in hand with the same identitywith pathetic underestimation.
 As a result, the topic arisesIt is a debate leading to polarization, during which it is impossible to understand what the objective characteristics of the Armenian national identity are. [5]
Modern trends in the organization of public life:Globalization and transnational processes align (have leveled) the value orientations of individuals և social groups.
 New types of societies are emerging as a result of geopolitical, socio-economic and cultural transformationsև New identities.
 As a result, changes occurin the traditional approaches to the collective self-consciousness of societies.
It is with this circumstance that some experts justify the activation of the identity discourse, acknowledging that in contrast to the ongoing processes of reviewing and redrawing group boundaries, efforts to preserve one's own group boundaries are actualized;Ethno-defense mechanisms are put in place.
In modern theoretical research on ethnic identityThe key question is to reveal its essence, that is, ethnicityto accept self-consciousness as a subjective desire or an objective demand.
  Accepting each of them as a scientific paradigm:As a result of research, opposite results are obtained.
 The basis of this scientific dilemma comes from the notion of "nation" in generalfrom the contradictory approaches of modern definition [3, pp. 46-48].
In general, it should be noted that there are two approaches to the concept of "nation" in modern professional literature.
One of them, conventionally called "French", is based on the voluntary choice of nationality.Against the ethnocultural interpretation of "nation".
 According to this concept:The objectivity of the notion of "race" is denied, therefore no state or nation from the ethnocultural or racial point of view canconsidered homogeneous.
  They are all socially differentBased on the constant mixing of groups living in the same area:They have changed each other.
The next concept, circulating in the professional literature as a "German" direction, is based on biologicalor on a cultural concept where the key is objectiveis the principle.
 Accordingly, the nation is viewed as an objective society, whichIt consists of members belonging to the same group.
 And the group dependsFrom a specific situation, it can be defined as a common language, blood, raceհիմ Based on origin.
 But whichever group definition you choose,"People belong to this or that nation is determined in advance."in time can not be denied.
The first is defined as the nation's civil, and the second -ethnic or cultural concepts.
  Moreover, the first conceptThe basis is the territorial right of the people, and the second is bloodthe right.
In our previous research, addressing the issue, note:We believe that subjective desire is derived from a genetically engineered objectiveon demand.
 Therefore, in our opinion, the identification problem is notonly պայմանավորված not so much due to the subjective desire to satisfy ethnic aspirations, but at the collective և individual levelwith the objective demand for the full ճիշտ full realization of one's own potential.
 SinceEthnic satisfaction is an incomplete but important component of an individual's well-being.
Thus, ethnicity remains a group identityOne of the most important eggs that provides nourishment to the rootsto have ապր the feeling of being connected to them, the feeling of psychological security և stability.
 In this sense, ethnos is for the individualpresents itself as a psychological community, and ethnic identity as thatone of the basic characteristics.
 People, naturally, regardless of their "location", try to identify with their own ethnic group, ևon the contrary, the difficulties of building a positive ethnic identityThey bring problems both at the individual and intra-group levelin intergroup relations [6].
The basis for such an assertion is the fact that certain transnational processes threatening one's own ethnic identityAlmost all national units are alarmed, even those for which national preservation is not a priority.
Urgent research of the problem in the pan-Armenian realityThe need is expressed first of all by the fact that the Armenian nationMost of them live outside the homeland, forming Armeniana powerful Diaspora.
 And for the nations with Diaspora communities, the problem of self-preservation is more than acute, because the nationalbasic, visible և expressive criteria of identity (language,religion, culture, perception of the homeland) there is a dichotomy.
That is, the objective factors of identifying with the same ethnic community(Genetic commonality, genetically transmitted codes of worldview, etc.) In parallel, there are obstacles to their effective implementation in the form of non-cohesive language thinking, cultural values, spatial perception of the homeland.
 Let us add that the self-categorization of an individual is expressed not only by ethnic, but also by social and civic identity.
 Consequently, for Armenians living abroad cut off from the Armenian environment, foreign social and civic identities affect ethnic self-consciousness.
 Diaspora Armeniansfor the national "we" does not become the only one, because they are objectivelymust be identified with other "us", other civil-social:with non-ethnic groups.
 Therefore, the key criteria for the expression of national identity: language thinking, faith, culture, homeland ևperception of the state, remain only in the emotional realm, become a desirable but not obligatory part of the behavior.
 And that in turn obligesSimpler mechanisms for satisfying the objective requirement of national identity, the national component of individual completenessto look for, which among Armenians is expressed by anti-Turkishness.
 It is obvious thatThere are certain objective elements for the formation of the latter.
 In particular, the factor of the Genocide, the scattering of Armenians around the worldThe absence of an independent Armenian statehood is possibleconsidered objective preconditions for choosing anti-TurkishnessThe main means of expressing national identity.
 It became in the DiasporaA key criterion for the preservation of the Armenian identity and national unification.
 Moreover, anti-Turkishness had its impact in Soviet Armenianational identity, mentality և nationalist moodson expression.
The problem should have changed radically in the case of newly independent Armenia.
  We need the restoration of an independent Armenian statehoodwould become the only axis of expression of national identity, because, oursIn his opinion, the society acquires only in the case of statehoodthe nation as the highest stage of development of human society,typical features.
  Absence of statehood, to the ethnic groupdepriving it of the opportunity to fully realize its potential, makesIt is a lower sub-unit: people, nationality, but not nation.
Thus, the first criterion of the Armenian national expression "we"It is the real connection with the Armenian statehood.
 That is, national identityThe sensory perception of the homeland must have a specific geographical (spatial) expression1.
  Therefore, eachThe criterion of an individual being Armenian will first of all be expressed in Armenianwith the size of a real connection with the state.
 According to that, it is objective to be ArmenianWe can define heredity and Armenianness as a conditionto express a subjective precondition - the connection with the state.
Other criteria of national identity: language thinking, culture,faith, traditions, etc., because they are viable only in the primarycriterion: in the case of national statehood, then nationalthey become necessary but not sufficient for identification1 Let us emphasize that by statehood we mean only ArmenianArmenian statehood based on geographical space,because, as history shows, in the powerful centers of the Diaspora they canto form forms of independence, even statehood.
  But theycan only provide a temporary effect, even interfering with the actualthe formation of the Armenian statehood.
condition.
 The latter, an individual, the largest social group, the ethnic group of the nationThe tools of identity realization are ու objective and subjectivepreconditions.
Defining such a subset of national identity criteria ումը rooting in public consciousness and behavior firstThey will enable us to neutralize the dangerous moods that exist today (and throughout history) in our reality.
  In particular, outside the Armenian statehood, at leastBy observing the visible standards of national self-consciousness, it is possible to fully express the Armenian essence.
 In this way, at the subconscious level, it will be possible to prevent and stimulate emigrationimmigration.
In addition, it will be possible to direct the realization of national potentialThe strengthening of the Armenian statehood, which in its turn is qualitatively newwill raise the level of formation and realization of national geopolitical ideas.
In previous studies [3,190-320], referring to the content of Armenian geopolitics, we have stated that itWe consider it a useful tool to discover the adaptation opportunities of our country to the ongoing geopolitical processestowards.
If we follow the general logic, then ում 'in the past, և'At present, geopolitics is considered in the public perception as "the science of mastering the territory".
 It is obvious,that such a formulation refers not only to the possession of new territories, but also to one's own.
 Consequently, every subject on the world political map will willy-nilly form a geopolitical onea system of one's own ideas, which can summarize only the necessary means of owning one's own territory, and a great potentialin the case of entities with which they also have the formulation of geopolitical ambitions.
Let us add that the current level of development of the world society proves that the possession of territories is expressed not only by physical confiscation, but also by ideological, cultural, moral, economic and other expansions.
 And this implies that the traditional approaches to the object of geopolitical research և research methods are being revisited.
 In other words, the latter are very comprehensive in terms of contenthas become, including the modern organization of public lifemeans հնարավոր possible levers to influence them [3, p. 201].
Thus, geopolitical practical researchwill allow not only to discover the adaptation of our countrypotential for geopolitical processes, which alsoIt is very important, but to appreciate our country (in generalWe have the opportunity of the Armenian nation to influence those processes.
 This:In this case, it is necessary to formulate a national geopoliticalThe framework of ideas, where the priorities of the activities of the Armenian geopolitical actors must be clearly expressed1.
According to that, the activities of the classical actors of Armenian geopolitics - the Diaspora, the church or the army - should be aimed atthe strengthening of the Armenian statehood.
  That is, the Republic of Armenia in the chain of actors of Armenian geopoliticsIt should not act as a separate link, but as the only area of ​​activity of those links.
  For the effective elaboration, realization և expression of national geopolitical ideas it is necessary to strengthen the Armenian statehood, the realization of which և the manifestation of the corresponding behavior must be considered national identityprimary criterion.
Summarizing the results of the research, we can state:• Modern trends of globalization today make the discourse of the issue of national identity more popular in scientific research.
  This is due not only to nationsethnocentrically subjective desire, but individual-groupActors in geopolitics include all the individuals, groups and structures that "develop, express and act on geopolitical desires and ideas."in. "
 See details about the actors [3, 7, 8]levels of internal objective (inherited) demandwith the need for satisfaction.
• It is a priority in delimiting the criteria of national identityis considered a real connection with statehood because of statehoodAbsence deprives the ethnic group of the opportunity to fully realize its own potential, makes it a sub-class below the "nation"points.
• The Republic of Armenia - a common pan-Armenian agendawith the exclusive right to form, with the levers of forming a corresponding culture of public consciousness, should define the subordination of the criteria of national identity.
 According to that, it is objective to be ArmenianThe condition is heredity, and to express ArmeniannessThe subjective precondition is the connection with the state.
• The re-emergence of statehood in the subjective domain of national identity will have a great impact on the effective implementation of national geopolitics.
 The latter is the only precondition not only to adapt to modern geopolitical processes, but also to influence the development of those processes.on.
Gossip policy.
  unsuccessfully necessary individual and:implementation of conclusions a basis is the target policy of the state.
 to provide the:Literature 1. Nersisyan A. H. Discovering the originality of Armenian civilization
the needindependencePrerequisite // GSPI, Materials of the Republican Scientific Session,Gyumri, "Van Aryan" publishing house, 2011, pp. 538-539.
as geopolitical2. Nersisyan A. H. Armenian statehood as the main actor in the expression of national geopolitical ideas // GPMI
Scientific Bulletin, B Prak, Gyumri, 2013, pp. 97-105.
3. Nersisyan A. H. Armenia on the big geopolitical board,
Vanadzor, "Sim printing house" publishing house, 2013, 320 pages.
4. Nersisyan A. H. Geography of the Armenian Diaspora, Vanadzor, “Sim
printing house "hrat, 2014, 207 pages.
5. YSU Center for Strategic Studies, the concept of "Ethnic Identity" and Armenian perceptions about it,07.10.2015.
 http:
//www.armcsr.com:6. Manusyan S. Problems of identity preservation in the Diaspora. socio-psychological point of view.
 "Norvank" Foundation, June 10, 2010.
http:
//www.noravank.am/arm/issues/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=48438. Желтов В. В., Желтов М. W., Geopolitics.
 History and theory. M.
 Published by Vuzovski:Information about the author:Nersisyan Armen Hovhannes - Yerevan State University, Geography և his teaching Associate Professor of the Chair of Methodology, work. scientist candidate,
E-mail:
