Integrated in general education and professional educational programsNew subjects appear (Natural Science, Social Science,Healthy lifestyle, Homeland Studies, I և the world around me, Modern issues of Natural science և etc.), the difficulties of organizing the teaching of which make us address some issues.
 Integrated:The main meaning of teaching subjects is worldview,The goal is the unified whole of the universe in the learner's consciousnessimage formation, the main feature of the teaching methodology, first of all integrated with the analysis of the topicproviding an approach.
  It presupposes the study of the phenomenon of itAcquisition of basic, complete, comprehensive knowledgefor a purpose that should be implemented not only by teachers familiar with itcreating an inclusive connection, but different (both related and related)and by revealing the essence of the phenomenon from the point of view of any other science.
 Therefore, it is not only required from the teaching specialistgood professional knowledge, but intellectual development,worldview, knowledge of specific methods, creative in the process of organizing learningapproach.
 That is why the organization of teaching integrated subjectsThe issue of developing a new methodology for modern pedagogyit becomes very necessary.
In this work, in particular, we want to reflectTo discover the potential of fairy tales from works of art in the teaching of natural sciences;means enriching the methodological treasury of humanities and natural scienceswith knowledge integration tricks.
A fairy tale for a child, without limiting the possibility of teaching knowledge in any field, in an understandable, non-scientific languageIt has great potential for teaching.
  The tools for learning fairy tales are mainly symbols.
 Or the means of symbolic thinking have been used by mankind for the spiritual development of the individualthroughout history, but the analysis of the pedagogical potential of figurative thinking, especially its applicationresearch in the literature on methodologyare few [1, p. 100; 10, pp. 89, 11].
In our opinion, in all works of artone can find a layer of knowledge through the analysis of which one can teacha lot of natural science knowledge, to discover among natural phenomenacause-effect relationships, develop symbolic և bio-philosophical thinking, free-thinking և comparisons,Ability to make combinations.
  Teaching through a fairy talepresupposes interpreting the meaning, concept and meaning of lifedrawing parallels with the example, making a connection with reality ևbetween scientific knowledge որը, which makes the learning process psychologically enjoyable and effective, as it is not accompanied by the pressure of scientific terminology [6, p. 10].
  Instead, it is served to the childwith familiar situations and characters [4, p. 10; 9, p. 18].
 Born of artFeelings are well preserved in the memory։ surviving strengthens scientific beliefs [7, pp. 60-64].
In addition, fairy tales not only address real-life issues, but also suggest keys to solving them, opportunities.allowing different age և to perceive problems and solutions in the environmentIn an evolutionary way, to develop thinking, to form a complete attitude towards the image of the world [5, p. 3].
When it is said in the fairy tale that “a person runs as fast as the wind, he turnsis a stone, then a petrified person becomes a human again ", or" In winterThe trees dry up, become burning wood, in the spring with some force, whichit is out of man, they are tormented ”[6; page 11], then that story activates the child's curiosity to know the reason.
 ExactlyThat stimulus should also be used by the child through the examples givento teach, on the one hand, the perfection of creation (which:which is very important in the whole of the Universein realizing the place and role, on the other hand, such scientific knowledge as the periodicity of events in nature, materialstorage, wintering of plants, and re-seeding in springabout sprouting or re-emerging from the sprout.
So, the most important pedagogical approach is to reveal the secret tips of art as a goal of teaching.[4, page 6].
  Let's try to present what has been said, one of the exceptional works of world children's literature - English mathematics, psychology,storyteller Lewis Carroll's "Alice in Wonderland և Alice in the Mirrorin the world "through fairy tales that do not stop for more than 150 yearsto be a researcher in a variety of fieldsobject.
 The selected tales are full of biological characters-symbols, which has stimulated our interest in reflecting on them.discovering the educational potential.
These tales have been commented on in our earlier referencesallegorical advice of titles [3], characters, situations,lessons of the author's bio-philosophy, on the endless path of development of the individual and humanity, science and faithrole և other issues [1-4].
  This work is dedicated to L. Discovering Carol's pedagogical skills and presenting their educational potential as a natural science through fiction
Knowledge teaching tool, knowledge integration pedagogicalapproach.
The key principles of the author's pedagogy are visiblebecomes from reading the very first lines of the fairy tale. what could be taught to teach a child, to understand his life subconsciously
demand to promote scientific knowledge, to ensure development.
 The author has three possible rules for solving this problempointing1) It is necessary to ensure diversity, fascination in the child's environment, to teach with familiar situations and characters, books and textbooks based on aesthetic taste.
 ... but thereThere was no picture, no dialogue.
 "It's not a good book," thought Alice.
 And the sameIs it worth getting up to weave a wreath of daisies [8,page 11].
2) Being in a constantly changing environment will force the childto be surprised at every new, unfamiliar encounter, but without surpriseand its emotional impact is not an innate requirement of human cognitioncan develop.
 When the Rabbit took the watch out of his jacket pocket, AliceHe jumped up because he had never seen a rabbit wearing a jacket orHe had a watch, "out of curiosity", ran with the "rabbit"և without thinking he jumped the hole under the fence [8, p. 11].
3) It is possible to measure time correctly for development and progressand evaluation.
 The rabbit passed while talking. - My God, I'm late [8, p
11].
  Rabbit as agile, with sharp hearing and sight,fast running, not strong, well observed in all environments, large distributionAn animal with a geography is presented in the fairy tale as a symbol of the way forward, the signifier of a bright future.
In different episodes of the fairy tale we meet other special pedagogical principles and tricks of the author, such asare each in teaching the development of the child's cognition
to look at the issue from different angles, to pay attention to the detailsnecessity, wisdom in the formation of beliefrepetition, analyzing one's own experience, using the experience of others,cooperation և etc. [4].
The high degree of the author's natural knowledge cannot remain invisible in the "decoding" of the abundance of symbols.
  AllClass features of biological organismssymbolize human characters and qualities (why?The fact that they are represented in capital letters proves that they are in favor), which:facilitate the understanding of the figurative meanings of the characters andDiscovering the mysteries and knowledge of the fairy tale.
Now let's present the selected episodes from the fairy tales and themInterpretation of symbols ենք point out the possibility of applying them in teaching natural sciences without:to delve deeper into the interpretation of knowledge.
1) - You see, I will pass through the center of the earth.
 What would be funny if:I find myself among people who walk upside down.
 In my opinion,they are called Anti-Cretans [8, pp. 12-13].
The episode teaches one of the basic principles of natural scienceCausal and consequent occurrence of mirror symmetryto develop ideas about relationships կտ will allow the childindependently conclude that in different parts of the center of the Earth (as:the conditions of any event or thing cannot be the same, thereforetypical of one, sympathetic, may be strange to another,mirror: Anti-wear.
2) Suddenly Alice slipped.
 Թվ It seemed to him that the sea had fallen.
 "If thisIt is the sea, so I can return by train. ”
 Wherever you go in EnglishBy the sea, you will always find removal booths, digging sand with wooden shovelschildren, furnished cottages, and behind them, a railwaystation [8, page 21].
This description of the English coast can be seen as a parallelapply the knowledge of the organic world, humanity and the individualto teach the way of evolution.
  As in natureLife began in the water, then came ashore, capturing all of itspheres, as well as during the development of humanity և individualprimitive knowledge (sea-water primitive knowledge) was accumulated, thenThey developed, became rich through self-education (furnished cottage-station), created sciences, then, through work and social maturation, cooperated with like-minded people (train), improved, matured, became progressive ideas and theories - the railway.
3) Unfortunately, there are no mice in the air, but you can catch bats.
  howYou know, a bat and a mouse are alike.
 I wonder if cats eat bats?are [8, page 14].
The episode can be used in different ways of life during evolutionin living environments of native living organisms (mouse on the ground, bat:are mammals living in the air) by way of misalignment of features(divergence) to acquire (move) various means of movementև to be able to fly).
4) a) What a strange feeling, - cried Alice, - it seems to be getting smallerI'm like a telescope.
 And really.
 He turned ten inches, և faceHe was enlightened by the thought that he could get out of the small door and leavethe picturesque garden [8, page 16].
  (b) How do you like the Queen?
 …I do not like it at all….
 At that moment, Alice noticed the QueenHe listened to the conversation.
 … Alice continued (changing wordsinitial logic). - He plays so well that immediately
must be surrendered [8, p. 73].
Both episodes are suitable for teaching the following knowledge:that in the process of biological species evolution, one of the ways to survive in changing conditions (different organs of plants, animalsnew to different organ-systems, as well as to the developing humanthe way to adapt to the environment) is to change.
5) I do not know who I am now, sir.
 I only know who I was todayin the morning, but I have changed so much since morning.
 … As you can seeYou are, I am not [8, p. 40].
Development of evolutionary thinking about the image of the worldIt is a very convenient episode for him.
 It teaches that one of the basic properties of the Universe is motion, due to which everything is constantly changing, evolving.
  It is also suitable for the inheritance and variability of all organismsteaching, which are factors in the evolution of organisms, contribute to new, changing environmental conditionsadaptation of organisms.
6) It will lengthen one side of the mushroom and shorten the other [8, p. 43].
The episode presents the natural science knowledge that mushrooms, doubleis a biological organism endowed with properties - plant և animal, which can be used at the same time to teachthat every event in life has at least two faces.
  He is comfortable!From an evolutionary point of view, organisms that are transitional organisms (euglena, colonial organisms, archeopteryx, etc.) are simultaneously different.to explain the characteristics of disciplinary groups.
7) a) Alice could not put her hands on her head, but she saw the neckIt curves in any direction like a snake.
 "You are a snake, a snake," whispered the dove.
- It seems that sitting on the hen is not enough, and now because of those snakes day and nightI have no sleep.
 - I am not a snake, I am a little girl [8, p. 44].
 b) “Looks like a real bee"It must be," thought Alice.
 No, they are not bees, a mile awayThe bees do not eat.
 It soon occurred to him that what he saw was not a bee but an elephant,մտ he lost his breath from that thought [8, p. 137].
Episodes can be used to teach that the morphological criterion for the description of the species is insufficient, asIn nature, they may be related to each other in appearanceunrelated organisms, therefore not belonging to the same species.
In this episode it is easy that K. To be artificial in Linnaeus classification
interpreting the reason.
 And as the wisdom of life, the episode teaches only a possible misunderstanding, a wrong conclusion to evaluate the appearance.about probability.
8) a) The dog growls when he is angry, and when he is satisfied, he moves his tail.
 Me:(Cat) I growl when I'm satisfied, եմ I move my tail when I'm angry [8, p. 55].
b) But it can happen that he (the March Bunny) is crazy!No, because now is May, or not as crazy as in March[8, p. 56].
c) When the sands are dry, he is as cheerful as a larva.Even the shark is terrible, it despises the brave and the stupid (the word is crab)is about being able to live և on water, և on land),But when the shark comes close to the current,His voice falls on his stomach, and his heart trembles in fear [8, p. 89].
The episodes are suitable for artistically presenting the idea of ​​the relativity of events as well as the devices of the organism.for when it is necessary to teach that 1) every earthly truth is relative, true only in a certain time and space և alwaysThe true value of a product is understood in comparison.
 2) For any environment, the organism's device does not protect it from enemies:in other conditions.
9) They lived at the bottom of the syrup well, they ate only syrup.
 But it is not possible to eat only that, they would get sick.
 - That's rightand so it came to pass, that they became very sick [8, p. 63].
 The episode is convenient to showfor a feature of the reaction due to the narrow norm of the organism onlyabout comfort in limited conditions, and what factor?This change increases the risk of extinction.
10) "The more I have, the less you have" [8, page 77].
  It is a very understandable word game of the whole, the law of conservation of matter, everything in the universeto form an idea of ​​what to see as a whole,teaches that every whole is big and small,each of which is irreplaceable in the whole.
11) Living organisms in a fairy tale symbolize a person who corresponds to the biological meaning of each.
  This approach, which is typical of a work of art in general,allows pedagogy to develop in the learnerAwareness of the need to know nature well in order to understand life.
 Thus,11-1) Alice at the top of the evolutionary ladder of the organic worlda creature standing on a ladder, endowed with intelligence and cognition,It is a symbol of those who have chosen the path of development and want to improve endlessly.
 By describing Alice's path, one can instill in the learner a sense of value for a good education.
a) "I can not do anything… I have never been so short.
 I confess, it is disgusting to be small (illiterate) ”[13, p. 21].
 b) This is chessIt is a huge field that covers the whole world.
 … I wish I could participate tooin that game,… as a Soldier, but I would rather be a Queen [8, p. 132].
11-2) Pearl flower - a flower with uniform, uniform petals ևas a plant, an immovable organism.
 It is a symbol of the one who has no independent opinion in the fairy tale, who has the opportunity for limited developmentwhich, giving birth to a negative attitude towards illiteracy,It has the opposite effect, emphasizing the interest and ability to be educated, to move forward on the path of continuous development.
"Pearls are the worst."
 When one speaks, the other inThey fall.
 It is enough to hear their voice, you will grow old >> [8, p. 129].
11-3) Tiger - as a wild plant, compared to cultivated plantsIt is more durable.
  Cultivated as an artificial choiceresult, unlike wild plants, without special human care,They can not survive in natural conditions.
 Why are you so good?"Are you talking?" Alice asked.
 … - Touch the ground with your hand thenyou will understand.
 ... - The ground is hard - but I do not understand what it has to do with youwith what was said.
 "In some gardens the soil of the flower beds is softened," continued the Tiger, "and the flowers are constantly asleep [8, p. 129].
11-4) Caterpillar - the egg of an insect in the development of an է adult զարգացման transitional organism in a fairy tale from different environments, past andIt is a symbol of the wise man who knows the future.
  Young Alice, who is entering life, moving forward on the path of development, has many life lessonsteaches.
 For example, 1) you should go forward not on foot, but smartly. You are many
old ես unusually obese, obese… dizzy (moving head)However, you threw yourself out of the door.
 2) You do not need anything to learnto save, even in the most difficult situation the mind will help to find a solution, andThe most valuable is the applied knowledge. … A pair of vials with two shillings, no
regret it or buy it.
    3) Much can be learned from what others have donediscussing and analyzing. When I was young, I loved going to court
(to analyze the actions of others), and when I came home, I sometimes heard what I said to my wifeto tell (listen to opinions, discuss).
  4) In some cases, in addition to the mind,Ingenuity, diplomacy and definitely faith are useful.You are tough, sharp, but the eel (The snake - of ingenuity, cunning,bearer of the qualities of diplomacy, Pisces of faith) how did you keep the tip of your nose (Keep the eel in your nose, use those qualities)?Where did you get such cleverness and ingenuity?
  5) You should only enter the environmentwith deeds ... do not boast with an empty head [2; 8 page 42].
11-5) Snail - a shell-like, slow-moving invertebrate animal, which in the fairy tale is a symbol of self-contained, limited possibilities, but a true connoisseur.
 "I can not hurry,... it is far away, I do not want to, and I cannot dance with you ”[8, p. 85].
"People generally look different," he said thoughtfullyAlice.
  - This is what I am complaining about, you all have the same face(society). Two eyes, a nose in the middle, a mouth below it.
 … And:if, for example, your eyes were on one side of your nose or your mouth was on your head(specialists with unusual sensory cognitive system: musicians, painters, other creators, scientists,Teachers, figures), maybe I remembered you [8, p. 181].
The episode illustrates well the essence of the variational curve of modification, although it has a deep bio-philosophical meaning.
As with all living things and humanstrue of the "golden mean" viability, և deviated from the mean, unusual,the small number of unusual individuals and the lack of viability(in the sense of paving their way in the environment).
 The society is mainly composed of the same faces - "golden"average ", but can give birth to personalities, extraordinary, whichis destined to change the course of history.
  They too will be remembered in historyin.
13) "The lower my head is, the more things I invent"[8, page 200].
This thought, which sounds like a false word, is a sign of cognitionin the case of development, in case of interest in nature,without special education, only the ability to discover valuable truths through the senses, nature as valuableabout perceiving a textbook.
Unfortunately, all the fairy tales are beyond the scope of workreferring to the episodes.
 However, we hope that such an approach:as a teaching method, it will allow not only in other episodes of this fairy tale, but also in any fairy tale to search and find multifaceted teaching advice,rich material և use according to purpose.
Literature 1. Adamyan N., Grigoryan A., Jivanyan H., Considerations on teaching the integrated subject "Natural Science" // 2nd Pan-Armenian Educational Conference. "Natural science in the 21st century.
Learning Issues և:Solutions "Conference Proceedingscollection, Yerevan, November 20-21, 2009, "Bnaget" special issue,2009, pp. 100-101.
2. Adamyan N., L. Analysis of Carol's ingenuity as:
integrated learning experience // Forerunner 2014, 4, pp. 21-35.
3. Adamyan N., L. Carol's Tales as a Natural Thinker
Teaching tool // "Education և Science in Artsakh", 2014, 1-2, p86-89.
4. Adamyan N., The Mysteries of Carol's Tales // Yerevan, "Edit Print"2016, Monograph, 146 pages.
5. Amiryan H., Diamond stories // Yerevan, "Zangak 97", 2011, 112page.
6. Margaryan A., The role of teaching fairy tales in elementary school //Forerunner 2011, 4.
7. Petrosyan Z., Petrosyan A., Establishment of interdisciplinary relations:as a result of the synthesis of scientific and artistic thinking// "Pedagogy", 2012, 5, pp. 60-64.
8. Carol L., Alice in Wonderland, Alice in the Mirror //Hayastan Publishing House, Yerevan, 1971, 224 pages.
10. Potanina L. T. Humanities.
 Theory and Methodology, 2008. p. 89. 11. pedportal.net/po-tipu-materialy-mo/integrirovanny-urok-284550.
 available,Information about the author:Adamyan Nelli Volodya - University, Biology, Ecology և themAssociate Professor of the Chair of Teaching Methods, B.Sc. scientist candidate,
Chief Specialist of Biology, E-mail.
