Bisexuality is related to the grammatical order of the verb gender, particularly gender changes տեղ is expressed by a lexical word that is a lexical unit, which combines the idea of ​​different genders without additional lexical-grammatical changes [1, 672].
Bisexuality, as a feature of the grammatical order of the verb gender, or specific to the Armenian verb system in all periods of historical development, has not been fully studied and continues to require in-depth and complete examination with practical-theoretical generalizations.
The examination of heterosexual verbs can be done according to different principles, one of which is the study of the composition of the initial basis.
 The starting point, as we know, from the word-formation point of view can be a simple compound, presenting all the word-formation types of Armenian.
Our study aims to distinguish the Old Armenian verbs with initials with word-formation suffixes in order to verify the specific weight of the Old Armenian in 1 of about 500 double-sex verbs (in the vast majority and simple in composition), as well as to show the difference of this or that common Armenian suffix. in sub-regions.
When choosing the original copies, we used the sources we studied, the dialects of the works of the 5th-7th centuries, as well as the dictionary articles of the New Haykazyan dictionary.
We have tried to group the Grabar verbs in question into classical-post-classical-pre-mid-regions2.
We have made this division with reservations, trying for the first time to present the classical verbs of classical Grabar և the following regions with a certain classification.
Such an approach can find out whether it is possible to form or neutralize heterosexuality in a relatively short period of the historical development of a language, such as the classical-post-classical period, or not.
1 See H. Zakyan, Old Armenian double-sex verbs. Time examination, Gyumri, 2015.
2 This approach, of course, can be disputed, as the linguistic division of the Mekhitarists is not accepted by some linguists, arguing that the arguments put forward for such a division are not examined [3, 28].
Thus, in the consonantal verbs of Old Armenian and the consonant, the consonantal verbs with word-formation (non-verbal) suffixes form a certain number.
It has been proved that suffixes mainly appear in the prescriptive period of a language, from independent words, with the result of "wear and tear" of the latter.
  The suffixes that appeared in the prescriptive period of the language become stronger and more stable in the written language.
 That is why a relatively small number of suffixes are created in the written language [2, 177].
Most of the Old Armenian suffixes originated in the pre-Armenian period.
 Among those suffixes are -avor, -at, -ats, -akan, -gin, -yan, -i, -urd, vet, -ot, -ak, -ayn, -aran, -ord, -ich և etc.
Verbs with such suffixes are formed in ancient Armenian, in which a number of double verbs combining the corresponding meanings nb and ch are formed.
The latter, as the study shows, make 1 small number in the sources written in classical script. with the suffix -2: to enlighten, direct, force, arm, perpetuate, with- և ar- with prepositions: to advance, to advance, to pause, -at: to shorten, to divide, -ord: to follow, to lead, to announce, -ot, -ak , with suffixes: rust, accumulate, confuse, unjust և etc.
Let's bring relevant original examples: illuminate-nb-light, fill with light, find out. Enlighten my multitude with baptism (Ag., 426), do not let it shine. They were mixed with innumerable things and enlightened to God (Ag., 352).
  To direct-nb- to direct, to regulate to direct. Zirs directed that it should not be according to the law [4, 457], not to be corrected. Virtue, although we do not correct it, we marvel [4, 547].
 To become a soldier, to arm. He thought of enlisting all the freedmen of the Armenian Imperial Pension (PB, 198), of becoming non-soldiers, of arming himself. Who will receive a pension from a soldier (1 Corinthians 9: 7)?
 Permanent - nb-extend. Let the winter be like this, when the sun in the south perpetuates its senses. 1 We mean Hr. About 40 sources separated by Acharyan.
2 This suffix is ​​one of the most frequently used suffixes in the Armenian written period.
  V. Arakelyan counted 114 words in the Bible with a suffix (see V. Arakelyan, The Language and Style of Armenian Translated Literature of the Fifth Century, Yerevan, 1984, p. 95).
[4, 291], to become eternal, to be eternal… only to the same eternal [4, 291].
  To shorten-nb-To make short, to summarize. Cut the word ևshorten [4, 1074] not to shorten, to delay, to evening. Woe to us, for he has shortened (Jeremiah 6: 4).
  Rust-nb- make rusty. Wine rusted [4, 831], not rusted. Do not rust against the stone for loss (Sir. 29,13) և etc.
Note that the non-verbal words underlying the verbs have a high frequency of use in Old Armenian ավորում condition the semantic structure of the non-verbal word.
It is known that the composition of verbal words from nouns is one of the linguistic-grammatical means in Armenian [1, 58].
 What is more interesting is the fact that these new formations, in some cases, repeat. when, for example, the objective meaning "begins" to express an active action in one case and a passive action in the other.
Like many of the above verbs, take a break belonging to this group (divide from the middle, divide. They paved the way [4, 772], do not interrupt, halve. And whatever interrupted the night with its melody (Wis. 18:14), guide (nb- To teach: No one to lead their priesthood (Cf. 15), not to be a leader, the Spirit to guide you to the truth (John 16:13), to follow (nb- to continue, for example, to the darkness that will follow them (Meaning 17:20), to stand after something: who followed the apostolic canons (K. VM, 86), to advance (nb-prevent, Pride grew in his arrogance [4, 337], not to arise, to be a leader: But let my lord prosper than my servant (Gen. 33:14) The verbs have also preserved the heterosexuality in the sources of the post-Cedar period, and have accumulated, mixed, cultivated,The verbs to recite are double-sex in modern Armenian (that is, they are double-sex throughout the historical development of Armenian) և they have mainly preserved the Grabarian meanings.
Thus, in the works of the Old Grabar period, there are about 20 verbs with a non-verbal suffix, which are mainly double-sex in the sources of the post-classical period.
  Let's move on to the examination of the corresponding verbs of the post-classical period1.
The verbs included in this subgroup either do not occur at all in the classical period or are used grammatically with only one gender2 (original examples are also given from the middle period).
To make worthy-nb-worthy. Zamanesian deserves his rest (Ag. 14), and he did not deserve himself [4, 356], not to become worthy. The Bdeshkhut side deserved to be taken (MG, 71).
 Serve-nb-serve, serve. When he was a child, he used to serve my brothers [4, 737], not to be a servant. That by longing to serve all, he will call great the kingdom of God (JP, 80).
 Shine. Do not let the light of the stars shine [4, 928] shine. Let the light shine on the people in front of you [4, 928] և etc.
This group also includes the verbs rebellion, privatization, characterization, zoning, grief, rage, benevolence, mediation.
As we know, in addition to the suffixes specific to ancient Armenian, from the second half of the 5th century, about two dozen suffixes created by Greek scholars came into use, with which a certain number of verbs with a basic origin make up the number of double-sex verbs.
In this group there are double-sex verbs with up-, open-, change-, dance-, anti-suffixes, for example, brighten-nb-brighten. Zanapak beam is a shadowless light in the mentally illuminated world (MG, 246), not to shine. Absorbed in all virtue, he was more than happy to return what was the work of Christ (MG, 246), instead of repaying, returning. Let the earth be reciprocated by sending a heavenly blessing [4, 946], do not return. The request made as a prayer should be reciprocated by the people [4, 946], to fill the vat. My nets were swinging on the net [4, 639], not to swell, to swell. Before they swelled their nets (Luke 5: 6, 6), to reverse-nb-turn the opposite side… .to reverse the same [4, 5], not to be -b reverse.1 Classical, as we know, it is customary to call from 461 to 8 The half-century period.
2 We have stated above that such an assertion may seem abstract, but we are guided by the facts provided by the sources we have studied.
The first is not the opposite, and this is the opposite [4, 5],… to whom should I reverse [4, 5] և etc.
Thus, in the originals of the post-classical period, there are about 20 verbs with basic non-basic verb suffixes, 7 of which are based on the origin of suffixes created by Greek scholars1.
The pre-middle period includes works written in the mid-eleventh century.
It should be noted that in classical Grabar sources some of these verbs are found, but grammatically with only one gender, and the usage (s) with the meaning of the second gender is found only in the works of the pre-middle period.
The original examples, however, show that most of the verbs in question are found only in pre-mid-period sources.
First of all, let's introduce the double-sex verbs, which are based on the prepositions specific to the ancient Armenian language.
Those verbs are to win nb-win. Sell ​​it with many profits, profit your soul [4, 458], do not benefit, use. Eat and drink so that the one who eats does not gain anything [4, 458], to moderate nb-moderate - Let's measure ourselves, և to measure [4, 574], not to be moderate, to be humble. Ziard's grave in moderation [4, 574], to rent. Fascinated by rent with silver… [4, 796], not to rent, to receive. Peter's residence to the martyr, և mercenary indeed [4,796].
In the same group, they used to train, align, pair, make possible 2 bisexual verbs, etc.
It is clear that these verbs, unlike the others, simply could not be found in the classical period.
2 Dashnakt-nb- to make an ally, to ally. To fulfill the promise of unity, which he allied with the sea, to become a non-ally, to reconcile. Now the seas wave to the federal [4, 595].
 Pair-nb- unite, unite, mix. You have purified my creatures for the sake of a living creature, not to join. Match the blood of Christ [4, 749].
 To be able to find something to succeed, to get rid of a goat-skinned goat from the air, not to bother. Do not make everything possible for you to cover [4, 107].
 Hairdressing, nailing, nailing, loading. Shave with a stick while chewing Sisara, do not become thick-leafed. The fig tree was haired with foliage [4, 798] և etc.
Let us turn to the formations with suffixes created by Greek scholars.
  In this period, there are two-sex verbs with initials, vowel-, par-, art-, har-, tar-, ham-, pre-, shar-, and lower suffixes, for example, re-sound-nb-call out loud. They were resurrected with man աստ their overseers [4,807], not to be heard, to make a loud noise. In common, the dialect resonated at night [4, 807], bewilderment, bewilderment, bewilder. The priest is puzzled, the Pharisee is in danger [4, 854], do not bewary, bewilder. When the king of Persia saw all the evil, he was troubled (Ag. 19).
In the same group they also took the verbs, initiated, reborn, joined, joined, underlined the verbs, etc.
In the third subgroup there are 16 double-sex verbs, 9 of which are based on the suffixes created by the Greek school.
Thus, the above-mentioned examination shows that in the Old Armenian (in all three sub-regions) there are about 50 double-sex verbs with a non-verbal derivative origin, making up about 10% of the Old Armenian-gay verbs.
The suffix -avor is prominent in the frequency of use (17 verbs), the initials of about 20 verbs have suffixes specific to ancient Armenian, the suffixes created by the Greek school are found in the initials of these 11 verbs1.
In general, after the classical period, there is an increase in the number of prepositional verbs with a prefix, with an increase in the total number of prefixes և the frequency of use.
The study shows that the repetition of a verb is mainly conditioned by the semantic structure of the latter կազմ by the composition of the initial base, in which the existing word-formation suffixes, having already formed the semantic structure of the nominal word, usually have no special meaning for the verb.
1 In some cases the verb base has two suffixes, such as mediate, in the case of rabid verbs, etc.
In the classical period of Grabar, verbs with a double sex usually retain this feature in other sub-regions as well, from which we can assume that it takes a much longer period of time to eliminate or neutralize the formation of a double sex.
Abstracts Ag.- Agatangeghos, History of Armenia, Tpghis, 1909 / original dialect, book 1, A-K /, Yerevan, 1973.
K. VM - Armenian dialect, Koryun, Vark Mashtots, Yerevan, 1972.
JP - Armenian dialect, 6 Ghazaray Parpetsyu History of Armenia, book 2, / I-Y /, Yerevan, 1978.
MG - Armenian dialect, 7, History of Movsis Khorenatsi Armenian, book 1, / A-L /, Yerevan, 1975.
NHB - New Dictionary of the Armenian Language, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1979, vol. 2. Yerevan, 1981.
CJSC - History of Faustus Buzandatsi Armenian, S. Petersburg, 1883.
nb - intransitive gender verb - neutral gender verb to be used is affixed with the affix -avor (17 verbs), even in 11 verbs in the verb verb connected with a semantic verb.
  с сосуществованием տարբերчныхAccording to the frequency of use, the affix - աւոր is the most used one (17The pledge of the verb is related only to its semantics.
 with the co-existence of Grakan 1. Abrahamyan A. A., The verb in modern Armenian, Yerevan, Armenian SSRGA Publishing House, 1962, 729 pages.
2. Ghazaryan S. R., History of the Armenian literary language, Yerevan, Haypethrat, 1961, 472 pages.
3. Arakelyan V. D., Classical և post-classical Armenian, Yerevan, Haypethrat, 1976.
 198 pages.
4. New dictionary of the Armenian language, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1979, vol. 2. Yerevan, Yerevan University Press, 1981, 2235 pages.
