Among the current problems of biology, a great deal of attention is paid to the cellular-molecular basis of heredity, the patterns of inheritance of traits, the chromosomal theory of heredity, the basis of sex, ontogenesis, population ևsport genetics և immunogenetics.
  Another important biological issue is the problem of ecology, related to the production of various harmful substances, the increase of industrial waste, the reckless use of renewable and non-renewable resources.
  Given the urgency of environmental issues in the specialty "Modern Problems of Biology", due to the need to implement many measures of ecological conservation, reproduction of natural resources, their effective use, as well as to try to prevent harmful human impacts. ways to solve them.
By discussing ecological issues, it is possible to ensure the harmony of plants, animals, humans մարդու nature,, the general ecological balance of the gene pool և different natural complexes.
In the process of learning, the resource of academic knowledge is used, the creation of interdisciplinary-interdisciplinary connections, the demonstration of skills and abilities to apply the acquired knowledge in life, the application of professional theoretical knowledge in practice.
  Modern teaching methods provide an opportunity to develop the student's creative, logical thinking, to express themselves independently, to distinguish the primary goal and objectives from the secondary ones, to develop appropriate decision-making skills, as well as a creative approach to the problem.
Modern pedagogy, in addition to the issue of providing subject-professional education, also has another important problem - the involvement of students in various social relations, developing the ability and skills to make collaborative, independent decisions, take responsibility for them.
In the process of teaching biology, the formulations aimed at the development of students' logical-scientific thinking are constantly changing.
 They are interconnected, the most common of which are science, accessibility, systematization, sequence, scrutiny, and so on.
  In this process, the teaching method is used, which is a set of approaches and tricks that reflect the interaction between the teacher and the students.
The teaching method is chosen with the aim of making the lesson more active and interesting, due to which it becomes possible to develop individual, group and collaborative work skills.
  Interactive teaching methods (interactive) have started to be used in the last few years.
 These methods imply a more comprehensive interaction of learners not only with the teacher but also with each other, during which the activity of the learners prevails.
  Interactive methods at the same time ensure the involvement of almost all learners, which leads to the development of individual և collaborative skills, making the lesson more interesting, engaging և accessible.
Interactive methods provide an opportunity to increase self-esteem and self-confidence.
Using the latest teaching methods, we have tried to study the topic through the CPT system, to make it more interesting, to develop students' individual, group and collaborative work skills, ensuring their involvement in the coverage of the environmental issue.
It is known that student-centered learning, involvement of all participants in the process develops such moral values ​​as having one's own position, compassion, will, mutual help, ability to analyze, courage.
  Humanity today is on the threshold of global change, for some reason it is man.
  Most of the sun's light energy, penetrating the biosphere through the atmosphere, is absorbed from the surface of the planet Earth, converted into thermal energy և infrared radiation reflects into space.
 However, due to some "greenhouse gases" in the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide (CO2), ozone (O3), methane (CH4), nitrogen dioxide (N2O) and hydrogen fluorocarbons (CFCl), the atmosphere "absorbs most of the heat radiating from the Earth."
  The main role in the "greenhouse effect" (64%) belongs to carbon dioxide, 19% to methane, 5.7% to nitrous oxide, 10% to fluorocarbons.
  The latter are released into the atmosphere during production processes, and the major part of N2O is of biological origin և contributes to the depletion of the ozone layer 7.
Methane is a strong "greenhouse gas", it has a growth tendency, նրա its quantity in the atmosphere will soon double.
  Sources of methane production are agriculture, coal and natural gas production.
The main reasons for the increase in CO2 gas are deforestation, fires, increase in the number of cars.
Global warming changes the Earth's axis.
  Researchers at the University of Texas at Urbana-Champaign have found that since 2005, the North Pole has moved eastward, moving 1.2 meters.
  In order to prevent or mitigate these destructive phenomena, it is necessary to invest extensively, to use the energy of renewable sources - earth, wind, water, earth - earth.
In order to study the "greenhouse effect" we used the "Wheel of the Future" method և to analyze the cause-and-effect relationships of the problem.
 By building a detailed picture of the causes and effects, learners are able to make the right decisions to eliminate the effects of the problem.
In order to study the cause-effect relationship of the event, the students used different diagrams to show the causes of the problem, which in turn led to a number of consequences.
 Mentioning all the causes and consequences, the students, using interactive methods, came to a number of conclusions, taking responsibility for each other's learning 2.
Due to large-scale human activity, irreversible changes have taken place in the environment.
  Due to the unintentional use of the various resources of the planet Earth, man has exhausted the flora and fauna to such an extent that many species of flora and fauna have simply disappeared, while others are on the verge of extinction.
The society, realizing the catastrophic amount of lost resources, has developed a special system of measures aimed at the rational use and conservation of natural resources.
 During the problem analysis, the students proposed the M-table, table, which separately identified the features of renewable և non-renewable biological resources և suggested ways to solve the above problems.
  Through the M-table, the researchers concluded that biological resources, such as plants and animals, not only have important ecological significance, but also constitute a means of conserving biodiversity.
 They used the preservation of the diversity of some insects as pollinators in the wild, emphasizing that sanitary insects clean the nature of carrion, rodents, and some soil-dwelling animals corrode the soil, improving its quality and structure.
In the four-part method, the students noted the close interaction of animals as the most important heterotrophic component of biogeracenosis with the plant world, as well as with the microorganisms that ensure the dynamic balance of nature.
Among the measures for the conservation of biodiversity և effective use by the students, the following were especially distinguished: the process of artificial spawning of fish, climate training of fish, hunting quantity, clarification of dates 6.
Any of the above measures can be implemented in Armenia for the protection of troutfish living in Lake Sanaa.
 The most important task is to artificially increase fish stocks by banning fishing.
 In Armenia, a group of divers recently conducted research on the bottom of Lake Sanaa (which attracts fans of extreme daring), during which underwater botanical research was carried out, bringing to land 10 species of high-quality plants, algae.
An important environmental problem is the alarming scarcity of fish stocks along with the pollution of the lake.
  Swimming in the water for tens of hours, the divers did not meet large fish in different parts of Lake Shana, the largest of the rare fish was barely 10 cm.
 Due to the disruption of the ecosystem, "phytoplankton" and "zooplankton" increased on the bottom of the lake, which were supposed to become food for fish.
  In some areas, divers found abandoned nets filled with rotten crayfish and fish.
There are also reserves, sanctuaries, national parks in Armenia, where many rare animals included in the "Red Book" of Armenia, such as the bald vulture, the bezoar goat, and the lamb, have survived extinction due to climate change and resettlement.
Armenia is characterized by its species diversity - endemism.
 In the last 2-3 decades, about 40 species of fish, mammals, birds and reptiles have completely disappeared or are on the verge of extinction due to human activity.
Poaching is always rampant in Armenia, and what is allowed is irregular.
 Caucasian nobles, pheasants and leopards were completely extinct, and only specific specimens of the Armenian mouflon և goat 4 մն remained.
The role of flora resources from plant or autotrophic organisms in the biosphere և is exceptional for human life and production activities.
  The directions and specific methods of conservation, rational use and restoration of plant resources are various.
 Among them are the preservation of the gene pool, the separation of specially protected areas, the creation of a "Red Book" of plants, the organization of forestry.
 The "Red Book" of Armenia has been studied, the commonalities and differences of the problems of plant and animal protection have been discussed through the Venn diagram.
In Armenia, a large number of wild representatives of cultivated plants grow: apple, pear, cherry, plum, arose, hawthorn, hornbeam, grape, pea, lentil, which have survived next to man, so they can be saved from destruction if man takes care of them.
 Particular attention should be paid to the rare places of wild wheat, rye, barley, Ararat-Urartian wheat, Vavilov's age, where there is a great diversity of species, the preservation and cultivation of which is very important.
After researching the issue, the students came to the conclusion that it is necessary to ensure the preservation of the gene pool of plant species, the inviolability of natural ecosystems.
Of the many species of wild pear found in Armenia, the Caucasian pear has been severely reduced by deforestation, while its drought resistance and high resistance to diseases and pests can be used to obtain new valuable eggs 5.
One of the "Mosaic" cooperative methodological exercises was used to discuss the issue of flora, fauna and biodiversity.
The students, forming collaborative groups, studied the same topic, performing different tasks.
 The material has been studied from different angles, and the picture is complete when the results of group work are combined 1.
The problem of freshwater is also a modern problem of biology and ecology.
  Fresh water is gradually gaining strategic importance in the world, becoming a serious political factor in international relations.
 Although this resource is considered to be renewable, but it is restored over millions of years.
 This refers not to the quantitative but qualitative elimination of water, the problem of pollution, which has become a universal, moreover, a global problem.
Fresh water is a limited ոց vulnerable resource.
  The vital human need for clean and safe water is explained by the absolute functional irreplaceability of water.
The largest consumer of fresh water is agriculture.
In the current situation, the use of freshwater has significantly increased, which makes the general lack of this resource extremely important for humanity.
 In order to regulate the amount of fresh water, in order not to reduce it in the future, it is necessary to increase the efficiency of its use.
 A number of countries have already switched to drip irrigation.
  Along with other anthropogenic factors affecting nature, fresh water is gradually becoming a crucial factor hindering sustainable development strategies.
  It is quite acceptable that in the 21st century, fresh water (not oil) will become the main strategic resource of the Earth.
The picture of Armenia of the same name is also worrying against the background of the ecological state և use of the world's water resources.
  The 70 billion cubic meters of water existing in the territory of Armenia at the current level of use "technologies" "satisfies" all the requirements of the people's և life և production, at the same time ensuring the self-cleaning of rivers and basins and the ecological condition.
If fresh water was used sparingly, it would be possible not to worry about the reproduction of this vital resource, և Armenia would be considered one of the most favorable countries in the world 7.
  But the picture is different.
 More than 70% of drinking water is lost in the Republic of Armenia.
 The barbaric loss of the entrails of the Ararat valley is not measured by anyone.
  In a number of settlements, artesian water comes out of the surface through large-diameter pipes for drinking and irrigation, flowing into rivers in unimpeded streams, raising groundwater levels, increasing soil erosion and secondary salinization.
Large amounts of artesian water are wasted by private fish farms.
The lack of state control over drinking water, in general, damages the vital security of our people.
In order to study and analyze freshwater problems, the students proposed the cube method, where one of the problems was mentioned in each session of the cube, after which a number of conclusions were made.
Thus, with the disturbance of the ecological balance, the sowing planet suffers from the loss of biodiversity, climate change, pollution of the environment, which can lead to irreversible losses.
  Desertification, population growth, uncontrolled use and consumption of natural resources have led to the extinction of mammals, amphibians բազմաթիվ many species of birds 8 .
  It is necessary for every person, any member of the society, to think about the preservation of the biodiversity that guarantees the existence of the planet, to leave to the generations the beauty and natural wealth that we use mercilessly.
 We must realize that man is a species that is directly dependent on the natural environment, it just needs cooperation, perseverance to save what gives us the opportunity to live, to survive.
For a comprehensive analysis of the above-mentioned problems, the students suggested the method of excursion to visit reserves, sanctuaries, national parks to study the species diversity of flora and fauna, to organize special events for their preservation.
After the analysis of the problems, the students suggested the ways to solve the above-mentioned problems.
Lake Sanaa
cleaning, fishing
resources:
recovery
Tree planting, animal breeding
և Consistency
process:
implementation:
please
Greenhouse gases
emission:
Restriction:
Problem solving
Fresh water
savings, networks
renovation
Fishing, animal hunting, logging
please state
level:
of punishment
hardening
Agriculture
field:
with respect to:
backwardness
especially lands
salting
desertification
please
Artificial
fertilizers
Usage:
restriction, biological
Fighting promotion, network irrigation
contribution:
An assessment was made at the end of the lesson, emphasizing the fact that it not only testifies to the achievements of students, the effectiveness of teaching, but also is considered a means of ensuring and improving the quality of education.
 The main purpose of the assessment is to check the level of knowledge, abilities and skills of the learners, to identify the value qualities, to improve the educational process based on them, to ensure the increase of quality control.
The following basic principles have been taken into account in the evaluation process of the application of interactive methods of collaborative learning: compatibility, fairness, accessibility, accountability, transparency, reliability 2.
It should be noted that assessment affects both the individual qualities of the learner and the person in general.
 Evaluation helps to develop perseverance, honesty, self-criticism, and its social function mostly creates a large-scale picture, on the basis of which the given issue is properly analyzed.
Thus, teaching using interactive methods enables students to establish themselves, to evaluate each other fairly, to compromise, which ensures the efficiency of the process.
 In addition to the pedagogical role, teaching through interactive methods also has a social function.
 By working in groups, students not only acquire a variety of collaborative skills, but also a higher level of self-awareness, which creates true feedback.
Literature 1. Arnaudyan A. Gyulbudaghyan A., Khachatryan S., Khrimyan S., Petrosyan M., Handbook of Professional Development, KAI, Yerevan, 2004, p. 178.
2. Edoyan R. H., Hovakimyan J. H., Manual of teaching environmental laboratory-practical exercises, methodology "Yerjan", 2015, pp. 12-28, 71-79.
3. Karapetyan M. A., Nature's Ethics, YSU, 2009, pp. 8-17.
4. Red Book of Animals of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2010, page 367.
5. Red Book of Plants of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2010, page 591.
6. V National Biodiversity Report of the Republic of Armenia, 2014, 15 137.
7. Hayrapetyan E. M., Harutyunyan V. S., Vardanyan Ts. H., Environmental Protection, Yerevan, 2005, pp. 112-120, 438-440.
Information about the author Anahit Fabritsusky Grigoryan - Dean of the Faculty of Natural Sciences and Geography, living. scientist Candidate, Associate Professor E-mail.
