At present, there is an objective need to introduce modern interactive teaching methods և methods of teaching geography in conjunction with traditional teaching methods and methods, with the aim of increasing the efficiency of mastering the taught material, enabling the application of various tricks.
These methodological innovations are necessary for educating the modern generation in modern conditions.
 It promotes the development of the learner to think and create independently.
The right choice of methods during teaching is of paramount importance for the development of children's abilities and skills.
 The student today uses the teacher to impart knowledge to him.
"In this regard, it is necessary for the geography teacher to be thoroughly prepared for each lesson, because the student's mastery of the program material is largely conditioned by the quality of the transmitter.
  The success of geography lessons largely depends on the equipment that the teacher had to work on days and months ago.
 They are not only maps, but also many different display materials ”[1 page 26].
The choice of appropriate teaching methods is crucial for the development of learners' abilities and skills.
  The interest in learning can be partially supplemented by the use of interesting educational material, as it contributes to the increase of class efficiency.
The scientific-pedagogical experiment was carried out in M. In 7a, 6b ,, և 4b classes of Mashtots N 29 basic school. The aim was to present ways to increase the effectiveness of the class in teaching geography.
6th grade - 16 students with low progress.
 The lesson was done in a new way.
 The "Mosaic" method was used.
 The topic of the lesson was "Southern Geographical Position: The Line.
"Coasts and oceans SOUTHERN AMERICASurface Earthquakes, current և extinct volcanoes in the AndesPlatform EastMountainWeb America, geographical location, coastline, surface."
 The points separated for the lesson study were written on the board beforehand according to the following scheme.
The first stage of the lesson is "promotion".
 During this phase, students were activated by recalling information about the topic.
  This forces learners to test their own knowledge and at the same time think about the main topic.
As a result of the brainstorming, the students' knowledge resource was discovered about the discovery of the American continent, the history of F. Magellan bypassing South America from the south.
The class did not make much progress, so students had difficulty remembering the names of geographical objects.
 The map showed the large straits, plains, plateaus, and mountains of the continent under study, saying their names, and the students, trying to memorize the difficult names, pronounced them aloud with the teacher and wrote them on the outline map.
The next stage of the lesson is the perception of meaning.
 As mentioned above, the "mosaic" method was chosen.
  According to that method, the class was divided into 4 groups.
For example, the numbers of groups 1 are gathered around one table, 2, 3, 4 are gathered around other tables.
First the class was instructed to read the lesson material.
  Then the leaflets were distributed to the groups, on which it was written which side of the question the group should present.
Each member of the group was selected as a sub-theme expert to teach the other group members their sub-theme.
 15 minutes were given.
 After graduation, the results were summarized.
Group 1 • Geographical location • South American territory, extremities • Africa և Hv. Differences in America's geographical location Group 2 • Map • Shoreline • Shoreline oceans Group 3 • Surface • Mountain west • Plains east group 4 • Earthquakes • Active volcanoes in the Andes.
Each group presented its work.
For example, the first group analyzed Hv. Compare the geographical location of America, marked the area, the extremities, with the geographical position of Africa.
Then all the groups presented their works.
 Clarifications were given to the incomprehensible questions.
  Each expert tried to teach the other members of the group his sub-theme.
  However, the students had a hard time completing this task.
 Later, cooperating in a group, they were able to work on a sketch map.
The usefulness of the method was found out during the weighing stage.
  The result became obvious when the GUS method was used.
 This writing assignment was assigned to the whole class to complete the questions in the table below.
I knowI want to knowLearnedIt took 5 minutes.
 After graduation, the results were summarized.
  In the process, the works of the outline map of 8 students were checked, the completed questions of the GUS table were evaluated.
As a result, it turned out that some of the students did not master Nordas well.
7a grade - 16 students with average progress.
 Topic: "Allocation of the world's natural resources".
 In this class we used the "mosaic" method.
In the first stage of the lesson, students' knowledge of natural resources was tested through brainstorming.
 The words were written on the board.
 Then he was instructed to read the new lesson.
At the stage of comprehension of meaning, the class was divided into four groups of four.
  The groups were given leaflets on which the tasks to be discussed were written.
Each group was instructed to study and analyze the section for them in the defined period.
Groups of four people worked on the given parts. Ocean Resources ”section.
After the expiration of the time allotted for the given works, each group presented its work.
  Then the children returned to their groups, each teaching the other members of the group the part of the lesson they had mastered.
At the reflection stage, the groups told the lesson.
  To determine the level of mastery, the "Questions Tasks" section included at the end of the lesson was used.
As a result, 8 students were evaluated, who were able to classify natural resources according to their origin, showed the most important mines on the map, explained the concept of "natural resource".
 That is, they overcame the minimum A and B average levels.
The other was 4 high-level classrooms consisting of 24 students, where this method was used.
  The topic was "The Discovery of America".
Potatoes, cigarettes, cotton, tomatoes, coffee, peppers, pictures of horses, etc. were put on the table.
  The question has been raised which of these items were imported from America to Europe, which, on the contrary.
  First, the blackboard was divided into two parts.
  One column read "America" ​​and the other "Europe".
  After thinking for two minutes, the students chose from the above-mentioned items those that, according to them, had been imported from Europe, wrote "under the word" Europe ", and the rest under the word" America ".
At the stage of understanding the meaning, it was instructed to read the material silently.
Again the class was divided into groups, this time into 6 groups, 4 students in each.
During the weigh-in phase, the whole lesson was told by my choice.
 As a result, all the members of the group learned the lesson.
 Questions were asked at the end of the lesson to make sure they had mastered the lesson.
  They were able to explain the impact of travel in the early past on human development, as well as the motivations for traveling around the world.
12 students were evaluated.
That is, in 4b grade we were already able to reach the maximum level.
Conclusion. Thus, it can be said that each lesson had its own approach, depending on the complexity of the material and the students' abilities.
In the selected topics, in the "Perception of Meaning" stage, the "Mosaic" method was mainly used.
 As a result, by helping each other, all the members of the group learned the lesson.
  In this way, educational materials with different content components on the same topic can be taught.
Suggestion. 1. In low-achieving classes, read the material aloud in separate sections with the help of the teacher.
2. Teaching in 50% արան higher grades can be organized by "Mosaic" or "Tour in the Gallery" method.
3. In order to achieve good results, students at the beginning of each topic need to be introduced to the specific requirements for studying new material.
  The mapping method can be used.
In general, it can be said that in order to improve the effectiveness of teaching, it is necessary to use new methods and tricks.
Literature 1. Sargsyan Kh. B., Geography Teaching Methodology 4, Yerevan, 2002, "Zangak-97", 328 pages.
2. Margaryan R., Manasyan M., Hovsepyan A., Geography 7th grade, Yerevan, "Manmar", 2013, 176 pages.
3. Hovsepyan A., Hovhannisyan G., Margaryan R., Manasyan M., "Geography 7-8" teacher's manual, Yerevan, "Manmar", 2013, 88 pages.
4. Hovsepyan A., Grigoryan A., Manasyan M. Geography of Continents and Oceans 6th grade, Yerevan, Astghik Bookstore, 2013, 160 pages.
5. Hovsepyan A., Grigoryan A., Manasyan M., "Geography 6" teacher's manual, Yerevan, Astghik Bookstore, 2013, 112 pages.
6. Hovsepyan A., Hovhannisyan G., Toghanyan N., Avagyan L. "I և the world around me, 4th grade" Yerevan, "Manmar", 2015, 175 pages.
Information about the author Minasyan (Asatryan) Narine Zhora - Geography teacher of M. Mashtots N 29 basic school, organizer of educational works, E-mail.
