Diana Hambardzumyan is one of the inner faces of modern prose.An original prose writer, publicist, literary critic, best-appreciated cultural figure, known to Armenian-foreign readers for a long timehe's unparalleled translation work.
  Lined with lifeThe writer discusses the problems, with an irreconcilable pen, far from ambitious thoughtsHe argues for the true, the beautiful, for the caring values, neither as a fruitless watchman, nor as sure that he is unsurpassed.
 The prose writer has disobedient and old-fashioned thoughts.
 The problems of our timeand exposing the defects, making the earthly pain and sorrow visible, sellingA pen showing the bankruptcy of the mind, trained in the power of the true word.
 His:Each work explores the current social problems and discovers new layers of human relations.
 Making writing a means of self-expression, Diana Hambardzumyan in works of art and articles of different years,He has repeatedly referred to these issues and issues in interviews and reviews.
  His answers in the interviewsThey complement each other, presenting not only prose but also aestheticsthe moving-developing nature.
"Only a moment of birth in the eternal stream of timeand the person in the middle of death… wants to convey beautyand immortalize with beauty, ”while discussing the problems of modern prosewrites literary critic Zhenya Kalantaryan [1,218].
  Diana Hambardzumyan also strives for beauty and perfectionto discover human care and truth, his life experience andTo reflect cognition in works of art of the human և generationto reach the edge of truth with the path of nostalgia, rejecting the fabricated literature, intersecting the writer's aesthetic, moral and socialhis perceptions, his perceptions of the national and the universal.
Diana Hambardzumyan is ordinary when browsing the social and caring layers of reality, full of unspeakable complexitiesWith the ability to make an unusual sound, he refers to the discovery of the foundations of human and national existence, voicing his painful thoughts that bring the message and the target, sometimes to the desecration of the sacred morals of the family, sometimes to the nature of man, covered with darkness.the doors of the soul, and sometimes the barrier between the real and the imaginaryin a dream.
 The family is one of the masterpieces of nature. for the Armenian people
it is sacred, the bearer and transmitter of traditions, customs, and many other attributes, the center of rights and responsibilities,a union forged by mutual responsibility, with its unconditional laws and rules.
 It is the bearer of the national feature and image.
In a family flooded with love and happiness, husband and wife are irreplaceablewith a sense of duty and responsibility towards each other ևThey are the ones who do not violate the balance of the world with their love.
In the face of marital duty and moral commitment. "Diana Hambardzumyan is a sinful character with the title "Arab"the hero of the same name in the story [2].
  The song, being a solid workAt the same time, it is distinguished by psychological justification, unique structure, convincing psychoanalytic descriptions.
  "The writer draws attention to people's moral behavior, their flaws andon sins, because of which history becomes destiny ևPunishment prescribed by God. "[3]
 In addition to these features, the sky stands out with interesting chronotopic transitions.
 The present of the story begins with Arabi, a loved one living in despairin search, և he, knocking on the door, without thinking of decency and shyness, walks from house to house, relentlessly knocking on a strangerdoors, hoping to find the one he loved and lost foolishly.
According to the Russian literary critic AB Yesin. "The problem is why?"
for what does a person achieve self-humiliation? it has a socio-cultural context, which is expressed in the affirmation of honor and inner dignity, not to accept voluntary service;
with the idea of ​​rejecting ”[4,41].
  To Arsho, who lives in one of the houses, who are you, what do you want?The hero of the story answers: I am an Arab. said married
A woman who has gone to a man (AN).
  "Don't you have a name?"
 - Arsho is already following this question with a certain article,as the answer sounded like a personal name.    "I am Arab."
Then, by presenting comprehensive, typical actions, the writer addresses the creation of such issues, problems,such as types, action, psychology, ideology, style issues, art.
  The plot of the song is far from ordinaryfrom being a story.
 This is what happened in the dark and invisible depths of manis a discovery whose "excavations" lead the writer to the behavior of a heroreferences to externalization.
Diana Hambardzumyan creates an artistic imageUnique patterns of construction. "To apologize
Please forgive me, I will run, kneel in front of your picture and beg with my hands outstretched, but I know what I did was a pig that you forgive me, I am not meների »[2].
 The book of folk wisdom, the Bible saysis. "And if the woman does not want to come after you, then you are invincible" [5,25].
According to the original principle of realization of artistic speech D. Hambardzumyan by examining the eternal problems inherent in human existence
discovers the reflection of the cosmic soul, of everything in eternityconditioning the beginning with love, which is the key to the mystery of saving the worldis.
 The writer's worldview reveals different combinations of artistic meaning of the material, presenting eventsThe next development, considering it in the movie, is real andtangible, which is a unique aesthetic and moral influenceacts on the reader.
  The nature of life with human feelingsthe tendency to weigh leads to the philosophical understanding of the novelist,that the spirit that balances the world, love, beats in everyone's soul."… Familiar murmur… Why?… Who can explain how it starts?everything.
 What name can they give it? torment, pity, pity, devotion,
self-forgetfulness, or they say love, because it is not one of them andThey are all together… or it is a pain spread by some writer, from which there is a cureIt is impossible, humanity has not invented anything that kills its causative agent to drinkand insure against all future infections, gain immunity andsave… »[2].
In the realm of authentic storytelling, the writer createscertain manifestations of the character's behavior that reveal himinner world feelings.
"Arab girl," he whispered to himself, "this is dark and cold."What did you lose at these unknown doors?
 Now the dog does not come out of the nest, you's thatHow many heads do you have that you have set off and are going wherever your eye cuts?Turn, as soon as you hang your leg, a trouble will come to your head, hurry up, hurry up ”[2].
The moral-psychological description of the hero, the intrusions made through the conscious word build on a fact-based basisConvincing and visible artistic environment, although the reader is unaware of the complexity of Arabi's marital relationship, the fact that he is happy or unhappy on the family floor, butThe anxieties of a woman looking for a loved one are palpable (jealousy is a way of expressing love. "Do you see who now?"he traps with his wise thoughts. "[2]
 The vision becomes weightless:the motive for the marginal belief in love and devotion).
The reader feels the suffering, pain and love of the protagonist, Arabichain development.
 Moral and psychological, philosophical and aesthetic questions are closely intertwined in Diana Hambardzumyan's story, as in real life.
Thoughts about life և love seem to flow spontaneously, howeverDiana Hambardzumyan holds the spring of their expansion firmlyIn his hands, he uses it from his point of view of the world and the human being, from his understanding of the role of literature.
 In the struggle of conscience and intelligenceArabi is pleased to have the opportunity to find a loved oneThrough his compassion and repentance for him, the writer dreams of a womanthe suffering of the soul, "… gradually making a new literary visiblethe new quality of generational thinking "[2,195].
The woman is the creator and originator not only as the mother, as the custodian and transmitter of the genetic code of the race, but also the basis for the preservation of the nation, the apostle who creates a family, for the sake of which love is sometimes sacrificed.
 Arsha's Vachaga is very talkative about the existence of a familyThe word addressed to Barikyan. "Was that the woman who came out of your house and I said, '
If you come to your senses, you will bring a woman, tidy up this house so that it smells like a house. ”[2]
    Analysis of female psychology, completely different self-esteemHe published Alexander Shirvanzade's "Arab".
   Both in volume and content in two different works, which:have the same titles, are examined in completely different eras andThere are two kinds of problems that exist at the timeեն are different observations of writers with different understandings of views ևwith unique interpretations of losses.
   In Shirvanzade's novel, the events take place in the second half of the 19th century, when there were cruel responsibilities, the fulfillment of which was strictly obligatory for every person.
 Honor presupposesis a feeling higher than interest? it links the activities of the individual, his position in society to the socially acceptable
to the higher spheres of morality և an indicator of its social valueis.
 The social psychology of a person is expressed in honor.
 The issue of marriage is a social and moral issue, so it hasUnique examination and evaluation criteria.
 It is clear from the plot of the novelIt turns out that Varvara is not a girl, but a married woman, an Arab, whoShe boldly abandoned her immoral, immoral husband.
"What should poor Varvara do? They took him, they married a useless man by forcewith a spoiled man and they say. "Suffer in his hands, whether you like it or not
If you want, suffer! ”[7, 246].
  The husband was only related to the wifewith.
 There was no mental connection between him and Varvara.
 The family was formed according to:on the basis of external motives and preconditions (father's will,consideration of wealth, youthful circle of passion, etc.).
  EmotionsThe psychic world of feelings is deserted by giving in to the urges of the father:without loving or hating.
  A groom with immoral behavior is cunning,double-faced և married for the sake of profit.
 He is the only heir of his uncle ևAfter acquiring his inheritance, he is given to lewd pleasuresHe fled to Odessa with the actress, making his young wife unhappy.
  The otherBy using his daughter's feelings of self-sacrifice and respect for evil, a tyrannical father selfishly destroys his young daughterthe life.
  Modesty and beauty are handed down moderninsult.
  But what can Rostomyan do when it is clear to his ear?His father's unmistakable voice was heard as he read the Bible's inspirationexcerpts. "Do not sit with everyone, - ... or, - Arab woman
a living man is bound by his law ”[7, 282, 283].
 This is a centuries-old tradition ևthe inseparable bond of the law.
 Thus, two powerful threats hang over Varvara like a sword of Damocles: society and religion.
 And:They could not imagine the sleepless, sorrowful nightsThe hopeless situation that throws him to bed leads to his death.
 Cold,because of a heartless, superstitious societyVarvara has no right to love anymore, moreover, he is deprived of that right,պատճառով Because of the terrible strictness and arbitrariness of the societythey deprive him of individual freedom and force him to accept whatIt is disgusting և disrupting happiness.
  And is society right?has the burden of throwing a burden on the shoulders of a young, fluffy woman who is full of love,to live և to create with infinite wealth.
  "Rostomyan և Varvarafeeling famousgossip societyis owned by the daughter of a kind-hearted housewife, her husbandCato, a secret traitor, malicious, jealous and arrogant, "one for fiveadding »» [8, 355].
becomes it   Al. In Shirvanzade, Minas Kirilich realizes that he is a girl
It is beyond their power to reconcile and live again with the hated husband, in the soulBy ending the battle of inner feelings, in front of the public opinionHe demands that the girl live in a church marriagewith her husband. Here is how influential the influence of public opinion is on an individual's social psychology. "Վ Varvaren, father's feet
hugging, he was looking pleadingly at… his fierce face… his fatherhitting the girl on the chest with the tip of his slipper էր shouted… go, I am a girlI do not have… He died for me, oh, if he died at the age of others "[7, 273].
Public tyranny erases and destroys everything in an individualThe girl solves the dilemma that is raging in her soulfor the sake of his father's honor, sacrificing personal happiness.
   Al. The depiction of Shirvanzade's personal tragedy, influenced by the manners of the time, becomes a public whole
բազ has a description of the multidimensional moral-psychological domain of the class:cultural mission based on pagan philosophyon.
   It is impossible to complete the substantive examination of the worksNot to mention the linguistic peculiarities of Diana Hambardzumyan's story "Arab".
In Diana Hambardzumyan's story, the word can be a containerhas.
  We follow the development of actions with his subtle linguistic choice, sometimes also with proverbs, sayings, phrases and ambiguous words, appropriate to different linguistic layers.application.
 Individual language units become part of this storyor unique means of completing that part, bringing the announcer.
The author's goal is not just to describe and depict what happened, but ostensibly!An artist representing human drama, depicting the kinship of mental states and the accuracy of actionsLinguistic:by self-creation of means.
 Semantic reflectionsrepresentations, inherent in life and lifestyleProverbs typical of everyday psychological, colloquial stylecreate typical images of the image, environment and events:giving emotional color to the word, at the same time contributing to the thoughtconciseness and brevity.
   There are many folklore proverbs that human thoughtsand express ideas metaphorically, such as a horseI'm sitting and looking for a horse, oh, don't kill a donkey, spring will come, you will eat alfalfa, thisWhat did you lose in the dark and cold at these unknown doors, now the dog is out of the nest?He does not come, how many heads are you, that you have set off and are going where your eyes are?cut, where is modern-day Heghnar, the mission of the savior, long ago?is an exhausted option, sit on the throne so that luck will come to you soonvisitor, they are all a canvas, they decorate your life at oncemake it hell and not vote, the time to cry will come, now it will gather you, so your footShake the stones, touch them, eh, it's a lifeless life, who needs it,Charity is your main job, or you do it by handmanages.
   There is reality, human thoughts and ideasdirect և immediately, without allegorical mediationProverbs. Oh, if you are deaf and dumb, then gather your passages,
Close your beautiful dreams and do not vote, you are a boy, show your face,Tell me what you have to say, otherwise you will hit from behind, who can't?
 He is not a man(instructional saying), the slightest duty of a person is happyto be, which if not done, no punishment is prescribed, see nowWhom does he trap with his wise thoughts? Do not die, I became a beggar, a saviorThe mission is a version that has long since exhausted itself, and it is arabic (complex)is a class sentence, the first component is taken, ordinaryThe sentence creates a contrast with the proverb, has the meaning of a pronoun. The word or phrase is used for another word or
instead of a connection with which he has a logical, causal relationship), although in this world of prostitute and thief(thought, instructive).
  There are a lot of everyday, colloquial styleTypical word units - phrases that are national thinkingare linguistic units of expression through which they are expressedthe manners and customs of the given people, the way of life and the way of life, howHis typical mental, psychological temperament and bio-philosophy.
 They express the national thinking of each individual, and in this respect contribute to the popularity of the language.
  Let's bringExamples: now he has come, he offers medicine and medicine, tomorrow he will not die like thatIf you call, give it to your head, it will not take off your face, like the one who falls on his hands and feet today.he was not. They avoid charity like the bankrupt owner of a charity
accustomed to the customer (figurative image) as charityhas become paid.
  The time to cry will come, now it will gather you (figurativelyimage-based phrase).
 There is an example of an oxymoron or antidote in the text: paid charity.
 According to prof. L. According to Yezekyan, they are
Are "syntactic structures composed of logically incompatible concepts with different words and containing opposite elements" [9, 238].
   Thus, referring to the two works of Alexander Shirvanzade և Diana Hambardzumyan with the same title, we tried to present different moral and psychological terms of Arabic by two writers.to discover the peculiarities of losses through the prism of different viewscomments that are completely different worldviewswith different weights.
        However, both Al. Shirvanzade or D. They make Hambardzumyan visible the immeasurable - love and devotion, which is put on the stack of beliefs and becomes a worldview, a way of adapting or not adapting to the social and everyday circumstances of their time.
BOOK: 1. Kalantaryan J.A. References.
 Yes!
 "Zangak-97" publishing house.
 2002.
 231:page.
2. Literary newspaper.
 March 12, 2004.
 (2746) 5 pages.
3. Kalantaryan J. A. Outlines of modern Armenian literature.
  Yes!
"Zangak-97" publishing house.
  2006.
 208 pages.
5. "Bible" Book of Old and New Testaments.
Constantinople.
 A. Hagop Boyajian printing house.
 1896.
 4424 pages.
6. Shirvanzade Alexander.
 Volume two.
 Yes!
 "Soviet writer".
1986.
 309 pages.
7. History of the Armenian novel (19th century).
 Yes!
 "Science" publishing house of NAS RA.
2005.
 593 pages.
8. Yezekyan L. K. Stylistics of the Armenian language (textbook).
Yes!
 Yerjan State University Publishing House.
  2003.
  375:page.
