Modern Armenian literature is rich in biographical novels.
 The critique of time reflects them to one degree or another.
 To themselvesarticles on biographical novels, various issuesmentioned by S. Sarinyan [11, 13, 14], J. Kalantaryan [20], S. Margaryan [15], D. Gasparyan [4, 16], Z. Avetisyan [2], G. Khachikyan [7, 8], we:
The author of the article [10] և others.
 There are very few authors of biographical novelsIn some cases, they single out the nature of their novels. just note
novel.
  In this article we focus on Haykaz Habobjanyan"My life was so difficult" ությանը Literary analysis of Ashot Avetisyan's biographical novels "The Lonely Star".
Vahan Teryan opened a chapter in Armenian poetry, we can saythat none of our poets had such a large number of followers.
His works were highly appreciated by famous literary critics A. Terteryan, E. Jrbashyan, S. Sarinyan, R. Ishkhanyan, H. Tamrazyan, D. Gasparyan և others.
 Academician E. Jrbashyan has two monographs
Dedicated to Teryan's works: "Four peaks.
 Tumanyan, Usahakyan, Teryan, Charents "[18] և" Vahan Teryan's grammatical system "[19].
 The reflection of Teryan's image was also expectedin novels.
Authors of biographical novels, of course, should benefitFrom monographs, memoirs and letters written about writers.
 Sometimes the authors are literary criticsin the novels.
 The best master of biographical novel Tinyanov novels There are disagreements in literature regarding this. some:
They consider them historical novels, some biographical novels, and others philological novels. moreover, he is considered the founder of that subgenre of the novel.
  It can be noticed in Teres Hakobjanyan's novelelements of a philological novel, but in the philological novels the observations of the writer-literary critic are merged with the artistic texture of the novel.
 We consider Ashot Avetisyan's novel purely biographical, despite the literary critics' ideas about the philological novel, in our opinion.They are controversial.
Haykaz Hakobjanyan is the author of three biographical novels: "White Edelweiss. R. "Light", "Flashing lamp. D. Varuzhan "," O human!
justice. Siamanto ", the preface of which was written by academician S.
Sarinyan.
  It seemed like the writer's experience was going to be an experience, ևThe last novel would be the best.
  But a biography written about TeryanThe novel has serious shortcomings.
The novel consists of four parts.
 The first chapter of the poet's birth,childhood, student և views and as a poet's formationis about.
  "Tizivava", Lalkan Vanik becomes Vahan Teryan.
  Teryan:Hakobjanyan presents the proclamation as a poet morefrom the point of view of a literary critic rather than a writer.
"Sincere to the last border sincere" Teryan with his dreams, ideals, longings and feelings, the mystery of love opens the secondin the part.
 According to the author, his great and true love was Antaram Miskaryan,but Teryan marries Susanna, who seems inaccessibleWith Pakhalova.
  The lyrical outburst anticipating the future follows."What is Love, which is considered a mysterious gift? J. He ignored the clutches
It is a wild beast, it can sleep in your arms under caress ... ”[13, pp. 166-167].
The writer introduces Teryan as a loving, caring husband, butsuffering from love because it was not understood.
  The inner anxieties and fears of the poet are delicately drawn.
When presenting Teryan's "The Coming Day of Armenian Literature" և "Careful Armenia" reports, the critic is the primary one among the author.
 When Teryan says that one of Tumanyan's "Parvana" will not be replaced by the works of suddenly pagan Istanbul-Armenian poets, Hakobjanyanis opposed. "Unfortunately, Teryan did not understand the main essence of the" pagan literary movement "that emerged in Western Armenian culture, literature, which had created powerful literary and cultural values ​​at the beginning of the century ..." [13,
page 249].
  The "pagan" literary movement made it possible to soar above the cruel reality of the Armenian-Armenians, it was the imperative of the day:bring literature strength, courage, beauty and freedomարկել Inject them into the national consciousness.
  High-quality literary gems were created in the field of this literature, the best expression of which was D. It was Varuzhan's work.
The third chapter leaves the impression of a historical overview.
 Tells the poet about the historical events of the genocideabout the attitude, then quotes from Teryan's poems, Vache Partizuni's analysis. "In his soul" of the Nair soul
for the poet bearing "high suffering" of the "bloodthirsty people" of ArmeniaThe question of the state had become a "phantom", the question of all questions.
 It is from this "phantom"The song-poem "Yerkir Nairi" was born and nurtured, which, according to Charents, became a "treasury of Nairi words".
  It differs from a literary monograph or a critical articleIt is only because the writer brings the passage without reference to the details.
  Then he quotes from Charents' poem. "Ah, it seems
You are sitting at the door, reading Teryan with me ”[13, pp. 279-280].
  Section:In a detailed presentation, we point out that it is not herethe writer's idea.
The author hints at Teryan's patriotic activities.extensively quotes from the decree "On Turkey-Armenia". Writer:
The "historical excursion" is supplemented by the facts brought by Teryan.
  Here:The poet's naive belief that the establishment of the Soviet power will solve the centuries-old dreams of Armenians is presented.is the poet, as an advisor, a member of the delegation:To participate in the signing of the Brest-Litovsk agreement և translationabout carrying out activities.
  The poet's firstborn dies.
Susanna does not write anything. "When the mother is silent, mountains and stones must cry out in pain,
they cried out heartily, for there is no other innocent angel ”[13, p. 322].
The woman is slowly being alienated from the poet buried in state affairs. The author gently presents the longing Antaram
Towards Miskaryan. The inner voice of the author և the hero, merged and united, rebuke, urge the hero, participate
his sufferings and pains, sometimes not noticing that it is a heroIs it an internal monologue or the author's thought? "Where is Antyan… Happy?"
Is it with ովի Petrov ... I'm tired, take care of me, be tender andWicked ... Cast away the dark doubts, the gall of despair ևendure, get up and go forward ”[13, p. 341].
The expression of the ideal and the dream is Antenka. It is immature and unrequited love, mysterious and captivating, misunderstood and unappreciated.
 The real one is Susanna, whose character is mysterious, dark as night.
She is not a loving husband, she can just be the first.
 The removal of the woman had matured.
 They were far apart due to the civil war, return was impossible, յանին Teryan was left with only separationthe pain.
 The poet's granddaughter քը the wife's action does not agree with this commentconsidered escape and abandonment of Teryan's closest friend, Al. With Myasnikyan [5, pp. 35-36].
 Let us mention that Ashot Avetisyan also has this issueleft it suspended.
 Apparently, the authors could not penetrate into the dark folds of Teryan և Susanna's personal life.
  Novels from itThey would benefit more psychologically.
In the last chapter, the events develop incomparably faster. The poet is sick and alone. to his wife, Susanna
The incurable pain was transferred, which he had to ironically call "poetic"disease. "
 He does a lot of translation work and is happy with ArmeniaWith the approval of the First Republic, Bash-Aparan և SardarpatWith the heroic battles, he is alarmed that the existence of the country's independence is endangered.
  The physically exhausted and sick poet appears in a dreamcaptivating and tender like Anahit Shahijanyan, who knows her poems by heart.
 Anahit is pregnant, and she has important state assignments.
 And the end with known factual details.
Hakobjanyan generously involved letters, memoirs, testimonies, made extensive quotations.
 The main source of biographical novels is the writers' letter.
  Even a famous literary critic,Tinyanov, who played a key role in the biographical novel genre, made extensive use of the letter [23, pp. 9-17], but when using themThe creator must show delicacy, not almost the narrationFully emailed emails when availableTo the readers, և he is not the first publisher.
The writer uses Teryan's style, but sometimes in this case as wellIt is not observed when the author's story ends or what it isQuote from Teryan's letters and poems.
 Hakobjanyan saidpays great attention to Teryan's psychic world, his characterto the creation and discovery of beautiful features, which he contributed toto the letter left by the poet.
 When depicting the difficult life of the poet, he especially tries to present him as "naked in soul", and the poetHe was so sincere mainly before Antaram Miskaryan.
The novel is documentary in nature, of course, artistically certainwith elements, because the documentary novel is not devoid of fiction.
 The writer even cites the source of the fact, quotes extensively from letters with a certain date.
  For example:"1884 Aram Ter-Grigoryan writes in "Taraz" "[13, 14]," Here is a master
a fragment of memories "[13, p. 66]," writes teryanologist Sako Sukiasyan "[13, p. 387] և etc., makes extensive quotations from letters with a certain date.
 Source of factual material used by the authorThe following books are Teryan's collection of works (1-4, Yerevan,1972-1979), "Vahan Teryan in the memories of contemporaries" (Yerevan, 1964), VachePartizuni, Teryan's biography (Yerevan, 1984), Sako Sukiasyan "PagesFrom the life of Vahan Teryan "(Yerevan, 1959)," Vahan Teryan. Letters "(to Antaram Miskaryan) (Yerevan, 1972), H. Tamrazyan, "Vahan Teryan" (Yerevan, 1985).
 Academician H. The last chapter of Tamrazyan's "Vahan Teryan" monograph is called "The way of the poet's brotherhood (with Charents)".
  Tamrazyan presents Charents's attitude to Teryan and brings his poem "In memory of Vahan Teryan" [7, 219228].
 Hakobjanyan նույն ends his novel in the same way, according to Charents, with the poem "In memory of Vahan Teryan".
  However,if the writer's dependence on other literary critics is indirect, thenHakobjanyan's dependence on Vache Partizuni's books is obvious. even in the matter of title.
 Let's compare "Vache Partizuni, Teryan's biography" as the original "And my life was so difficult"The first line of the poem with the same title, Hakobjanyan's book"My life was so difficult. Vahan Teryan. in life. "
Lack of archival-factual materials used by Hakobjanyanis due to the fact that the author was far from his homeland, in Franceis located.
  That reality significantly affected the novel. it has only cognitive significance.
The lack of data leaves the novel incomplete., Hakobjanyan Teryan is a polished and polished, purely poetic character we knowhas not been commented.
 The author felt that a lot was left incompleteending "section, presenting his book, writes: "Forgive my mistakes" [13, p. 390].
Ashot Avetisyan's novel "The Lonely Star" has a different quality.
 Here:The biography of this writer is presented from childhood to death.
 TeryanThe image develops in the natural environment, and it was first of all the family.
  The poet's brothers presented the writer's life, family, and even his relatives in great detail և interesting ևtheir occupation.
 It is up to the writer to include all this in the realm of epic actions.
  But it և requires this skill և the writer is introduced to the dialogues, thoughts and authorial narration of the charactersthrough.
  The events develop in a natural way, and the artistic characters are formed in a typical environment.
 Environment:The color is convincing, because the author is Teryan's compatriot.
The novelist has done a thorough and serious work of a literary critic,to study archival, little-known factual material.
  In the novelWhen entering the fact, the author preserves the writing independenceև Nature in the epic domain.
 For example, Russian writer Leonid Bolshakov was able to find the traces of "Princess Na" mentioned by Teryan.An Armenian girl, "who, escaping from the enemy's slaughter and finding refuge in distant Buluzuk, came to look for her relatives" [3, p. 46].
 In Ashot Avetisyan's novel, Poghos Makintsyan, clarifying from Vahan Teryan about the heroine of lyric poetry, says: "I thought she was a wonderful lady like Block
You find and dedicate poems.
 _ ._No, it will not be like the Block series ”[1, p. 347].
In doing so, he points out that Teryan's mysticism is influentialIt is not a result, but an independent direction with an individual stamp.
 Literary critics confirm this.
  The writer is able to presentTeryan's neutral position, և the main character is revealed to the reader not by the obvious love and caress of the author, but by his ownas a result of cognition.
The complete image of Vahan Teryan is presented in the novelBy looking, by searching, by love, by doubt, by aspiration, by encouragement, by disappointment.
 Here are the political life of the time, the reactions of ordinary people and intellectuals to political events.
It is impossible to imagine a biographical novel without the people around the hero.
  Lightly or strongly expressed, they nevertheless complete the epic environment.
  He is a full-fledged character of TeryanTeacher Karapet Kusikyan, who played a big role in shaping his views, with whom he remained close until the end of his life.
 The Armenian-Russian intellectuals, the literary directions of the time, the political life are presented.
 Teryan's closest friend, Poghos MakintsyanContradiction of image's people ներքին Enlightenment Committee on InteriorAfter becoming, it is fully represented.
  He is in dialoguetheir alienation from each other.
  After Brusov and his wife և Teryan were invited by the Armenian Catholicos, Poghos said: "Didn't you have a nail in the pulpit too?"
chewing.
  Otherwise, you would have severely insulted our elegant and insightful Catholicos ”[1, p. 358].
 This seems suspicious to Teryan. Does he speak out of jealousy, or is he really upset about everything?
 Makintsyan is expelled from the seminaryto teachers who were not enthusiastic about the Soviet system.
  SurenKhachatryan, who with the support of Teryan is an artist at the lyceumHe opened a studio, does not include Makintsyan in the list of lecturers:saying she has nothing to do with him.
  We do not meet Hakobjanyan at the end of his life because of the coldness of their relationshipin the novel.
 This proves that Avetisyan is well aware of the material.
The presented citizen Teryan is especially interesting.
The author introduced the poet with new, modern ideas.
  With the change of the new classes, Teryan remains the same conscious patriot.
  Releases ARF doctor Zavri from the shooting, which costs him dearly, they establish tense relationsWith Avanesov.
 The poet is concerned about the state of the intelligentsia."It hurts that the intelligentsia is in a difficult situation."equally, regardless of party affiliation, positionsgives to his relatives, distributes money to migrants, visitsto the orphans.
  The author says that Teryan intended to write a poemAbout the heroic battle of Van.
  And whether he is familiar with Teryan's urgingWe are not sure about the originals of the memoirs written by the orphans.
  We are more inclined to the opinion that Avetisyan is familiar with the fact. Partizuni
from books [17, pp. 284-286].
 Grandson of the poet G. Emin-Teryan in 2016 published "Vahan Teryan's unknown initiative. Memoirs of Armenian Orphans "
The monograph, where he published the originals written by the orphans at Teryan's urging, which complement the series of documents on the Armenian Genocide, according toEmin-Teryan can only be compared to Anne Frank's diary, "but ifThe latter's manuscript is under the special control of UNESCO,then the documents of the Armenian Genocide were hitherto inaccurate, they were kept in the wrong archive, that is, the researcher couldfound only by chance ”[6, p. 5].
Former lyceum teacher Barsegh Gasparyan is also angry with the poet (he dedicated his daughter Nyura to Teryan's firstThe poems with the title "Blood" are the opposite spelling of the name Nyura (Blood> Nyura). Instead of engaging in literature, Teryan is new
distributes categories. They demolished and destroyed everything.
  And when Teryan asks Nura, he explodes that he should have asked that question.
 Relations with the Bolsheviks are gradually strained.
  Poet:The "care" shown towards the treatment leavesending him, proves that he is removed from the arena.
At first Teryan had a naive belief in the Soviet regime, in Lenin. "She is bright and amazing."
  And when Susanna?He asks if they say that dozens of people have been shot every day, he answers that they are gossip. "If they crack, then so be it
it had to be cracked ”[1, p. 405].
 Here is the infamous Brest-LitovskProsh Proshyan leaves the Bolshevik government.
Teryan was depressed. "Russia, whether tsarist or Soviet, will live again
would stay in Russia.
  And his country ... ”[1, p. 408].
  The book accurately presents the establishment of Soviet rule with its brutality, which would later lead to atrocities.
Not all facts need to be included in a biographyin novels, but the accuracy of the fact is mandatory.
  In this respect, the author of biographical novels, theorist Andre Morua is interestingmonitoring. "I do not invent situations or words ... I am based
I am on the fact that I find in documents, letters, newspapers, memoirs. I cling to the fact with such demand that
as the authors of university dissertations և professional erudites ”[22, pp. 46-47].
  Ashot Avetisyan used it correctlyfrom facts revealed by historical truth.
In 2011 the novel was awarded the WUA Derenik Demirchyan Prize.
 Literary critic Zaven Avetisyan, August 25 of "Aravot" dailyReferring to the novel in the issue, he excluded fiction (in a negative sense), which we can not say about Hakobjanyan's novel.
 Here it isHis high assessment of the novel. "As a result of the author's talent, rich knowledge, creative perseverance and suffering, a book has been created, which I am sure will be worthy of
to the attention and approval of the general public of the reading public ”[2, p. 6].
Conclusion. Two biographies have been written about Teryan
novels.
 Each of the authors has created Teryan's artistic image with his own ideas.
  Hakobjanyan is directed to the expression of Teryan's feelings in the world; he leaves out the formation and development of his literary taste, և his political views.
 AshotAvetisyan creates the full, complete image of a writer.
 Hakobjanyan presents Teryan with more ideal features, in Avetisyan's novel as a living personality.
 Avetisyan is not dependent on sources. the sky is perceived as independent
a work of art.
  Avetisyan's novel is higherclass from Hakobjanyan's novel, but as a work of art, perfectno.
 Davit Gasparyan, speaking about the demands of modern literatureեմ quoting Hemingway's "truth must be reached" when writingto reflect, not to describe "the idea, he concludes. "Here is how to describe it
There is a big difference between և reflecting։.
  And ours still!They describe it in a long and thin way ”[4, p. 97].
Both Avetisyan and Hakobjanyan are left to describein the simplest terms.
  That's why they have both novelsat least cognitive significance.
We have presented Haykaz Hakobjanyan's "My Life Was so Hard.
 Vahan Teryan ”known materials to the extent of his power.
 based on his own taste and preferences, but:BOOK: 1. Avetisyan A. Sh. The lone star.
  Yes!
    WUA Publishing House.
2010.
 481 pages.
2. Avetisyan Z. V. About Vep Teryan.
 Yes!
 "Aravot" publishing house.
 25.08.2011
3. Bolshakov L. Ն. Vahan Teryan's last business trip.
  Yes!
  "Soviet writer" publishing house.
 1985.
 79 pages.
4. Gasparyan DV Armenian literature.
  Book 6.
  Yes!
  "Tigran the Great"publishing house.
 2017.
 736 pages.
5. Emin-Teryan G. Գ. Vahan Teryan. Atypical and unknown pages.
  Yes!
"Tigran Mets" publishing house.
 2014.
 740 pages.
6. Emin-Teryan G. Գ. Vahan Teryan's unknown initiative. Armenian:
the memories of orphans.
 Yes!
 "Antares" publishing house.
 2016.
 376 pages.
7. Tamrazyan HS Vahan Teryan.
  Yes!
  "Soviet writer" publishing house.
 1985.
 232 pages.
8. Khachikyan G. V. Biographical novel by a famous American-Armenian painter
About Arshile Gorky.
 Yes!
 "Nation".
 18. 08. 2017.
9. Khachikyan G. V. Hovik (Hovhannes) Charkhchyan's biographical novels //
"Shirak".
 Number 5.
 Gyumri.
 2017.
10. Karakhanyan N. H. The life story of Nahapet Kuchak.
 "Kantegh".
 2017.
pp. 17-26.
11. Hakobjanyan H. A. Flashing lamp. Daniel Varoujan.
  Gyumri.
  "Scribe"publishing house.
 2004.
 304 pages.
12. Hakobjanyan H. A. O human justice! Siamanto.
  Yes!
WUA Publishing House.
 2005.
  313 pages.
13. Hakobjanyan H. A. My life was so difficult. Vahan Teryan.
 Yes!
Gasprint Publishing House.
 2011.
 392 pages.
14. Hakobjanyan H. A. White edelweiss. R. Սևակ.
  Yes!
  "Nairi"publishing house.
 1997.
 414 pages.
15. Margaryan S. A. The border of a biographical novel (Al. Topchyan: "And
even after death ") // Literary parallels.
  2009.
 pp. 218-236.
16. Charkhchyan H. A. Sulamita. The great love of Paruyr S.
  Yes!
  "VanBlood "publishing house.
 2004.
 174 pages.
17. Partizuni V. F.
 Teryan's biography.
 Yes!
  "Soviet writer"publishing house.
 1884.
 354 pages.
18. Jrbashyan EM Four peaks. Tumanyan, Isahakyan, Teryan, Charents.
Yes!
 "Soviet writer" publishing house.
 1982.
 468 pages.
19. Jrbashyan E. Մ. Vahan Teryan's grammatical system.
    Yes!
"Periodical" publishing house.
 1995.
 224 pages.
20. Kalantaryan Ts. A. Outlines of modern Armenian literature.
  Yes!
"Zangak-97" publishing house.
  2006.
 208 pages.
литературной жизни.
