The 20th century is considered by ecologists to be a period of "3 E's"energy, economics ոլոգ ecology [12], and already in the 21st century, with themdue to the immediate solution of many environmental problemsis the period [11].
Growing interest in nature-society relations related to environmental protection ևSolving the complex problem of rational use of natural resourceswith necessity, it posed a number of challenges.
  Science has an urgent task to find out from ecological tensionsways out. [13]
 "Geology" is a cross-border geography-ecology course that studiesThe environment as a system interconnected with the earth in the processes of social interaction.
 Man in geologyis observed in the social, cultural, economic and man-made environment, due to which the geo-ecosystem is more applicable.the term.
  They need the results of research on this systemfirst of all, the management bodies of nature use [15].
Mankind has become such a powerful, natural, global force that constantly transforms the planet Earth through its activities:leading to the destruction of its individual components.
  The anthropogenic impact is largely irreversible, often catastrophic.
Modern society is characterized as a consumer society (consumerism).
  Guided by economic growthin terms of indicators, it reproduces a generation with growing needs,which needs more resources every year to meet its needsare necessary [18].
Using the non-renewable resources of the environment, man returns to nature increasing volumes of waste.
  Let's not forget that the "presumption of guilt" in the organization of sustainable development of ecologically clean, low-waste economyAny technology is a disruptive factor for all living organisms.
 Man always strives to develop և use suchtechnologies and materials that will do the least harm to the environment.
Solve the above-mentioned problems and challenges, like him!In order to develop new, more optimal strategies, from the theoretical material of the training process of the Geology courseIn addition, the corresponding practical significance has become more importantwork aimed at developing solutions for the economics-energy-ecology triangle for different cases, understanding the nature-society connection, as well as assessing the importance of rational nature use and nature management management [19].
When selecting practical work for individual sectionsThe possibility of their implementation was taken into account, starting from didacticfrom materials, methods to scientific materialAvailability of a reliable database և their statistical analysis.
Below are practical assignments for individual topics.
Geo-environmental concepts, laws, provisions,principles:Terms used in geology course and:The concepts are diverse, as they include the basic concepts and laws used in և´ geography, ոլոգ ecologyև principles.
• Create a glossary.
 Give basic terms
explanation [17],
• Localization of the 4 laws of the Commons.
 In order to get an idea of ​​the environment, it is necessary to understand the separate laws, from which the many laws applied in ecology, in particular in geology, derive.provisions և principles [20].
 Needed to understand these lawsto give practical examples of them, to localize [Agh. 1], [6].
Table 1. Analysis of Common Laws և LocalizationLaw:practicalexamplesLaw:Description:Everythingis interconnected.
Everything is somethingHe has to "go" somewhere.
The components of nature are complexin the interaction, և there is no concept of "standard".
 Its stability is dynamic.
  The connection of the components of the system is sometimes direct և obvious, and sometimes complex and indirect.
Nothing is lost in nature just like that,disappears, but everything is stablein a cycle, constantly recovering.
Nothing just like thatis not given.
Which is needed to achieve the result?to change something - ecological boomerang.
Nature is morehe knows well.
If nothing exists in nature,so its absence is necessaryfor the survival of life!
 New material or:The introduction of the process is harmful to naturebrings it to life.
When completing the table, you should be guided by the NDPfrom the material.
  It is also necessary to localize the RA իր Shirak regionfor.
• In order to be informed about the modern challenges, it is necessary to select the 10 most urgent issues, to give the goal, to compile a questionnaire և to conduct social surveys [Salt. 2].
Table 2. Sample of the questionnaire [1]Question №:Question:Yes NoI do not knowNot alwaysWe evaluate the "yes" answer to each question with 2 points, the "no" answer:0 points, "I do not know" և "not always" - 1 point.
The question can be in the form of a test, question and answer4version [Salt. 3].
For the implementation of this type of work you need:a) compiling a questionnaire;b) results of the survey;c) interpretation of the survey results.
Amount of points:Comment:Table 3. Evaluation scaleObserve the points in detail when making the commentpossible monetary options անել analyze them accordingly.
  As a result of analysis of survey dataIt is necessary to provide solutions ել to evaluate the effectiveness of their implementation.
1. Evaluate the human-nature relationship by measuring the "Ecological footprint".
 Each student calculates their share of impact through a detailed questionnaire developed by professionalsEarth on the planet.
 The questionnaire covers human activitiesin all areas [16].
2. Landscape differentiation and classifications are necessary for accurate analysis.
 Different systems are distinguished in the environment, which are interconnected and interactive.
They are open systems with the exchange of matter և energy with the environment [1].
• As a first step it is necessary to create a terminological dictionary.
• As a practical task should be given in a separate environment
Schematic diagrams of the rotation of elements: water, carbon dioxide,
cycles of oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur և other elements and components [1, 2].
• Give schemes of anthropogenic systems of ecosystems by schematic mapping.
 Anthropogenic systems are man-made and created, which, unlike natural, are not self-regulating, self-renewing, or both are environmental
They exist through the exchange of material, energy and information.
3 ․ Population from a geological point of view
Is humanity threatening the biosphere, the planet Earth?in number, with increasing growth of nature use, shortage of fresh water.
• Creation of a terminological dictionary [3].
• Calculate the share of energy in food by the next 10% law
in the 3rd level of the chain, if in the first level it is 1000
conditional unit [4].
• Using the TSC tables և Armecommonitoring Center
From the results of the observations, evaluate և analyze the surface of the RA
Ecological condition of water և basin of separate objects
for example (one student for each river և city).
• Compile the map of the ecological situation of the Republic of Armenia [4].
To make these works more complete
The group method is applicable.
  Each on the outline map of RAa group places what is needed in the city or river allotted to itindicators by performing background coloring using a singlefrom conventional signs.
• The real feature of the modern demographic situation
Clearly cover the latest statistics, according to which the population of the Earth in 2011. exceeded 7 billion, birth rate - about 25 ‰, mortality - 10 ‰, natural increase - 15 ‰.
 Every minute
270 children were born, 110 people died.
 The population of the Earth in one day
increases by 230,000.
 55% of the population lives at 200 m altitude, 24% at 200-500 m, 12% at 500-1000 m, 8% at 1000-2000 m, from 2000 m
high - 1%.
  75% of the population lives on 8% of the country.
 It:
causes "population pressure" on the environment, regardless of economic development or technical armament [1, 5].
• There are many models of civilization development,
in which an attempt is made to determine the optimal number of the given population
for the area, that is, “the capacity of the environment.
As in all the above cases, the initial step should be the terminological dictionary of the topic.
Table 4. Implementation of demographic policyin different countries [5, 7].
I. Countries to implementpopulation reduction strategy.
II. Countries that must be preserved
population indicators.
 The list of countries can be left to the students' choice or givenseparate series.
Explain why the demographic revolution did not stabilize the population (demographic explosion, average population)environment:biologicalresistance,annual growthpotential) [4, 5].
• Using population change data in different years, make a graph և perform analysis using the comparative statistical method.
For the other topics of the course, these are practicaltasks that are not included in the article only technicalfor reasons.
  Mathematical, statistical, analytical, comparative and other methods were used for their implementation.
Practical work ությունը analysis of the resulting data will allow a clearer պարզ visual understanding of the processes և contribute to professional knowledge and skillsgrowth.
every theme, diverse methods for creation of respective practical work were applied.
BOOK:
Harutyunyan L. V. General ecology (university textbook).
 I issue.
Yes!
 Haybusak University Publishing House.
 1997.
 80 pages.
Harutyunyan L. V. General ecology (university textbook).
 II issue.
Yes!
 Haybusak University Publishing House.
 1997.
 86 pages.
3. Muradyan A. H. Ecological explanatory dictionary.
  Yes!
"Science" publishing house.
 2001.
 210 pages.
Егоренков И. Л, Кечуров И. B. Geology. М օ сква. Published in "Finance and:
8. Turner B. The Earth as Transformed by Human Action.
  Global and Regional:
9. Mücher C. et al. A new European Landscape Classification.
 A transparent, flexible:
10. Hertwich E. Consumption and the Rebound Effect.
  An Industrial Ecology:
11. Martine G.et al. Economy, society and environment in the 21st century.
  three:
16. JM van den Bergh et al. Spatial sustainability, trade and indicators.
 an evaluation:17. Ellabban O. et al. Renewable energy resources.
 Current status, future prospects and:18. Jackson T. et al. Prosperity without Growth.
  Economics for a Finite Planet.http:
//scienceblogs.com/ethicsandscience/2007/03/28/how-important-are-labs20. http:
