Exupery's "The Little Prince" is a world-renowned multidisciplinary and multi-layered work.
There are various assessments that value the work in many ways in the well-known professional world.
 We will try to come up with a new approach to the analysis of the work.
 Presenting episodes from the "Little Prince" fairy tale, we will point out the natural and ecological knowledge hidden in them.
  We offer this methodical trick of integrating humanities and natural sciences as a means of supporting the teaching of natural sciences [1].
1) On the planet of the little prince, as on all other planets, there are both useful herbs and weeds.
 And this means that there are not only useful seeds of useful herbs, but also useless seeds of weeds.
 But those seeds are invisible.
They sleep deep in the ground until one of them suddenly decides to wake up, releasing a harmless sprout to the blood.
 If it is a radish or a rose, then let it grow as much as it wants.
 But if we are talking about weeds, that sprout should be immediately uprooted and discarded.
 And so, on the planet of the Little Prince, there were also "harmful seeds".
 They were baobab seeds.
 The whole crust of the planet was infected with those seeds.
 And if you do not find the baobab in time, you will not get rid of it!
 … If we are talking about baobabs, then delay is equal to disaster.
 I know a planet where a lazy man lived.
 He had neglected only three sprouts of baobar [2, p. 26].
The whole episode testifies to the fact that in all environments of the biosphere there are different organisms in structure, function and significance, useful and "harmful", visible and invisible, the species features of which are manifested by reproduction.
 Particular care must be taken to prevent the rapid multiplication of pathogenic, harmful organisms. It can cause an epidemic that will be difficult to get rid of.
The second part reveals the essence of the artificial choice that those chosen in that way correspond to the human interests.
 But the advice behind the lines is that when choosing species to grow plants in a given environment, one should be guided not by individual interests and tastes, but, as the essence of natural selection teaches, by the principle of being useful to society.
The last line can be used to show the power of multiplication.
 As Vernadsky said: "There is no more powerful and powerful force on earth than the multiplication of living organisms."
 It means that in the absence of factors regulating the reproduction of the organism, each, especially wild, "weed" organisms, multiplying in a short time, will occupy all areas of life, pushing out the rest.
 For example, one cell of a bacterium will be able to cover the earth with its offspring in just three days, the years of unpredictable reproduction of locusts are threatening to destroy all the vegetation in the region, and so on.
And the philosophy of the episode is that a person is given the right to make a choice in diversity, which he can do either for personal taste or consciously for public interest.
(2) The sheep eats what it sees.
 "Even thorny flowers?"
 "Yes, even thorny flowers."
 "What are thorns for?"
 - Thorns are of no use, with the help of thorns the flowers only express their wickedness.
 … - I do not believe.
 The flowers are weak.
 And they are very naive.
They try their best to be brave.
 It seems to them that they can scare everyone with thorns….
 … And isn't it a serious matter when you try to understand why they put so much effort into releasing thorns that they don't need?
 Isn't the fight between sheep and flowers also possible?
Is it not a more serious and powerful work than the summoning of a fat and red-faced man [2, pp. 32-34].
In the episode, the phrase "serious business" can be understood as a symbol of cognition, education, raising the level of knowledge, which is a symbol of great value, and the addition of a fat and red-faced gentleman is a symbol of serving what one knows for one's own benefit, not of value.
 Understanding the meaning of the fight between the thorns, the sheep and the flowers released by the flowers can be perceived as the supreme goal of a person. understanding, recognizing divine laws and perfection.
What the sheep sees, eats, the mind teaches that the connection of the organisms in nature with each other is mainly expressed through food chains.
  And in order for a species not to be completely destroyed by becoming another food, it must have various means of protection.
Natural science knowledge is that plants are immobile (flowers are weak).
 And they are very naive.
 They try in every way to be brave, to not be destroyed by the grass, to survive in the struggle for survival, they necessarily have some protective device, for example, thorns, poison, etc.
 Devices are acquired over a long period of evolution by transforming natural organs or some of them into eggs, so they can no longer be useless (... to release thorns that are not needed).
3) I know a flower, a unique flower that grows only on my planet, և if it suddenly blows in the mind of a sheep to eat that only flower in the universe without accounting for what it does, isn't it possible, huh? .
 ... But if a sheep eats that flower, it will seem to him that all the stars of the Universe died at once.
 And in your opinion it is not possible, right? [2, pp. 34-35].
According to the fairy tale, the sheep accidentally appeared on a planet where this unique flower was growing.
 Having no other food source can lead to the extinction of a unique species of plant.
 The natural science of the episode is that accidental changes (such as mutations) can be dangerous to coexistence or to any of its members if they do not correspond to the inter-species relationships that have evolved over a long period of time.
 And the educative potential of the episode is the emergence of the environmental awareness that the existence of the biodiversity of any historical area can be endangered by the unconscious activity of man.
  The information "A unique flower that grows only on my planet" teaches about the irreplaceability of every living organism for the integrity of the universe և endemic plants, which are limited in distribution in the world, therefore, need more attention from humans.
 At the same time, the council of the whole episode, guided by personal interests, calls on the fat red-faced gentlemen not to harm the planet.
4) On the planet of the little prince have always grown simple flowers with only a few petals.
 But this one, that unique flower, one day sprouted from a seed that you do not know where it came from.
 ... Appeared in the form of a seed չգ knew nothing about the other planets.
 ... The little prince never left that sprout, which was not like all the other sprouts.
 It could also be an unknown type of baobab.
 But one day the growth of the bush stopped immediately and he started to prepare to become a flower.
 The little prince felt that now, somewhere, a miracle would happen.
 But the flower was in no hurry to get out of there.
 He carefully chose his colors.
 He slowly put on his clothes, adding his petals one by one.
 His mysterious attire was formed during the long days.
 And so, one morning, at the right dawn, he showed himself.
 ... - How beautiful you are!
... Once, speaking of his four thorns, he said to the little prince: "Let those tigers come to Dehima with their claws."
 I am not afraid of tigers, but, alas, I am afraid of the wind [2, pp. 37-38].
The episode speaks of several biological patterns.
a) The seed from an unknown place can be mentioned as an example in favor of the "theory of panspermia" of the origin of life, according to which life appeared on planet Earth from other planets and space in the form of seeds, spores.
b) The information that a flower is not similar to those around it, such as the fact that it takes a very long time to prepare for its final appearance, can be used to study the process of ecological species to show that a new mutation may be preceded by an unexpected mutation. , but the formation and formation of the species in all cases require a long evolutionary path.
c) Flower thorns are an evolutionary device acquired not to become food.
 And the fact that the device that can not protect the device against one factor (biotic) from another factor (non-biogenic - corridor), testifies to the relativity of devices.
5) You should never listen to flowers.
 You have to look at the flowers and smell them.
 ... I should have formed an opinion about him, looking not at his words, but at his deeds.
 He spread fragrance around me, he illuminated my life [2, p. 42].
a) In the episode one can find knowledge about the limitation of the morphological criterion of the species, that only by that criterion (words) one can not accurately describe the species (or any phenomenon).
 It is always necessary to understand the comprehensive criteria, the essence (cases).
b) From another point of view, the episode indicates each kind of uniqueness, the uniqueness, which can be taught that each one should be required to define his ability, to evaluate each feature as only a device of certain conditions.
6) ... but since he was very tired, he yawned a little.
 "Yawning in the presence of the king is a violation of the rules of conduct," said the monarch.
 "I forbid you to yawn."
 "I'm sorry I didn't do it on purpose," said the little prince.
 - I have come a long way and I have not slept at all ...
"If so," said the king, "I command you to yawn."
 I have not seen anyone yawning for a long time, I enjoy yawning at others.
 So yawn again.
 This is an order.
 "I'm ashamed, ... I can't either ..." the little prince muttered and blushed with shame.
 "Hmm, huh," murmured the king, "that's right, I order you to yawn from time to time."
 He was an absolute monarch.
 But since he was a very kind king, he only issued reasonable orders.
 "If I order a general to become a seagull, if the general obeys me, the general will not be to blame.
 I will be the culprit. "
 ... You have to demand from the person what he can do.
 If your people are ordered to go and the sea is flooded, they will make a revolution.
 I have the right to demand obedience because I give wise commands.
  ... It is more difficult to judge yourself than others.
 If you manage to judge yourself, then you are truly wise [2, pp. 48-51].
The episode is very symbolic to show the ability to regulate all processes at any stage of life formation, to learn from mistakes, to study the causal connections of phenomena, to cultivate an ecological attitude.
  Studying a single-celled living organism as a complex system consisting of different structures designed to perform different functions, organoids, inevitably develops the notion that relatively independent structures in the system are simultaneously connected to each other by the most complex chains.
And in order for their mutually agreed activities to act as a unified whole, the system needs to be regulated.
 In the cell it is carried out by the nucleus, in the living organism by the nervous and humoral systems, in the family by the experienced bearer of the legacy of the past, in the state by the government, in the Universe by the divine laws.
  And if the nucleus, the nervous system or the leader make wrong orders that are not in the interests of the structure, the cell dies, the organism gets sick, the family and the state decay, the life of the planet goes out of balance.
7) Getting acquainted with the constellations and planets of numbers 325-330
to the inhabitants: the monarch-king [2, p. 47], the greedy [2, p. 55], the drunkard [2, p. 58], the businessman [2, p. 60], the flashlight [2, p. 66], the research geographer [2, p. 77 ]: The little prince understood the correspondence between the peculiarities of different occupations, their significance ակի the planet (that is, any environment) and the occupation (devices) of its inhabitant (the organism living in that environment).
 All these chapters reveal the interconnectedness and interdependence of organisms' devices and environments, which is one of the basic ideas of the theory of evolution հիմնական the basic trace of evolution.
  We can use the fact that life with only one inhabitant on each planet is uninteresting as a means of facilitating the perception of evolutionary ideas that uniform conditions do not provide development, and the species does not change.
 This idea is equivalent to the essence of a stabilizing choice, according to which the species remains the same under constant conditions, without changing the level of formation.
 And the general conclusion to be drawn from all this is that the most important meaning of human life is the perception of the perfection of creation, which is not typical of any alien inhabitant, as such consciousness can be reached only due to biodiversity in relation to the diversity of devices.
  This is the educational potential of the students of the episode.
8) Provide environmental education
he և The thoughts of the geographer.
  The values ​​(or abiotic factors) belonging to the physical world he points out, such as rock, mountain, and ocean, are eternal;
 It rarely happens that the mountain changes its place.
 It is rare for the ocean to dry up.
And can the flower disappear in the near future ... because it is transient [2, p. 75].
9) The seventh planet was Earth.
 There are 111 kings (of course, we count the slaughter kings), 7,000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7.5 million drunkards, 311 million greedy people, that is, about two billion adults.
 ... On all six continents they were forced to maintain a huge army of flashlights consisting of 462,511 people.
 Flashlights can be compared to the ones in the ecosystem of producers (phototrophs or plants) that provide octogenic food as the primary food for life in other parts of the system under light conditions.
 By the same logic, they can be compared to the intellectuals, teachers and philosophers who organized education before the birth of science.
 With this point we can emphasize the role of knowledge and education for the development of the individual and humanity.
 Until they discovered electricity on Earth, there, on all six continents, they were forced to maintain a huge army of flashlights consisting of 462,511 people [2, p. 76].
 And directly, this idea points out that before the discovery of artificial light on the planet Earth, the only source of natural light was the celestial illuminators.
10) The continuation of the episode summarizes a lot of geography
Interesting information about the six continents of the planet Earth, their different time zones and their correct sequence.
 First the lights of New Zealand and Australia, then China and Siberia, then Russia and India, then Africa and Europe, then South America, and finally North America.
 And they never broke the order of appearing on stage.
 Only the lanterns of the only lanterns of the North and South Poles lived a quiet life. they were employed twice a year [2, pp. 76-77].
 The last thought teaches the important knowledge about periodicals, that in the loads half of the year is day and the other half is night.
  The order of the countries listed coincides with the natural knowledge that the dawn is first met in Australia, New Zealand, then in the order listed in the episode, and finally in the state of Alaska in North America.
11) The little prince looked at the roses, all the roses were like his flower.
 ... His flower said that there is no flower like him in the whole universe.
 Here, in one garden only, there were 5,000 flowers like it ... [2, p. 87].
This episode (as in point 4) can be used to explain the essence of the theory of the origin of life sperm, according to which the seeds of life fell to Earth from outer space (here, only in a garden ...).
12) You are just a little boy to me, you are no different from the other 100,000 little boys.
 I do not need you.
 You do not need me either.
 ... But if you get used to me, we will need each other.
 For me, you will be the only one in the whole world.
 I will be the only one for you in the whole world ...
 ... You are forever responsible for all those whom you have trained [2, p. 91; 97].
  To interpret the meaning of the episode, it can be compared with natural and artificial selection, emphasizing the dependence of cultivated plant varieties and pet breeds on human care compared to wild species in nature.
 This combination of art and knowledge has a powerful potential for upbringing in order to develop a sense of responsibility in each of them according to what they have done.
"Please train me," said the fox.
 "I would gladly get used to it," said the little prince, "but I have very little time now."
 And in order to get used to it, you have to be very patient [2, page 93].
 This episode also shows that the emergence of cultivated plants and pets is the result of a long-term evolutionary process.
This is where, in our opinion, one of the main mysteries of the fairy tale is summarized. To love your neighbor, to endure various trials, to keep your close ones, or, in the same way, to take responsibility for all those whom you have trained.
 This makes it very emotional to understand the important point of environmental thinking that the preservation of biodiversity is a condition for the stability of life.
BOOK 1. Adamyan NV Fairy tales as a means of teaching natural science knowledge "// Scientific Bulletin of the University of Yerevan.
 2016.
 N1.
 Prak B.
  pp. 198-209.
2. Exupery A. de S. "The little Prince".
  Yes!
 Areg Publishing House.
 2010.
 125 pages.
