Well-known Spanish journalist Jose Antonio Guriaran is the authorsix books, two of which are dedicated to Armenians.
  By the way, to the Armenians andIn particular, Guriaran referred to the Armenian Genocide1982 In the novel "The Bomb" published in 1959, presenting the topic of the Armenian Genocide for the first time in Spanish literature.
  Note that:This novel by Spanish writers dedicated to the Armenian Genocide, including Guriaran, has not undergone a literary analysis.by Spanish literary critics.
 The article examines the novel "The Bomb"genre և typological features, philosophicalthe problem, moreover, the material is provided for a specific analysis of the originalBased on the writer's ideas and positionWe have made a number of original quotations for that.
  Moreover,The translations quoted from the original are ours.
The reality is that the so-called "Armenian terrorism"is one of the remarkable and at the same time dramatic pages of Armenian history, which got its characterization in Armenian fiction.Spanish writer Ruben Perperyan, 1981 published "Anger
The Messenger ”in the novel.
 This little-studied topic is also presented. "In Guriaran's novel "The Bomb", in which the genocide is depicted through Armenian terrorism.
  Real, authentic characters in the novelare members of ASALA who tried to commit terrorism in the 80sto remind the world about the Armenian Genocide.
 It's worth rememberingthat terrorist acts in Spain are primarily linked to the Basque Countrywith terrorist groups.
  In Spain in the 60s. start:
They carried out terrorist acts and found their reflection in Spanish literature.
 The first works on this subject were Roberto Velasquez Rera's Seven Days to Die (1963) and Ra Ռl Gera Garrido's The Unusual Reading of Capital (1977).
In fact, an interesting pattern can be seen in raising the Armenian Genocide, asking questions and giving the countryliterature և.
 In our opinion, the territorial factor is essential in this issue իղ directly to the sub-theme of comparative genocide.
 Thus, the literary hero in Turkish-Arabic literature is mainly a Muslimized Armenian woman, who at the end of her life (typical of Turkish literature) discovers her roots, speaks through her grandchildren.The reader is witnessing the inner psychological turbulence of the hero (in this case, the characters of Muslimized Armenian women are the majority) [2, 118121].
  This must be explained by the fact that during the genocide aboveIn these countries, there was one of the consequences of the genocide - "stolen lives" [11] and the rediscovery of identityThe process of reconciling with memories.
 And to the survivors, who?They have mainly settled or formed the Armenian Diaspora, they are typicalThe topics of longing and longing.
 The novel is based on an autobiographyis a diary in which the writer tells the story of 1980. was born on December 29 in Madrid
A bomb exploded by ASALA in a square called "Gran Via"His story of being seriously wounded by two bombs.
  The two novels written by Guriaran on the Armenian theme can be analyzed by a biographical method, that is, by the writer in the creation of a literary work.The role and significance of life experience, personal knowledge.
 Guriaran constructs the novel with "self-reflection" (absolute identity of the artistic image և the real story) as a confession.where the story of one's own life becomes more than just genocideThe opportunity to depict the consequences and their tragic impact in general, but also to address the painful issues of violence, terrorism and hatred.
  At the same time, let us emphasize that the novel does notonly tells the story of 1980. The story of the bomb planted by ASALA in Madrid, but through the fate of an individual, opens the way to a wide range of universal questions.
 The author uses the novelThe trick to making the blog more compelling and excitingrevealing not only the chain of events, but also the inner world of the heroes.
  It is not only the author's purpose that dictatesthe diary of the structure of the novel, but he "the first person evokes immediacy, captures the reader's sympathy by directing him"The emotional life of the character.
  The first person intensifies the tension of the story և the emotional impact ”[4, 94].
 Provides a blog!the sound side of the story, and in terms of content it is an autobiography, the author of which acquires an image in a fictional story.qualities.
  Or the main character in the story is completely identicalto the author, but it does not dissolve in the work.
 Noticeable:Guriaran has been building the novel in Spanish since the middle of the last centuryAccording to the principles of "objective novel" used in prose, which means that:"Literature has restored the value of the subject և started speciallyto pay attention to the inner process of man "[7, 310], and the latter is technically used for" flow of consciousness "or" inner monologue "through [5, 333].
 The plot of the novel is intertwined with the hero's inner monologue and his thoughts about himself, due to which the monologue and the inner structure of the novel are not limited to the diary.with genre and psychological possibilities.
 Note the residenceKnowledge is the starting point and essence of human self-knowledge, and the artistic texture, with a minimal plot and psychological deepening (introspection), aims to reveal the hero's self-search, during which the author's identification with the diary is observed.the image, moreover, the erasure of the boundaries of reality and fictionbetween the author and the character.
  Guriaran uses consciousnessthe trick of flow as a powerful means of expression, especially within itcomponent of analysis, which helps to analyze the image of the image, which:As a result, the novel is perceived as a diary or autobiography:full of inner monologue and meditation.
The novel first of all presents the life story of the writer, an absolutely true and touching story, which always fascinates the reader.for we must agree that "successful narrative prose is sincere prose" [4, 318].
 The "bomb" tries to show the way to forgiveness, revenge and hatred accumulated inside, it is done Guriaraby the example of a human-literary hero.
 "The concept of a person, a person, to be transferredis the point of view of literature and literary image, of looking at its world, of being oriented by that world ”[1,79], and in the novel ության of reality ևthe boundaries of imagination coincide in the case of author and image,which brings to the forefront the writer Guriaran. here is the gasket thought
It can be understood in the literal sense: "Man is nothing but drama.his life is a pure and absolute event that takes placewith each of us, and within which each of us has hisin turn, it is just an event ”[10, 32].
 The writer from the position of a victim of terrorism(personal suffering) presents and generalizesthe condition of the victims of the genocide, each for his own victimsIt shows the way to forgive through experience.
"Why a bomb?"
  This is a means of explanation, another in the marginsto oppose a self-isolated group from societyYou are looking for your own claim in the square.
  The bombIt is a page of a magazine, a program on radio and television, because"What did we know before?" [9, 137], ”Guriaran asks.
  On the other hand,It can be assumed that the bomb exploded inside a personIt is a symbol when a person suddenly notices or simply discovers the inside of another person standing next to him.
  The bomb was calledto blow up human indifference to the Armenian pain, to achieverecognizing it and realizing the pain of others as one's own.
 Writer:tells about the psychological feelings of an individual and the painful and left behind themabout the ill effects, considering it all in ASALAby the example of terrorists.
 Guriaran represents one of those terroriststhe feelings and psychological traumas of each of them, the tragedy of their fate.
In addition to the main topic of the victim-executioner relationship, the writer delves into new themes and secondary motives: the discovery of the psychological depth and soul wounds of the descendants of genocide survivors, the depiction of a person's personal drama, in the context of whichInflammation of human psychological feelings and emotionsThey deepen the possible text-reader connection of receptive aesthetics.
The journalist in bed in the hospital room is trying to copeat the same time outlines the theme of human loneliness and alienation, the destruction of values, the lack of justice, which leads to the desperation to restore justice through terrorism.experiments.
 Guriaran also depicts the crisis of values ​​and points out the way to overcome it: humanity and kindness, Christian self-purification.
  At the heart of the semantic structure of the novel is:From the beginning the problem of man is set.
 The problem with the "bomb" is the man and himthe problem when it is exacerbated by the moral orientations of lifein conditions of weakening (often absence).
In the novel, the heroes themselves expose the injustice, the cruel indifference of the society, which makes them react with the same cruel response.
 Speaking about his hero Pascual Duarte,Writer Jose Sella expressed such an idea. "Isn't he the one who usually?
They call it a criminal, it is just a tool. The real criminal is the society that produces the tool or allows them to be produced ”[8, 528].
 The protagonists of the novel portrayed a generation that had not lived through the genocide but had heard it from their parents or grandmothers, whose suffering had caused them psychological trauma.
 The idea that "the survivors of the genocide, however, were once alive, innocentsubject to the persistent demands of the vengeful ghosts of the victims ”[3, 189], and in general, the ghosts of the current creeping past were to force newto break down the wall of silence and indifference of the young generation.
 Except:that, "the ghost of revenge, as a justification for the murder of children, drivesIt is the duty of a relative to avenge the blood of a relative, a fact that has been transferred from the family level to a new symbolic level of nationalism, "said Joan Frijole.Referring to the Armenian Genocide in the article "Genocide-Reproduction".
In Spanish literature in the thirties of the 20th centuryThe trendist novel (in Spanish tremendo means horrible, terrifying, hence the name "cruel realism" of the literary current) was spread, in which the hero was fighting against the environment and against himself, and his ownCreating justice with the hands of a heroIt became a way of working.
 By the way, this was due to crueltyand the misery of the human spirit, against which the characters of trendy prose came out.
  "There is always a lonely person in the center of trend-setting work.
 The world is shown not through the interweaving of social relations, not through the context of society and history, but through the destiny of that person ”[6, 43].
 From this perspectiveThere is an interesting similarity between what the Armenian terrorists did and what the Spanish didbetween the actions of the characters depicted in the literature.
 The thing:is that for the Spaniard the sense of justice (fairness) is a national line when the individual himself tries to be a judge to achievefor justice, which received its artistic expression in 1898.in the works of a generation of Spanish writers.
  This is what he found in the novel "The Bomb". heroism and self-sacrifice
They become the choice of heroes, which starts from human indifference or is the denial of it.
Thus, the above study shows that Guriaran's novel is characterized by the expression of elements of autobiographical prose.The discovery of the psychological complexes of the descendants of the genocide survivors, the depiction of a person's personal drama.
 Guriaran,By depicting the aftermath of the genocide, he refers neither directly nor through a primary prism to the Armenian Genocide.
 The author, the narrator, becomes an artistic character, whose speech features express the essence of his thinking and character.the lines.
  Thus, the writer deductively examines the genocide:reaching the value of human destiny and drama in general.
BOOK: 1. Avetisyan ZV Psychology of literary work.
  Yes!
YSU Publishing House.
 2011.
 240 pages.
Giragosian SG The Great Genocide in Arabic prose // Literary Journal.
 B (D).
 Yes!
 2005.
 Pages 118-121.
3. Muradyan SP Literary destinations.
  Book B.
  Yes!
  Happy!University հրատ.:
 2007.
 335 pages.
4. Surmelyan L. F. Prose technique. size և madness.
 Yes!
 NAS RA"Science" publishing house.
 2008.
 333 pages.
5. Wellek R. A., Warren O.E. Theory of literature.
 Yes!
 SargisKhachents. "Pritinfo" publishing house.
 2008.
 513 pages.
 Ortega and Gasset J. Complete works. Vol. 6. Madrid. Editorial.
  Magazine de:11. Reixach FJ Genocide and procreation. http:
