Preface. The collapse of the socialist system and the formation of new states made the adoption of constitutions in those countries an issue on the agenda.
  In this respect, the newly independent countries could not ignore the world experience, but at the same time, the fixing of national-historical, legal-political peculiarities in the constitutions became noticeable.
 The ideological and political preconditions for the adoption of constitutions are especially important in terms of the frequency with which the constitutions of those countries are amended in the future.
  Only in 2015-2016. Constitutional changes were made in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan.
  In this regard, we consider the aim of the article to present the resolutions and differences of the constitutions of several countries, especially in the post-Soviet space, within the framework of the article, to group them according to the adopted constitutional models.
In the modern world, the issue of assessing constitutionality is very important, as sustainable and mobile development is based on the supremacy of the constitution or the guarantee of constitutionality.
Armenian researchers addressed the issue to V. Baghdasaryan, G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, N. Ayvazyan, and from foreign researchers, F. Giniatov, V. Blishenko, M. Solnts! Ք others.
The constitutions of the countries of the former socialist system, including Armenia, were adopted during almost the same historical period, 1992-1997, in similar political situations.
 In this respect, the initial starting point for the adoption of constitutions was the ideological and political significance of almost the same in these countries.
First of all, there was a transition from state law to constitutional law, which first of all presupposed the exclusion of state or party ideology for the sake of universal values.
 If in the Eastern European countries the liberal-statist constitutional model was immediately applied [1], in the post-Soviet countries there were tendencies to establish two types of constitutionality [3].
 Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, one of the countries pursuing the prospect of joining the European Union in the future, created their own constitutions, showing tendencies of transition of Russian influence to the European zone.
 The three state-building figures included in the preamble to the Estonian Constitution, 1918, 1938, and 1992, are directly related to the loss of Jedra's sovereignty.
  The Constitution of Latvia, which was adopted in 1922. It is the restored version, it already shows the obvious circumstance of the loss of statehood and the accusation against Russia, even in the case when some of its provisions are simply outdated.
 Let us mention as a fact the fact that in 2014 The preamble of the Latvian Constitution stipulates the provision that: "The identity of Latvia is a European cultural area, and the creation of Latvia is a guarantee of the existence of the Latvian nation."
  Georgia has taken a similar approach by restoring the old constitution.
 The Latvian constitution is also ethnocratic, as it refers not to Latvians but only to the Latvian nation, [7] as in Article 66 of the former Turkish Constitution, which considers all Turkish citizens to be Turks.
  A similar approach is found in the preamble to the Lithuanian Constitution.
 In the constitutions of these countries, non-citizens have too many privileges, because "everyone has property / Lat. border h.105 /, freedom of information / religious / Lit. border հհ. 7, 25, 26 /, to hold positions in state-local self-government bodies / Est.sahm., H. 11 / right ».
Article 122 of the Estonian Constitution states: “The land border of Estonia was established in 1920. The Tartu Peace Treaty and other international agreements on borders "are definitely not perceived by neighboring countries, particularly Russia, because" by entering Estonia into the USSR, the Tartu Agreement lost its legal force, and in 1991. Estonia's withdrawal from the USSR does not mean the restoration of the Tartu Agreement.
 Recognition of Estonian independence in 1991 "September 6 is simply based on the fact that Soviet Estonia was part of the USSR."
 {16} This provision also raises border disputes; On July 12, 1994, the presidency of the Supreme Council of the Russian Federation proposed the annulment of the Tartu Agreement, on the basis of which on June 21, 1994, Russia unilaterally delimited the Russian-Estonian border {17}.
The second group of countries is those countries that are in closer military-economic-political cooperation with Russia [4].
 They are also the thinkers of the Eurasian Economic Union.
 In the case of these countries, problems of restoration of historical justice are immediately noticeable, tendencies of hidden territorial claims of legal formulations.
 In particular, the preamble to the Constitution of Kazakhstan states that the Kazakh nation established its statehood on the original or indigenous Kazakh lands.
 The issues of belonging to Zelinograd or Astana, Pavlodar, Semipalatinsk, Yaik or Gur are historically disputed.
  In addition to the inclusion of universal values ​​- freedom, equality, brotherhood - there is an element of national ideology in the Constitution of Kazakhstan.
 In particular, Article 2 mentions "Kazakh patriotism" as one of the foundations of the state's activities.
 In contrast to Russia, Article 13 of the Constitution prohibits the creation of a state ideology, Article 5 of the Constitution of Kazakhstan provides an opportunity for the formation of such an ideology, if necessary.
  In contrast to the Baltic states, the Constitution of Kazakhstan prohibits parties and trade unions from being funded from foreign sources, and the appointment of heads of foreign religious organizations is agreed with state bodies (Articles 5, 9).
The Constitution of Belarus also has controversial historical issues.
  In particular, the preamble states that the basis for the self-determination of universal values ​​is the centuries-old Belarusian statehood.
  The history of this provision is zero, as the territory of Belarus was part of Russia, Poland or Lithuania.
 There is a similar wording in the preamble to the Constitution of Ukraine, which is somewhat understandable, but the phrase "Ukrainian land" is used here.
 This constitutional provision is more political, which justifies having a state independent of Russia on the one hand (this is evidenced by Article 18 of the Constitution, which stipulates the military neutrality of Belarus), on the other hand, the prevention of Polish-Lithuanian claims.
  The main constitutional goal of this idea is to ensure the rights and freedoms of every citizen of Belarus.
 It is forbidden to have a mandatory state ideology here, but there are no legal grounds for having it.
  Following the example of Kazakhstan, Belarus "distinguishes between religious organizations" by separating them from its own "foreign". Article 16
The provision in the preamble of the Constitution of Azerbaijan is more than political and extreme, according to which, in line with the unsubstantiated thesis of the centuries-old statehood of Azerbaijan, the Azerbaijani nation includes those citizens living outside the territory of Azerbaijan, territories that can be considered Azerbaijani territories.
  It is noteworthy that no Central Asian state refers to its centuries-old statehood in its constitution.
  In this respect, the Moldovan constitution is unique, which indirectly enshrines the idea of ​​having the same statehood with the Romanians.
  The preamble to the Constitution takes into account the fact that the Moldovan nation has an uninterrupted statehood in historical-ethnic territories.
Conclusion. Thus, we can prove that the constitutions of a number of post-Soviet countries at the time of their adoption had the following commonalities.1. In the preamble of the constitutions, the fact of "having a centuries-old statehood" is fixed by the countries that have the establishment of sovereignty, territorial issues or conflicts, in particular Belarus, Kazakhstan, Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan.
2. There are two groups of countries whose constitutions are indicative of their geopolitical orientation.
3. The constitutions of the above-mentioned post-Soviet countries should be adopted on the basis of the rejection of the communist ideology.
4. The Liberal-Statistical basis is present in all constitutions.
5. The frequency of constitutional amendments is evidenced by the monitoring of constitutionality and the management of existing issues.
BOOK 1. Kocharyan H. Issues of constitutional law.
  Yes!
Yerevan State University Press.
 1997.
 80 pages.
2. Harutyunyan G., Sargsyan H., Gorgyan R. Constitutionality. Diagnosis, monitoring and management issues.
Yes!
 "Zangak" publishing house.
 2017.
 140 pages.
gosudarnstvoгоno district ogiversite. Series.
 Руриспруденция. 2015.5. http:
//www.comcourt.am/ armenian / / legal_ resources / world _constitutions6. http:
//rus.lsm.lv/statja/politika/novosti/preambula-k-satversme-napravlena7. Constitution of the Republic of Latvia [сулектронный ресурс]. URL.
 http:
//www.satv.tiesa.gov.lv/?lang=3&mid=8 (date of publication).
 24.06.2015) .8. http:
//www.krugosvet.ru/node/42730?page=0,5http.
//www3.lrs.lt/home/Konstitucija/Konstitucija_RU.htm (date of publication).
10. http:
//www.akorda.kz/ru/official_documents/constitution11. http:
//pravo.by/pravovaya-informatsiya/normativnye12. http:
//meget.kiev.ua/zakon/konstitutsia-ukraini/razdel-1/13. http:
//www.azerbaijan.az/portal/General/Constitution/doc/constitution_r.pdf14. http:
//lex.justice.md/viewdoc.php?id=311496&lang=215. http:
//lex.justice.md/viewdoc.php?id=311496&lang=216. http:
//www.rg.ru/oficial/from_min/mid/87.htm17. Мялксоо Л. Soviet annexation and state continuity.
and after 1991 Tartu.
