 Many who study the concept of "politeness"Researchers clearly distinguish between polite and impoliteto the peoples.
 In our opinion, in reality there are not more or lesspolite peoples.
  Every nation is polite in its own way.
 For example, the Russian people, like the German people, are no less polite than the British or the Koreans, if we take into accounttheir national thinking, behavior or culturevalues.
As for the French, their image is characterizedhappy, cheerful, at the same time polite, brave and luxuriouswith adjectives.
 Politeness is inseparable from the daily life of the Frenchis part of.
 From a very early age, the French taught childrenThe basic rules of etiquette are linguistic / verbalnon-verbal / non-verbal / non verbal /.
  The French are allAt times they tried to maintain their politenessreputation using different communication strategies ություն appropriateness regardless of their position and publicfrom the field of activity.
  Aware of all the norms of politenessBeing already meansto be polite and polite.
The French attach great importance to good manners և politebehavior.
Nowadays, the norms of politeness are higher in French culturesimplified, though, about the norms of politeness of the FrenchThe attitude remains unchanged.
 It was եղել remains to the environmentThe kind attitude, which is vividly proved by the following proverbs. To this day, it is acceptable for the French to say helloThe use of the words au revoir for bonjour or farewell Madame ևAccompanied by the words Monsieur.
 It is considered rude if they do notThose words are used with the words "Mrs." or "Mr."
 When communicating with neighbors or strangers, the FrenchThey keep their distance.
 The French strictly observerequire chacun chez soi և work with each otherDo not overload yourself with personal problems.
One of the peculiarities of the French is the order of inviting them to dinner, they do it a week or even a month in advance.
As it is commonly said among the French, “Avant l'heure, c'est pasthe hour, after the hour, is more than the hour ”. It should be added that the French
They never go to dinner without an invitation.
The French are very punctual.
 That's about itTestimony of Louis XIII: “L'exactitude est la politesse des rois”idea.
 Punctuality is one of the most important imperatives in life sciences.
 As for business meetings, it is advisableis allowed to attend the meeting five or ten minutes early because:Punctuality is considered a sign of politeness and trustinspiration.
  However, the law "le quart d'heure de tolérance" also applies, which:Sometimes it helps to avoid a failed meeting.
  But amenIn this case, the delay in such meetings is considered rude and irresponsible.
The approach to informal meetings is different.
  Today:The French are quite tolerant of delays, even a delay of twenty minutes is not considered.
  According to the French, that orderDelays allow the host party to swimto prepare properly for the meeting.
 It also works!Another rule is that the higher the guest status, the morethe possibility of being late.
  Referring to the business worldIn the protocol of the meetings, it should be noted that it is acceptedInterrupt the interlocutor to make a critical comment.
  In this case, it is customary to apply to femalesMadame politely, regardless of their marital status.
 A handshake is generally accepted.
Referring to another verbal situation, that is, the telephone conversation, it should be noted that it is a very important place for the French.occupies.
  This horse of communication also has its own courtesyrules that are completely in line with the principles of negative etiquette that the French follow, because evenFriendly and civilized communication depends on the tone of voice.
The other most important feature of French etiquette is that very early in the morning and after 9 pmThey do not call to report any news.
 Telephone conversation:First, the French introduce themselves, then they say to whomwould like to talk to, for example, Allô, ici Robert H., pourrais-je parler àMonsieur X.? If the person is out of place, the following is preferable
پاسخը: Monsieur X. is sorted, you want me to vote for yourappelle? It should be noted that during the telephone communication, the French are very friendly, they behave more than civilized.
Politeness is a flexible system of different verbal acts.
A strategy of positive etiquette presupposes intimacyReducing the distance with the interlocutor and showing mutual respect, regardless of the close relationship with the interlocutor, is a strategy of negative politeness.
 Positive expressions of politeness are aimed at bringing the interlocutors closer by showing togetherand mutual sympathy և are more related to the interlocutor with whomThe main function is to express the feelings of the speaker (for example:greeting, appreciation, compliment, etc.).
 Negative courtesy methods, the main purpose of which is the addresseeshowing respect for the individual, are primarily relatedwith a compulsory verbal act.
  It is possible for this jobThe study of verbal acts, as in Armenian ու Frenchappear when studying the verbal acts of the communicatorsdifferences in the behavior of different cultures.
  Let us examine the verbal act expressing a request.
A request is a compulsory verbal act, the supposed actions of which are related to the actions carried out within the interests of the communicators.
  Moreover,The person making the request has a clear freedom that allows itto perform or not to perform the given action.
Ask the verb in Armenian / please - be kind to the expression /has a pronounced functional value և application.
  It is not accidental thatThey call it the word "magic".
  When using that command with the commandchanges the request, making the imperative request a form of polite expression.
 It can change the toneto obey.
 French s'il te / vous plaît egg in its full functional valueis equivalent to the above-mentioned Armenian expression.
  At the same time!The use of the s'il te / vous plaît template in French is desirable, evennecessary even if it is used in parallel with the prier verb.
/ Please pass it on.
The purpose of the change is not to mitigaterequest, but to make it more emphatic.
Ayez l'amabilité de / Բար՛ եղեք - Avoir l'amabilité de: Ayez la bonté de / Bari՛ / Սիրալի՛ր եղեք - Avoir la bonté de: Ayez is sometimes used in conjunction with the above expressionsl'obligeance de structure, but the frequency of application of this template in modern French is decreasing.
Phrases like Aidez - moi, s'il vous plaît.Ne fumez pas, s'il vous plaît are described as low-level politeness or courtesy.
  Preference more oftenis given to more extended expressions: / Ne / Pourriez-vous / pas /But phrases like, for example, Entrez!can be expressed more politely և polite by adding s`ilgiving the word vous plaît or Je vous en prie a polite shade.
In Armenian համար To perform operations in FrenchOrientations are often used in the expressions usedquestions.
  These can be questions that guide the interlocutor:to perform the given action.
 For example, would you not say what time it is?
 Weren't you?may come tomorrow.
    Pourriez vous me dire l`heure, Ne pourriez - vous pas venir:demain ?:
 In French, the conditional tense is used not only to express possible or possible actions, but also as a complete structure in expressions of politeness.
  Denial:particles are mainly used to the degree of politenessto show, as it implies a dual answer և allows the interlocutor to choose the answerpossibility.
From the analysis made it becomes clear that in order to make the word polite more meaningful, in both Armenian and French cultures the verb to ask is more often used.
 In the studied languages, the use of that verb և the templates created by it is carried out equally.
 In both languages ​​it has the value of a magic word.
The request is most often formulated using the imperative mood of the verb և "please" և accompanied by expressions such as: Sois aimable, s`il te plaît, si tu veux que je te parle seriusement! Be restrained,
s`il te plaît! Please be kind.
Please, if you want, I can talk to you kindly.
The request can also be expressed conditionally or"To be able" with the help of a verb.
Est ce que je peux vous demander / Can I ask you?
Pourriez-vous transmittedtre / Can you transfer?
Puis-je vous demander de / Can I ask you?
The Puis-je structure used in the last template is usedto soften the request.
       Thus, the study of the concept of "politeness"The problem is urgent, as it is fundamental without politenessIt is impossible to imagine the effective communication of peoples belonging to different cultures and civilizations.
  In terms of intercultural communication, "politeness"The concept is a typical national communication category, of which:The main and characteristic part of the content is linguistic andnon-linguistic communication systems.
BOOK: 1. Aharonyan AS Behavior culture.
 Yes!
 Luys Publishing House.
 1981
 175 pages.
2. Lepeshinskaya OV, Ordanskaya LR, Zhukova RM և others
Aesthetics of behavior.
 Yes!
 "Hayastan" publishing house.
 1966
 307 pages.
4. Kerbrat-Orecchioni C. The construction of the interpersonal relationship.
  quelques:6. Citation and proverb on politics // http:
