Modern Armenian presents two literatures to the world todayin versions: Eastern Armenian և Western Armenian.
 Eastern Armenian is the state language of the Republic of Armenia, the language of universal communication, press, radio, television, theater, cinema, elementary and high schools.
 It is a subject of state careև has been thoroughly studied by linguists.
ArmArmenian is the language of the majority of the Diaspora community.
 They are with himArmenians living in four corners of the world communicate in this languageMany periodicals are published and givenradio and television programs are createdfiles.
After gaining independence հետո After further strengthening of Homeland-Diaspora ties, the Armenian-Armenian language became more urgent in Armeniateaching և examining it on a scientific basis.
  Strict todayThe problem of closer rapprochement and mutual enrichment of the two versions of our language sounds urgent, the implementation of which should start from schools and relevant departments of universities.
The issue of teaching Armenian-Armenian became more urgentAfter the famous UNESCO publication, according to which the Armenian-Armenian languageIt has been included in the list of endangered and endangered languages ​​since 20101¹.
In this case, the rapprochement of the two literary versions of the mother tongue andComplementary education is perceived as a patriotic step outside the civic duty.
A brief study of the Armenian-Armenian literary language is includedis only available in the high school humanities program, while teaching Armenian-Armenian originals begins in the 8th grade of high school.continues in all grades of high school.
 In this case, the study of Armenian-Armenian originals can simultaneously become a process of studying the Armenian-Armenian literary language.
Teaching the Armenian language in high school should be done in a practical way, based on the work done on the originalwithin.
Using the matching method, they become apparent in the native languagethe similarities and differences between the two versions, the perception of the linguistic peculiarities of Western Armenian becomeseasy and affordable.
The training can be carried out both 'inductive' and 'by extrajudicial (deductive) methods.
In the first case, the learner, getting acquainted with the linguistic reality, itsfinds the expression in the context of the original.
  In the second caseThe learner from the interpretation of the Armenian-Armenian words և in the originalleads to the discovery of linguistic realities.
As it is known, Eastern Armenian-Western Armenian literary languages ​​were formed on different dialectal bases.
  If for Eastern ArmenianThe Ararat dialect, then the Armenian-Armenian literary language, served as a basisfor the dialect of Constantinople.
1 Shahinyan D., ArmArmenian on the verge of loss, "Asbarez" periodical, Istanbul,2010 (Internet).
This is the main reason for the phonetic, orthographic and grammatical differences between the two literary languages.
The main phonological differences between the two literary languages ​​are the movements of the consonants.
 In Armenian Armenian b,The sounds c, d, d, j are pronounced as breathing deaf: p, q, t, ts, ch, andSimple deaf people, p, k, t, ts, j, become vocal: b, c, d, dz, j (with some exceptions), as beautiful - keghetsig, Petros - Bedros և etc.
 In the pronunciation of ArmArmenian, the sound r and the contrast և r are eliminatedIt is pronounced uniformly (aru-aru, aru-aru).
The pronunciation features of ArmArmenian morewill be available a pronunciation image of the studied originalson display.
 It is advisable to combine the original versions of Eastern Armenian and Western Armenian, especially if the teaching is combined with listening to recordings of works (Hrachya Nersisyan,Read by Vahram Papazyan և other masters).
The night is sweet, the night is easy!With hashish perfume and balm.I cross the light road with wine:The night is sweet, the night is easy!          M. Metsarents, "Love Song" The clichés are sweet, the clichés are easy!Hashish with snake and palasan.         I'm going to sleep on the light path:The cliché is sweet, the cliché is easy ... Then, practical exercises will be performed according to the original topics, such as:  - Read the given words in Armenian-Armenian pronunciation1. flower (dzaghig), spring (karun), artu (ardu), atuk, (untouched), door(sword), window (baduhan), bari (dance), Hovik (Hovig), dzon (tson), float(փոց), փառք (փարք), ջոջ (չոչ).
1 The samples included in the assignments were selected by Armenian-Armenian authorsFrom the works included in the textbooks of the secondary school (GasparyanD., Literature, 8th grade, E., "Tigran Mets" publishing house, 2017, pp. 187-223.
 Kirakosyan V.,Avetisyan Z., Literature, 11th grade, E., "Manmar" publishing house, 2010, pp. 15-109).
-Continue the series of pronouns, explaining the pronunciationthe event.person - after, person - passed, front - bear, stream - male, rivet - squeeze,silent - news, forward - groaning.
- To express the following special names typical of Eastern Armenianwith horses.Zohrab (Zohrab), Baghdasar (Baghdasar), Bol (Paul), Switzerland(Switzerland), Baris (Paris), Pera (Bera), Berjuhi (Perchuhi), Setrag(Sedrak), Hagopos (Hakobos), Dikranuhi (Tigranuhi).
The next step in the linguistic work on the Armenian-Armenian originals is the verbal work.
The main vocabulary of Eastern Armenian և Armenian-Armenian literary languagesIt is the same, but there are words that are used only in Western Armenian.
Separating such words and explaining them in Eastern Armenian versions will support not only the content of the literary work և the ideadiscovery, but will contribute to the enrichment of the student's vocabulary.
Verbal work on the originals is recommendedto perform the following tasks.
-Using R. From Sakapetoyan's dictionary, mention the Armenian-Armenian equivalents1.
alutsq (deep), akaghdzun (full), morning (morning), zakatel (longing),kalyak (drop), hambun (hamak), dumb (slow), easy (pleasant), memik(quiet), patarun(false),indebted (tired).
(feed), wall(zehun), jambel-Write out the words that have different meanings in Eastern Armenian and Western Armenian.zyrakht, wardrobe, musician, dictionary, employer, gots, antenna, gesh, nickname, literate, rag, envelope, egg, aliak, akhoyan, oral.
- Write the Armenian-Armenian versions of the given words.brandy (bitter), bad (ugly), tears (artosr), end (lmnnal),to fall (fall), central (central), doll (puppet), envelope (cupboard), surname (nickname), humble (obligatory), wind (wind).
1 Sakapetoyan R., Textbook of Armenian-Armenian, E., Yerevan University Press, 2006, p.317 - 490.
Familiarity with the grammatical realities of Armenian-ArmenianIt is carried out through practical training.
 Applying trainingThe deductive method is that students are first given an ideaon the grammatical peculiarities of the Armenian language, thenOriginal works are used.
It is known that Eastern Armenian և Western Armenian literary languages ​​(like:The first feature of differentiating dialects) is the border of the verbis the composition of the present tense of the weather (flows - flows, passes -I pass).
  The student will know this linguistic reality by observingin the originals studied, such as:Դ Trembling flows deep within them անս
   D. Varuzhan, "Ghoryan Seas"
… And I pass through the sand trembling on the sandy shore ...
  Մ. Metsarents, "Boats"
In Eastern Armenian it exceeds the pronunciation of the noun, and in Armenian-Armenian it also exceeds the pronunciation.
  Plural form of -er, -s from suffixesThen the trailer generally increases.
 On a field road, Or the foot of the mountain…  Մ. Metsarents, "The House"
 My art is gold!  Similar flames…  D. Varuzhan, "Mature Art"
The main ending of the exceptional in Eastern Armenian is from,and in Western Armenian, they are.
     Road, river, and field դաշտGive me, Lord, joy impersonal.
  Մ. Metsarents, "Give me, Lord!"
There is no ending in the Armenian consonant in the Armenian consonant. The meaning of the noun is expressed in connection.
My heart disappears in the twilight…  Մ. Metsarents, "Second"
The sexual syllable never gets a decisive article in Eastern Armenian, andcan be received in Western Armenian.
… In the valley of the valley of Aleta
Seas cross.
  D. Varuzhan, "Ghoryan Seas"
One that's based on the plural's and's soundsA number of words, in contrast to Eastern Armenian, appearon an unchanging basis.
… All fruits in autumn,
And honey, and milk, and wine.
  Մ. Metsarents, "The House"
In Eastern Armenian, a pronoun is used instead of an indefinite article.
In ArmArmenian there is an indefinite article, a postposition (with the vowel, m ', mn).
  A word of magic enchanted my heart….  P. Duryan, "To Love"
    A little more, Ah, shine, shine, good! I'm sick.
  Մ. Metsarents, "Ar!"
Double denial is typical of Eastern Armenian, which is never expressed in Armenian.
 Nobody said. - Huck boy,
Why does խ mix?  P. Duryan, "Pond"
In ArmArmenian the direct problem has only one form - straight.
 I hate the lush women in the halls… D. Varuzhan, "Oh, Talita"
They are following the introduction to the brief theory of grammarpractical work on the originals.
- Write out the grammatical forms typical of Armenian-Armenian from the original,to interpret the linguistic reality.If the angel of deathCome down to me with a deep smile,My pain and my soul are burning, Know that I am still alive.
- To write Eastern Armenian versions in front of Armenian-Armenian grammatical letters.  P. Duryan, "My Death"
my soul, they say, in the fields, you feel me, her, a flower, women,My mancher, he came, showed it to him, he said, to me, to everyone.
- To turn Eastern Armenian grammatical forms into Western Armenian.to the souls, a dream, pass, through the goggles, I sing, under the springs, the stars, from him, he said, after this, my hands, my wife, my husband.
- Compare the Armenian-Armenian-Armenian originals, noting the grammatical differences. He sheds leaflets of flowersThe fragrant breeze in the evening,A dream comes down to the souls,How easy is the twilight of this satap!
            Մ. Metsarents, "Under the light of acacias"
It sheds quiet leaves from the flowersThe fragrant breeze in the evening,A dream comes down to the souls,How pleasant is the twilight of this pearl!
Thus, the patterns of the Armenian-Armenian language can be learnedduring the hours of Armenian literature, within the framework of the work done on the original.
 Students learn Western Armenian by combining Eastern Armenian and Western Armenian linguistic realities.
It is obvious with the combination of Eastern Armenian and Western Armenian originalsThe similarities and differences between the two literary languages ​​become.
Knowledge of the Armenian-Armenian literary language contributes to the comprehension of the content of the literary work and the discovery of artistic merits.
Studying the Armenian language is a patriotic step in the realization of the civic duty.
BOOK:   1. Shahinyan D. ArmArmenian on the verge of extinction.
 "Asbarez" periodical.
 Istanbul.
 2010 (Internet).
2. Gasparyan D. Literature.
  8th grade.
  Yes!
  "Tigran the Great" publishing house.
2017.
 pp. 187-223.
 Kirakosyan V., Avetisyan Z. Literature.
 11th grade.
Yes!
 "Manmar" publishing house.
 2010.
 pp. 15-109).
3. Sakapetoyan R., Armenian-Armenian textbook.
 Yes!
 Yerevan State University Press.
 2006.
 pp. 317 - 490.
