The high scientific rating of the theories of the geography of civilizations and their spatial-temporal motion is based on the objective requirement of discovering, perceiving and predicting modern realities.
  In the depths of the latter we must see the current crisis stage of the development of the world society, which in its turn completes the content of the corresponding social order presented to science.
  The latter comes to the following in general terms. To understand the "past", "present" and "future" of human development through a new scientific interpretation through the study of civilizations.
The requirement to prove the purpose of this article and to separate research problems is dictated by this very logic, when there is a need to understand, evaluate and evaluate not only the process and stage of human development, but also the logic of one's own coexistence (people, nation, state).
 It is imperative of the time to discover how one's own kind is identified with the coexistence called civilization, what is one's own plane of creation and realization of civilized values.
  Is it identified with other coexistences, or is there its own, original, in which case it is necessary to clarify the content boundaries?
Comparing the results of the successful experiments in this field in the article, we have received our own point of view for the interpretation of the mentioned problems, complete with new theories and scientific hypotheses.
 At the same time, we are convinced that the proposed innovations and methodological solutions will be the basis for discovering new aspects of world cognition in this field and launching a scientific discourse.
In terms of methodology, the methodological point of view of social geography has been chosen for the solution of research problems.
 However, due to the multi-layered nature of the object of research, the "civilization" social system, at the same time tried to introduce the knowledge, methods and tools of other social sciences.
In addition, "civilization" is an open system for the study of which the former mechanistic model can be applied.
 Note that this model is based on the fundamentalist proposition that all phenomena of reality are the result of causal relationships.
 Therefore, the deterministic explanation of reality is true if it refers to a closed system, the condition of whose development (self-development) matures as a result of the interaction and integration of smaller components of its subsystems.
  Their regular course, which is almost devoid of chance, is therefore fully calculable and evaluable.
The situation is completely different in the case of open systems, such as civilization.
  In this case, the nature and process of the system's self-development already changes qualitatively, the system follows the environment, exchanges energy, material and information.
  The number of preconditions and factors determining its development is growing rapidly, which cannot be calculated with absolute accuracy in practice.
Thus, we can reasonably claim that this article presents a rather complex research task, which is expressed not only by the complexity of methodological approaches և theoretical generalizations, but also by the difficulty of exchanging results.
 In particular, social systems և their identification1 is considered to be a rather complex research task, as it often takes a long time for their essence to be revealed as a result of scientific cognition վի to clarify its place in the accumulated system of scientific knowledge.
  All this is especially complicated when the process of scientific cognition is not complete, the same term or concept is circulating in different meanings.
The modern process of scientific recognition of civilizations should be considered by this logic.
 As a social system, it has existed for millennia, but the very concept of the term։ came into scientific circulation several hundred years ago.
 And the scientific debates about its content do not stop to this day.
1 The term "identification" is the Armenian version of the Latin "identificāre", which means the psychological process of identifying oneself with another person or group of people.
It is one of the psychological defense mechanisms.
 One of the first researchers in this field is the younger daughter of Sigmund Freud.
 The term "identification" is often used as a synonym in Armenian, which, however, is the literal translation of "identification" in Russian.
Thus, the attempts to interpret the concept of "civilization" are many and multi-layered.
 We consider their detailed discussion outside the scope of our research, especially since there are quite successful attempts at their in-depth analysis in the professional literature [2], [3].
Based on the evolution of the scientific thought on the theory of civilizations, we can state that the key issue, both in the past and now, concerns the definition of the scientific content of the concept of "civilization".
Civilization is a social system existing in the objective reality, which is characterized by multi-level (multidimensional) manifestations of both structural and spatial existence.
Therefore, in order to fully discover the content of this scientific category, it is necessary to answer the following three questions: What is the system, what is its structure, what is its progress?
  In this article, our research task involves looking for the first answer.
As a system, civilization is a certain form of social coexistence.
 That is, the term "civilization" describes a certain socio-cultural commonality of human beings.
  The main scientific debate of experts is whether all the people living on the planet (past, present and future) form a united coexistence, which is a universal civilization, or civilization refers only to a certain stage of the historical development of the world society (after the atrocity of the world). and it represents the highest type of evolution of human coexistence, forming local civilizations.
As we have already mentioned above, we consider civilization as a social system, which is an objective reality operating in space and time; it provides systemic fixation with human coexistence.
 That is, the formation of this system is conditioned by the process of identification of different groups of coexistence by the individual.
 It consists of various system-building components, subsystems and many elements, which at the same time is a subsystem component.
As a system, it has the following definition. a unity consisting of parts, by the interaction of the elements of which a unique whole was formed.
  In the case of the social system, it is considered as a set of social (social, political, theoretical, spiritual-cultural) phenomena and processes, which are in close interaction with the environment, thus fixing space and time, ensuring its objective existence and functions. և development as a whole.
Thus, by the notion of "civilization" we define the whole system operating in the objective reality of the human species, its coexistence և biological activity (past, present և future), which is expressed in "structural" and "spatio-temporal" multidimensional (multidimensional) manifestations.
As for the different aspects of the scientific interpretation of civilization, our ideas coincide with those of Russian academics BN Kuzik և Yu. V. The approach proposed by Yakovets.
  They singled out three functional levels for the common concept [4, pp. 29-30].
  Accordingly, for the complete understanding of "civilization" we propose a three-dimensional definition: a) Universal civilization, b) World civilization, c) Local civilizations.
Human civilization, as the highest type of social system, is characterized by both internal coordination and the existence of external borders.
  In the case of the latter, the natural component of the geographical layer appears, which is also characterized by the internal subordination of system-creating elements.
 But the two together are at the same time subsystems of the geographical layer, system-building components.
 And so the Earth, Solar and Space systems continue to form.
As for the internal subordination of human civilization, as the highest system of the human species, it integrates all types of social systems.
 Moreover, including the sectoral systems of human life - political, economic, social, spiritual-cultural systems, as well as the systems expressing the different forms of human coexistence - their spatial-temporal course.
  Despite the strong internal multiplicity as a system, it is characterized by structural systematization.
 Accordingly, universal civilization is considered a multilevel system, where the subordination of structural components is specific.
 The main component is the rational person with his connections, relationships and interactions.
 The latter are of a sustainable nature, based on human life, reproduced as a result of a historical process, ensuring both the types of world civilization operating in time and the generational transformation of local civilizations.
Thus, the universal civilization is the whole humanity, with the "content" and the spatial-temporal whole of its activity.
As the highest type of social system, in addition to the structural multilayer, it is also characterized by the development ownership cycle.
Specialists try to reinterpret the course of world history with the chronological component of the theory of civilizations.
  In other words, instead of the current class approach in scientific circles (still proposed by K. Marx), the whole world history is presented in the order of the world civilizational types that prevail in a specific time.
 The latter, in turn, expresses the spatial-temporal course of the "World Civilization" social system, the life cycle.
Thus, the "world civilization" social system expresses the nature of all the elements within it in the pyramid, their connections and interactions in a specific time and space.
That is, the geopolitical, geoeconomic, geocultural and geo-ecological structure of the planet is revealed by the world civilization type in a specific historical period.
The highest type of evolution of human coexistence is the local civilization.
  Together with the corresponding degrees of the other system-building components, they form the lower floor of the top of the "Civilization Pyramid", on which the "world civilization type" and the whole human civilization is built.
 Accordingly, local civilizations reflect the whole diversity and variability of universal world civilizations.
Local civilizations express all the richness and multiplicity of humanity as a unified system, ensure its stability, the continuity of the transmission of human cultural heritage and the enrichment of the social genotype.
In other words, in the case of local civilizations, human coexistence is able to realize its full potential, already creating civilized (universal) values.
Note that even today there are no common criteria for the separation of local civilizations.
 This is the main target of critics of the theory of civilizations.
  According to them, the lack of common criteria for the delimitation of local civilizations increases subjectivism, և researchers get the opportunity to arbitrarily grant or deprive this or that coexistence of the status of civilization.
Acknowledging the objective existence of the above-mentioned problem, we see the solution in the context of revealing the structure of the "civilization" pyramid.
 Here we accept the vertical and horizontal connections of the system-building elements as a real reality, as a result of which the evolutionary subordination of the types of coexistence becomes obvious, accordingly, the objective basis for the separation of local civilizations.
  Following the logic, we can prove the factors of separating independent civilizations.
 They are built on the basis of value identification of communities, the original realization of those values.
 Thus, the originality of local civilizations is expressed by the following factors: թն unique ethno-geographical area,  genetic originality,  unique linguistic thinking,  unique religious values,  unique cultural values, ինքն original institution of values,'s unique institution.
Thus, for the separation of local civilizations, we get the following logic. Local civilizations are the highest type of human coexistence, which create and realize unique universal values, thus conditioning the whole diversity of human life.
 The originality of the created values ​​is conditioned by the uniqueness of the ethno-geographical area, genealogy, linguistic thinking, faith and culture, their institutionalization and realization.
 These are separate necessary but insufficient conditions.
 Therefore, the simultaneous harmonization of these unique elements makes it possible to create universal civilizational values, which are carried and realized by local civilizations.
Local civilizations, as a social system, are characterized by two important features: the variable course of space and time ոչ the non-homogeneity of the components.
To sum up, let us note that throughout the history of mankind we have singled out shifts of seven generations of local civilizations.
  Discussing the cyclical course of their lives is another research issue.
BOOK 1. Valesyan L. H. Methodological Basics of Geographical Sciences.
 Yes!
 YSU Publishing House.
 2004.
 264 pages.
2. Muradyan Yu. Geography of civilizations.
  Yes!
"Tigran Mets" publishing house.
 2011.
 476 pages.
3. Erasov B. С. Comparative study of civilization-Chrestomathy.
  Учеб.пособие для студентов вузов. M.
 Published in "Aspect Press". 1998. 556 p.4. Кузык Б. Н. Яковец Ю. В. Civilization.
