Immediately after the conquest of Alexandropol, the Turks created a new city autonomy.
 On May 17, by order of the Ottoman military command, the General Assembly of Citizens, chaired by the manager of the Trade Gymnasium, Leon Sargsyan, formed a city council, and the next day, a city administration.
 Alexandropol city autonomy, national parties and stateIn the absence of other institutions, it became the only body that centralized all public and state institutions in the city and provincecases.
The Turkish authorities avoided restoring the judicial system in the province of Alexandropol.
  Instead of capturing the cityOn the fifth day, they set up a police force for six monthswas engaged in looting the occupied region, Turkish atrocitieshiding the traces and "revealing the atrocities of the Armenians against the Muslims."
Preface.
 1918 The history of the May heroic battles is one of the least studied issues in Armenian historiography.
 Dozens of memoirs and scientific monographs have been published in the homeland and the Diaspora during the past century.
  Available on the squareA huge amount of documentary material.
  despitesome issues, such as the occupied province of AlexandropolA new administrative-political system by the Ottoman authoritiescontribution, genocide against the local populationpolitics, the current population of Shirak and Lori regionsethnic disfigurement, the province, why not, the enormous damage done to the economy of the newly independent Republic of Armenia, etc., have not been seriously studied so far1.
Combining newly discovered archival documents, scientific literature, and press releases of the time, we have dealt with a separate study of the administrative policy adopted by the Ottoman authorities during the six-month war in the province of Alexandropol.politics.
  We hope this way public propertyto turn this page into a criminal history of our neighboring state.
1918 In the spring of 1945, the military-political situation on the Caucasian front of World War II changed dramatically to the detriment of the Armenian people.
  Under the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk outside of Soviet RussiaAfter his arrival, the Transcaucasian Seym tried with the Ottoman Empireto find the edges of mutual agreement, but did not succeed.
 The Turkish-Transcaucasian war, which resumed on April 1, is a Georgian issueAs a result of the anti-Armenian position of Tatar figures, it turned into a sword in 2018, due to the 100th anniversary of the proclamation of the first Republic of ArmeniaThe demographic policy pursued by the Ottoman authorities in the province of Alexandropol during the same period will be the subject of a separate study.
Victory march of the Kaka troops.
 The Turkish command, which became insatiable after the fall of Kars, demanded an ultimatum on the night of May 14to hand him over to Alexandropol.
After Kars, Alexandropol is Turkish for the Armenian sideIt was the last stronghold to stop the triumph.
 Leave the city means:had handed over not only the Alexandropol-Julfa railway to the enemy, but the wholeEastern Armenia.
Without waiting for the answer to the ultimatum, on the morning of May 15, the Turks attacked the city for a short time after the bombing, and thenmost of the province of the same name [22, p. 171].
Future Prime Minister of the First Republic of Armenia, not soonIn the past, the mayor of Alexandropol Al. Khatisyan years later
He presented what happened in the work entitled "The Origin and Development of the Republic of Armenia" as follows: "It simply came to our notice then
We negotiated with the Turks in Patum on the terms of reconciliationThe Turks suddenly attacked Alexandropoland captured the city ”[10, p. 73].
On the eve of the ultimatum in terms of protection Alexandropolwas almost impregnable. The official number of the garrison army alone was 506 officers և 5576 soldiers with 100 machine guns և 134 artillery pieces.
 In addition, the Armenian First Division was stationed in the town and surrounding villages.Armenian joint military unit և Andranik military unit in generalabout 16,000 soldiers և 1,100 officers [23, p. 622].
 General T. was in Alexandropol.Nazarbekyan, colonels D. Bek-Pirumyan, A. Hovsepyan, Karakeshishyan, S. Samartsyan և others.
  Even a Turkish attackAt that time there was a military unit of 7000 people in the city.
In this case a logical question arises. How about the enemy?
He managed to take over the city without any serious resistance.
 Especially when it was already clear after Kars that the Turks were going to move forwardto Alexandropol, then everything had to be done to the latterto provide protection.
Analyzing the secret of Turkish victories, "Caucasian word"The periodical wrote: "If we look closely, it will become clear that the Turks
All the successes, from Trabzon to Alexandropol, are not so successful in the implementation of military operations:in the true sense of the word, as much as diplomatic intrigue andthe result of a violation of the norms of international law ”[25, page 1].
  According to the newspaper, his obsession with defending Georgian provinces at the expense of ArmeniansThe Transcaucasian government, represented by the Georgian Mensheviks, is the enemyInstead of retaliating, they were forced to make regular concessionsto believe in the myth of one's own invincibility.
  Here it isAn example of that behavior. To deploy General De's troops, who arrived in Alexandropol after the fall of Kars, to replenish the city's garrison
Instead, the authorities sent them to Tbilissi (Georgia).
The Armenian military command, which naively believed that the fall of Alexandropol had a share,that the Turk Akhuryan will not pass [9, page 2].
 It was baseless and illogical. "In the position of Commander-in-Chief, General M., known for his defeatist moods. Areshyan's appointment.
It's just coincidences and criminal nonsenseThe series was published in 1918. May 15, led to the loss of the city.
 Witnesses:According to the testimony, the fortified garrison resisted at the beginning of the attack.և 180 Turks were killed in the first hour alone (9 victims from the Armenian side).
The enemy had to stop the attack, sending a delegation and saying that "they do not intend to occupy the city (my Alexandropol-AH) or to fight against the people's militarism, why?You fight in vain.
 Decision of the conciliatory deputies of BatumiAccordingly, the railways have already been given to us by which we have our armyWe will move to Julfa, we will stay at the station, without the cityto enter վնաս to harm the military or the population ”[24, pp. 1-2].
The resistance of the garrison garrison lasted for about three hours.
 "After the Armenian troops, he's with them."Most of the urban population left Alexandropol, the rest sent a delegation led by Mkrtich Ghazaryan to the Turks և at the suggestion of the fortress guard Yankovsky Յ life, property ևAfter receiving guarantees of inviolability of honor, the city was handed over [14,page 51].
Interestingly, Alexandropol ս as a rule: as a ruleThe neutral Muslim population tried to take advantage of the situation, sending an independent delegation to the Turkish command in the early morning of May 15, accompanied by two Greeks and an Armenian, and offering to surrender the city without a fight [5, p. 2].
The city that is being destroyed at that crucial moment for AlexandropolThey left in panic, "they fled in the direction of Gharakilisa and Dilijan."city ​​council և board members, heads of non-governmental, economic and immigration organizations, as well as ևthe city police in its entirety [12, pp. 1-41].
 From AlexandropolEven the local spiritual leader, Archimandrite Artak, resigned (in a letter to Catholicos of All Armenians George V on June 3, 1918, ArtakThe monk tried to justify his escape: a) with the general panic and anarchy that started in the city after General Nazarbekyan left և b) 30,000 AMD for Harich Monastery և The caretaker government of Kars and
About 10000 r belonging to Etchmiadzin. with the desire to save money) [11, p. 1013].
 Realizing his mistake, he returned a few days later and triedto get permission for the refugees to return to the city from the Turkish command through negotiations.
  And urbanOn the contrary, the members of the board և went to Tbilissi (Georgia)that urban autonomy ceased to exist [16, p. 3].
The attitude of the people of Alexandropol to the "native" authoritieswas best reflected in the press of the time.
 "Flee from the city"Our ARF fathers," writes the unknown correspondent who corresponded to "Mshak", "taking with them food and other institutions."money, viciously betraying the people in whose name they had torn so many throats.
  You should have seen what a curse the people were readingAfter the ARF, what curses were heard from its figures?to the address ”[4, page 2].
Realizing the temporary nature of their success, the TurksThey did not introduce an Ottoman system of government in the war-torn province of Alexandropol.
  The leadership of Gavar is Ottoman civilianHe had nothing to do with the authorities, and the governor (during the six-month war in Alexandropol province, Haidar Bey, Rashid Bey, Recep Bey, Rahim succeeded each other in the position of governor.(Rohem) Bey) was directly subordinate to the commander of the Kars Front [13,pp. 105-109].
  The province was divided into village groups ությամբ villages headed by bash-mukhtars (senior village head) and mukhtars (village head).
The provincial center was divided into six more Mukhtars.
Immediately after the conquest of Alexandropol, the Turks restored the activity of city autonomy.
  On the second day of the siege of the city, on May 17, by the order of the Ottoman military command, the general assembly of citizens, headed by the manager of the Commercial Gymnasium, Levon Sargsyan, consisted of 29 people.consisting of a city council (16 Armenians, 3 Greeks, 3 Muslims, 3 Russians, 2:Georgian, 2 Jews) [3, pp. 24-40, 1, pp. 283-300].
 The next day the city councilIt elected a 15-member executive by secret ballotAuthority: city administration, with 16 commissions (sanitary, food, auditing, financial, listing, maintaining relations with the authorities, etc.) [19, pp. 8, 17, p. 30].
The mayor of Alexandropol, L. was elected chairman of the city council. Sargsyan, assistants: P. Merkurov և H. Yusuf-OghliYusufov, secretary: Tsikhistov, translator: Mubayajyan [16, p. 5].
They came under the jurisdiction of the city autonomyadministrative officials - bash-mukhtars and mukhtars, because "These were appointed by the department at the suggestion of the Turkish command.
On May 19, the Turkish command recognized the citythe legitimacy of the authorities, and three days later AlexandropolArrived at Vehib Pasha Commercial Gymnasium (city)in the council hall) met the council members.
 The Council submitted a petition consisting of 9 articles to the Turkish military commander, demanding to respect the inviolability of person, property and honor, to release citizens from the arbitrariness of Turkish officials, to stoprobbery, violence and falsifications, as he allowed1 Sargsyan Levon Davit 1862-1927, supervisor of Alexandropol Commercial Gymnasium, mayor of Alexandropol 1918 May 1919 June, 1919 since June 3
Honorary citizen of Alexandropol, supervisor of the Commercial Gymnasium in 1919.June 1920 November 1920, Mayor of Alexandropol November 7-17, 1921 Chairman of the Alexandropol Regional Revolutionary Committee. from April 23 to mid-May, 1921-1922.
Representative of the Armenian SSR in Kars, then in Tabriz.
About 120,000 Armenians who migrated from the Kars region to return to their homes [5, page 3].
On June 26, the city administration was reorganized, and allThe cases were concentrated under one general leadership in five departments: financial-economic (Ter-Martirosov), administrative (S. Ghazaryan), sanitary-medical (Tsikhistov), ​​technical (Chakhmasazov).food (Yusufov) [15, p. 5].
In order to clarify the tax policy, a new body was created in August, chaired by the governor of Alexandropol, Idare Mejlis 1, consisting of four members of the city administration.
 Next:Within a month, the three main types of taxes were defined: a.pets, b. land and real estate և c. trade and work
front.
Finally in 1918. The RA diplomatic mission started its work in Alexandropol on September 4. Khoyetsyan said
(the latter reports are exceptional informationreports during the Turkish occupation in the province of AlexandropolThe atrocities that took place now against the Eastern Armenianson the genocidal policy applied).
  Until TurkishWith the departure of the troops, the representation became a mediator between the Armenian "Ottoman authorities".
 [2, pp. 112-149].
In fact, during the Turkish rule in AlexandropolMunicipal autonomy of national and state partiesIn the absence of other institutions, it became the only body that concentrated all the public affairs not only of the city, but also of the province, at the same time being a mediator between the city andbetween the "Turkish command" of the population of the province, he triedto suppress Turkish violence as much as possible and to protect Armeniansthe interests of the population, to ensure its physical existence.
"Urban autonomy," wrote the Administrative Council of the RA Diplomacy in Alexandropol under the Governor of Ottoman Turkey.The officials included two representatives, Muslim and non-Muslimfrom the population.
 The council discussed administrative, financial, public,agricultural և other issues.
Representative G. In one of his reports submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Khoyetsyan raises mediations many times with a successful outcome, regarding issues that have a state
they cannot be subjected to a wide range of competences ”[19, p. 8].
The return of refugees and the tax burden became a priority for the newly formed city authoritieslightening.
The department organized grain purchases [17, pp. 8-9, 19, pp11].
  To meet the needs of the population, particularly the bread consumed in 1918. On July 26, the city council set up a bakery
A trade committee then set to workAlexandropol taken to Tbilissi by former board membersThe sums of the bank are 1,200,052 rubles. to return to the case [16, p. 103].
 The financial problems between the old and new city authorities were settledonly in 1918 in September, after L. arrived in Tbilissi (Georgia).
At Sargsyan's request, the RA diplomatic representative in Georgia A. intervened in the case. Jamalyan [16, pp. 103-104].
"It has become a matter of concern for the city."The fight against epidemic diseases.
  Steps were takenFrom Yerevan ելու To invite doctors from Tbilissi (Georgia), to bury the bodies of cholera victims in special places, to treat venereal diseasesto open hospitals for [15, p. 62].
 Attempts were made. "Tbilissi (Georgia) To bring back the Alexandropol teachers who fledto revive school work [18, p. 26].
Thanks to the steps taken by the local authorities alreadyFrom June, life in the city gradually returned to normal.Canteens, restaurants, hotels, catering centers and shops reopened.
Contemporaries praised L. during the six-month Ottoman war. The activity of the structure headed by Sargsyan.
In particular, the RA diplomatic representative in Alexandropol G.Khoyetsyan in 1918 In his report sent to the Foreign Ministry on December 4, he wrote:
"When the former administration left the city, and everyone else leftwas looking to the near future with fear,… Mayor L. Sargsyan և M.
Ghazaryan 1 ին only the people who were left headless and martyredThey stay in the city to help as much as they can.
 What they wear is thisin six months նրանց, their endurance, their strong և bold protest itagainst everyone, even beyond their competence, was of a wider naturebears, the selfless protection of the interests of the people, because of whichthey were constantly persecuted, even risking their lives;only their self-sacrifice, honesty, strength and courageThey awaken a deep sense of respect in me… ”[13, pp. 90-96].
The Turkish authorities persistently and persistently avoided restoring the justice system in the war-torn province.
  Or in response to Vehib's requests for municipal autonomyPasha promised to establish a court, and conditions were even worked out for it(the Turkish side appointed the president of the court, the prosecutor-investigator, the municipal autonomy the other members of the court), however, the judicial system did not function.
 A total of sixFor months, those accused of serious crimes were sent to Kars, and the minor crimes were investigated by the Commission for the Investigation of Legal Disputes of Citizens under the City Autonomy [19, pp. 9-10].
Instead, the Turks launched a new police forceto create a system.
  According to contemporaries alreadyOn the morning of May 16, in the streets and neighborhoods of the city, as if orderlyto maintain order, when in fact mass looting is officialTo give character, the Turkish command appointed patrol groups [4, p. 2].
 Four more days later, a mixed Turkish-Armenian police force of 50 people was formed, the so-called "Aji Tabuli" (Hunter 1 Ghazaryan Mkrtich Minas (1867-1919), studied at the Department of Archeology at the University of Strasbourg.
 Moving to Eastern Armenia, he taught the Armenian language in Shushiin the seminary.
 After some time he moved to Alexandropol and was appointed Arghutianschool manager, then supervisor, and in 1918 May-December - Member of the Alexandropol City Board, Migrant of the Municipal Autonomy
Chairman of the Committee.
 He died of typhus in 1919. He was buried on January 16 վող called the Hill of Honor
in the cemetery.
Dakan Battalion-AH), whose Muslim members were armed with mosin-bullets, and the Armenians as traitors, Shq Pasha 1by order only with mosin [24, p. 2].
He was appointed head of the Alexandropol Provincial GendarmerieKhatun-oghli Mahir Bey, one of the former beys of Shoragyal, "a bloodthirsty beast,who proved by fact that he was a toothless wolf. "
  AtrpetAccording to the testimony, every night with his gang at the expense of the citizensIn addition to indulging in sexual pleasures, this robbed everyoneHomeless houses.
 So, when in 1918. Born on May 22 in Alexandropol
Vehib Pasha met with members of the city councilThe first demand of the latter was to get rid of their Mahir Bey.
  Turkish:The military commander both announced and"Ottoman militaryThe officers are all "Kulicha" (refined-AH) gold, they are not capable of committing crimes "[5, pp. 2-3], however, a few days laterKhatun-oghli Mahir Bey was dismissed.
  Chief of GendarmerieTahib Bey, a Kurd who replaced him in office, with his insidious gamesbrought to an end the plunder of the Armenian population ”[6, p. 2].
Hundreds of innocent people were arrested for false betrayal and suffered terrible months in hellish conditionsIn the prisons of Kars.
 Many went missing, others were shot:not even knowing what their crime is.
  About the activity of Alexandropol gendarmerie G. Khoyetsyan wrote in his messages. "There is a constant disgrace here, which is a name
does not have.
 By giving a bribe, the landlord could be forced to sell for freeIn the house of a Tatar, a person could be killed, wounded, and then arrestedto give to the wounded.
  Money disputes are especially easy to resolve.
The head of the gendarmerie called the debtor and ordered him to payHe owed the debt and said goodbye, then put the money in his pocket.
 And that's allsix months ”[20, pp. 94-95].
1 Major General of the Pasha-Ottoman Army, born in Kharberd, 1918 from spring
Commander of the Kars front, the right hand of Enver Pasha.
 It became known to the world in 1916.
Exceptional endurance and courage against the Russian troops in GolitsaHe was awarded the Order of the Holy Cross by the German authorities.
He was nicknamed "Turk-Hindenburg" in the army.
Investigation of rural cases լուծ solution of villagers' problemsIt was assigned by the city administration to the priest Ter-Grigoryan.
  A man who was ready to appeal to the people of any meansto solve problems.
  For his selfless work, Ter-Grigoryan was hated by the Turkish authorities, especially the police.
  He was arrested on false charges and sent to Kars prison, then beheaded in an abandoned trench without trial.
  The same fate befell him, the poetNikoghayos Tsitoghtsyan.
  He was arrested on the pretext of taking him to Kars,Then they killed him in the car with gunshot wounds.
  Without:Mutafyan, Hekimyan, Tigran Shekoyan and others were imprisoned for months on serious charges [5, p. 3].
The periodical press of the time is full of Turkish in Alexandropolwith stories about horrific crimes committed by the police.
  For example: "The governor of Alexandropol, Rahim Bey, had captured"The furniture store of Uzbashian's house, where a million pieces of iron, construction, paint, chuan and steel items are made," Atrpet writes.
After returning to the city, Harutyun Yuzbashyan demanded that the Turkish authorities return his property.was immediately arrested for treason, accused of espionage,then deported [8, pp. 4, 20, pp. 41-42].
In the first days of the siege of the city, the Turkish command demanded that the citizens hand over their weaponsThose who disobeyed were threatened with execution.
  Guessing the real purpose of that order, the people of Alexandropol immediately handed over the main part of the weapon through the city council.
  No further weapons were found in the population as a result of further searches, thereforeThe Turkish gendarmes started their favorite hobby - stealing.
  Searches in the villages generally turned into unbridled looting[24, page 2].
After the Ottoman army entered Alexandropol with the active support of the same gendarmerie, the Tatars, who had filled the city, opened the houses and shops of the departed citizens and appropriated their property [7, p. 2].
Often complete as a result of police fraudVillages were deprived of their settlements.
 For example, Adiyaman was settledHe was with the Muslims who migrated from the province of Yerevan.
  The village is their legalThe head of the gendarmerie responded to the requests to return the ownersHe declared that "the people of Adana are deceivers, and the Tajik government has always had a fair attitude towards the Armenian subject people" [21, p. 61].
In another case, when the body of a Turkish soldier was found on the road to Horom, the police sent a cavalry with a cannon to Horom to punish the villagers without conducting an investigation [20, p. 70].
"During the six months of its existence, the police tried it."to hide the traces of Turkish atrocities.
 Military areasThe people were forced to write letters of thanks and give false testimonies, the priests were forced to present the victims of mass murders as victims of natural disasters, and those who died from torture were presented as drowned by lice.
  At the same time, the police collected documents after the warto show the world "Armenians' atrocities against poor Muslims", to justify Tajik governmentresponse strictures [21, pp. 60-61].
Conclusion.
  Summing up 1918 A brief examination of the administrative policy pursued by the Ottoman authorities in the province of Alexandropol in May-November, let us mention the following. The Turks did not introduce Ottoman rule in the war-torn regions.
The city to make its own illegalities look "legal"Immediately after the capture, the Turkish command restored the activity of city autonomy.
 By the same token, instead of restarting the justice system, the Turks created itA police force designed not so much to maintain order as to hide traces of its own crimes.
BOOK: 1. Alexanyan KV Local government of Alexandropol province
Activities during the Turkish occupation (May-December)1918) // Haykazian Journal of Armenology.
 H. LD.
 2014.
 Pages 282-300.
2. Alexanyan K. V. Diplomatic representative of the Republic of Armenia in Alexandropol province G. Khoyetsyan's reports
To the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the activities of the representation ևOn the situation in the province of Alexandropol (September-December 1918) // Banber of the Armenian archives.
 2014.
 Pages 112-149.
3. Alexanyan K. V. Documents 1918 On the occupation of Alexandropol by the Turkish army in May 1945 and the formation of new bodies of urban autonomy // Banber Archives of Armenia.
 N 1.
2011.
 Page 27-40.
4. In Alexandropol.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N116, June 20, 1918.
5. Atrpet, the Ottoman occupation of the city of Alexandropol for 200 daysfrom the troops.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N262, December 21, 1918.
6. Atrpet, the Ottoman occupation of the city of Alexandropol for 200 daysfrom the troops.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N 265, December 25, 1918.
7. Atrpet, the Ottoman occupation of the city of Alexandropol for 200 daysfrom the troops.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N 266, December 26, 1918.
8. Atrpet, Shaghi Pasha.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N 270, December 31,1918.
9. The situation in the region of Alexandropol.
 "Mshak" daily.
 Tbilissi (Georgia).
 N 87.
 12:May (April 29), 1918.
10. Khadisian Al. The origin and development of the Republic of Armenia.
Beirut.
 "Hamazgayin" publishing house.
 1968.
 487 pages.
11. National Archives of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as AAA), fund 57, list 5, case178.
12. AAA, fund 57, list 5, case 187.
13. AAA, fund 105, list 1, case 126.
14. HAA, fund 105, list 1, case 2768.
15. AAA, fund 105, list 1, case 2710.
16. AAA, fund 105, list 1, case 2711.
17. HAA, fund 105, list 1, case 2713.
18. HAA, fund 200, list 1, case 97.
19. HAA, fund 200, list 1, case 125.
20. AAA, fund 200, list 1, case 126.
21. HAA, fund 221, list 1, case 89.
22. Harutyunyan A. Turkish intervention in Transcaucasia in 1918 և:
self-defense battles.
 Yes!
 Publishing house of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
 1984.
 355 pages.
23. Melikyan V. The military-political situation in Armenia և Transcaucasia (January-May 1918).
  The May heroic battles.
  Armenian:history.
 New period (second half of the XVII century -1918).
 NAS RAհրատ.:
 H. III.
 Book II (1901-1918, Armenian colonies, periodical press և culture in the XIX և beginning of the XX century).
 Yes!
 "Zangak-97" publishing house.
 2015.
pp. 615-654.
24. Hovsepian M. Alexandropol after the capture (The story of an eyewitness).
 "Ashkhatank" newspaper.
 Yes!
 Year C, N 6 (206).
 8 (26) June 1918,Saturday.
