Health is the invaluable, irreplaceable wealth of human life, the basis of life, the source of joy, the comprehensiveness of the person.a necessary condition for development.
  Therefore, every human being is a childFrom an early age, at a young age, he should take care of his health, physical development, possess certain knowledge, be healthylifestyle.
 It is obvious that good health is conditioned by a personfeeling throughout life.
Current world developments in the environment ևադեպ Unprecedented changes in public relations have a direct impact on human health ևon social coexistence, the first among various issuesPlanning the use of the role of education and improving the quality.
In a broad sense, a "healthy lifestyle" is necessary in lifeIt is the possession of certain skills.
 The World Health Organization focuses on decisionsto make և problem-solving, to think critically և creatively, to communicate հարաբերությունների interpersonal relationships, self-knowledgeև The skills of empathy, mastery of emotions և resistance to stress [6].
The main goal of "healthy lifestyle" education is to develop students' own health as the most importantQuality of value անվտանգ Safe behavior based on knowledge, abilities and skills to maintain it.
Creating a "healthy lifestyle" is essential for good healthis a capacity in the direction of which there are significant multidisciplinary actionsnecessary.
As a result of learning, students should be formedappropriate attitude, health as essentialwillingness to perceive value ուն ability to appreciate it,Qualities of public coexistence, healthy, safe and secure behaviorhealthy lifestyle.
The problems of healthy lifestyle education in a public school are defined by the following main provisions:a) Develop learners' scientific worldview by teachingNecessary knowledge and skills on the following issues:• Ways and means of health care և main measures;
• Arising from bad habits, misbehavior
disease prevention
• Develop a negative attitude towards harmful habits;
• Develop responsible, safe behaviors for health care;
• Environmental quality assessment;
• Prevention of life-threatening illnesses (HIV / AIDS, sexually transmitted infections), drug addiction.
b) Develop healthy lifestyle skills, as well as develop learners to use and analyze information sources;ability to combine.
c) To contribute to the planning and organization of extracurricular, educational activities with students within the framework of "Healthy Lifestyle" topics, a separate inter-classroom;Organizing and conducting inter-school, inter-school events (Olympiads, knowledge tests-competitions, etc.).
d) Involve learners and their parents in solving “Healthy Lifestyle” advocacy issues.
"Healthy lifestyle" includes age-appropriate physical activity, healthy eating,Creating a safe environment, giving up harmful habits.
According to international health organizations, the development of a healthy lifestyle for disease preventionIt is an effective և less costly means.
 Moreover, a healthy lifestyleMeasures to strengthen the secondary school, such as:They are the best investment in the health of the population.As a result, they have a positive impact on the country's economic well-being.
It should be borne in mind that "Healthy Lifestyle" is included in the standard "Physical Education", "Pre-Military Training" (CFS) in the field of safe living, but it is an independent field, it includes specific topics.which must be studied in completely different methods and ways.
 This raises the issue of student assessment methodsselection և professional development of teachers.
It is planned that the test, the surveyors և evaluationThe use of non-traditional methods will enable students և teachers to create an atmosphere of confidence վելու to express themselves freely in the classroom environment.
At the same time, it will be necessary to train teachers to work with students in accordance with the specifics of the course.
It is offered in the main and senior classes of general educationImplement a "healthy lifestyle" training, taking into account the previous oneknowledge and skills acquired by students in the classroomlevel, their age and gender characteristics [1].
Gradually deepening the content of the course into topicsto form a sequence on the principle of spiral development.
Topics should include the following content areas:1. Physical health,
2. Mental health
3. Social health
4. Factors and environment affecting health.
These areas include the following:
• Perceptions of values ​​about health care
development
• Personal hygiene skills
• Healthy food և diet maintenance;
• Diseases, epidemics ուղ ways to protect against them;
capacity building
• HIV / AIDS prevention
• Use of alcohol, tobacco, drugs, psychotropic substances և
abuse prevention
• Reproductive health, sexual behavior;
• Creating a healthy environment
• Development of interpersonal relationships, social coexistence և social communication skills, cooperation և tolerance qualities, idea of ​​mental health.
  At the same time, the content of education, according to the age of the students, should be included and clarified internationallya number of commonly accepted and frequently circulated concepts andideas, including "health factors", "marital relationships", "family planning", "safe behavior", "attitude", "counteraction", "abstinence", "syndrome", "pandemic","Infectious", "vulnerable groups", "empathy", "awareness","Mental-physical dependence", "euphoria", "harm reduction"etc.
Systematic teaching of the above-mentioned content areasallows learners to shape their own և othersHealth Behavior - as a Core Valuequality to evaluate.
Targeted learning of the subject "Healthy lifestyle" will helpthe physical, mental, moral, and emotional development of the learners.
 It:will enable health in the value system,family, healthy family relationships, stability, howRespect, love and care in gender relations.
By teaching a "healthy lifestyle" it will be possible to contribute clearlydeveloping positions that in turn will help learnersto make the right, balanced decisions.
Thus, in the end, the appropriate attitude should be formed in the learners, health as the most important value.willingness to perceive ություն ability to evaluate it, qualities of public coexistence, healthy, safe և safe behavior:healthy lifestyle.
BOOK: 1. Methodological bases for teaching a healthy lifestyle in a public school.
 Educational manual in two parts, Part I.
 Yes!
2015.
 Page 31-40.
2. Minasyan SM, Adamyan JI Health science.
  Yes!
  YSU Publishing House.
2008.
 376 pages.
3. Arzumanov SG Physical education in the school is taught in 10-11 classes.
4. Вайнер Э. Н. Valeology. Textbook for vuzov. Moscow. From Flint.
 Science ”.5. Дубровский В. И. Valeology.
 zdorov cheek live.
 Textbook for vuzov. Ed.
7. https.
