We value the legacy of every famous poet from the point of view of combined manifestations of traditional, new and original in the richness of ideology and ethics, as well as the establishment of national, social and universal values.
 With such approaches, the best part of H. Shiraz's works have been appreciated by the readers who love his poetry գր our famous writers and literary critics / S.Aghababyan 's 2), H. Tamrazyan' .Gasparyan [3], S. Muradyan [7] և others /.
 We do not want to delve into other high-value investments in Armenian literature by our great poet, who was born in Shirak, achieved pan-Armenian fame and became a classic writer.
  Our above-mentioned other, even foreign writers and literary critics have been engaged in it, and in recent years an unprecedented, comprehensive two-volume study on H. Shiraz has been published by Doctor of Philological Sciences, Professor Samvel Muradyan [7].
 They appreciated the themes of motherhood և in the poet's lyric poetry, which were mainly related to some of the best poems in the collections "Monument to my mother" (1968, 1979, 1980) and "Monument to my father" (2017).
 We think that there is a need to analyze the above-mentioned works of the poet from the point of view of the content of the poems created within the genre (poem with poems) he has used, taking into account the modern literary ideas and methodology.
 The author's description of the genre is already interesting in itself.
 H. Shiraz considered the literary type of the first collection / "Monument to my mother" / "Poem with woven poems", the second simply "Poem with poems".
Poetic series, then poems with poems in world lyric poetry were written especially often during the 19th century, the beginning of the 20th century.
  Significant specimens were created by V. Goethe, J. Byron, A. Pushkin, A. The block, A. Akhmatova, I. Brodsky, K. Balmont և others.
  For the first time in Armenian literature J. Alishan appeared in the natural poetry series ("Nougak", five volumes, 18571858), M. Peshiktashlyan's Zeytunier songs (1860s) was considered a series by literary critics, before that Avag Isahakyan was a series of poems by A. Isahakyan "/ 1895-1917 /, which he later turned into a poem based on poems.
 D. Varuzhan's "Song of Bread" is very close to the genre of poems with poems.
 V. Teryan performed his famous poetic series.
  Linguist, literary critic S. Melkonyan tried to substantiate the hypothesis of considering the "quartet as a lyrical poem" as a literary type in connection with H. Tumanyan's famous quartets. [6]
 E. Charents' "Tagaran" և etc., etc. was considered a poem with poems.
The series of poems has similarities with the poem with the poems, nevertheless they differ from each other.
 Both have a main, priority theme.
 In the poem, however, many sub-themes and mentions of different ideas can be played by different lyrical heroes.
  The poem with poems is, in fact, a series of poems, which "is published in a certain sequence; it is united with a lyrical hero (whose image can change during the poem with poems), with motive, theme, image" [11].
  H. Shiraz started writing poems dedicated to his parents in the 1930s, which he later summarized in the above-mentioned collections, presenting the literary type with the subtitles mentioned above.
The literaryization of the characters of the poet's parents, the lyrical, philosophical attitude and meaning, is the result of local thought and creative work.
  And here, due to such consistency and interest in the idea, unique, original literary and artistic works have been created (the book "Monument to my mother" stands out among them).
 Indeed, in world lyric poetry, as well as in the works of Armenian poets, we do not seem to encounter such an attempt to portray the images of parents through poetic words and inspiration.
 This circumstance gave rise to literary critic S. Muradyan evaluating the above-mentioned works of H. Shiraz in the following way. The book "Monument to my mother", which the author called an epic with woven poems, is unique in its kind not only in Armenian, but in the whole world lyric poetry.
 Previous ones, including Isahakyan, one or several poems were presented to the mother, while Hovh. Shiraz, continuing and developing their contributions, created a complete book consisting of 174 poems, which is full of real poetic inventions and lyrical wonders.
 The 4th volume of the collection of poems includes the poem "Monument to my father" with mother songs, woven with 109 poems.
Here, too, there are many good and the best, and both poems woven with poetry deserve special examination. "[8]
 We want to emphasize how these poems, which are unique in their kind, have been stimulated by vital signals and literary patterns.
 After all, within the framework of the interests of world-renowned poets, there was no desire to comprehensively depict the lyrical characters of their parents.
 In their works, the interest in the national, the inner world of the individual, personal feelings, love, his freedom, the individual-social environment, other related issues and the demands to include them in the spheres of poetry became more pronounced.
 And in all these contexts, the reference to the images of the family home և parents has remained in the back domains or has been expressed in relation to other artistic and thematic issues.
  What? It is easier for us to present the preconditions that could have contributed to the creation of the images of our own parents in the field of vision of a lyrical hero in Shiraz, which stimulated the extensive discussion of the motives of motherhood and patriarchy in his lyric poetry.
The spontaneous impulses of the poet, who tended to deepen his lyrical self-expression in the motives of creating the images of his mother and father, are conditioned by a number of factors.
  In our opinion, the personal destiny of the poet had a prelude, which was directly conditioned by the historical and political situation of his people and the circumstances created in the 1920s in the city of Alexandropol (then Leninakan, and now Gyumri) in the Shirak region.
  Already in 1915 To the Turkish criminals who committed the Armenian Genocide in Western Armenia in the 1920s. They were replaced by the massacres of the Kemalist movement led by Mustafa Kemal (Ataturk).
  They continue to advance their bloody cause in the territories of the First Republic of Armenia.
 The Turks who invaded Alexandropol killed the future poet's father, the farmer-gardener Tados, when his son was 5-6 years old.
Early childhood orphanage, deprivation of father's home with his mother Astghik և sisters, the unattractive environment of an American orphanage, living a life of stealing "one onion, one bread from one" with homeless children, and finally being reunited with his mother's care for his family. The opportunity to live in it, the place of deep feelings and reflections were in the soul of Hovhannes (Onik) endowed with creative talent, in the presence of creativity.
In addition, the relationship and attitude towards family members, particularly parents, has formed an exceptionally strong bond in the historical existence of our people and the Armenian human-individual consciousness.
 The family was understood as the basis for the coexistence of relatives, society and the existence of the nation.
 The atmosphere of parental love, care, maturity, and childlike affection for them creates a special warmth and intimacy between them. "
 The attitude towards the mother is especially exceptional, which, being formed in childhood, continues throughout the child's life, reaching the level of worship.
 The image of the mother, expressed in the form of human features, the most delicate and tender attitude of a woman, as well as satisfying the biological nutritional needs of the child, protecting him physically and morally from unfavorable domestic and vital circumstances, acquires special significance for the latter.
 And all this, naturally, H. They could not be left out or bypassed within the framework of Shiraz's interests, world knowledge, literary and artistic works.
Entering the literary life, from the 1930s onwards, the mother poet's preference for expressing the feelings, confessions and philosophical reflections of the young poet through the mother-themed world through the literary verse about man and the homeland began.
The poems woven with the poems "Monument to my mother" and "Monument to my father" were composed from the lyric works of Shiraz written on the motives of motherhood.
The source of their idea, of course, is the human and poetic temperament of the author, the feelings of love, humility and respect for the parents.
 By revealing the moral-psychological essence of their characters, the poet has achieved the goal of expressing and embodying the diverse and multicolored manifestations of the human being in human beings, of expressing his social and aesthetic ideal of his national and universal description.
In our opinion, the characters of Shiraz in the lyric poetry of his parents and future poet son have archetypal lines, which are related to the features of archetypal prototypes of mother, father, child, insofar as the poet expresses his cherished, universal-sounding feelings and ideas about preserving human beings.
 In addition, the mother of her lyric poetry, ostensibly bearing the features of her archetypal prototype, symbolizes the rebirth of life and the eternal cycle.
  The father is an archetypal prototype.
 "The father is a powerful archetype that lives in the child's soul," writes the modern psychologist.
 - The archetype of the father is a generalized image of all the fathers of the past, it represents the attitude of a person towards a man, law, state, intelligence.
  In advance, the Father's archetype could be an image of God, of power, of struggle, of all natural forces, ready to help or harm. ”[12]
 We see many of the above-mentioned characteristics in the artistic images of the poet's parents.
It can be said that with the books "Monument to my mother" and "Monument to my father" Shiraz achieved his aesthetic goal in the process of searching for literary characters of the time in the Soviet Armenian reality and literature, revealing his parents' relationship as a lyrical hero, his father's human values. , with the lyrical expression and meaning of his son's attitude towards them.
  The fact of archetypal drawing in them testifies to the fact that the poet uses the above-mentioned features in order to oppose the somewhat acceptable attitude towards parents in the new generation or to oppose people who have departed from high human moral values ​​in general.
The literary type of poems assumes that the poems presented here are "self-finished lyrical works", are closely connected with each other in the presence of lyrical characters created by poetic words, the human essence of which is revealed by the poetic son's lyrical-philosophical confessions.
  In both books, both the poetic-lyrical hero and the characters of his parents were created by the artistic application of some basic features of the lyrical poem and poem genre.
 In general, they are characterized by the pathos, solemnity, high style expressed in the originality of the Shiraz poetic word, but in such a mixture of speech the vital and everyday life is intertwined.
 Due to this approach, in both works the author has created somewhat idealized literary characters of his relatives and himself, who have a positive description of him as a lyrical hero.
 They are presented to the reader both in everyday life and in the field of raising the moral description of the individual, issues of national and universal resonance.
"Monument to my mother" consists of "Prelude", two chapters "End Song".
  The poet originated the moral basis of this work from the points of love, reverence for his idealized image of his mother, his kindness, care and devotion to his son.// I must open my mother's heart to you: // I give // ​​All lost, all lost to mothers… [10].
The poet uses the genre possibilities of the ballad, uses the fantastic conventionality of the legend to show the power of motherly love and the power of influence towards his son.// They say, as if on a bonfire // // They say, as if,'s ashes were taken out of the bonfire and taken to the mother, // The mother cried on the ashes, // And when the tears fell on the ashes, // Her child came to life… / "Ballad-poem" /.
The mother is an earthly goddess, because her kindness and love for her son are immeasurable and immeasurable. Therefore, in order to preserve the human in every human being, it is necessary that at least his mother be an object of bitterness. // Now I say, you ungodly ones, // Accept the mother god as your mother, // Young or old, the only saint, // My and your mother goddess.
 / "Message-National Guard" /.
 More and more artistic and literary tricks are used to express the emotions and praises of the great-grandmother, emanating from the soul, creating poetic diamonds, one of which is the "My Mother" strip.
  The poet presents the mother, who meets the much-needed needs of family members and meets the needs of orphaned children in ways that seem possible and impossible, comparing them with the life of an Armenian and the big and small phenomena of the spiritual and moral world.
 The monumental image of the mother is created by original poetic comparisons.
  // The door of our hope is my mother, // The chapel of our house is my mother //, // The cradle is our mother, // The castle of our house is my mother, // Our father and ours is my mother, // The cradle and the owner is my mother, / / Our mother is the ugliness of our house, // Our mother is our majesty, // My mother, our mother is our bread, // My mother is the god of our house ը The poet presents the mother mostly with her moral image, thought and advice given to her son, attitude, world attitude , with wise generalizations about human relations.
  Poetry with general themed poems ։Freezing with the genre of the poem, Shiraz, in the context of his aesthetic and moral ideas, reinterprets the meaning of the image of the mother for her son in episodic situations and self-expression in the realm of one poem.
 Due to the use of such a literary invention, the general theme of the genre "poem with woven poems" is enriched with poems written with various sub-themes.
 Among them, the artistic perceptions and life meaning of the orphan child, the unique manifestations of mental feelings and emotions born from the longing for the mother and the expressions of the dream of growing up in the life under the mother's protection stand out.
  And the theme of depicting an orphan child has accompanied the world literature, appearing in different genres.
  It included condemnation of "social injustices", "war and genocide, as they were used to" orphan children "," expressions of the orphans' mental anguish "," heartbreaking desire to be under the protection of parents. "
  We think that in the realm of verse fiction, the theme is best expressed in Shiraz's poem entitled "I Found".
 It is impossible to read it without getting excited, where the above-mentioned themes, the images of the orphan child and his mother are depicted with perfect artistic performance, which further increases the influence of this work created by the interweaving of epic elements of lyricism.
The boy, who left the orphanage because he missed his mother, tries to steal the bread from the stranger in the market, but it turns out that she is the mother of the boy who became a mob.
 And the impressive thing is that the author expresses the boundless joy of his little hero with the imagination of a hungry orphan child. // He madly cherishes, cherishes, // And my soul stung, // And as if in the market // How much bread was there, they gave it to me./ But he also forgot the bread: // He was still pressing it to his chest, // Ah! , he was my mother lost, // The lost son's year… The author, who has grown up, matured, become a well-known poet, introduces the mother in a new relationship, who, concerned about her son's safety, experiences a life full of irony and jealousy. gives advice. // People are very timid, // Always be sweet behind your back, // So that your door does not knock // No clouds, no sorrow.
// One enemy is many, yes, // Seven hundred from a friend, // My son, just believe me, // Always put your tongue in your sword.
 / "My mother's persuasions" /.
The poet considers the image of the mother in the field of the relationship between the son and the bride.
 And again he makes profound generalizations, where the motherly behavior is beneficial.// The woman's heart was a crystal glass, // I crushed it and I can't paste it. // And from that day, alas, he can no longer // Take the wine of my kisses wholeheartedly.
  // What miraculous heart is there in a motherly heart, // That no matter how crazy the son crushes, // Not a moment passes, not a second passes // He always clings and has fun with his son.
 By honoring his mother, the poet reveals the moral aspects and merits typical of mothers in general.
 And in order to make the image of the mother in the poem written with poems more personalized and original, the poet presents her particularly modestly, in comparison with other mothers.
 Expressing such prudence, Shiraz writes: // My mother would say, praise me, // Every mother is a mother forever, // Do not criticize others, // There is no wicked mother //.
Nevertheless, the poet gradually unites the image idealized by the visible image of the mother with the ideas of mother Armenia, the perpetuation of the Armenian language that keeps Armenians Armenian.
  Due to this embodiment, the image of Shiraz's mother includes a number of sub-layers of a complex mother-land archetype.
Thus enriching the lyrical and human content of the image of the mother, the author in the second chapter, in the "Last Chapter", presents with a new whirlwind the waves of poetic feelings and thoughts that pervaded him after his mother's death.
  / Such a structure inadvertently resembles Petrarca's "Book of Songs", in which some of the songs are written during Laura's lifetime, and the second part after her death //.
 While creating this book, Shiraznir had already mastered the experience of national and world literature, wrote poems with unique and original poems that stand out with their theme.
  They are works that complete the poet's motherhood and patriarchy.
The image of the mother created by lyrical means in the second chapter's essence is related by the poet to the size of the universe to express the greatness of her death, the grief of loss.// Passerby, humble // Head up, // Here rests // A handful of space //
 The loss of the mother motivates the poet to present his essence and significance for the child from new sides. // You healed my soul with a prayer, // You saved me from a thousand and one evils, // You were the mortar of man աստ God, // You drove away pain and conspiracies from life //.
  The line entitled "Morse Tomb" / is a harmony of poetic horse and content.
 The greatness of the image of the mother created by the poet is felt by the mother nature.
  His tombstone is created with the participation of God and the angel, with special care and gentleness. // Snow falls and accumulates // On my mother from above, // Like a feather falls // From the angel's wings.
//… // God puts the flake so gently, // That it does not hurt for the rest of my life // My mother's sore heart is old.
Even after the death of the mother, his image and image continue to accompany his son, both in his wake and in his dreams.
 The son continues to feel the need to communicate with him, as he has lost a wise counselor, an endless hand caring for his children, a watchful eye, and a tender heart.
  And here is the mother who appeared in the dream, testing the tempter, checking the foundations of his human nature, of the moral existence, which he himself had instilled from childhood, that is, the ability to be compassionate to people, to help the poor, the poor, the orphan unselfishly.
// I was scared, but I fell in my arms, // My mother said. "It's me, I, // I came to test you: // Hasn't it changed your life?"
  // I came in the form of a beggar, // Ready to know: // Is the place your conscience, your conscience, my son, // Or did he die with me… "/" Miracle of spirituality "/.
 In this book, the image of the mother, of course, often appears in parallel with the image of the father, as creators and guardians of the poet's life.
 In the second part of this poem, the author's father appears from the grave with a literary similarity.
 Through the latter, the writer presents the issue of preserving his national identity, reviving the topic of the liberation of the lost homeland, Masis-Western Armenia, ordering the liberation of the largest part of the captive Armenian world. // But when he looked at Ararat, // My old father looked at me sternly, // - What else are you my son, // When our house is half… // My father died of grief, // He said, my son, if you want // Let the soil be light on me, // Do not leave Tunskisat… //.
The images of both mother and father in the field of the poet's thoughts, feelings, feelings are finally elevated, intertwined with the destiny of the motherland, the Armenian language, the people.
 Therefore, the message of the dead mother is impressive and profound. // See, my soul will rise, // Death is only the death of the flesh, // Your mother will die at that hour, // When your mother tongue dies.
// I will die when suddenly // Mother Araks lands, // When Masis worships you // Pokhvidzor and land //.
The book "Monument to my father" was published with a long delay, decades after the poet's death, in 2017. [9]
 It continues the idea born of the book "Monument to my mother" with its structural principle.
  Here, the author has created the image of his father with poems that have a common theme, but he is also independent with his poems, episodic imagery and lyrical self-expression.
 As in the previous book he used the canonical, classical forms of lyrical poetry.
  The image of the father in the sphere of the poet's lyrical feelings ևmembers with the description of his human, great devotion to his family, diligence, person who is constantly interested in the fate of the homeland, both real and idealized.
 The image of the father, like the image of the mother, emerges in the texture of the poet's feelings, emotions and thoughts in the text depicted with the artistic shades and sculptures of the artistic verse.
 This book may be slightly smaller than the previous one in terms of the number of high-quality works of art in terms of its content, but there are poems here that depict the theme in a unique and impressive way.
 He wanted to present his "dull peasant" father with such generalized character and interests typical of the individual and the Armenian man, where the concerns about the preservation of both family members and national issues and the protection of universal moral values ​​were combined.
First of all, the poet recreates the image of the father in the memories of his childhood, because he had seen his father in that period.
 The character of the poet means him first as the guardian and sponsor of their family and home.
  The presence of the father is a guarantee for the child to enjoy the security of the family, harmonious coexistence, the beauty of life and the benefits of life. // My father would come to the hut of the Shirak winds, // A shining shovel on his shoulder, like the moon rising from the mountain, // My father would come, I will remember yesterday like a dream, // It was as if the world was entering through the doors of our hut… // He would come with the scent of all Shirak shovel on the shoulder, like the golden hope of our house, // And he would carry me on his shoulders, and ringing in the hut, // Imtotovank was flying, father, will you take the vegetable garden?
  / "My father's return" /.
In the poet's inner world, the image of the father is constantly presented in the field of dreams and longings of the young man who was orphaned because of a dead relative who died.
 Thus, the feeling of his caring love for the memory of the murdered parent remains endless.// What a prodigal son I am, // That my father is unfortunate in the grave // ​​He lost a bottomless treasure // And I do not find it until today!
// But when the wind blows from the field and the valley // It brings a shovel and a sound: // It seems to me that it is my father again // It waters the melons in the dark.
/ "Illusion" /.
The murder of his father, which took place at an early age, disrupted the normal life of the consecrated family in the family, and later, in the soul of the mature poet son, the feeling of being deprived of the opportunity of parental gratitude and compensation in retrospective emotions. // I owed you, my father, I owed you, // My father, I owed you, // They did not let you breathe one day // The scent earned your son.
  / "The permanent debt of a son" /.
The author expands the field of interests of the father as a collective image of the Armenian peasantry, including the concern for the fate of the lost Western Armenia, the popular message and the dream of liberating a large part of the homeland.
The poet finally weaves in the image of his father the wise old man-archetypal lines, which enrich his human essence, conveys the temperament of a wise counselor living with humanitarian views and way of life.
 Such an idea arises due to comparisons with Jesus Christ, the Armenian King Ashot the Merciful.
 The poet saw in such a character the expressions of his moral and vital ideals, cherished ideas.
  // It seems that Ashot was the Merciful King in my father, // For he was a "backward" poor man in the loaf of bread, // If he was a leper, whatever he brought, he would have to live forever: // My father was Jesus when he entered the crowd // « "My father, Sharan, sang a lot."
  And so, through the literary image of the father, which is typical of the archetypal ideas of Jesus, the Wise Old Man, the poetic-lyrical hero expresses his cherished ideas, national and universal aspirations to eliminate evil and cruelty in life, to establish harmony in the country through work.
  And they were closely related to the entreaties and commandments to live justly and honestly, to do good to people.
 Expressing his ideas from the point of view of his father's worldviews, the author uses the message to create crops and goods through work, even to teach humanity to the enemy through his work.
  However, in order not to give rest to the Turkish invaders who occupied most of the homeland (almost one tenth) in the past, the poet considered it one of his main tasks to keep awake in our people through the image of a father to avenge the age-old enemy and bring back the lost.
 He condemned the world indifferent to our people who went through the Great Genocide.
 In the end, he saw the only support for the Armenian self-preservation in the solution of the problem of unity and consolidation of the internal forces of the people.
  The patriotic poet living and creating with pan-Armenian concerns did not leave his deep faith in the liberation of Western Armenia.
 Therefore, in "Father Silent Monologue with the Fate of His Nation" he writes: // But this origin is a witness: // The witness light is Sana: // The vampire of Taghvipit, // The sea will be liberated and Van.
H. Shiraz, however, presents the image of his father in a certain way in the context of him and his birthplace, the city of Gyumri, its surroundings, the nature of Shirak, the beauty of the gardens cultivated by his father.
 Or the poet's mind is constantly on the other side of the Turkish-occupied cities of Ani, Kars and Van, other areas of the historical homeland, to keep alive in the reader at least the memory of the sacred geographical names of the homeland lost.
 But at the same time he acted as a claimant of his occupied country1.
In this book, the life and destiny of the father killed by the Turks becomes a model for Shiraz for the destiny of the homeland.
 It was with the pain of his death and loss that the poet directly felt the depth of grief caused to the Armenian man by the Armenian Genocide.
  And since this book is a poem with poems in its literary form, Shiraz has preserved in it such features of the poem, such as solemnity and pathos, with different pages.
 It is within the framework of such an artistic depiction that he recreated the character and actions created by his father's faithful and creative imagination.
 In the image of Bostanch, a night owl father, the poet saw the lines of a brave Armenian, Hayduk-Fida.
 With this approach he enriched his father's description by presenting him as a "wise, humane, patriotic and brave person."
 In the poem depicting the episode of his murder / "My father's last murmur" / the author writes: // - In the garden of your garden // You hid Hayduks… // - Take you, Hayduk vampire… // - You killed an Turk… 1 Let us note here that this book by Shiraz, like many of his other works, for example: "Hayots Danteanakan", "Karabakh mourning", etc., were not published in his homeland during the Soviet years, because the censorship of the time did not allow him to publish a false statement against the Armenian-occupied Western Armenia, the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region (NKAO). the works defending the interests of the Armenian people.
The idea of ​​solving the revenge of the Armenian massacres ների father's death does not leave Shiraz in the thematic-ideological discussions of the "Last Chapter" of the song.
 In order to express the idea of ​​avenging his father's murder by the Turkish gang, he chooses from the world-famous literary prototypes the protagonist of Shakespeare's "Hamlet", the episode of revealing the message of revenge of the last king's father's ghost to his prince son.
 The hero of H. Shiraziknar was, in fact, inspired by the example of Hamlet, who avenged his father's death.
  Therefore, depicting the murder scene with the tortures of his dream father, the Armenian poet writes: // They had beaten him, tore him from his tongue, // He was muttering speechless, // I was afraid of a bloody, silent voice, // My son, take revenge on your father… / "My father's roaring silence" /.
 In taking revenge on the enemy, the poet considers his situation more difficult, as he feels responsible not only for his father, but also for the million and a half victims of the Western Armenians.
  It was already intolerable that in 1915 The Young Turk authorities who carried out the Armenian Genocide were not retroactively condemned, and in the Soviet years even the works of the poet and the poet who rebelled against the genocides were not even published.
 // Hamlet was roaring for a father, // My father, how can I scream, // When a whole highland is calling me, - // Until they let me roar with a ghetto //.
 With its shape and content, this is one of the best stripes in the book.
 In relatively short lines (11.7 syllables) the author has constructively and purposefully constructed his thought և to finish it.
Thus, H. Shiraz's mother-in-law and patriarchy enriched those sections of Armenian lyric poetry with unique themes.
The artistic achievements of the poet's poems "Monument to my mother" and "Monument to my father" can arouse interesting interest when drawing parallels with lyrical works on the same themes in the world of lyric poetry.
 Especially, as it has already been noticed, the poems with the above-mentioned poems can even occupy a special place next to the verse poets of the world, dedicated to their parents.
H. Shiraz pursued a moral goal through the idea of ​​parenthood in the above-mentioned literary analysis, at the same time he gave lessons of patriotism to his readers.
 Their ideological influence continues to be felt even today.
Literature 1. Atabekyan S., the lyric poetry of Hovhannes Shiraz.
 Yes!
 Yerevan State University Publishing House.
 1979.
 216 pages.
2. Aghababyan S., Hovhannes Shiraz // Aghababyan S., History of modern Armenian literature.
 Yes!
 Publishing house of the National Academy of Sciences of Armenia.
 1993.
 186-219.
3. Gasparyan D., Poetry և the truth of life.
 Yes!
 Light.
 1990.
396 pages.
4. Tamrazyan H. Hovhannes Shiraz // Tamrazyan H., History of Soviet-Armenian literature.
 Yes!
Yerevan University. հրատ.:
 1980.
 pp. 608-625.
5. Mahari G. About Hovhannes Shiraz // Shiraz H., Monument to my mother.
/ Poem with woven poems.
  Yes!
  Soviet writer.
1980.
 pp. 250-264.
6. Melkonyan S. The biography / quartet of Tumanyan's soul as a lyrical poem.
 Gyumri.
 "Dpir" publishing house.
 2004.
 128 pages.
7. Muradyan S. Hovhannes Shiraz, the poet, the man.
 Book A.
 Yes!
YSU Publishing House.
 2012, 576 pages.
 Book B, Yerevan, YSU Publishing House, 2016, 408 pages.
8. Muradyan S. Hovhannes Shiraz, the poet, the man.
 Book B.
 Yes!
YSU Publishing House.
 2016.
 64-65 pages.
9. Shiraz H. A monument to my father, a poem with poems.
 Yes!
"Hayrapet" publishing house.
 2017.
 240 pages.
10. Shiraz H. Monument to my mother.
 A poem with woven poems.
Yes!
 Soviet writer.
 1980.
 272 pages.
