The events of the last quarter of the 20th century in Armenia, one after the other, broke all the established stereotypes, changed the normal course of life and the description of the country everywhere.including in Gyumri.
 Being traditionally a cultural city, reflecting on all the changes and innovations, Leninakan (Gyumri) responded politically, economically, culturally.to the turns.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union, the independence of Armenia, the Karabakh war, the devastating earthquake left their markon the psychology of people.
 The city "lost" its history both ideologically and materially. The connection with the past was broken
between the present.
 "Reality was divided into two parts before the earthquake."then, as Baudelaire would say, "the old was not over, and the new was not yetstarted "[1].
  Many lose by falling between two value systemsThey turned their faces away and surrendered to the whims of fate.
 Artists, on the contrary, tried to fight time and circumstancesrevealing the ideas of the new times, the hidden meanings, the peculiarities. they paved the way with their art
to approve new ideas.
Each of the older generation of artists reacted differently to the changes of the time.
 Representatives of the 1960sSergey Mirzoyan and Ashot Hovhannisyan predicted in their pictures1988 disaster.
 Thus, Mirzoyan's 1987 The "Seven" canvas created by him was predictive. It was like saying goodbye to Leninakan, which would turn into ruins a year later.
  The picture is made with amazing freedom,with solid creams, bright color contrasts.
 Scene selectedfrom a high point of view. The picture is monumental, complete.
 After the earthquake, Mirzoyan temporarily stopped creating. he seems to have lost
was the connection with his beloved city.
 And, as it happens in such cases, exactlyThe painting revived him.
 He started painting brightly, activelywith colors, unprecedented solid creams.
 1997 The painted "Surb Nshan Church" becomes Mirzoyan's new business card in art.
 The night skyThe silvery church is outlined against a dark background.
 It stands against meof all trials and tribulations.
 The sublime and proud description of the churchinspires faith. As long as the temple of faith stands, it will exist. "
the city...Ashot Hovhannisyan felt a special connection with Leninakan.
 In his words, "Leninakan seemed to me the only one at that timethe city in the world "[2].
 1988 "Prediction. "Self-portrait" became really predictable for his favorite city.
 In the pictureIt shows a broken head, a deformed face, from which light radiates, andThere is the salt of salvation in the penetrating eyes. The background of the picture is highlighted with intense red.
 It seems to predict the impending catastrophe and the infinite human tragedy… On this occasion, the artist wrote: "Reality has never been able to influence an artist.
 The artist is hypersensitiveչեմ I have not missed a brush in my whole life, andI did not enter the studio for a month and a half this winter.
 Indeed, the physical impact is very great, but we must face J. mentally. panic is not allowed
is…. we must be able to draw the right conclusions "[2]… There were artists who, while painting Gyumri, never paintedits ruins and wounds.
 For them, Gyumri always remained as ifa standing and poetic city.
 There is nostalgia, sadness, loss and ...to find an endless bio-philosophy… But he neverHe did not paint the ruined city.
We can consider the works of photographer Hayk Adamyan, which were "viewed" and "seen" by his camera, a document of the city.They are urban scenes before and after the disaster.
  They are the documentary basis of time and the city.
Looking at the city with "open eyes", the artist with ruthless truthtold about the wounds of the city, but soon his nervesThey can not stand it.
  He decides to leave his beloved city, leaving for a distanceUnited States ...The key theme of the earthquake is sculptor Zaven Koshtoyanin the work.
 A city of its own loss and many victimsKostoyan summed up the grief dedicated to the victims of the earthquake, mother and childin the monument, where the mother with her body protects the child from the weight of the walls, which were pressed and endangered their lives.
 SoKoshtoyan turns a personal tragedy into a universal tragedy, makes it a unique embodiment of "Pieta".
  The statuewas located in the yard of the Church of the Savior (later moved to Ani(58) district, church yard), and in 2008 it is replaced by a Moscow resident
Sculptor Frid Soghoyan's "Innocent Victims, Beneficial Hearts" statue, which was donated to the city on the anniversary of the earthquake.
Interestingly, the artists of the 1980s generation turned to religion in the 2000s, trying to find answers to their torturous questions.
 The religious series of Garik Manukyan, Gagik ManukyanThey were aimed at revealing caring values.
 What was this? A tribute to time, the discovery of topics that have been banned for years, or?
Experience of self-examination and catharsis of one's own inner world ... Gagik Manukyan's series was dedicated to the "trials" of Christ - "Gospel", "Bringing to the Temple", "Crucifixion", "Descent from the Cross", "Resurrection".
  These topics:For a long time in the Soviet Union they were kept "under 7 locks".
The artist tried to view the catastrophe in the realm of the Christian series catastrophe ("Crucifixion") and rebirth ("Resurrection").
Garik Manukyan Natural disasters in the "Location" - the tide caused by the tide and the earthquakecompared with each other, showing what exists in natureA real situation that has a well-known abstraction.
 Location artist:seen in Denmark. The sea, retreating, left on the sand moss, crawling fish, shells, its "wealth" in the form of real and imaginary fragments.
 Disaster disrupts the course of nature, harmony.
The artist presented his series from a philosophical point of view, gave interesting interpretations, found new expressions.
There were artists who painted themselves while talking about the disasterpictorial symbolic language, means of expression.
 Earthquake theme:forced to return to history, the past layers of the city… “WhenI realized that the ground was breathing, it even exploded under my feet, it started here"Conversation with nature," said Hambardzum Ghukasyan.
 He died in 1988.He could not create for a long time after the earthquake.
 After the break, he took the brushes in his hand and first created an "Requiem" abstractstyle series.
  Selecting the scenes that are the symbol of the city:Amenaprkich building, Abovyan street, the viewpoint opening from the park,He put them in a certain color relationship.
  The color getssymbolic meaning.
 "The idea of ​​a color symbol penetrated my work when I saw the spectral sequence of colors in nature in Gurzuf.
 Everything in naturewhat is lawful, regulated ”[2].
  This discovery continued in the "Zhamanak" series, which was a post-earthquake referenceTo the description of Gyumri.
  The key to the series is the tuning forkthe heartbeat of the city.
  The first canvas is painted in grayThe Savior. The tuning fork does not move.
 This is post-earthquake Gyumri:cold and motionless.
 In the other canvas, the tuning fork moves and the colors of the picture movethey become hot and dark.
 The pulse of Gyumri is beating and they are recoveringhis wounds.
  Against the background of the city, Ghukasyan depicts its inhabitants:Lovers of sacrifices and khash, actors and dancers, beggars and ... knights who try to save the city from despair,out of politeness, out of hunger ...One of the important cultural events of post-earthquake Gyumri was the Gyumri Biennale, which seemed to be the sum of the two festivals of the Venice Biennale and the Cassel Documentary.
 The founders were Vazgen Pahlavuni-Tadjosyan and Azat Sargsyan.The Biennale was organized and held without serious funding.
Speaking about the Gyumri Biennale, the authors mention its post-Soviet, post-catastrophic, post-industrial, post-authoritarian, in general, being "with" / "post" /.
 Initially aiming to enliven the cultural life in Gyumri, the Biennale also sought to be involved in the context of contemporary art.
  But time has shown thatGyumri remained in the status of "back".
 From the very beginning, without setting a goal for discussions about contemporary art, in factHe remained in that "position".
 This is evidenced by the articles in various biennale catalogs, which always state that "GyumriIt is a post-earthquake city.
  The Gyumri Biennale is more than favorableIt was a place where Tradition / History / had such an opportunityKeeping it, take a step forward to create the future.
 More precisely, it was himto be the future. "
[3]Sculptor is one of the most symbolic works of the Gyumri BiennaleAlbert Vardanyan's "Surgical intervention" installation, by which:The cracked part of the building (adjacent to Gyumri Social-Educational Center)The sculptor had "operated" with a metal "thread and needle" and"Sew" it.
"The Biennale found itself at a dead end, unable to pave the way it wanted to walk."
  A total of 8 were organizedBiennials. Each had its own title and concept.
 Although the organizers tried to put all this in the modern worldin the context of art, but the majority of Gyumri residents did not accept itand did not like conceptual art. It remained in the interest of artists and academy students.
So each of the older generation of artists is differentHe responded to the changes of the times.
Today the situation in post-earthquake Gyumri reminds JürgenHabermas' phrase "the modernity of the past" is the fact that the past is modern.
 [4] Gyumri, with its rich cultural traditions, has found itself in a field of cultural dichotomy.
 The city hasCreative potential, does not have the opportunity to develop it, having talented artists, does not have a gallery, a museum of contemporary art.
печать на душевном состоянии людей. Gorod "destroyed" his history.
 and in the idea,настоящим. The activity is divided into two parts.
 to and after earthquakes.Literature 1. Baudelaire Charles, Aesthetics և Criticism.
 Yes!
 Sargis Khachents.
 1999.
430 pages.
2. Margaryan A. Creators of Shirak world.
 Yes!
 Gold Print &Design. 2016.
 60 pages.
3. Gyumri Times, July 1, 2014, Nazaret Karoyan, Karine Gusarenko,"Historization can interrupt the biography of the Gyumri Biennale."
