E. Charents (1897-1937) is the originator of modern Armenian literature. expanded the field of artistic thinking,
to predetermine the ways of further development of literature, to updatelanguage, grammar, enriched literary genres.
  1922 He published an article entitled "Declaration of the Three", which was a literary manifesto "signaling the entry of innovation into Armenian literature", in particular,
poetry.
  The article denied the literary merits and experience of the past,literary contribution, even the literary method and heritage of great writers,but it was intended to update and set new challengesstanding Armenian literature.
  Charents later abandoned these ideas, becoming the writer's "great spiritual conversion" [1, 344] և he was able to create his highly valuable works.
  It is invaluable E. No to Charents
Not only the greatness of the talent, but also the influence left by him as an Armenianon literature.
Federico Garcia Lorca (1898-1936) was the leader of the literary circle of his time, the two brightest representatives of the "27th generation".
  LorcaHe was close not only to some poets but also to world-renowned surrealists Salvador Dali and film director Luis Bu Բuel.
 Thus, Lorca was at the epicenter of Spanish avant-garde.
  Lorca is the brightest of Spanish literature of the 20th centuryHe is a writer, one of the peaks of Spanish drama.
  He is numerousIn his lectures ("Duende's Theory և The Game", "The Poetic Image of Don Luis Gongora", etc.) he presents his literary beliefs and aesthetic views.
 He was against the "dehumanization" of Gasset art, he was an innovator (he was interested)surrealism), but at the same time Lorca's lyric poetry is characterized by the features of national culture հատուկ the special musicality of the poem.
As E. Especially in Charents' first poems
It was felt in the six-page booklet "Three Songs of the Sad Girl" (1914)V. Teryan's influence, as well as Lorca's 1921 In the first collection entitled "Book of Poems", R. was felt.
The influence of Dario և Jimenez.
 Later they both overcome writing influences, having a search period, appearingas innovators, which makes them 20th century Armenian-Spanishtops of literature.
The thirties became years of creative growth for both writers.
 During this time they wrote not only a large numberHigh value works, but also a collection of poems. 2 of the writers of the "27th generation" were Jorge Gien, Pedro Salinas, Rafael Alberti,Gerardo Diego, Luis Cernuda, Emilio Prados.
  The name is connected with 1927.With the cultural event dedicated to the three hundredth anniversary of Luis de Gongora's death, the participants of which were called representatives of the "27th generation".
that brought a new quality with their artistic features, ideological-compositional solutions.
 1929 Lorca leaves for America
և Travel impressions are reflected in “The PoetIn New York "collection, and in 1933. Charents writes "Book of the Road"
collection.
 Interestingly, these collections were banned for many years, only to be published after the death of the writers, withoutto be censored.
The events of the 20th century do not differ tragically in Spain ությունում in the Soviet Union.
 In the 1920sStalin came to power, and in Spain in the 1930s -General Franco. two dictators who caused thousands
distorted destinies.
 Both poets were extremely sensitive, they immediately reflected on the events of the time with their poetry.
 This was the main reason that in 1936 In November, Charents was accused of being a counter-revolutionary, nationalist, Trotskyist, terrorist.
He was placed under house arrest and later arrested.
1936 G. arrested in August Lorkan. he was accused
"Being a Russian spy, communicating with them by radio, being homosexual" [5, 476].
 Victims of the same cruelty, two poets are sentenced to death at the same time - two of themThe location of the tombs remains unknown.
 1936 In June, on the eve of his death, Lorca wrote:
And I do not want to mourn.should lookin the eyes of death…Silence!I said silence!
We will drown in the sea of ​​mourning…Do you hear me…Silence!I said silence,                                       Silence 3!
      (Toghatsi translation is ours-SK.)¡Silencio! (Quote source: https.
//www.lainsignia.org/2004/junio/cul_065.htm).
We see the dense image of silence in Charents' recent works, especially in the poem "Untitled".There will be silence on the day of my death,It will be hard on the city It came down to a scorching evening, And a silence without shadow, without door, without rest, As the grief of the days, as cruel The sadness of death, imprisoning my silent heart.
1936 On August 18, Lorca was shot by Wisnar Alfacar
on the way.
According to one of the hypotheses (according to Samson Stepanyan's testimony that he was supposedly Charents' shooter), November 27, 1937Early in the morning, Charents was shot near the village of Fantan.
Lorca's poetry is dominated by the theme of death և this is due to the fear of death that torments him.
 "In his (Garcia Lorcai-SK) poetry, the folk-fateful expectation of death is preserved;386].
Tragedy from the dimensions of Lorca's entire workOne is the quality of his worldview.
 The tragic worldview is characteristic of many poets of the 20th century who:Realizing their refusal, the whole team tried to overcome that gap [2, 411].
 Lorca understood contemporary artThe difficult, morbid development is connected with the separation of the artist և art, the collective whole [2, 418], which willy-nilly leads to the personal drama of the poet and the individual.
  "I am just happy to be freefar from the current poetic decline եմ I dream of the coming dawnabout when the incomprehensible feeling of the past will return "[3, 102], he wrotehe was a friend in 1929.
  Charents touched upon the topic of death in his "Visions of Death".
"The logic of life pushes him domestically to the subject of death, he is connected in many ways with the tragic reality, the current of modern poetry that brought him to the ashes.The history of the way of death "[1, 419], - writes literary critic H.Tamrazyan.
 The theme of the great tragedy unfolds in his workhaving literary և especially vital sources [1, 420].
Mar murmurs the sunset,He sifts the ashes of death from the moss, The darkness dies in the twilight, Mar mumbles the sunset.
 My thoughts are death, they are dark,Marquee thoughts only smoke, And the sunset murmurs,It sifts the ashes of death from the wind…The theme of death is obvious not only in the recent cases of Charents, which was conditioned by the prediction of his own death ևwith a sense of impending catastrophe, but in the works of the previous period.
  The tragic fate of their own people, especially the facts of genocide, deprivation of the homeland, further emphasized the concerns of the great poet and patriot.
 If in the works of the first period he mentally depicts the death of his peoplethe ghost, then in the last years of life it increases - personalthe feeling of the tragedy of the drama.
An interesting similarity can be seen in the deaths of the two poetsthen in the issue of high appreciation and appreciation of their art.
  Time:A similar parallel can be drawn between those who became famous after their deathamong atypical poems.
Poems entitled "Dark Love Sonnets" by Lorca ևCharents' antypes, some of which, by the way, Charents calls a sonnet, They are similar in terms of content and ideology, even the similarity of the pictorial system is characteristic of some poems.
Undoubtedly, the topic is multi-layered, but in the case of the presented volume, it is impossible to find a similar philological-biopsychological article. full depth of the facts, which, however, we will try to presentin further studies.
Thus, the above study shows how Two talented writers of the 20th century have independently gone through the same creative path, addressing similar topics,to create a similar artistic pictorial system.
E. The study of the literary feature of Charents-G. Lorka was obvious
makes the greatness and talent of artists. both standing
being close to the roots of national culture and poetry, however,They were able to go from the national to the universal with their poetryas a result, the depiction of national issues in the fictional textacquired universal, universal significance.
Egise Charents-Garcia Lorca.
This research has two purposes.
  For example, these writers show:дожника в исторической эпохе, в результате чег о ему пришлось переосмыслитьYeghishe Charents-Garcia Lorka.
Literature 1. Tamrazyan H. Yeghishe Charents.
 Yes!
 "Arik", 1987.
 477 pages.
2. Terteryan I. А. Examination of history.
 Eyes of Spanish literature XX century.3. Gallego Morell A. «Federico García Lorca.
 Postcards, posters, poems and books ».Madrid. Ed. Currency and Credit. 1968. 175 pág.
https:
//www.lainsignia.org/2004/junio/cul_065.htm:vol. II. Barcelona, ​​Grijalbo. 1987. 611 pág.
