Timeliness.
 Based on time, social conditions ևFrom the level of development of the country, the views of the society, preferences արժեք the values ​​of life are quite changingto obey.
  Because the main force for the socio-economic progress and development of each state is the healthy generation, thereforeThe use of health by the population is considered a countryOne of the leading issues.
Empowering the growing generation to lead a healthy lifestyle is essentialto reveal their attitude towards the value of "health".
 How early will it take to strengthen and maintain health?The more knowledge and skills you have about it, the more realistic it will be to improve the health of the population.
As a component of the educational process, "assessment of the values ​​of life" is included in the "Physical Education" of RA secondary schools.in the "Healthy Lifestyle" section of the "Culture" subject program [1].
 These values ​​were compiled by the specialists of UNESCO և Ministry of WFP,which includes 10 values ​​of life (material security, favorite occupation, freedom, family, health, education, healthyenvironment, happiness, homeland, to love և to be loved).
Based on the above, the goal was to reveal the "Values ​​of Lifeassessment by high school students. "
The above-mentioned issue has been resolvedThe following issues:1. Identify the "health" value of high school studentsevaluation2. Compare rural և urban senioramong the values ​​assessed by schoolchildren.
The research methods are:• Study, generalization և analysis of literary sources;• Sociological survey.
Based on the issue, a questionnaire was conductedAround the high schools of Bambakashat, Pambak, Arևik villages, YerevanAmong 200 bisexual students.
  Research participants:They evaluated the 10 values ​​of life according to their ability (Table 1).
Table 1.VALUES OF LIFEYEREVANVILLAGES:STUDENTSSTUDENTSFAMILY:EDUCATION:FREEDOMMOTHERLANDLOVE AND BE LOVEDMATERIAL:SECURITYHAPPINESSHEALTHHEALTHY ENVIRONMENTENVIRONMENTHOBBYAccording to the survey, the maximum number of high school studentsThe value of "family" was considered, which was chosen by 29% of students living in rural areas and 19% of schoolchildren living in rural areas as the most important value.
 It all starts with the family, the upbringing of the child,human relationships and cognition of the world, therefore, the stronger the families, the healthier the moral normsThe children will be endowed.
 Given the attitude of schoolchildrenև Consumption of the value of "family" of healthy families, the registered indicators are considered positive.
Out of 10 values, the second dimension in the capital is occupied by "education" - 20%, and only 14% of rural high school students choseit as a leading value.
 Given the age of the respondents, how?the demands of today's work and life in general, which:dictate the benefits and potential of higher educationIt can be said that the value of "education" is at the middle level.
The highest attention was paid to the highest students of the villagesThe value of the percentage is "freedom" (23%), and in Yerevan it is quite low - 3%.
 From conversations with rural children during the surveyIt turned out that the limited rights of families, careless yardscondition, lack of leisure, art and sports centersThe reason is that children's daily life is uninteresting and incompleteto organize, then many of them value "freedom"were perceived as life beyond their parents' control, outside of rural limited resources, one that would allow them toto have interesting and full days.
 Unlike them, urban dwellersThe students do not have such a problem.
The value of the "homeland" gives food for thought, the latter "in the villages"!In Yerevan he received 8% of attention.
  Armenian since ancient timesThe main value for the nation was the defense of the homelandand independence, which has always been emphasized in the system of physical education, where the main ideology is to prepare versatile and harmoniously developed citizens who will be ready for work and defense of the homeland.
 The value of life is directly proportional to age.
The individual, living in different eras, the same value is uniqueperception and evaluation.
 The following results show thatthat the transition from adolescence to adolescence does not allow us to have realistic ideas and to evaluate the world around us correctly,because they are in the profession, work and educationin a difficult period of orientation.
The age of high school students also speaks to their feelingsand a vivid expression of imagination, from that point of view "to love և to be loved"The value is at the proper level.
  And in Yerevan, in the villages11% was registered.
The next value - "material security", happy5% of students and 7% of villagers mentioned it as a leading value of life.
 It is commendable that our schoolchildren do not value muchmaterial, but we can not deny the fact that one of the main obstacles in the life of our society in modern timesIt is connected with material problems.
The next value is "happiness", 8% of the city's students, and4% of the villages were mentioned as the primary value.
  Family for oneto have happiness, for another - a secure life, the third to himselfHe considers himself happy only by being loved, the other thinks that he is abovecan only be complete with all the values ​​listedhappy This is a debatable issue, because everyone is different
Perceive the concept of "happiness".
As for the core value of our query:"Health", then it turned out that both in Yerevan (10%) and in the villages (11%)did not receive much attention.
According to existing data, [2] death in ArmeniaDiseases are the main cause.
  In the first placeare cardiovascular diseases, in the second - cancer.
  The third platform is shared by diabetes and respiratory diseases.
 Within which 65-70% of deaths per year are men.
 The quoted sources state that it is connected with the unhealthy lifestyle of men.
 It should be noted that according to the RA GovernmentStatistical data of 2014 of the Republic of Armenia17.5% of the population has physical inactivity, andAbout 49% - obesity and obesity.
 The prevalence of daily tobacco use (50% among men, 2.3% among women) and alcohol abuse (among men - 15%) is high.in the region [3].
 The above facts: The results of the surveyOnce again, the health issues of the population prove itshould be one of the problems of the state, because only solidA person with health can work well, have a healthy generation,to dedicate oneself to the homeland ունենալ to succeed in different spheres of life.
 The last two values ​​- "Favorite occupation" և "Healthy environment" - did not receive decisive attention from our studentsfrom.
Conclusion.
 Thus, from the results recorded, it can be concluded that the population is improving and maintaining its healthThey need it to properly assess their healthEducate with relevant knowledge և Develop appropriate skills for leading a healthy lifestyle.
 It's a good idea to start earlyfrom that age, while studying in public schools.
And what about the lives of rural and urban students?a significant difference in the valuation of some values ​​is then necessaryImprove the conditions for organizing entertainment for rural children(Installation of sports equipment in yards, creation of art, sports and other entertainment centers).
 It will naturally help themthe correct perception and evaluation of the values ​​of life.
Literature 1. Grigoryan YG, Hakobyan ES, Harutyunyan AA Healthy lifestyle
The basics of teaching the subject in a public school.
"Asoghik" publishing house, Yerevan.
 2015.
 page 123.
2. http:
//www.tert.am/en/news/2016/11/30/deadlyillness/22081593. https.
