Timeliness.
  Athlete weight training is one of the most important components of effective competitive activity.
  In martial arts, where there are weight classes, weight management is mainly characterized by weight loss, so most athletes in different weight classes want to lose weight.
In the process of sports training, weight loss is a pedagogical approach to weight management, which allows athletes, while maintaining the functional capabilities of the body, to participate in this competition in the most favorable weight class, which will allow them to achieve high athletic achievements.
The results of studies conducted within the framework of this topic show that the effect of weight regulation on the body is very individual.
 Therefore, athletes must clearly realize the correct assessment of their capabilities in order for weight regulation to contribute to the effectiveness of competitive activities.
Purpose.
  To study modern approaches to regulating the weight of Armenian Greco-Roman wrestlers.
Problems.
  1) Explain the wrestling weight control options.
2) Identify the impact of weight management on competitive activity.
Methods.
  During the study, methods of study of scientific-methodological literature, analysis և generalization, sociological survey, study of competitive activity և mathematical statistics were used.
73 wrestlers of 10 weight categories took part in the poll, 43 of whom were masters of sports, և 6 - masters of sports of international class.
  Among them were Arthur Aleksanyan, three-time champion of the Olympic Games and the world, Arsen Julfalakyan, vice-champion of the Olympic Games, world champion, Maxim Manukyan, as well as athletes who won prizes in the youth championships.
The average sports experience of the respondents was 10 years, and the average age was 21 years old.
• To our question, "If you regulate your body weight before a competition, how do you do it?" 52% of respondents answered: "Limiting food and water intake, ensuring heavy sweating during exercise, using a sauna, massage" and other aids 34% stated that they "limited the amount of food և water consumption, ensuring heavy sweating during training", while the other options համ combinations of options showed a small percentage.
Choosing the right weight management method is very important, because, according to the literature, excessive or erroneous weight loss can reduce the athlete's activity during the march, the frequency of tricks performed և variability [1].
• To the question we were interested in: "If you lose weight before the competition, by how many kg?", 36% of respondents chose the "2 kg" option, 27% - the "3 kg" option, 4, 5 և The 6 kg versions received a relatively low percentage, and 14% of the athletes mentioned that they did not "reduce" their body weight.
This issue has received a lot of attention from us, as according to the data available in the professional literature [3], reducing the body weight by more than 7% may reduce the body's ability to work, and reducing it to 7% generally stimulates the athlete's systems that provide preparation of more economical and reliable technical-tactical operations.
To the question, "If you lose weight before the race, how long do you do it?", 59% of athletes answered "in the last week of the pre-race period", 32% said "in the last 2 days". , and 9% answered that "it starts to decrease a month before the competitions".
According to the literature, it is advisable to lose weight in the lightweight category in a short period of time, and athletes in the heavyweight category should lose weight over a longer period of time, because heavyweights lose the same relative weight with more difficulty. to get rid of "excess" weight at the expense of the fat component.
• To the next question, "What effect does weight loss have on your well-being?", We get the following picture. 68% of athletes answered "My level of functional abilities is increasing", 14% said "I am becoming irritable", և "I am increasing the level of functional abilities", 10% chose "I feel lack of energy". In the other versions, 4% of the answers were registered.
This question has been asked because athletes who are overly obsessed with losing weight often not only suffer from irritability and irritability, but also many famous athletes complain about their health after the end of their sports career, complaining of this or that disease of the gastrointestinal tract.
• We considered it necessary to clarify that "What effect does weight loss have on the performance of athletes' technical and tactical tricks?" 98% of respondents answered that "offensive-defensive actions become more effective", և only 2% answered "Offensive-defensive actions are becoming slower and more ineffective."
This is a rather happy fact. It is known that as a result of weight loss, the absolute index of muscle strength undergoes a significant change, which is the basis for the manifestation of the body's mobility, in general, motor abilities.
• Can we consider finding out "What effect does weight loss have on the efficiency of competitive activity?"
  In this question, 12% of the wrestlers mentioned "sometimes", 36% - "mainly", and 48% - it "always" has a positive effect, only 4% of the respondents mentioned its negative effect.
The latter may be due to the fact that athletes, realizing the peculiarities of their own organism և their capabilities, mainly organize the weightlifting process correctly and effectively.
CONCLUSION.
  As a result of a sociological survey, we came to the conclusion that most of our wrestlers regulate their body weight before the competitions by keeping a lot of workouts, using a sauna, especially in the last pre-competition week, during the last 2 days.
Thus, as a result of our research, the data in the professional literature on weight management was reaffirmed, according to which weight management is an integral part of competitive activity in martial arts, so we suggest paying more attention to this modern approaches during professional lectures and trainings.
Literature 1. Arakelyan V. B. Athlete weight control.
  S. Author's publication.
 2004. 157 pages.
2. Arakelyan V. B., Saghyan B. Z., Kirakosyan K. K., Galtagazyan EG Greco-Roman wrestling.
 Education manual.
  Հեղ. հրատ.:
  2012.300 pages.
3. Nersesyan V., Danielyan A., Abrahamyan M. Weight management methods և means in boxing.
  Educational manual.
Հեղ. հրատ.:
 2016.
 76 pages.
