Introduction.
 As it is known, if there is symmetry in a physical problem, in many cases it is necessary to use that symmetry to solve the problem, otherwise the problem cannot be solved in practice.
 The observation and application of symmetry will have not only practical, but also cognitive-aesthetic significance.
 However, in various physics curricula և in collections of tasks, we encounter many problems in which the symmetry of the physical object or process is incompletely or partially broken.
  Direct standard approaches to solving such problems without consideration for symmetry face serious mathematical difficulties.
 In order to solve such problems, it is usually necessary to supplement and restore the "lost" symmetry.
  As a novelty in this work, we have tried to coordinate some methodological approaches to restoring symmetry by analyzing methodological guidelines and example problems.
We think that in the conditions of this information flood, the classification and coordination of information, in this case problems, their solutions, is very relevant.
 In addition, the perception, search, discovery and application of proportion և beauty play an invaluable role in the formation of a person's thinking և value system.
  Let's move on to the presentation of some types of symmetry restoration.1. The essence of this approach is that they mentally restore the disturbed symmetry of the object under observation, so that the conditions of the problem do not change, they introduce an additional object that is fully equivalent to the original object.
 After such a replacement, the problem is easily solved using the principle of retrieval, if the solutions for a symmetrical and additional object are known [1].
 It should be noted that the additional object mentioned in the issues under discussion is also proportional.
 Consider a problem. Problem 1. From a homogeneous thin disk with radius R in Figure 1, an egg-cut square.
  Determine the center of mass of the disk with such a cut [2].
Fig. 1 Solution 1.
 In the absence of a cut, the homogeneous disk is a symmetrical body, կենտրոն the center of mass is in the geometric center O.
 By mentally filling in the square section, we get a complete disk, restoring the symmetry of the body.
  In order to get a body adequate to the initial body, we consider a body with additional negative mass at the incision site.
 Thus, we replaced the original asymmetric body with two equivalent symmetrical bodies whose centers of mass are known (Fig. 2).
 It is obvious from the considerations of symmetry that the center C of their masses is on the line connecting the centers of the "square" section of the disk.
  Let C be the distance from the center O of the disk by x, the solid disk by 0 m, and the additional part by m.
 Now the mass of the search engine - x distance can be determined using the moment rule - Fig. 2.
Given that where է is the mass per unit area of ​​a thin homogeneous disk, we find from this equation: և.
2. Describe a possible second approach to solving such problems.
 In this case, too, a part of it is mentally removed from the observed asymmetric object, which is arranged in a proportionate part about the missing object that violates the symmetry of the object.
  As a result, we get two proportional bodies և using the principle of overlap, we solve the problem.
 The latter is possible if the solutions of that proportionate body obtained as a result of the removal of a part are known.
 In this method, unlike the previous one, the body is presented as a system of its parts; no additional body is introduced.
 Understanding this approach requires less abstract thinking from learners, but it has narrower application limits than the previous one.
 The point is that in the first case, the "restored" body has a higher degree of symmetry than the body obtained as a result of removing a part.
Let us present the solution of problem 1 with the second approach.
Solution 2.
  Mentally separate the squarely spaced m-square fragment of the missing part from the disk (Fig. 3).
 Without this part, the disk with two symmetrical cuts is already proportional to the vertical line passing through the center O,։ it is obvious that the center of its mass is at the point O.
  Thus, we replaced the original asymmetric body with its two equivalent bodies whose centers of mass are known (Fig. 3).
 By denoting the initial mass of the disk by m, we get from the rule of moments, taking into account that, we find again. 3 և.
3. As a third type of symmetry restoration method, we can consider all the problems where the symmetrical rotation of a physical object or a part of the general motion of a body restores the whole symmetry, and the required physical quantity does not change.
 As a result, the problem with symmetry from the beginning acquires symmetry է is easily solved.
Let us give an example. Problem 2. The body was thrown towards the horizon with an initial velocity / s.
 During the flight, it hits a vertical wall, which is located at a distance from the point of vertical throw to the plane of motion of the ball (Fig. 4).
  Considering the blow absolutely elastic, decide how far the ball will fall from the wall.
  ankyank. 4 Solution.
 The ABC trajectory of the ball hitting the wall is not symmetrical.
 However, after the stroke is absolutely elastic, after the stroke դեպքում in the absence of stroke, the movements will have a mirror symmetry with respect to the upright (Fig. 5).
  Indeed, as a result of the elastic shock, the modulus of the velocity vector of the ball remains unchanged) ից reflects from the wall at the same angle, with which it struck.
  To find the now searchable l, it is enough to "remove the wall" և to consider the symmetry of the body thrown at an angle, for the attainment of which we will have. 5 wherever we get it.
 Let's add that in case of not using the considerations of symmetry, the solution of the problem becomes quite labor-intensive and unattractive.
4. There are physical problems for which the solution of the symmetric problem obtained after filling the missing symmetry can be easily obtained from the solution of the initial asymmetric problem.
 Consider a problem that can be solved using this trick, which is similar in position to the problem of electrostatics nominated in the final round of the 2009 Republican Physics Olympiad.
Problem 3. The capacitors of a flat capacitor are plates of quarter parts of a circle with radius R, the distance between them being very small in size (Fig. 6).
  The capacitor is q.
 Determine the field strength at the midpoint of the section connecting the vertices A և B of the plates if the plates are parallel to each other and the segment AB is perpendicular to the plane of the plates.
Assume that the electric charges are evenly distributed on the capacitor plates.
fig. 6 Solution.
 Consider the charges on two a a և equal surfaces of the positively charged plate above, which are proportional to the half of that circle.
  At the midpoint of segment AB, these charges create an electric field voltage in a plane composed of sector halves (Fig. 7).
 The field created by the charge (negative charge) of the plate, the corresponding stresses created by their corresponding surfaces b և b!, Is proportional to the stress of the field created by the plate above the axis AB (Fig. 7).
  Therefore, in the midpoint of segment AB, as E is created by four charges
 the field strength, as well as the field E created by the complete plates
will be directed along segment AB.
  strained. 7 Now, in order to obtain a charge distribution with respect to AB, let us "complete" the system by placing a pair of three-sided rectangular fish next to each other. 8 plates with the same charge.
 Since the voltages of all these pairs of charged plates are correlated հավասար equal to the modulus, the cone կլինի will also be directed inside the capacitor AB - the voltage will be longitudinally (Fig. 8).
  Using the well-known formulas of a flat capacitor [5], for the search voltage we get:
4. Summary.
  Thus, in the work we discovered և tried to classify the different ways and tricks of restoring symmetry in physics problems.
 It should be noted that the above lessons of problems are not limited to the examples given, և there are many other problems that can be easily solved with similar approaches.
 Dantric acid can be used to determine the point-by-point interaction force of an infinite plane by the method of electrostatic representations, when the plane and the charges on its surface are "replaced" by an equivalent charge that is proportional to the point charge arranged in the plane.
  As a result, the problem is replaced by a completely balanced elemental problem և easily solved.
  The approaches presented for the solution of all these problems are aimed not only at obtaining not so easy results, but also at the students's proportionate perception of beauty and the promotion and development of their creative abilities.
The research was carried out with the funding provided by the State Committee of Science of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of the scientific topic with the code 18T ‐ 5C287.
Literature 1. Ghazaryan EM, Elective questions of school physics teaching methods.
 (Collection of scientific and methodological articles).
 S..
"Edit Print".
 2009.308 pages.
2. Physics.
  3800 task for schoolchildren and postmen in the air (Author: N. V. Turkina et al.)
 Drofa, 2000. 672 p.3. Davtyan AM, Methodical manual for solving physics problems, Kinematics.
 S..
 "Phil".
 2007.
136 pages.
4. Grigoryan G., Yuzbashyan E. Republican Physics Olympiads.
Final stage.
 2004-2016.
 S..
 "Edit Print".
 2016.
 192 pages.
5. Grigoryan GV, Pakhchanyan BA Republican Physics Olympiads (1983-2003).
 S..
 "Edit Print".
 2003.
 224 pages.
