Within the framework of the article, a combination of scientific literature, periodicals and memoirs of contemporaries separatelywill be the subject of study in the XIX century. Avetis Gharibyan (Padvali Vagho), the most mysterious figure of the ARF structure in Alexandropol
life and activity.
 A legend of the revolutionary underground, who bypassed the tsarist punitive machine, organized and carried out it three timesThe "cleansing" of the state arsenals of Alexandropol.
Preface.
 Next to the traditional centers of the liberation struggle in the XIX century. In the early 90s, a new hearth appeared in the person of Alexandropol, which, due to its geographical location and here
Due to the Russian state arsenals located in the 19th century, it gained special significance. late և XX century. beginning of liberation
in armed struggle.
 In a short period of time, the city became a gathering place for the armed forces and fighting groups passing to the Earth.
 1890 in the summer
The structure called "Kar" was founded here until the XX century. The beginning remained as if
The most vibrant and active ARF groups operating in Yerevan provinceand its founding members (Tadjos Khzmalyan, Avetik Maloyan,Alexander Petrosyan (Peto), Enovk Gunjyan, Vagharshak Zhamakochyan,Avetis Gharibyan (Padvali Vagho), Ter-Khoren Abgaryan (Notaji)) deepThey left a trace in the history of the Armenian liberation war [8, pp. 37-39].
From the first day of its activity, the structure became an accumulation and delivery of weapons for the organization of the Earth's liberation.base.
 Usul Grigory (Durgaryan), Vram Nalchajyan, phaetonist Varos, Atrents Tigran (Stepanyan), priest from Sogyuth (Sarnaghbyur)Mesrop Badoyan, landlord Tano Nersisyan, Ghonakhghrantsi (Shirak)Matik և's other efforts were made to make weapons and ammunitionrepair workshops and arsenals, formed և CountryDozens of fighting and armed groups passed.
The ARF Dashnaktsutyun from Alexandropol achieved especially great success in "emptying" the Russian state arsenals.
 "His friends there were brave and self-sacrificingof unspeakable size, - remembers the famous ARF figure Sargis Ohanjanyan (Farhat), - during the day they were driving the wheelchair to the state weapons store, theirThey were carrying boxes full of bullets on their shoulders, in a wheelchair դարThey drive freely to the ARF Dashnaktsutyun warehouse ”[18, p. 53].
Under the total control of the Tsarist policePadvali Vagho, Usta Gabriel (Gabriel Zhamharyan), student Grigori,Thanks to the efforts of Vahan Jallatyan and others, Alexandropol since 1894The repeated "cleaning" of the fortress arsenals is nothing elseIt was, if not in the exceptional manifestation of the ingenuity and self-sacrifice of the local ARF figures.
The first group of ARF in Alexandropol included intellectuals,Pretty strong with craftsmen and small tradersWilling and active individuals.
 Avetis (Avo) Gharibyan, also known as Padwali Vagho (1866), has a special place among those devotees.-1904), the incomparable master of procuring weapons and ammunition.
 He is the most mysterious among the ARF figures of Alexandropol of all timesis.
  A man who bypassed the tsarist punitive machine for 14 years in a row,He procured weapons and ammunition, renovated them, and regularly organized and carried out the "cleansing" of Alexandropol's state arsenals.
Avo was a well-known innkeeper in the general public.
"He was not an intellectual, but he was a very modest, honest and devoted person. from the eyes of the police, "R. wrote. Syan in "Hayrenik" magazine [15, pp. 117-118].
The catering facility called Padwal, which did not stand out with its white tablecloths, vases or snacks, was only a semi-basement part of the dormitory, "… a few black tableswithout a crowd and with bottles lined with shelves մը a few barrels of wine and beer ”[14, p. 213], but he made a great name both in Gyumri and outside Gyumri.
  To get to Gyumri չ Do not enter "Padval" by:contemporaries meant not to see anything [14, pp. 211-212].
Another person was the ARF underground figure Vagho.
 Instead of local costumes without military uniforms with straps, beautiful,cheerful, generous, polite, and at the same time very secretiveand a mysterious young man whose only, according to Ruben, they knewSpecial members of the Central Committee.
Despite his personal acquaintance, Ruben got acquainted with some episodes of Vagho's revolutionary activity only in Sergey [1, p. 3] 4 andThanks to Jacob [11, p. 232] 5 after Vagho had already diedIn the battle of Zardanis [12, p. 111].
 And even in this case, he got it clearinstruction: "Do not hide your face if you do not want to put your head in trouble" [14, p. 213].
Tomorrow was a fabulous day for ordinary party members,who was able to supply as many weapons and ammunition as they could hide.
 And at what cost and in what way was it done:It was a secret.
Ruben got acquainted with Vagho in 1904. in the spring in "Padval".
It was here that he first saw another underground legend, the SwaziBizza (Harutyun), who was said to have a "soaped rope"to stifle traitors.
 "When I heard the name Bidza, I shivered"Me," Ruben recalls, "Bidza seemed to me like a snake from which there is no escape.although he was a handsome man and there was nothing monstrous about him ”[14, p. 215].
If Vagho's job was to obtain weapons, then Bidza's duty was to hide what he had acquired.
 And because they both stood outWith extreme silence and secrecy, rumors were circulating in Alexandropol that "Bidzan, who was suspected of having a weak mouth orIn opposition to the betrayal, Chuan, who had been soaped in Vagho Padwal, was strangledHe would suffocate and suffocate and throw in the well that was opened there ”[13, p. 83].
It is noteworthy that an experienced ARF member like Ruben has been around for a long timeHe believed the news for a while, and years later in his memoirsto confess "If I tell you that I know the whole matter, do not listen.
hang ”[14, p. 212].
4 Sargis (Sergey) Harutyun Hovhannisyan-the same Aram Manukyan. was born in 1879.
He was born on March 19 in the village of Zeyva in Ghapan, now in the village of Davit Bek.
  According to another point of view, in Shushi.
Well-known statesman, governor of Van, Yerevan provincedictator, RA Minister of Internal Affairs.
 He died in 1919. was born on January 19 in Yerevan.
5 Hakob Chilingaryan (Ashot Haykuni) - former officer of the Russian army, graduated from EtchmiadzinSt. George Seminary, one of the key figures of the ARF Kars Jraberd structure, since 1903In 1904 he supervised the formation of groups passing through the country. Participate in the "cleansing" operation of the Alexandropol state armory.
  He died in Vladikavkaz prison in 1912. at the beginning.
Vagho began his revolutionary activities in the early 1890s to study the needs of the country with Grigol Grigor,Weapons from private individuals together with Vram Nalchajyan և Atrents Tigranbuying.
 However, this method of procuring ammunition did not justify itself.
"First of all, it was impossible to get a lot of weapons at once in this way."Then guns and rifles were purchased at a fairly high price, used and often repaired several times.
 HimselfHe did not justify himself from the Russian soldiers guarding the state institutionsthe tactic of seizing the weapon.
 After one or two successful incidents, the police simply doubled their forces [9, pp. 147-148].
 And finally there wasa constant danger of being exposed by betrayal.
By the way, for the Alexandropol Gendarmerie Department tomorrowThe opportunity to get revenge on him was not long in coming.
  1891 February
At the beginning, when the local ARF structure was preparing for its first military servicesent the group to Van [8, pp. 37-38], his Greek neighbor A. Vagho as a result of a search in Abramov խ's own tavern
He stood before the irrefutable accusations established by the material evidence. "
 On March 6, a search of "Padwal" found a Berdanka cavalry bag on the floor near the window.229 rifle type և Turkish Sneijder rifle factory 128with production, usable bullets.
  The search revealed "lists of names written in Armenian"Unaddressed letters with the content of receiving weapons and ammunition from Vagho.
In the presence of such a material evidence baseIt seems that he should not have had a chance to escape punishment tomorrow.
  However, the response steps taken by the people of Gyumri with special ingenuity, which simply amaze with their logic,They turned the trial around, turning the defendant into a victim of slander, and the defendant into a criminal who had falsely betrayed.
On March 14, defendant A. Gharibyan based on testimonies of Alexandropol residents Harutyunyan, Nalbandyants and Tanyants
gives a written statement that the bag with the found bullets was thrown into a tavern by A. By Abramov, and "1888. 16:
April, money collected for the sacrifice "The list is just a list of fundraisers organized before the Easter holidays.
 According to the witnesses in the case:Armenians have a habit of making donations on the eve of Easter.
 The bull bought on the day of the holiday is grilled with bread and winedistributed to the poor.
  That is to say, it is in the found documentSome of the names belong to the fundraisers and the other to the sponsors.
 On the same day, witnesses in the case Mkrtich Khalatyants, Madat Zatikyants շակ Arshak Charchoghlyan informed the investigating motherthat the real reason for Gharibyan and Abramov's enmity is the first to take away the second buyers, that they regularly hearThey are how Abramov threatened to take revenge on Gharibyan.
This fascinating endeavor came to an end after:1892 It was proved by handwriting examination on February 19
(probably not without the help of Vagho's relatives) that the unsigned letters found in Gharibyan's tavern were written by Chukharyants, a former student of the city college, A. By the compulsion of Abramov.
Based on these newly discovered facts, A. The criminal prosecution against Gharibyan was stopped.
1892 By letter No. 1707 sent to the Yerevan State Gendarmerie Department on September 7, 2010 to the Police Department
Chief Lieutenant General Shebeko had to inform that"Ով Accused of accusing Avetis Gharibov (aka Gharibyan AH), a resident of Alexandropol, of a state crimeThe investigation is terminated, gentlemen համաձայն with the consent of the Ministers of Justice for further investigation, canceling the measure of persecution against the accused "[3, p.188-197] 6.
In fact, thanks to the ingenuity of his entourage to Vaghomanaged to disrupt the justice system of an entire empirethe investigation undertaken.
6 "City accused of state crime. Avetis, a resident of Alexandropol
The photocopy of the "Gharibov case" report from the State Archives of the Russian FederationBrought to Armenia by G. Khudinyan in 1988.
1892 Recently, arms purchases have resumed.
 However, as notedThis method of procuring ammunition did not justify itself.
  Purchase:to meet the growing needs of the liberation movement through others!It was impossible.
  Tomorrow he was against buying ammunition from private individualsin the weather.
  "A drop will not be enough," he repeated, "another way."must be found ”[14, p. 216].
And that way was found. 1893 Recently, the idea of ​​looting the state arsenals of Alexandropol came to fruition.
 The program was developed by members of the ARF structure in Alexandropol: teachers Avetik Maloyan, Tados Khzmalyan, painters Gabriel Zhamharyan, AlexanderKupalyan և jeweler Gorg Halachyan.
 It was decided to take out a large number of bullets from one of the arsenals in the "Polygons" district of the city.
"Cleaning" was to be done by Vagho, blacksmith Vram Nalchajyan, Martik from Ghonakhghran, student Grigor Faytonchi Varos.
 The security of the group was to be provided by Aramayis Aznavuryan, Atrents Tigran ոռ KorYeghon, accompanied by three soldiers of the arsenal guard.
 Project:The ARF local structure allocated the necessary amount of money for the implementation - two four-wheeled trucks (vans).
"The spirit of practical work and the solver of difficult problems"It was Padwali Vagho," A. remembers. Aznavourian - a simple and modest man
who was surprisingly secretive, knew how to keep his thoughts to himself. ”
Through diligent work, he succeeded in getting a man named MargarBy bribing a Russian officer from Karabakh to find out which military unit is which?What part of the arsenal is there?
 "We owe it to Padwali Vagho's hard work and perseverance to kill not only soldiers serving in the Alexandropol army in the future," he said.They did not spare us the necessary support, but played an active role in the difficult task of extracting ammunition from the arsenals, in danger."submitting their lives and positions," he writes [9, p. 148].
 The two-day "cleansing" of the arsenal took place in 1894.at the end of August.
  "It was taken out of the warehouse by Russian soldiers."He was transported to Jonakhghran by the truck and phaetonist Varos200 boxes (60,000 pieces) of ammunition.
The most responsible moment in this action, according to A. According to Aznavuryan, the doors of the warehouse were sealed with wax. "Locks
The two ends of the thread passed through it were sealed and fastened with beeswaxon the door leaf.
 The candle was slowly torn off with a sharp knife, then the ends of the threads were torn from the candle, the locks were opened with pre-made wrenches, and then the candle was attached to the thread in the same way and made in advance.He seals and closes the opened doors ”[9, p. 150].
The ammunition purchased was so large that the ARF in AlexandropolThe committee decided to build two new arsenals.
  The first of these was built in the basement of the house of Master Martiros in the village of Daharli.
 SecondThe warehouse was built outside Alexandropol by the blacksmith GeorgUnder Chakhmakhyan's shop: ՝sul Grigor, Vram, painter Gabriel ևWith the efforts of tomorrow.
 Drilled to hide traces of constructionThe soil was taken out in sacks, the river flowing next to it was filled, andThe excavated basement walls and floor were reinforced with cement mortar [9, p. 151].
During the days of the Hamidian massacres, when the issue of transporting ammunition to the country became urgent [16, pp. 59, 2, p. 217], the Alexandropol StateRepeat the operation of "cleaning" the arsenals.
  This timePadwali Vagho took over.
 With the support of the painter Gabrielfinding supporters of Armenian soldiers and officers of the Russian military baseIn the meantime, they agreed to remove bullets from the arsenal.
 1896The last Vagho, Martik from Ghonakhghran, teacher Tadjos, A. Aznavourian, Moruk Karo (moved to Alexandropol in late 1896) and
Painter Gabriel from different arsenals for a weekIn the villages of Daharli, Ghonakhghran and Bayandur, 4-5 trucks of Berdanka rifle cartridges (500,000) were transported and stored daily.item) [10 pages 138, 17, page 52].
 "The case was so well organized that the military authorities did not know anything," wrote A. Aznavourian in his memoirs
[10, p. 138].
Sasun 1904 on the eve of self-defense when ammunition
and the transportation of combat groups to Earth again became an urgent issue,The ARF structure in Alexandropol re-launched the tradition of emptying the local state arsenals.
  The third, last creator of "Cleaning" was completely planned by Vagho.
Establishing close ties with one of the officers of the military unit controlling the arsenal, Vagho persuaded him to support the case of unnoticed looting of the warehouses for 20,000 rubles.
  He managed to get involved in the case5-6 of the most trusted Armenians serving in the military unit, who were "thirsty to go to" Yerkir "[14, p. 216].
The main characters of this adventurous program were two:Bidzan from Swaziland tomorrow.
 By the way, Bidza should not have known with whom or how?He was going to enter the warehouse tomorrow, and Vagho should not have known with whom and how?է Where is Bidza going to keep that huge amount of ammunition?resource.
The main operation was performed in three stages. 1. Vagho "decorated" the arsenal, only himselfthrough two famous friends and Armenian soldiers of the military unit.
2. Kars organized the removal of traces and transportation of the theftBidzan with 10 friends and four trucks.
 Ammunition removed from the warehouse He was transported to Kars by two trucks (twice a day)Ghizilchakhchakh village of the region.
 Immediately after the wagons left, the smell of sheep under the walls of the arsenal erased the traces.
3. The acceptance and storage of ammunition was organized by Hakob Chilingaryan from Gyumri.
  After Bidza left, Gizilchakhchakh arrivedHakob's group (Usul Khecho, Haji Lon, Ashik, Saro from Mshetsi, A. Aznavuryan)He divided the ammunition into parts and placed them in the local ARF arsenals[13, p. 83].
Due to such a division of labor, the people of Gyumri did not know thatIn which village of Kars region was the quantity of weapons stored, and the people of Kars thought that the weapon had been stolen from a soldier from Tula?from the train [13, p. 81].
This series of actions was repeated over the next month13 years.
  Tomorrow the group succeeded from the arsenals of Alexandropol437 "Berdanka" rifle (50 Y 389 pieces), "Pipot" type30 rifles (30,000 pieces) 46 46 boxes of Smith ոն Wisson pistolbullets (66,240 pieces).
  As well as 30,115 different types of bullets with their capsules (cartridges) [4, pp. 4, 5, p. 2].
 "Forgotten?"was only Vagho's bag with his tools and an empty beerbottle… ", Ruben wrote in his memoirs [14, pp. 222-223].
However, the withdrawal of this huge stock of ammunition goes unnoticeddid not stay.
 A Russian soldier named Bushkov in 1904. on the evening of January 7th
When he returned to the fortress of Alexandropol at 9 o'clock, he noticed "10-15 Armenians andWheelchairs on the snow with them and something eaten on the ground "[4, p.4].
 He immediately informed the non-commissioned officer Shamakhyants about what he saw.
  But the latter told his superior Sheremet about itreports only one week later, on January 13.
 An immediate investigation revealed that the theft took place in JanuaryOn the 7th, from 7 to 9 o'clock, ordinary Margaryantson duty (at the time of the discovery of the theft he had already disappeared).
 It turns out within the framework of the same criminal caseIt is said that one case of robbery of an arsenal took place in 1904. January
On the 5th.
 One of the Georgian soldiers of the guard, surnamed Kutashvili, noticed 8 people carrying suspicious goods near the "Akhaltskheyan" gates of the Alexandropol fortress on the evening of January 5.
 After finishing their work, 5 of them left the field, and three returned to the fortress.
 Two of those who returned to the fortress through the efforts of Kutashvili և's other soldiers, Grigor Ghazaryan և Harutyun Melikyan, were arrested.
 At 8 o'clock, Kutashvili reported about it to NCO Baghramyan, an Armenian, but the latter did not proceed with the case.
Criminal on January 13 against the non-commissioned officer ShamakhyantsA few days after the case was filed, the rumors of the January 5 incident were non-commissioned officersBaghramyan's suspicious behavior and the arrest of two Armenian soldiersThey reached the Russian command.
  1904 on January 23
By the order of Colonel Smirnitsky, the arsenal No. 131 of Alexandropol Fortress was opened.
 The investigation revealed that the theft was committed on January 5, between 7 and 9 o'clock, from the warehouse window, during the duty of private Shahbazyan [4, pp. 4, 5, p. 2].
In the framework of the criminal case initiated on the basis of the obtained evidence, the military court in 1904 On June 24, he sentenced non-commissioned officers Martiros Baghramyan and Nikoghayos Shamakhyants to 6 to 5 years in prison, respectively.
  Before the military court!Ordinary soldiers Harutyun Melikyan and Grigor Ghazaryan stood upArshak Shahbazyan.
  The first two are innocent by the courtArshak Shahbazyan was released and sentenced to 6 years in prisonyears of hard work [4, page 4].
Alexandropol was immediately surrounded by troops, and searches and arrests began.
  According to "Droshak" periodical:Acting Prime Minister of the Caucasus Civilian General Frese arrived in Alexandropol from Tbilissi (Georgia) to monitor the situation.
 Within a few days, 400 people were arrested in the city of Kars alone, and 50-60 people were deported [6, p. 29].
However, these events were late.
 The crime is realThe organizers and implementers had long since left the borders of the province of Alexandropol.
 The officer of the military unit controlling the ammunition was transferred to the service in the inner states of Russia with a change of position.
Bidza from Swaziland and Suren and Grish, Armenian soldiers who directly participated in the "cleansing", had disappeared from Alexandropol.
  Months laterRuben arrived in Salmast with Nikol Duman (Nikoghayos Ter-Hovhannisyan)In the group he got acquainted with two soldiers of the Tsarist army from Akhalkalaki, about whom they "whispered" that they were Vagho people andThe heroes of Gyumri, but they refused to deny that they were Gyumri andRecognizing Tomorrow ”[14, p. 221].
Vagho was not the direct initiator of the case.
 Torgomi (TumanTumyants) he died in Zardanis as part of the "Hunter" groupFighting in 1904 in July.
 While passing from Olti to Narima, the group appeared Russian ևunder the crossfire of Turkish border guards.
  Some members of the groupHe was killed during the skirmish, and the captives were Russians by nationalityBy the order of Tatar Colonel Bikov, they were killed in the presence of the Turks [7,pp. 60-61].
The tragic end of tomorrow was an irreversible loss of liberationFor the movement եց caused great pain to friends.
 A. Aznavouryan remembers
"Against the request of the Alexandropol authorities and friends andto insist that he stay and continue his responsible work ", primitivewith a smile on his face, he answered. "Enough, brother, as much as the others
I will give him a weapon and send him to die.
 Now the love (my turn - AH) has reached me "[9,page 141].
Conclusion.
  Summing up all the ARF structure in AlexandropolAvetis Gharibyan, one of the most mysterious figures of the time(Avo, Padwali Vagho) A brief examination of the revolutionary activity, let us mention the following. The life of this unique master of weapons and ammunition can remind many of the plot of an adventure movie.
 The imperative to act in the revolutionary underground forced A. To combine Gharibyan with courage and ingenuity, but that did not demean him at all
manifested complete self-sacrifice.
 Bypassing all the traps set by the tsarist regime, he engaged in the procurement, repair and delivery of weapons for fourteen years in a row, personally or with friends organized and carried out the looting of the state arsenal of Alexandropol.
Such was the real routine of the revolutionary struggle,where the tsarist administration and the long-standing aspiration for the liberation of the homeland clashed.
Episodes from the history of war.
Episodes from the History of Military Struggle.
  Literature 1. Manukyan A. Collection of documents and materials, comp. Գ. Avagyan,
Մ. Avetisyan, edited by A. Virabyan.
  S..
  National Archive of Armenia.
2009.
 575 pages.
2. Dean H. Յ. Dashnaktsutyun, supplemented by "Hayrenik" magazine, ed. Ս.
Georgian.
 pcs. A..
 The post.
 1934.
 395 pages.
3. Khudinyan G. The legend of the ARF underground.
 A remarkable documentary on the revolutionary activities of Avetis Gharibyan (Padwali Vagho) is Vem Pan-Armenian Magazine (13).
 2015.
 Number 3:(51), July-September.
 Pages 187-198.
4. Caucasian courier, "Homeland", national weekly, Boston.
1904, No. 265, Year 6, August 6.
 Pages 1-8.
5. Caucasus, "Homeland", national weekly, Boston, 1905, No. 2 (288), 6th year, January 14.
 Pages 1-8.
6. In the Caucasus, "Droshak", Born, 1904, No. 2 (143), XIV year, page 29.
7. Hakobyan K., Torgom's "Vorskan" group և its influence on the further tactics of the liberation war, "Echmiadzin" official magazine of the mother of the Catholicosate of All Armenians, St. Etchmiadzin.
CT year.
 Ս. Etchmiadzin, 2013, August.
 Pages 54-70.
8. Hangoyts N., M. Memories of Sh. From the history of Armenian social movements, "Hayrenik" magazine.
 The post.
 1923, No. 5.
 Pages 27-39.
9. Hayrapetyan E., Memoirs of Aramayis Aznavourian, "Hayrenik" magazine.
 The post.
 1937.
 No. 9, July.
 Pages 145-151.
10. Hayrapetyan E., Memoirs of Aramayis Aznavourian, "Hayrenik" magazine.
 1937.
 No. 1, November.
 Pages 136-143.
11. The documents of the ARF Dashnaktsutyun's big trial were compiled by AvagHarutyunyan, "Vem" Pan-Armenian Magazine, ed. Գ. Khudinian.
 2011.
No. 3 (35), July-September.
 Pages 162-182.
12. "Vorskan" group fight near Zardanis, "Droshak", August.
 1904.
 Number 8.
Pages 109-111.
13. Ruben, in the furnace of Kars, "Hayrenik" magazine.
 1951.
 No. 12, December.
Pages 77-85.
14. Ruben, The Memoirs of an Armenian Revolutionary, vol. A, "Horizon" printing house.
Los Angeles.
 1952.
 401 pages.
15. Sevian R. The first ARF figures of the Alexandropol region,
Homeland Magazine, Boston, 1938, No. 7, May.
 Pages 117-121.
16. Simon Zavaryan (on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of his death), ed. HR.
Dasnabedian.
 B. pcs.
 Beirut.
 1992.
 612 pages.
17. Papazian V. My memories.
 H. A., Boston, 1950.
 600 pages.
18. Sarkis Ohanjanian, MyThe memoir, "Hayrenik" magazine.
The post.
 1942.
 No. 6, November-December.
 Pages 51-57.
