Theories of the geography of civilizations and their spatial-temporal evolution have a high scientific rating, which is based on the objective requirement of discovering, perceiving and predicting modern realities [see details 1, pp. 60-66].
  In other words, the study of civilizations is an attempt to make sense of the "past", "present" and "future" of human development with a new scientific interpretation.
The purpose of this article ացումը to separate research problems completely fits into this very logic.
In the article, the social component of the system of geographical sciences has been chosen for the solution of research problems, as the level of development of the latter provides wider methodological possibilities [see details 2, pp. 41-61].
We have already referred to this issue in our previous publications.
In particular, this discipline, in the current stage of theoretical-methodological re-equipment, makes the best use of the principles of synergy.
Accordingly, in this article we have not limited ourselves only from the socio-geographical point of view, but we have tried to concentrate it from the methodological arsenal of other social sciences.
 In other words, we have tried to combine the research results of different disciplines in one dimension, the point of view of the social geography chosen for its implementation, with its research object, internal structure, methodological basis, fully satisfies the necessary requirement.
Civilization, as the highest social system, is a multilevel "multifaceted" formation, which is expressed in the "objective reality" of human subjective consciousness [4, p. 30].
  From this point of view, presenting the internal structure of civilization in one dimension is a rather complicated process.
  However, we propose the following modeling of the internal structure. As a system, it is expressed by a three-dimensional three-dimensional pyramid, which is characterized by both the sub-order three-dimensional: top, middle, base (each with its own sub-components), and the three-dimensional side seats is the complete spectrum of system-building elements (Figure 1).
  In the first case, the vertical connection of the system-creating elements is expressed, and in the second case, the horizontal connection.
CULTURE INSTITUTSIONALATSUMLOKALKAGHAKAKRTUTYUNPETUTYUNAZGZHOGHOVURDGtsapatker 1 HAMAMARDKAYINKAGHAKAKRTUTYUNHAMASHKHARHAYINKAGHAKAKRTUTYUNKAGHAKAKRTAKANNUYNAKANATSUMNERUZHI IRATSUMCHGNACHAMVERARTADRUTYUNKAM MAHKAYUNATSUMHASUNATSUMZARGATSUMMSHAKUTAYINNUYNAKANATS.HAVATKAYIN NUYNAKANATS.LEZVAMTATSOGHAKANNUYNAKANATSUMTSAGUMNABANAKAN NUYNAKANATSUMTARATSKAYINNUYNAKANATSUM HAMAKETSUTYANBAGHADRICHABARZHEKAYINBAGHADRICHGARZHEKAYINBAGHADRICHHAMAKARGASTEGHTS BAGHADRICHNERUghghadzig yentakargutyan apical part are the trinity of civilization, its sub karutsvatskov.Sakayn, unlike local civilizations, on top of the higher floors of the world and human civilization are without horizontal components,for this is where the whole variety of vertical ուց horizontal connections of system-building elements are completed.
 As for the third unit of the trinity, as the highest type of human coexistence, local civilization is the final stage of the systemic component of coexistence.
Therefore, being located on the lower floor of the top of the pyramid, at the same time it meets the final stages of the other components of the system, as it is in strict agreement with the last ones.
At the base of the pyramid are separated both the three side sessions, which correspond to the system-building components, as well as the floor size of the sessions.
 The latter express the evolutionary process of the components.
  The middle part of Naburg is built with the same system.
 Moreover, each floor of the structure is completed with a system of its components, by which it acquires the features of a separate, smaller system.
The system-building components of civilization are the elements whose unique existence պայմանավորված is conditioned by the interrelationships of the nature of the whole system.
 Taking into account the whole multifacetedness and multiplicity of the system of civilization, we conditionally combine the system-forming components into three groups: The term "civilization" describes the highest type of human coexistence, therefore the first group of system-building components includes the whole subcategory of human coexistence.
 It shows the whole hierarchical staircase of formation and maturation of local civilizations.
  It is in each of the stages of the latter interaction with the other components that create the number. In turn, it determines the formation and development of world and universal civilizations.
 Subclass levels of coexistence component correspond to ethnic groups8.
 The basis for internal delimitation is both the vertical connections of the subordination and the horizontal connections of the other components of the system.
That is, each type of coexistence is characterized by a certain level of value identification of the individual, the corresponding degree of the value component, which is enriched in the case of successive groups.
 Identification with any group expresses the identity of an individual.
 That is, the mental sphere of the individual, which builds its own identity, brings to the forefront the relationship between the other and us, between them and their opposition.
  And this in turn is conditioned by the value orientations of the individual (interests, ideas, beliefs, views, feelings, principles of behavior), the unique harmonization of which forms the inner world of each person, the basis of uniqueness և individuality.
 The main scientific discourse in this field refers to the basics of understanding meaning.
  That is, the identity of the individual has an objective affiliation, in the form of conformity-non-conformity according to the fixed "criteria", that it should be perceived as a subjective affiliation - self-categorization.
The urgency of the problem is conditioned by the fact that the modern tendencies typical of the development of human civilization, globalization and transnational processes, align (have leveled) the value orientations of individuals երի coexistence groups.
  Under the influence of the ongoing geopolitical, geoeconomic and geocultural transformations, an attempt is being made to reconsider and transform the traditional group boundary.
 In Armenian, it is often identified with the term "nation", in which case there is confusion during delimitation.
 In our opinion, "ethnic community" as an international term in Armenian language thinking corresponds to the term "national (civilized by extension) community" and describes the whole diversity of human coexistence.
 However, its application to certain types is wrong.
In contrast, efforts to preserve the borders of their own group are intensified, and ethno-defense mechanisms are put in place.
Thus, in modern theoretical research, the key question of identity is to discover its essence, that is, to belong to the coexistence group, to accept a subjective desire or an objective demand?
In our opinion, the subjectivism of an individual's self-categorization is conditioned by the desire to satisfy objective requirements.
 That is, without the objective basis operating in reality, the subjective value system of individuals and groups is not complete.
  It is with this logic that we have built the whole subcategory of the system-value component of civilization.
Accordingly, the more the identification groups (coexistence eggs) grow and become more complex, the richer the value components with which the individual identifies with the given coexistence egg.
As a social system, the constant changes in the current time typical of "civilization" is a dynamic category.
Therefore, its integrity is expressed by the spatial system-building component.
 The subordination of the latter corresponds to the stages of life.
 That is, to take as a basis for delimitation, the possibility of realizing a specific type of coexistence, a corresponding value component in time and space.
 In general, such dynamics is typical of all forms of civilization - "universal," global, "local.
 However, each of them has its own process of spatial development, the interpretation of which is another research issue.
In conclusion, we can state that as a system, the multifaceted concept of "Civilization" is expressed in the form of a three-dimensional three-sided pyramid.
 Moreover, the latter is first of all characterized by sub-disciplinary three-dimensionality: peak, middle, base, where each one is distinguished by its sub-disciplinary components.
 In this case, the vertical connection of the system-creating elements is expressed.
  In addition, the pyramid of "Civilization" is characterized by the three-dimensionality of the side sessions, which completes the whole spectrum of system-building elements.
In this case, we are already dealing with horizontal connections of system-building elements.
We believe that a clear definition of the system-building elements, the connections between them, will allow to create in the practical sphere the living environment that is necessary for the full realization of its own potential.
 In other words, in the theoretical field, scientifically grounded approaches should become a pillar to identify the causes of our coexistence crisis, to more accurately outline their solutions and the vital basis for the fullness of different degrees of coexistence.
Thus, the clarification of civilized affiliation is the only alternative for all levels of coexistence below it, which will allow to identify the necessary environment for a full process.
Literature 1. Muradyan Yu. Geography of civilizations.
 S..
 "Tigran Mets" publishing house.
 2011.
 476 pages.
2. Valesyan L. H. Methodological and theoretical foundations of geographical sciences.
 S..
 YSU Publishing House.
 2004.
 264 pages.
3. Manusyan S. Problems of identity preservation in the Diaspora. socio-psychological point of view.
 "Norvank" Foundation, June 10, 2010.
http:
//www.noravank.am/arm/issues/ detail.php? ELEMENT_ID = 48434. Кузык Б. Н. Яковец Ю. В. Civilization.
