The principle of continuity of mother tongue teaching is conditioned by the consistent learning of language levels.
  During the teaching, the content of the Armenian language, the gradual mastering of language levels, develops in learners the ability to construct speech, to control their speech, to display appropriate verbal behavior in different situations, as well as linguisticEnsuring sufficient վերաբերյալ sound knowledge of all parts of the system.
  Systematic on separate language unitsKnowledge training contributes to the development of learners' analytical skills [1].
  It is noteworthy that in modern linguistics a special place is occupied by the scientific part of speechmany studies that result in noonly the grammatical changes of the words, inclining from themparts of speech, but their grammatical features.
 Among the studentsIt is formed about the idiological structure of language and its elementsknowledge that allows them to distinguish parts of speechaccording to their common meanings և according to grammarfeatures [2].
 We notice the learners during the trainingthe fact that the noun, as part of a word, indicates materialsubjects in general.
 There are grammatical categories specific to the nounto be special և to be simple, to have certain և vague aspects, հthe grammatical order of the consonant, the grammatical order of the number, etc.
As a result of the preliminary analysis, we point out that the grammatical order of the noun is the number of objects.is.
  It turns out that a noun has two unique numbers that indicate oneSubject: stone, house, monastery, door, etc.
 As mentioned by S. Abrahamyan [3],
In some uses of the singular noun, the singular-plural contrastneutral, և singular can express a) the meaning of the indefinite plural, b) the collective.
  And the plural number indicates more than oneSubject: books, cities, gardens, etc.
In this article we have tried to use the purposeful learning of the learners about the composition of the plural of the noun, which, we think, from the point of view of the learners' knowledge.presents a difficulty.
 Parts of speech և their grammatical features are taught in the 7th grade of secondary school.
A sound theory of nounsBy focusing on the detailed teaching of the grammatical order of the number of knowledge, especially the composition of the plural, we ask the question to what extent the learners are able to turn the acquired knowledge into social skills.
Any lesson is effective ում serves its purpose if it is built with modern methodical tricks.
 During the training, the teacher creates problematic situations when the studentsThey find the answers to the questions on their own, do investigations.
 Learning the topic is one of the priorities for learnersDetermining the level of knowledge ության of the noun part through repetitionto expand the knowledge gained from previous classes andenrichment [4].
The subject program of the "Noun Number" sub-general secondary school envisages four lessons.
 In order to organize the lesson effectively, the teaching is conducted in a deductive way.
In the first lesson, general information about the suffixes of the noun is given, then methodological method.List words and ideas that are relevant to the topic being taught.
 Each learner is free to express their point of viewand monitoring.
  All approaches and ideas are recorded on the board.
  Then the teacher writes two on the boarda series of nouns: monosyllabic և polysyllabic, then suggest writing in the pluralhorses, emphasizing the endings as:                          tree - trees room - roomswall - walls log - logs          houses - houses corner - corners                        heart - hearts spring - springs   Learners notice the difference then with the help of the teacherdefines that the plural of singular nouns is formed by -s, and the plural of polynomial nouns is formed by -s ending.
  One of the students reads the relevant part of the textbook and then:They strengthen the rule by discussion.
  The next step is to do the training exercises as well as the homework assignment.
The purpose of the second lesson is to provide students with solid information about plural deviations.
  AboveIt is instructed to write three sets of nouns on the board.fish - pasture - watchmaker mouse - textbook - novelist - slippery - large load bakery - miner The method of conversation explains that the Grabarian of the first series of wordsThe final sound n has fallen in the world, but in the plural ևis restored during word processing.
 The plural of words in the second row is formed by the ending -er, then it is followed by noting that:The words in this series are complex in composition, և the last components are monosyllabicnoun, the plural is formed with the ending -er.
 The third series of complexThe last components of the words are monosyllabic but contain:meaning of action, as a novelist means a novelist, etc.
One of the leading tasks of the teacher is to impart knowledge about other words deviating from the regularity of the plural composition, such as Russian -,man -, woman -, և etc.
The third lesson is by group research method in advanceThe recommended topic is divided into sub-topics և research groupsis instructed to complete the tasks within the given period.
 A combination of separate sections is compiled for the studythe overall picture, after which each group selects one speech, to find out the involvement of group members ևthe degree of mastery of the assigned topic.
  The first group represents the group of singular nouns whose secret vowel is the secondsyllable, that the plural of these words is formed by the particle -s, such as:  Tiger - Tiger - Star -notebook box emperor-daughter-combThe second group represents the group of nouns to whichThe consonant h is in the first syllable, վում is formed with the ending -s,such as school, scissors, tie, tablecloth, chest և etc.
The third group presents from the point of view of modern Armenianwe, - we, -onk, onk, - have a group of ending nouns,of which the formations with -enk are regular, while onk with -unqThey have a colloquial tone, limited usage, such as:grandparents, yours…The purpose of the fourth group is to represent the plural of nounsFeatures of the composition, distinguishing three groups:a) nouns that have "singular" and "plural" numbers: city, field,sea, book և etc.
(b) nouns that have only a singular number, usually a pluralare not used.
  These are the indefatigable nouns: milk, bread, dough,oil և etc.
 c) nouns that have only the plural և չեն can not be singularto be used.
 They are neuter nouns: Ander, Carpathians, etc.
Learners are also introduced to the plural form of nouns in modern Armenian by the particle q,which can be used to form words ending in the suffix -tsi, -etsi, -atsi, such as:Lori, citizens, these also have parallel suffixes, which are more canonical for the literary language, whilethe former are specific to the vernacular.
The next group represents the plural numbercases of sound change. a. The closed syllable i of monosyllabic words becomes h. Books, prices, hearts.
b. The closed syllable and the plural of monosyllabic words become h. Doors, swords, water.
c. The last and of the monosyllabic words becomes v. eggs-eggs, lu-lver.
The fourth lesson is a topic summary lesson, which is conducted through self-assessment through the GUS chart.
 It becomes obvious what knowledge, abilities and what learners learn during the topicacquire skills.
As homework is instructed to form a knee, a thought,plural of the words stream, garden, load, shooter, then invent a short story.
Literature 1. Armenian language ական literature.
 5-day teacher training plan և materials.
 Yes!
 2006.
 30 pages.
2. Abrahamyan S. Գ. Modern Armenian grammar. Yes!
Luys Publishing House.
1969.
 438 pages.
3. Abrahamyan SG Modern literary Armenian.
 Yes!
 1981.
 418 pages.
4. Yezekyan L. Armenian language.
 Yes!
 Head of Yerevan. University Press.
 2007.
402 pages.
5. Khlghatyan F. Armenian language.
 7th grade.
 Yes!
 "Zangak-97" publishing house.
 2006.
160 pages.
6. Manukyan Al., Speech development during the teaching of the Armenian language.
Yes!
 Luys Publishing House.
 1969.
 249 pages.
7. Sarukhanyan S., Mirumyan M., Dishaghajyan N. , Phase training
weather.
 Yes!
 "Zangak" publishing house.
 2014.
 158 pages.
8. Asatryan ME Modern Armenian language.
Yes!
Luys Publishing House.
1983.
 432 pages.
