Going to school is a leading activity for a childbecomes an educational activity.
  According to academician A. Leonti:
Leading is the activity during which the formation of essential mental processes ական essential personality traits that characterize a given stage of age developmentthe main achievement.
 According to that, the educational activity of the primary school student is a socially significant, obligatory, evaluable activity, thus it is fundamentally different from the activity.of all the types that the child used to do in preschoolin institutions or at home. ”[6]
The flood of information has affected all segments of societyincluding junior high school students.
  Living in a modern environment:It is not possible to ban television, newspapers, magazines, movies, radio, the Internet.
    Often family upbringing is sufficientdoes not pay attention to what the child is watching on TV, what it islistens with headphones, what games he plays on the computer, what literatureprefers heroes and movies.
 Or why it, no one else.
  MoreOften in this area the child is independent, not yet formed with self-consciousness, because he is impressed, he is often influenced by the media.
 "The freedom of a child does not mean a state of abandonment, on the contrary, the correct perception of freedom in our fantasiesinstead brings the real needs of the child և leadsreal, real care for the child.
  Our modernthe child enjoys only physical freedoms. ”[1]
All spheres of human life living in the 20th-21st century have been invaded by the mass media, the latest technologies.All these elements are of great importance in the formation and socialization of a person's value system.
 It is a well-known fact all over the world that the first places in the mass media are occupied by television and the Internet.
 So, let's look at some of themfeatures related to aesthetic perceptions, aggressive expressions և values.
The value system of children has not developed so much yetcorrespond to the perceived event.
 They are often the hero of the screenHe considers the aggressive actions "insignificant" compared to his victories.
 These actions take root in the child, which later becomes difficult to correct, unchangeable.
  Most children can imitate anyone in a matter of secondsthe behavior of the hero or host, to say what they learned from the media.
 But, unfortunately, there are negative elements in the information that can getchildren by pressing a button or opening the Internet.
 Aggressive tendencies of children are more often noticed by parents.
 Many parents are concerned about their child's behavior on television և massunder the influence of other media.
 How to make it difficult?Do not darken the child's consciousness in the situation, do not spoil his psyche,not to harm his physical health.
  These other similar situations were the basis for choosing our topic, which is very topicalis a problem nowadays.
The goal is the aggression of junior high school students ների the mediarevealing the connection.
 Problems:• Analyze Internet, TV information և JuniorThe reciprocal connection of schoolchildren's aggression.• Conduct a theoretical analysis on the nature մանկ classification of child aggression.   • Choose diagnostic tools. • Parents at home and teachers at school try not to cause harmto the child's sight.• Encourage adults to pay attention to themselves when interacting with childrenbehavior.• Help parents with tips.
The mass media is an institution created for open public programs.
It is a relatively independent system with its content, means, tools, methods and a certain level of organization.
"One of the characteristics of a primary school student is their emotional highis irritation.
 Teacher's touching speech, bright colors, watching the movie,The story they read completely captivates and absorbs the children.
 To thisas opposed to a long and tedious dry verbal narrative, instructiveThe stone-throwers get tired, distract them, and watch the horrormovies հաղորդ aggressive bullying programs և deepthey leave a residue on the further upbringing of the child. "[4]
The flood of modern information has become personal to the childproperty formation factor.
 From the first years of his lifehe appears in the information field, where he is already communicatingcommunicating.
  An interaction occurs between the information environment կառույց the structure of the growing generational value orientations։.
 This relationship between the environment և subject և is contradictory in nature, as the components have a complex structure.
  Use violence on the one handthey learn, they spoil eyesight, they waste time, on the other handThey are brought up with the help of education, computer games and programs, which develop their worldview, opening new horizons of life.
  This culture gives an opportunity to meet new people, other cultures.
 Statistics show that special children's programs occupy about 5% of the airtime, itin the case when 5-10 years ago it was 30%.
 Only cartoons are leftand several thematic programs.
  The rest of the time the children watch the same programs as the adults.
Violent TV programs are sharply criticized by educators and social workers, andhorror movies.
 They find that these scenes make the child cruel, aggressive.
 Until this debate goes on or on childrenDo the military actions and scenes of violence displayed on the screen have a negative effect?
  Thus, the statistics report that:[7] Most popular TV channels show physical every hourSeven facts about aggression ին nine facts about verbal aggression.
 And the child,who spends about two hours on TV, sees aggressionat least fifteen cases.
  And it is no coincidence that this topic is of great interest in pedagogical psychologyև has great social potential.
Studies have shown that “school-age childrenThey spend 3-4 hours a day in front of the TV, which is equal to 5lesson time.
  What do the children manage to see during those hours?There are three scenes of violence and murder in which there is a societyUnjustified behaviors / drug, tobacco use ևone sexual scene /.
  Will all this have no effect?on the child's consciousness.
  After all, a child after graduationwill watch about eight thousand murders, ten thousand violencescenes.
 Once upon a time there was a survey among American prisonersCan TV theory teach a new criminal?tricks.
 8 out of 10 answered that question positively.
 To the next question3 out of 10 answered that they tried to commit a crime:guided by the tricks seen in the film.
  Another studyshowed that watching programs with scenes of violence in a childThey caused aggressive behavior.
 Such children several timesthey commit more offenses than those who are not attracted to themwatching such programs. "[8]
Why do children become more aggressive?
  Known to the childsuch a psychological feature. The adult's actions are usually accepted by him և easier for the child
It should be copied rather than deepened into its permissibility.
 If a childto cross the street with the wrong place, then he will do the same in old age:Even though he knows that it is wrong, because it penetrates his consciousness, it is strengthened չէ it is not subject to correction.
  In the same way, watching an aggressive scene leads not only to aggressive behavior, but also to emotionalof insensitivity.
 The child becomes less responsive, cold, he has lessbegins to worry about the pain and suffering of others;Watching aggressive scenes at the age of 7-8 can be predeterminedThe child's aggression at the age of 17-19.
 That is why it is necessaryAdvise parents to ban aggressive programs, watch movies, limit their number until they are 12 years old.
  It can also be limited or reduced by the whole familyTV քանակ hours spent at the computer և moreto carry them out effectively.
To imagine what the circumstances are for the childWhat are the fears? It is necessary to know that growingThe child learns the environment, whether it is peaceful or notwar.
 As the child grows up, he goes to school, gradually the connection with the parents weakens, շրջ the period of difficulties in the upbringing begins.
 Parents can not follow the behavior of children,who express their morbid desires or fearswith the incarnation of aggressive animals, and at a slightly older age, watch horror movies for adults.
A 6-7 year old child, watching TV, takes it deeperinformation, has feelings of joy and fear, his psychemay be in strong irritation or inhibition.
  For example, funReceiving scenes of murder and violence, he was reprimandeddoes not feel իտ unconsciously, under the influence of hypnosis, voluntarily manages the management of his mental process on television.
 All:communicating with the world through the screen, he finds something for himselfsomething valuable, including the ideal of its existence.
 For some elementary school students, they are superhumans, brave policemen, socio-political figures, and for others, famous film actors, sports masters, pedagogues.
 He trusts his ideal, herHe considers words and actions to be true and begins to follow themhis principles.
 The effect of such an ideal is a great inspiration from the screengives.
 Children are not ready to respond appropriately to the information received from the screen.
 Scientists have discovered that:Only 60% of parents try to explain the scenes of violence shown on television.
  And 40% do not give any importancethe content of the program watched by the child.
  Playground:One can often witness how the winner hits the loser with pleasure, and before that it was enough to just catch himto the opponent.
 The reason for this is that the primary school students, not having enough consciousness, consider what they saw to be real ևMurders and violence do not cause fear or disgust, as they are accustomed to the phenomenon on television ևit is normal for them.
 Apply the same aggressive attitudeThey are at school.
  It is pointless to keep the primary school student away from the TV, the parents just have to control what the child is watching.
From all this we can conclude that in modern conditionsThe level of aggression shown by the primary school student is influenced by the information they receive (from TVած what you have heard and seen from the computer).
  Children take this aggression to school, apply it at school, showing aggressive attitude towards teachers and friends.
  Not to mention that the child sits for hours in front of computer games, causing harmsight without watching any educational program, with nothingwithout contributing to his own knowledge, abilities, value systemdevelopment.
  "Every third person in the world sees badly.
What is most troubling is the growing short-sightedness of primary school studentsis a trend that mainly comes from reading while lying down,from poor lighting, for a long time on the TV or computerfrom sitting in front of him, from the inconvenience of the table, etc. ”[3].
  At home, parentsIn school, teachers need to be given serious media attentionto the children և Relevant moments during the lessonsuse accurate examples to explain the harms that:will give horror movies, such programs, computer և internetabuse.
 "According to Vygotsky and his followers, regular trainingIt can really affect a child's mental development and upbringing.
  To this end, they suggest that teachers actively intervene.
  According to them, the corresponding educational environment ևProviding certain materials is not enough to stimulate that developmentfor "[2].
 / These are all problems with their solutions /.
Leaving the analysis of the data provided, you can get adviceto give to parents և teachers.
1. To follow the formation of the established order of behavior during the upbringing.
a. To form a versatile and harmoniously developed individual who will satisfy the public demands.
b. It is very unfortunate that neither the state nor the family has decided how much time the child should spend in front of the TV.
Adjust yourself.
c. Social experience has shown that the constant presence of a child in front of the screen is interrelated with his emotional sphere, his intellectual abilities, physical data, including the deterioration of vision. d. The main methods that regulate this process can be conversation
with other educators, child psychologists about the harmfulness or usefulness of this or that program.
  Private or:showing the positive and negative sides of the story by the public example.
 In the form of games, it can be didactic, developmental, at the same time educational or computer or television.educational programs;2. Gradually the child should learn the positive from the Internet և from the screento take
3. Parents should follow the scientific innovations, read literature in different educational directions, includingabout aggression.
4. It is very important to have a mutual understanding with the child: what to look for, when to look, how muchin time.
 The child imitates the parent, the teacher in any way, their image develops in him.
Literature 1. Maria Montessori, Self-Criticism և Self-Teaching Juniorat school.
  Syllabus.
  Translated from Russian by GorgHakobyan.
 2013.
 Page 21.
 37 pages.
2. Hovhannisyan G. և Others, Fundamentals of Constructive Education և
methods.
  Handbook for teachers.
  Yes!
  "Tigran the Great" publishing house.
2004.
 Page 32.
 336 pages.
3. Aniedu.am, Tuntunik, Typhoid pedagogy, for visually impaired childreneducation.
 2013.
 Available on July 16, 2018.
4. Mi-lingvo.biogsoot.am, Areob Serobyan, Age Psychology.
  2015.
Available on April 8, 2018.
5. Khudoyan S. Crisis ages of personal development, Yerevan.
 "Zangak-97".
 2004.
 176 pages.
6. Elkonin D. B. Elementary school teaching psychology.
  Yes!
Luys Publishing House.
 1975.
 Page 19.
 238 pages.
7. Beron R., Richard D. Aggression.
 SPB, ed. Peter.
 1997.
 Pages 104-108.
 194 pages.
8. Problems of media psychology.
  Collection.
  Moscow.
  "Rip Holding" publishing house.
 2002.
 Page 146.
 Available on 20.05.2018.
