And it is the soul of God, and the body of the parents, and the mind of the hopeful.
Grigor TatatsiEach period has its own peculiarities and goals, from which derive certain requirements for the educational system.
 At the same time, however, it should be noted that school management does not presuppose rooted education; experience has shown that every innovation must be anchored again on the educational culture that has overcome the expertise of years (in the case of the Armenian people, centuries).
 Thus, for example, as T. Juharyan mentions, since the 5th century we have received a number of effective verbal methods used in the Armenian school: narrative, interpretive, descriptive, interrogative, lecture, etc. [7].
 Along with the development of schooling's education, the verbal methods are improved, and research methods are developed, making the verbal methods more effective and productive. [7]
Global developments, educational area reviews, the demand for developing education և new challenges to the education system pose some serious challenges that require more flexible schooling policies, combining the acceptable new with the best tradition of world-wide integration.
Everyone knows that the role of a teacher is incomparable in terms of teaching effectiveness. His personal charm, his love of the learner's subject matter are a precondition, but the method he has chosen may be the methodical tricks derived from it.
 The teaching of Old Armenian is not an exception in this respect, the role and significance of which is incomparable both for the study of the Armenian language and for the presentation and understanding of the church ritual.
  That is why they study in Greek in the historiographical departments of the universities, in the humanities stream of the high school, as well as in the gift halls and seminaries, of course, taking into account the professional direction of each person նպատակ the goals of teaching.
In this article we will try to present some methodological techniques that we think are effective when teaching Grabar.
Let us mention the role of the teacher again, addressing our caring fathers. "Teachers teach the students what they know with greed, they will be condemned even more than greed.
 Because the stingy are afraid to spend the money for the head or to give something to the needy, knowing that the more they give to others, the less they have of their property, but the teachers are not so afraid, because they are like a lighted lamp, from which no matter how many lamps are lit, its light will not fade.
 Especially since they know from experience that their knowledge increases and not decreases according to the proverb. "He who teaches, learns himself" [3].
The dedication of the teacher is first of all expressed through professional progress. Continuous work, methodological-experimental research create opportunities for effective teaching.
Of course, a solid presentation of the grammatical material should be used.
 It is no coincidence that since the early Middle Ages, "grammar has been entrusted to monastic schools and monasteries as a gateway to the study of all other subjects."
  According to Arakel Syunetsi, the subject of grammar as the study of rational art is the parts of speech, and the goal is linguistic regulation and improvement [7].
Guided by the above, we would like to single out a few questions related to the verb topic from the temporal material of Old Armenian teaching, which we consider to be the most important in order to present the mentioned topic more effectively.
  It should be noted that since the 8th century, Stepanos Syunetsi, based on the role they played in classifying parts of speech, singled out the verb, considering it the center of the sentence, the nucleus.
In teaching the verb, it is very important to pay attention to the rhetoric. We know that in Old Armenian there were four syllables: a, e, i, and, and in modern Armenian, two - a, e.
There are no major complications in the case of current-based timelines, especially in the case of transactions. We think that in this case, especially the comparative comparison is enough, especially at the stage of class consideration.
 Moreover, the comparison can be presented both by writing the example of bowing on the blackboard and by presenting an example of a pre-compiled comparison table through a poster.
Grabara humble / -al / play humble / -el / questionable humble / -il / meditate and humble / -ul / wake up Modern Armenian humble / -al / play humble / -el / ask to meditate awakenYou can present the relevant grammatical material after presenting it in modern Armenian Comparison table with 9, emphasizing the similarities.
  Let us bring a comparative example of the borderline imperfect present tense. GrabarE khonarhumArdi learned Armenian bowed bowed khonarhumKhaghamKhaghasKhaghayKhaghamkKhaghaykKhaghanvazum yemvazum yesvazum evazum yenkvazum yekvazum yenkhaghum yemkhaghum yeskhaghum Playing yenkkhaghum yekkhaghum yenVazemVazesVazeVazemkVazekVazenAys For instance in modern Armenian eghdzakaneghanaki formal similarities / grabaryan imperfect present form coincided with ardihayerenyan eghdzakan aparnun /, as well as grammatical material into a mechanical template, araveltesaneli and to make the utterance perceptible, as I am running + in, that is, to remove whose imperfect ending.
We can use the Wen diagram, the use of which helps to see and understand grammatical contemporaneous realities together, distinguishing similarities and differences.
 We think that the use of this trick is quite effective, especially when referring to difficult-to-understand grammatical materials, such as the past perfect tense, which has some difficulties in distinguishing both types of inflection, inflection, conjugation, and verbs.
 The issue of education is further complicated by the fact that according to the school curriculum, no reference is made to verbs.
 That is why we offer to make practical training by video comparison. that is, to present Grabaryan և 9 It should be noted that the use of tables has also been applicable in the Armenian reality since the Middle Ages.
  For example, Isaiah Nshetsi attached a grammar table to grammar analysis to make teaching more effective and easier.
GrabarPatmetsiPatmetsirPatmetsPatmetsKatmetsikPatmetsinPatmetsiPatmetserPatmetsPatmatsakTatmetsiktrpardiardiHayrenian equivalents, comparing the differences of their commonalities.
Example A. Introduction - Humor - Modern Armenian - Singular 1st, 3rd persons. Plural 2nd, 3rd persons. In the given example, we have emphasized the Grabarian "modern Armenian" sound commonalities, which after presenting it is necessary to bring original examples, translating and separating the past perfected verbs.
 Of course, it is desirable that the perfect perfect past participles in these original copies be first similar to modern Armenian, then to refer to the different ones, moreover, we have brought them formed on a radical basis.
Grabaryan և Identical versions of modern Armenian.
 They sealed the military uniform.
 They played river, breathed 2 winds and hit the house.
Horses different from modern Armenian As the Father sent me, and I will send you.
 And he healed them.
  You said.
Lord, I knew that you are a strict man. You reap what you did not sow and gather, so you do not scatter.
 Lord, when did you see yourself hungry and fed or thirsty and drunk?
In modern Armenian, similar in form but different in meaning? When did you see yourself as a stranger and gather or naked and feel?
  When you see yourself sick or in prison, you come to yourself.
  Lord, Lord, did you not prophesy in your name, and cast out devils in your name, and did many things in your name?
 Why didn't we take him out?
By the way, giving importance to the original copies is not accidental, as it was an accepted form in the traditional classification. to ensure high efficiency of the joint original teaching of the language ևliterature.
 In this respect, it is not accidental that, for example, Gregory the Magistrate views grammar as literature, linking the origin of grammar with literature [7,15].
  In order to make the grammar material more grounded, Vartan Arzeltsi allegedly used folklore, proverbs, sayings, and idioms as original examples [7, 19].
As for the content of the original copies, we think it is desirable that the original material for the gift-seminaries be selected from the well-known literature or church rites, and in the history courses, from historiography and source studies.
  In this way, the "interdisciplinary connection" can be provided, the material can be substantiated with the knowledge gained from the related subjects.
Original copies. This is my beloved son, and I am pleased with him.
He thought of releasing her in silence.
  Expressing the meaning of the passive, He was opened to heaven.
1 All the original copies are taken from the Gospel (according to Matthew).
2 Unfamiliar words in the original copies must be explained ևComment, how to breathe, here to blow.
Common Humble Grabar Modern Modern Armenian Let us compare: And they went out of the way of the servants, and gathered together all that they had, and found evil and good; and the weddings were multiplied.
    The chief priests and Pharisees gathered together.
For example: B. Unique 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons. Plural 3rd person. Spelling Differences. I left. I left. I left. In terms of meaning, and in the second, in terms of the ordinary, they gathered.
C / Mixed HumorGrabar ZarteayZarteartZarteavZarteakZarteayakZartianOld ArmenianWakeWakeWake UpWake UpWake UpWake UpWake UpWake UpNo's I was afraid to go there.
  He gave it to the other and said the same.
 Did he rise from the dead?
 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
 And while he was sitting on the mountain, the Book of the Olives went to the building.
  Then all the virgins arose and formed Zlaptersurians.
 And when they knew him, they sent him unto all the region, and brought unto him all that were diseased.
 Because I was hungry and then you ate me.
We think that such tasks are effective during the lesson, they justify the material presented.
Literature 1. Abrahamyan A. Grabar manual.
 Yerevan, Luys Publishing House.
 1976.
 557 pages.
Barseghyan H. Teaching the parts of the Armenian language.
  E.
  YSU Publishing House.
1980
  527 pages.
Fathers of the Armenian Church, h. E, Poghos Patriarch of Adrianople, Educational Museum (18-19th centuries).
  Holy Etchmiadzin.
  "Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin" publishing house.
 2009.
 403 pages.
4. Movsisyan A. Outlines of the history of the Armenian school և pedagogy.
 Historical-philological journal.
 1958.
 N 3. Pages 275-277.
Simonyan J. History of Armenian pedagogy.
  Yes!
  "Pedagogue" publishing house.
 2006.
 263 pages.
Jahukyan G. Grammatical "orthographic works in ancient" medieval Armenia.
 Yes!
 1954.
  316 pages.
Juharyan T. Գ. Methodology of the Armenian language.
 Book one.
 Yes!
 Luys Publishing House.
 1978.
 259 pages.
