One of the primary goals of education today is to make the learner independentthinking, judgment, independencedeveloping other problem-solving skills.
 It can be achievedIn different ways, necessary software changes,Providing an appropriate learning environment, applying a variety of methods and practical tasks that contribute to the qualitative change of knowledge and worldview,education և etc.
Coverage of integrated learning featuresIn our next work we want to analyze and suggestMultipurpose and multifaceted application of different tasks in the process of teaching (both general and professional)opportunities.
The teacher, as the organizer of the content of educationplans integrated, like any other type of lessons:providing different ways of organizing training and different types of tasks.
Assignments can be a guide for teachers and lecturers, as well as learning objectives for lesson planning.when drawing the final results.
 These tasks include all components of education content: knowledge, skills, value system, can describe, according to Benjamin Bloom scale, different levels of learner cognitive achievement: memory - perception of meaning - application - analysis - synthesis (comparison) - evaluation (evaluation) [ 4; 6].
 Depending on the purpose, each of the tasks we present can be doneshould be used in different ways.
  Let's present what is said differentlymost frequently used in the subject teaching processshowing the multifunctional practical meanings of the tasks in the tables with a specific example of biology.
In the process of teaching biology, tables can be made for different purposes.
 For example, to stimulate և develop the learner's attention, comparative abilities, symbolicthinking (as it may often be necessary to create and use symbols), diligence, reading, sourceto study, to classify information according to the selected criteria,to separate the possible from the impossible, the primary from the secondary, the effective from the inefficient, to combine, to present the thoughts in a concise way,to fully comprehend, assimilate information, to ensure the logical sequence and completeness of the material, to self-check, to ask questions, mistakes and omissionsto discover, to edit, as well as non-verbal communication,Other skills to use time efficiently.
Therefore, the presentation of knowledge by the learner in the form of a table in accordance with the set goal, in our opinion, is one of the most telling evidence of the extent of his knowledge, depth and degree of mastery.
When teaching biology, spreadsheets can be used at different stages of lesson organization.
 For example, a positive event,negative, in some cases also to compare, analyze the neutral sides,Interrelationship of structure and function, cause and effect, devices of the organism related to environmental conditionsthe nature of the same organ-systems of different disciplinary groupsto identify or compare the levels of formation, to understand the patterns of evolutionary development, the proposed materialTo develop the ability of learners to find patterns, tables can be created for other purposes1) in parallel with the explanation of the lesson, to facilitate the comprehension of the material, 2)Assign homework to make learning and mastering more effective.
 Compiling spreadsheets required by the learner, in addition to developing the above features, will allow the teacher to identify what students թույլ allow ևstrengths that are usually difficult to articulate verbally,to present what they know (which is convenient for a certain CAPfor the organization of inclusive education of children), 3) knowledgefor inspection.
 For the latter, we offer a variety of variations to test different standard levels.
In any case, a clear methodological approach to compiling spreadsheets is the clear formulation of the requirement, which, according to the methodology, should be proposed.by imperative or by way of question.
 This requirement applies to anyonethe formulation of another task [5].
 For example, the most common form of knowledge table is the following:a) Complete the endocrine glands and their functions representing the table.
InsertGland:Hormone:Hormone:gland:nameproduced by:dysfunction:hyperfunction:hormonemanifestationmanifestationb) Only the first one can be left in another type of tablethe two columns, or one of the third and fourth columns.
c) It is possible to suggest one of the columns or (to be more than two)in case) some are completed and given to the learnercompletion instruction.
d) Nominate one of the columns in full and the other in partcompleted table, requesting to fill in the blank sections of the table;which can be headlines, etc.
e) Suggest that the learner based on the completed columns of the tablefrom the content, select for the main lines left blankheadline.
To the weakest students: f) nominate some boxes filled in all columns of the table, requesting to fill in the blanks on their own.
It is advisable to develop spreadsheet skillsand develop, starting with small amounts of information, gradually moving to aggregate individual small pieces of information, then larger onesto develop the skill of presenting the material in a table.
  In this sequence, the skill can be developed independently, unappreciatedthrough assignments, focusing on seeing the link between the title and the content of the table, from unnecessary informationthe requirements to get rid of it, to choose a more accurate heading, to ask the right questions to check the contents of the table, etc.
Here are some tips, some of which are:is most common in pedagogical practice, wishingEmphasize their non-exhaustive practical possibilities and goals.
 And let us remind you that the tasks with their multi-purpose approach can be applied to whole lessons as well as anyto organize a lesson, like teaching a teacher,as well as for presenting the learning outcomes of the learner.
Because, the combination of the same methodological approach is "teaching"The best guarantee for the learner to acquire the skills and abilities set by the teacherforward որպես as a goal of the organization of training and the expected end result.
1) Submission of the material with combined explanations.
  It is the most popular learning tool, it provides a teacher-learner, learner-learner dialogue.
 Can be accompanied by slides, pictures, movies, diagrams for clarification and simplificationThe process of perceiving and assimilating information, providing differentInvolvement of the senses, formulate and develop summary, systematic presentation of information, primary to secondarydifferentiation and modeling skills.
 Combining explanations with media presentations helps to motivate learning.
  And as an individual or group homework assignment,Media presentations prepared by students not only help to increase the effectiveness of learning, but also develop independent, clear organization of group work.և skills to evaluate the abilities of others correctly, cultivate friendship, mutual help and responsibility, etc.
2) Clarification of the material, using parallels and similarities of different knowledge.
 Such tasks can be used to develop comparative skills, to analyze causal, structural and functional relationships, to use knowledge in one area to solve problems in another area,Applying the basic laws of natural science to explain different natural phenomena, worldviews on the harmony and unity of nature through similaritiesin order to shape և etc.
  For example, it may seem surprising at first glance, but the vector of analysis of many examples of biological structural-functional units, behavioral inherited traits can be directed towards the upbringing of patriotism and humanity.
  In particular, bird droppings,Explaining the migration mechanism of many fish, emphasizing the pattern that these animals live in a certain, stable adultin a favorable environment, but necessarily for reproductionreturn to their homeland with the most favorable conditions, often having to go through very long, difficult, full of trialsto cross the road (fish often have to go against the currentto swim).
  By the principle of similarities, comparing what is describedwith human thinking, one can successfully cultivate patriotism, calling for the primary reproduction in the homelandcapacity for species conservation and development.
As an example of educating humanity and devotioncan be considered the explanation of the structural feature of red blood cells - erythrocytes by the principle of causal analysis.
 The cell has lost the nucleus, its most important organoid, which would allow the cell to multiply, "rejuvenate":in order to accumulate hemoglobin in the volume occupied by the nucleus,by which the cell must deliver oxygen to all the cells of the organism because:The activity of the latter is directly conditioned by the amount of oxygen received through the blood.
  This approach:The logical continuation is the analysis of the patterns of energy distribution in the oxygen-energy էներգ respiratory phases.
 Drawing students' attention in the cellon the doses of energy released to the environment in the form of thermal energy from the complete energies dissipated in the two phases in the current phase, from 150 kJ to 90 kJ in the oxygen phase and 2650 in the respiratory phase.From 1570 to 1570 kJ, the idea of ​​the possibility of kindness and charity in human relations can be deduced on the principle of similarity.
  This logic will become more impressive and illustrativeWhen spice up the word with folk wisdom, for example, when it is mentioned as an analogy, "Do good, throw it in the water" orother similar wisdoms.
  A similar approach can be pointed outExamples in the analysis of any organ-system և to educate not only Christian ethics, but also to cultivate the perfection of nature, at different levels of living systemsUnderstanding the generality of existing patterns և Ensuring the development of a high value system holder.
 These are training todayև In particular, they are one of the priority goals of integrated learning.
Tasks using the principle of parallels and similarities can be categorized as concepts of comparison tables, covering knowledge, showing logical sequence, creating interdisciplinary connections on different principles.mapping of diagrams, networks of concepts, explanation of terms, artistic and folklore material (prose, verse, fable, proverb, phrase, word of mouth,riddle, symbolic wisdom, song, film, picture) through other forms of analysis of works with naturalistic and bio-philosophical thinking [2; 3; 4].
3) Analysis of examples of bionic և science fiction phenomena.
 Applicable for the same purposes as 2).
 In addition, promotionlearns the cognitive activity of the learner, develops the imagination by the example of integration of biological and engineering, technical knowledge, develops ideas of the diversity of the fields of practical application of knowledge, the possibility of acquiring and integrating knowledge, the perfection of nature and unityabout which one can learn everything that everyone needs - his ownto organize life properly և etc.
4) Experiments, laboratory, practical works.
  First of allDevelops practical skills to apply theoretical knowledge in practice.
 Forms and develops attention, workto plan, design, analyze results, conclusionsto do, to follow up and make suggestions, to self-assessflexible, creative attitude in unexpected situationsto demonstrate other abilities.
5) Role play, trial, causes of problems ևReverse analysis.
 The latter is very convenient to organize using the "Wheel of the Future" method.
  Role play and trialThey develop and develop to play different roles on the same issueto evaluate, analyze, justify one's point of view, to show flexibility in different situations,honesty, insights into causationdeveloping skills, the ability to integrate knowledge,People քաղաքացի civic awareness of one's place and role in nature, worldview և etc.
6) Material analysis through questionnaires.
 A series of questions is neededto compile the solution of the problem from the simple to the complex, on the principle of maintaining a logical sequence: the learner's logic, causal connections of events, structure andIn order to discover the basic principle of the connection of the function, to form and develop the consciousness of the constructiveness of learning.
 Greatprovides an interactive atmosphere, activates the learnercognitive process, develops logical thinking,In essence, the skills of asking questions, understanding the causal links of the event, drawing conclusions and suggestionscapacity, ensures the perception of the integrity of the event [1].
7) Creation of handicrafts.
 Develops practical skills to apply theoretical knowledge, prepare self-made educational materials, waste secondary treatment,develops an awareness of the value of nature, implements a saving attitude towards resources, as well as taste andAesthetic, labor and environmental education.
8) Discussion of essays, interesting information.
Essay writing primarily develops and develops researchSkills (topic selection և substantiation, planning, application of the title page և other technical requirements, formulation of links, conclusions, creation of a list of literature ևetc.), teaches to plan work, search for sources, make logical connections between different information, literateto construct a written word, to substantiate an opinion, to evaluate, to evaluate, to formulate conclusions and suggestions.
 Essay discussionforms and develops by appearing in front of an audience through a performance, building a literate speech, answering questionsAudience communication skills.
Fascinating information is just as it is calledThey help to cover, enrich, illustrate the information.
They promote learning not only logically but also emotionallymanifestation of approach, expand cognitive knowledgethe framework.
9) Rebuses, crossword puzzles, transcripts, competition questions, predictions according to a picture, exhibition or history.
  Such tasks provide great involvement and learning of learnersmake it more lively, interesting, train the brain, make it easierperception and memory, create a game atmosphere, raiseThey develop an emotional approach to learning, develop imagination, creative abilities, logical, associative and symbolic thinking, develop team consciousness, etc.
10) Writings on problematic issues, fictionMultifaceted analysis of works.
 Develop writingand oral speech, to comprehensively analyze and evaluate the phenomenonObjective (historical period, geographical location, level of civilization, social relations, linguistic thinking) կարող Ability to combine subjective conditions, substantiate one's own opinion, conclusions ան make suggestions, seek alternative solutions to the problem.
 They form and develop the unity of the universe, the interconnectedness of phenomena, people ևCivic awareness of one's place and role in nature, worldview.
Naturally, they are not consumed by the teaching processOrganizing opportunities for dedicated professionals.
 However, all types of tasks analyzed in the work will be enriched by the emphasis on the possibility of using them for multiple purposesto each specialist dedicated to providing quality educationMethodological approaches will help to enable updated learningThe two approaches we point out in the organization process. common to impart mechanical knowledge և to evaluateփոխարին Replacement of non-quality education training toolswhich will enable learners to discover knowledge on their own, to show an integrated attitude towards phenomena, other higher thinking mentioned in the work.the end result that provides the ability-skills, The knowledge will serve to ensure the appropriate level of education of the citizen ready for the challenges of the modern world.
Not only sound education but his alertness and dedication too are most requiredwill make it more effective and interesting, but will also increase students' interest and involvement in the learning process, the lack of which exists in the current education system.It is one of the undeniable facts.
The research was carried out thanks to the financial support provided by GSPI (now SSS): № ShSU N 02-SGI-2017 scientificwithin the topic.
Literature 1. Adamyan N. Application of mathematical elements to some biological
during the teaching of concepts // Public. scientific session.
Collection of materials.
  December 10-11, 2007.
  Gyumri.
  GPMI.
      "Scribe"հրատ.:
 2008.
 pp. 405-408.
2. Adamyan N. A key to the interpretation of Lewis Carroll fairy tales // "Golden
Divan Fairytale Magazine. "
 2014-2015.
 Practice 5.
 pp. 97-104.
3. Adamyan N. Teaching natural science through fairy tales
// GSPI "Scientific Bulletin" 2016.
 N1.
 Prak B.
 pp. 198-209.
4. Adamyan N. Avagyan K., Amazaryan A., Mikaelyan H. Integrated:
Peculiarities of teaching // Naturalist.
 2017.
 N1.
 pp. 23-28.
5. Jivanyan K. Where? A collection of current biology assessment tasks // Yerevan.
 Ministry of Education and Science 2007.
6. TEMPUS "ARMENCA" project No. 543817- TEMPUS-1-2013-1-SE-TEMPUSImplementation of SMHES National և Qualifications Framework in Armenia.
 Training of teaching staff. Topic 1.
Formulation of educational outcomes of the course.
 Workshop:topics.
 November 24-December 16.
 Yes!
