Timeliness.
 Our republic is not left out of the socio-economic changes taking place all over the world, whichconstantly presents new requirements to the theory of pedagogyև practice.
 Even today, one of the problems of school education is learningthe creation of positive motivations towardsphysical culture subject.
A number of authors, M.A. Arvisto [1],
V.K. Balschich [2], VI Zholdak [3], V.A. Sokolova [4], OS Farfel [5], E.P. Sherbakova [6], the study of scientific works shows that
that the formation of schoolchildren's physical-sports interest remains one of the problems of schoolchildren's physical education.
  This is due to the fact that it has been created in recent yearswith a worrying situation. are considered pre-school և school
Deterioration of the level of health and physical fitness of children of old age, low level of positive motivations for physical culture, sports, healthy lifestyle.
  Physicalstudy of motivations for culture and sportsIt is an important condition for the organization of physical education of schoolchildren and the management of their physical education process.
The purpose of the research.
  Determine the ways in which junior high school students develop an interest in physical education classes.
The research was carried out in Hrazdan city N 5 basic school after Hovhannes Tumanyan.
 Involved in the studyThere are 79 students in the third and fourth grades.
 Freedom:A questionnaire was developed for the implementation անկ An individual interview was conducted with the help of the teacher.
After analyzing the data, we got the following:the image.
 The majority of respondents - 86% - said they were happyParticipates in physical education classes.
Although physical education lessons differ from other subjects in their emotionality, their ability to move freely during the lesson, and in other positive aspects, in our opinion, similarThe answer is declarative, as evidenced by the followingthe answers to the question.
 To have a choiceIn this case, 30.3% of students answered that they would not participatephysical education classes.
  For this period of age development, such an attitude is opposed to childrento the natural need to move.
 The roots of such a contradiction may lie in the organizational and methodological problems of physical education classes.
The students' attitude towards physical education classes was clearly expressed in the answers to the question "Are you absent from physical education classes?" - Figure 1.
             Figure 1. Absence of students              from physical education classesAbout 60% of students try not to be physically absentfrom culture lessons, which may indicate that they wanted to beobjective և unique absences associated with illness or otherwith possible reasons.
 It can be noted that the schoolchildren who answered this way show a rather stable physical interestto the culture class.
 Towards physical education classesThe indifference or complete lack of interest of schoolchildren is manifested in the “absence of physical education classes.I often do, ”he answers.
 16.4% of respondents answered:that they are often absent from physical education classes, notingunfounded reasons. "I forget my uniform", "I do not feel well", "something
It hurts somewhere. ”
Next question: "What do you dislike about physical culture?"The aim of the lessons was to find out the factors that hinder itactive participation in physical education classes.
  Schoolchildrenmentioned a number of disadvantages that can be attributed to the physicalThe methodology of conducting cultural lessons, the content of the program ևFigure 2 for the organization of the educational process.
Figure 2. Active physical education classes Factors hindering inclusion30.3% of respondents mentioned that physical education classHe is very tired at times, that is, they do not like being physically bigload.
  The majority of respondents, 20 students or 25.3%, were girls.
 31.6% stated the opposite that they do not move much during the physical education class, ie physicalThe loads are small.
  It is interesting to note that almost the same percentage of schoolchildren who chose the answer "we move less" - 32.9 - attend various sports groups: judo, karate, football, field hockey, boxing, dance, for which the physical activity is probably small.
 62% of schoolchildren "dissatisfied" with physical activity classes, both large and small, can speak of a mismatch between physical activity and the ability of schoolchildren, such asabout the non-implementation of the principle of individual approach.
 Respondents:22.7% said they were not interested in physical cultureThe lessons, of course, are quite unfavorableIdentifying the causes and immediate correction.
 Like:The situation may be due to their low level of theoretical knowledge of the subject "Physical Culture" բաց lack of purposefulness.
It was gratifying that the schoolchildren were quite clearorient themselves in their interests են understand whatThey want to do some kind of exercise.
 48.1% of them mentionedthat there are few competitions in physical education classes, and that 44.3% - thatThere are few games.
As a result of the survey, it was possible to find out what it isAttracting them to physical education classes - Figure 3.
 To this question:Of the answers offered, most schoolchildren chose "free movement" - 62%, և physical exercises:49.3%, which can be considered natural for them to move naturallydue to demand.
  The respondent can be emphasized separatelyThe desire of schoolchildren to compete is 40.5%.
Figure 3. Physical education lessons for studentspreferred motor activity The meaning of doing physical culture and sports closelyis related to:for each student in these classesfor personal significance.
  Students make choices based on meaningThey are motivated to train; it is very possible that these motivations stem from the goals of physical education.
Based on this, it was possible to find out whether the children do physical exercises on their own - for what reasons?does.
 Surveys show that exercise on its ownOnly 34.1% of the respondents do.
  This figure is almostcoincides with the number of children attending a sports or dance club.
One can assume that independent physical exercisespush the coaches of the children.
 Respondents were more likely to choose "I just want to be" որպեսզի "to be.healthy "answer options, respectively: 22.7 և 13.9percent.
  The other incentives were less percentage: Figure 4.
Figure 4. Independent physical exercise motivations for trainingHere are some observations. "Just a wish
I have to do "option as a motive, in our opinion,is related to the child's natural need to move, andTo consider the "to be healthy" option as a motivationIt can be mentioned that the schoolchildren who answered this way have a formbelief that exercise will help them stay healthy.
As a result of the survey, the factors hindering the performance of independent physical exercises were found out, see Figure 5.
 As:Obstacle respondents mentioned more lessons: 35.4percent, և lack of desire - 20.2 percent.
 The latter is a very serious signal և requires clear measures to change the attitude of these children towards physical culture.
Figure 5. Exercise on your ownObstaclesFactors influencing the formation of children's motivationsTo find out, they were asked to answer the question of whoOr what motivates you to exercise?
 BiggerCoaches have an impact on this issue - 32.9%, parents - 26.5% և spontaneous desire of children - 27.8%.
Thus, the conducted research allows to make onea number of conclusions.
  The development of interest in physical culture among primary school students can be carried out by influencing individual motivations վրա the motivational sphere as a whole.
 However, everything is motivated by schoolchildrenis interconnected. When some motives are created, others are directly influenced and formed.
  Therefore, in the case of targeted pursuit of interest in physical culture, the influence is pedagogically justified asIndividual motivations, as well as the complex impact on the motivational sphere as a whole.
  For example, cognitiveSuccessful motivation is achieved through learning awareness and the development of motor skills.
  Creating productive motivations is a necessary condition for arousing active, sustainable interest in physical culture among schoolchildren.
 Without result orientation, the student's motor activity is not as effective as active interest;as well as the physical and technical training of schoolchildrenfrom the point of view.
  The specific level of the result depends on the school age, the level of physical fitness.
 It canIt should be the result of a game, a sport, an educational standard, whateverThe result of the competition, the specific indicators in the movement tests, etc.
Effective motivations need to be developed as well as mobilityin the process of learning actions.
 This is necessary for every student during physical education classesInclude competitive activities of individual significance when:While studying, schoolchildren prepare to participate at the same timethe competition held in the classroom or school with the given competition.
 HoweverHere, too, a certain individually achievable result should be defined for each student, which should be evaluated and encouraged.by the teacher, by classmates as a success և self-overcomingstep.
 In this case, there will be an internal motivation to train with physical exercises, which determines the interest of schoolchildren in physical culture.
Analysis of the results of the survey, our observations made of physical education lessons և that the age of the childrenat different stages of development of physical culture ևThere are new motivations for sports, they allowto assume that ultimately to physical culture և sportsThe leading intellectual, cognitive interest is consciousan approach that can develop the physical education of primary school studentsby constantly raising the level of theoretical knowledge about culture, sports, hygiene, healthy lifestyle, about their body.
Literature tour and modern cheek life.
 ФиС. 2002.169 p.
Development of motor skills in children.
 Thesis of the All-Symposium:(24-26 November 1976 Mr. Tula) .- M.
