At the heart of recent linguistic studiesconstantly in German անր English և language commonalities,their interactions at different language levels, the content of German as the first և second foreign language course ևThese are the new concepts of methodology.
 Therefore, the urgency of this topic is due to German as a second foreign languageNew methodological concept on university language course և newthe need to develop approaches where the commonalities of the two languages, German և English և their practical application, come to the fore.
Thus, the aim of this topic is to show the role of German in the modern world in the context of modern globalization, the similarities between German and English, to evaluate the English languageThe practical significance of transmitting events into German as:In terms of developing the content and methodology of the second foreign language university course.
In the age of modern flattening (globalization), a foreign language is increasingly used in the modern world.socio-economic significance, which leads to languagesfrom the point of view of creating global communication preconditions.
 Under these conditions, widespread English becomes "power by other means" (The Econom, 2001).
  It penetrates lifeall areas, first of all via the Internet.
 Consequently, English words and phrases in all languages ​​today (in particular:in European languages) make up a large number.
 For example, in GermanA closer look at the vocabulary reveals that at the verbal level the boundaries between German and English are not stable today, despite the fact that German occupies a special place.In the Indo-European language family է is the mother tongue of all Germanic languages.
 There are many factors that determine the languageinteractions and interactions.
 Among them are political,economic, cultural contacts, which can often be linguisticto be a source of changes and penetrations.
  Contacts:can be reflected at all levels of language.
  Currently globalizedLinguistic communication has become commonplace in the world, which raises the need to pass common language standards.
Such a tendency has a direct impact on the German language as well as the general concept of its teaching, forming a "languageThe policy ", at the core of which is the spread of the German language in the world, the increase of its role ումն the strengthening of world positions.
Due to the latter, German continues to be one of the most popular foreign language learners in the world, which is due to the fact that it is one of the leading German-speaking countries in the world.position in the fields of science, education and economy [1,3].
 Thus, German and English, coexisting on the same cultural level, have many commonalities, the registration of which can significantly contribute to the practical learning of German.
 This:The circumstance should be introduced in German as a second foreign languageBased on the development of the course content and methodology, how many?that in the Armenian education system German is mostly taught as a second foreign language, երկրորդ any second և next foreign languagelanguage inevitably bears the influence of first language learningin the process, U. Weinrich describes it as a deviation
from linguistic norms, which occurs as a result of linguistic communication [3,22].
Thus, English language և literature, translation work in English-Armenian, English-Russian sections, the practical course of German as a second foreign language becomes especially effective on the basis of such methodology.
 German as a second foreign language for learners whose mother tongue is Armenian,English is especially important, as in this case the mother tongue has no similarities with German.
  Meanwhile, English offers many opportunities in that context.
 As many observations show when teaching German as a second foreign language, learners are more likely to turn to English if they do not know anything about German.
 From this point of viewThe comparison of the linguistic-structural levels of the two languages ​​becomes more important, as it can be a favorable basis for linguistic research in the later stages of learning.to be.
The last term of German as a second foreign language courseObservations in practice confirm that it is a different methodrequires substantive approaches.
  It becomes a priorityInvolvement of German և English և commonalities, which in itselfin turn, it brings about the phenomenon of language transmission3.
  Moreover,The transfer of English to German as a second foreign language course can be positive or negative.
 In both cases:3 Transmission in this context implies the transmission of linguistic phenomenaThe principle that the realities of one language can be transferred to another.
և´ positive,: negative, transmission phenomena can be correctleave a positive impact on learning in the case of observationon the process.
Here, however, there can be no unequivocal assessment.
 There are two traditional approaches to this issue.- in one case, transmission phenomena - positive or negative,often not observed և consequently, do not engage in foreign language teachingin;- in the other case, the negative transmission is considered as an interference - a linguistic effect that hinders the teacher ևto use the transfer potential of the learner while learning a foreign language [4, 4-5].
Here, in fact, the teacher factor becomes primary.
The latter's task is to expand the teaching of a second foreign language The process is based on the results of the latest research, concepts, creating new perspectives, providing relevanttoolkit.
  There is a new requirement for the teacher, which implies:Ability to choose new methods of content delivery.
Thus, in the teaching of German as a second foreign languageTransmission phenomena can be observed at all language levels: phonetic, verbal, grammatical, such as: • Equivalent horses at the phonetic level, such as pronunciation, writing, composition, meaning. Dance / to dance, the Elephant / the:
• Latin script;• Existence of a certain և indefinite article նման principles of use.• Equivalent sentence models. Er ist krank./ He is ill. Es ist kalt./ It is:
• Generalities of timelines: three main types:sound series. kommen-kam-gekommen / come-came-come, composition. have + Participl II / haben / sein / + Partizip II;
• Weathering verbs. Müssen / must, können / can, dürfen / may.
The many things listed above և many other phenomena can be the basisto be a conscious approach to the second language of German as a second foreign language in university students, due to which the negative impact factor of the first language is reduced.
  Whereas the conscious transmission of the realities of the first language leaves a definite positive effect, in this case the wordIt is about a positive transmission event.
 Positive transfer of language knowledge, abilities and skills to a second foreign languageThis field ensures the rapid and efficient mastering of the latter.
 In this case, the initial attitude towards the language is no less important.
It is necessary to instill in students a positive attitude towards German at this stage, denying the insurmountable language of the given language.stereotypical approach to complications, showing that:it is at the level of their cognitive knowledge.
 From this point of viewis a significant factor in the large number of English words in Germanavailability.
  English studies were singled out within the framework of the German language course as a second foreign language.
 English:The elements are described in German by one common definition, "Denglisch".
  Such penetrations in the German vocabulary are assessed negatively, which is due to a number of factors.
Not to mention the general linguistic picture of GermanThe use of English words in the case of disruption, let us mention that one of themMany come from different historical periods and are used in other European languages.
 The latter are characterized by:with the term "international words".
 Such elements predominate in the vocabulary of economy, sports, politics, science, press,in technology, in the fields.
 English և International words are included in the German vocabulary, adapted to the phonetics of the languageներին grammar rules.
  Moreover, they are adapted to the German language rules to varying degrees, complete և partialadaptation.
 For example: park, café, politik, auto, Physic, arm, hand, address,emotion, bus, hotel, և many other nouns get in GermanCapitalization, article, gender, respectively, are pronounced accordinglyհոլովքում ՝ der Park, das Café, die Politik, das Auto, die Physik, der Arm, die Hand,the Address, the Emotion, the Bus, the Hotel.
 To surf, to download, to check in, to check:out և other verbs in German end in an indefinite article,sometimes naևve prefixes are bowed according to face and numberwith corresponding suffixes: surfen, downloaden,einchecken, auschecken.
  The same principle can be used to list many words with other idioms, which, when adaptedGerman language rules, however, are perceived as international words or English words.
 They make up a large number in the German vocabulary, the tendency to increase them is constantly growing.
International words և English studies can significantly contribute to the interest in language դեպքում if given correctlythe acquisition of prior knowledge.
 In the early stages of language learning, it can be achieved through a collaborative method among studentsfor the mentioned purpose.
  For example, it is possible with 10-15 student groupsForm 2 or 3 groups from the group.
  After explaining the rules of the gameIn the prescribed period (10-15 minutes) students should:Write as many international words as possible that are already familiarfrom their German course, are also used in other languages:in Russian, sometimes in Armenian.
  At the end of timeThe teacher checksresults of each team, correctionerrors և count points.
  The winning team presents itselfthe glossary, then the competing team or teams fill in the datathe dictionary with words that do not sound.
  The instructor introduces:their German equivalents, if any, of the given wordsCorrect pronunciation:in German, thusgiving students the opportunity to supplement their vocabularywith certain words դարձ to make the lesson more interesting և informal.
scrap:և:The same can be said for some German grammarquestions, as can be seen from the examples above.
 BilingualThe interaction also has a beneficial effect on Englishduring the examination of some theoretical problems.
 In this case, a possible factoris considered by the teacher to be English as a second foreign languageknowledge.
In this regard, it should be noted that international words և English studies are only one of the interactions between the two languages ​​ևare part of.
 It should be added that the many commonalities between German and English at different language levels are deeper.They have roots, which are clearly revealed during the typological comparison of the two languages ​​at different levels.
 First:և The main precondition is the kinship between the two languages.
English as a separate language is derived from Germanisch:undergoing many changes at different stages of historical development [2,5-8].
 Thus, the similarities and similarities between these languages ​​are due to the existence of a common mother tongue, the fact that the same language branch belongs to the same language family, which could not be without its direct influence.not to have different stages of language development.
Literature   for the Lehre and the German-speaking Hochschulen. Berlin / New York.
 de Gruyter.(Rus. Ed.:
 Vaynraykh U.Yazykovye contacts.
 sostoyanie i problemy issledovaniya.the university. Series.
