Introduction.
 The northern fold region of the Republic of Armenia occupies the entire northern part of the territory of the republic, bordering the central volcanic region from the south.
 As a typical foldarea, it has been severely affected during the latest geological phasedifferentiated intensive tectonic uplifts,which is clearly reflected in its modern complex blockin structure.
 Among the researches in this directionhas a special significance for the structure of the sedimentary layer of the earth:as the study of the highest, most dynamic layer of the earth.
  Deviating from traditional geological-geophysical methods:We have tried to apply it in previous worksmethods of modern tectonic geology, which are mostly based on modern relief and its individual elementsAnalysis is directed to the highest horizons of the earththe study of structure.
 Within the framework of the mentioned worksThe obtained results are weak due to their reasonable nature and reliabilityallows to continue and gradually deepen in this directionworks.
Research methodology.
 As in our previous work,In this case, the study was conducted by analyzing the quantitative values ​​of the river network of the study area.
  Guided by:by the famous Horton-Strachler classification [1], separated by us2nd և 3rd class river flows are in the studied area.
  2nd classOur previous works are dedicated to the analysis of river flows [2,3],within which the initial assumption that the field of isolongs composed of 2nd order river flows characterizesThe structure of the upper horizons of the sedimentary layer.
  The main purpose of the work is to study the structure of the deeper horizons of the sedimentary layer, as in the theory of geological interpretation of the insulating method, according to which the river flowsAs the order increases, so does the placement of the layer under studyThe main emphasis in this article is on the 3rdon river flows that allow sediment to be exploredthe deeper horizons of the layer, which will directly delimiton the surface of the crystalline base.
 The last assertion has found its justificationIn our previous work [4], when analyzing the Vayk-Syunik region, the same approach was used.
The main results of the research.
 In Figure 1 belowis presented within a crystalline base within the study areathe gravitational model characterizing the surface structure [5, 6].
 On the modelBetween the "raised" structures of the crystalline base, the isohyps of 0 km characterizing the sea surface is accepted, with respect to which the surface of the crystalline base has positive or negative values.characterized by correspondingly elevated zones orseparate structures.
At the same time in Figure 1 you can see the sequence of raised and lowered zones, which mostly have a common Caucasianstretch.
 The first of them is the Shirak intermountain concave area, where the crystalline base is located at sea level.up to a depth of 4 km.
 To the east, the edge of the territory of the republicIt stretches from the north-west to the Arzakan exposure areaThe rising zone of the crystalline base, where the base rises by 1-2 km compared to the sea level.
 This zone in the Spitak section is interrupted by a structure of the same name -1 - -1.5 km, which connects each other with the same name extending in the direction of Shirak և Bavra-Vanadzor-Dilijan-Chambarakthe lowered belt.
 From here to the east, the ascent of TashirIjan stretches in a parallel direction, which ends from the east with the descent of Noyemberyan-Berd.
 In addition to the general Caucasian direction, there are also some structures of anti-Caucasian tension, of which the Gyumri-Spitak-Vanadzor stretch, the Artik-Vanadzor-Dilijan stretch, the Hrazdan-Dilijan-Berd stretch are clearly expressed.the lowered structures.
  Such a complex mosaic image testifies to the complex geological-tectonic history of the folded region under study.
Figure 1. Crystalline of the northern corrugated region of the Republic of ArmeniaGravitational model of the base surfaceReferring to the structural model of the sediment layer, let us mention:as it turned out, dedicated to our previous Vayk-Syunik regionat work, the structural model of the sediment layer, which is composedon the basis of quantitative data of 3rd degree river flows, descriptionis its deepest horizons, which directly border the surface of the crystalline base.
On the model of the proposed sediment layer structure (see:Figure 2), field values ​​range from 3 to 16 km.
It should be reminded that according to the applied isolonger method, low field values ​​characterize decreasing and high values ​​characterize elevated structures.
 In the proposed model, the 6 km long isolong is chosen as the separation boundary of these structures.
Guided by the same sequence of structure analysis, it should be noted that the structural model of the sediment layer clearly shows similar to the low-rise structural zones.shift, in the case of a crystalline base.
 At the same time, it should be noted that there are some limitations in the boundaries of the zonesinconsistencies, which naturally had to be considered.
Figure 2. Sedimentary earthquake in the northern fold region of the Republic of Armeniathe model of the layer structure according to the field data of the 3rd order isolongersAnd so, in the far west, the lowering of Shirak stands out, which, however, along with the lowering of Spitak, is included from Amasia.It extends to the Chambarak geosynclinal, which extends geographically to Chambarak.
  At the same time, this large area is interrupted in some placesThese are, in fact, the result of the Artik-Vanadzor-Dilijan elevated structure of the anti-Caucasian tension observed at the crystal base.
  As the surface of the crystal baseIn the model, here this structure joins Tashir-Ijani from the eastincrease.
The proposed model of sediment layer structure lacks the raised Amasia-Vanadzor zone, which was clearly expressedon the surface of the crystalline base.
 This circumstance should not be explained!in that the crystal base surface model is a gravitational model ևis based on the recalculation of the local gravitational field, on which, as:It is known that rock density values ​​have a great influence.
In the mentioned Amasia site, which is in the Saint-Amasia ophiolite zoneis a continuation of the northwest, a widespread superstructureThe rocks of the composition created an excess density of gravitational localwhen calculating the field, which led to the surface area of ​​the crystal baseartificial elevation, և it is not excluded that in the specified siteThe crystal base is actually at a greater depth thanis available in the model.
  This is also evidenced by other authorsSome surveys were conducted for the site [7], including:According to this, the surface of the crystalline base is in the seafrom the surface to a depth of 4-5 km.
  The same can be saidfor the ophiolite site of San.
The Noyemberyan-Berd descending zone from the other structural zonesIn the structural model of the sediment layer it is more clearly expressed in Berd precinct, and as for Noyemberyan precinct,then the effect of Lalvar intrusions is observed here, as a result of which the field values ​​here are high, up to 16 km.
  And finallyThe Hrazdan-Dilijan-Berd lowered zone of the plain is clearly expressedup to a maximum value of կմ 5 km.
Conclusion.
  Summarizing the above comparative analysis, it should be concluded that the structural horizons of the deepest sedimentary layers within the northern fold region of the Republic of ArmeniaThe feature is mostly inherited from the crystalline base.
 The main faults on the surface of the latter, in the form of separate structural-tectonic zones and units, have affected the structure of the deep horizons of the sedimentary layer above, giving it a comparable structure.
  In all this case, you should notignore the role and significance of the process of introducing intrusive bodies, as the formation of separate structures at the local levelThey played a crucial role in that.
Literature Czech method of quantitative morphology. M.
 Ed. Inos. Lit., 1948. 158 p.
2. Sargsyan RS Structural connections between the crystalline base և sedimentary layer of the Armenian volcanic plateau
Analysis // YSU Scientific Bulletin, Geology և Geography.
 2015.
 N3. pp. 20-24.
3. Sargsyan RS Earthquake in the northern fold zone of Armenia
Study of sediment layer structure by morphometric data // YSU Scientific Bulletin, Geology և Geography.
 2015.
 N1.
 pp. 24-30.
4. Sargsyan RS, Hovhannisyan HH Study of structural features of the sedimentary layer of Vayk-Syunik region using isolonger method // YSU Scientific
Bulletin, Geology և Geography.
 2017.
 N2.
 pp. 97-102.geophysical data // Izv. NAN RA, Science on Earth.
