In the current information stage of the development of society, when globalization, the growth of the pace of life, unstable political, socio-economic upheavals, ontological problems challenge the formation of a mentally healthy person, the issue of social adaptation becomes urgent.
  People face negative situations, become powerless, helpless, lose their moral orientations.
  The issue that not only adults but also children are affected by these influences becomes more and more, as a result of which they are affected.
  Systemic characteristics such as personal helplessness can be formed in this regard. The urgency of the study is primarily due to the development of warning and coping strategies, as helplessness touches on all aspects of a child's mental development - cognitive, emotional and behavioral, contributing to his / her social environment.
  The aim of our work is to develop psychological pathways to overcome the problems conditioned by personal help in primary school children.
Behavioral Disorder The problem of helplessness in psychology has been discussed to this extent by various psychological theories.
  Psychoanalysis views it from the point of view of psycho-traumatic experience, relationships (Z. Freud, A. Adler, D. Vinicott);
  Existential psychology considers helplessness as a way of making decisions in difficult situations, inability to search, a way to avoid responsibility (L. Biswanger, V. Frankl, R. May).
  The problem of helplessness in a more systematic way within the framework of the theory of "acquired helplessness", where it was considered as a state of mind arising from uncontrollable negative situations, which is accompanied by passive behavior, lack of attempts to change the situation. Hiroto, J. Tisdale, L. Abramson).
  Acquired helplessness syndrome was first described by American psychologists Martin Seligman և and Steven Meyer based on experiments performed on dogs when dogs were no longer trying to avoid them after receiving an electric shock.
Later, numerous studies revealed the existence of this phenomenon in humans (B. Hanusa, R. Schultz, D. Hiroto).
The phenomenon of helplessness has been studied in person by M. Seligman, S. Mayer, representatives of the theory of helplessness (D. A. Gering, E. V. Vedenea, E. V. Zabelina, I. V. Ponomorova, Y. V.Yakovl) [1, 2].
The term "personal helplessness" was introduced into the scientific framework by N. A. Baturin, who singled out two types of helplessness: և personal.
  Situational help is a temporary response to uncontrollable situations.
  Personal helplessness is a personality-motivational characteristic that is shaped by the interaction of relationships during development.
  Personal helplessness is manifested by dichotomy, emotional instability, agitation, cowardice, pessimistic worldview, guilt, low self-esteem, low level of ambition, indifference, passivity.
with those around him. Seligman notes that helplessness builds on the effectiveness of eight-year-olds.
  He singles out three sources of helplessness: և expresses self-belief1. The experience of experiencing unfavorable events, that is, the lack of control over the events of one's own life.
  Moreover, this experience begins to affect other events in a person's life, when they can actually be controlled.
  According to M. According to Seligman, uncontrolled situations include parental insults, the death of a loved one or animal, a serious illness, the daily quarrels and divorce of parents, the loss of a job.
educators) (by teachers, 2. the experience of watching helpless people (for example, TV stories about helpless victims).
3. Lack of independence in childhood, willingness of children to replace parents [4].
The family is a great environment for the development of a child's personality.
Family upbringing styles - super patronage, gross abuse of moral responsibility.
Controversial parenting style's contradictory style of parenting have an impact on child support.
  Parents attention, care երեխայի care for the child.
  Instead, restrictions, control, do not teach children independence and responsibility.
  In case of such a style of upbringing, the child is able to show initiative, activity, independence, which is the basis for the child's helplessness.
Unconditionally, the restrictions are imposed, in many cases the child is demanded. High moral responsibility, upbringing, discipline, responsibility, which corresponds to the age of the child.
  Ignoring the interests of the child և opportunities, they put the responsibility for the welfare of others on the child.
  Parents have high hopes for their child, and he is afraid of those who disappoint him.
 The child's expectations are coming true. He often starts to disappoint, to upset the parents, because of which the child's self-esteem drops, he considers himself incapable, he gradually becomes helpless.
  Child abuse can be manifested when a child is abused, abused, or turned into a scapegoat, or it can be hidden when the parent և child's emotional coldness, indifference, and hostility stand in the way.
Mental instability Contradictory parenting style shapes child care, parenting methods, incentives, and punishments that disrupt a child's homeostasis.
  The children of such parents are sure that the living conditions and events do not depend on them, they can not decide and do anything, they do not make any attempt to change the situation, thus maintaining the seeming comfort state.
  Such a protective function of self-help weakens the self-esteem, as the person avoids decision-making situations, taking responsibility for them, which is one of the important indicators of personal helplessness.
It is interesting that the influence of such styles of upbringing is more obvious in the primary school age, as at this age the child is completely dependent on the parents, և personal help increases.
Naturally, such children need psychological support due to the child's developmental characteristics and behavioral manifestations.
It should be taken into account that behavioral problems are closely related to emotional և communication problems, աջակց support for primary school students requires a comprehensive approach, otherwise աշխատանքը work with them will hardly lead to the desired result.
V. V. Shipovskaya considers personal helplessness as a characteristic, which consists of six components: behavioral, cognitive, emotional, evasive stress և confusion [5].
    Due to personal helplessness, psychological work considered to overcome behavioral problems should be carried out in different directions: (escapism), 1. Stabilization of the child's emotional sphere by reducing the level of anxiety և phobias.
  To reduce anxiety, relaxation techniques should be used to relieve muscle tension, and then work to increase the child's self-esteem.
The technique of expressing the child's emotions is very effective, when the child tells about his emotions, easing the tension.
  Techniques and psychotherapies aimed at overcoming irrational fears and phobias are various: behavioral (desensitization method), cognitive therapy, NLP, etc.
2. Equivalence.
Self-esteem - Low self-esteem contributes to the formation of personal helplessness.
  That is why it is necessary to work with those who take them with the aim of changing authoritarian, contradictory styles of education, over-patronage or cruel treatment.
  Introducing age-appropriate demands և expectations to the child, as excessive demands frustrate, frustrate the child, is a personalization of personal helplessness.
  The methods of encouraging upbringing, which do not cause guilt, increase the child's self-esteem, promote child-adaptation.
The basis for improving relations should be useful և 3. Development of self-defense skills.
The self-esteem of a high school student may be adequate, but not the self-defense skills of the master.
  For many children, school is the first social environment where they are left without parental control; they must learn to protect themselves.
  Initially, the child has feelings of emotional և social deprivation (deprivation) (they have taken him, they will not even take him out of school), the post-graduation period increases, the child is isolated from his classmates.
In this case, the child should be taught in conflict situations, ways to choose behavioral strategies, assert one's own opinion, talk, listen to the other person.
during effective disputes 4. Development of communication skills.
 Imitation plays an important role in a child's education.
  For this reason, it is possible that teachers և parents will constantly involve isolated children in group work, thus creating a communication space for the child.
  By communicating, watching, learning from each other, children experiment with different roles, play, and the development of self-help.
cooperate, will hinder 5. Activation of resources.
  Distrust of the environment, dissatisfaction with needs, emotional deprivation, unfavorable family relationships, conflicts, divorce are the main reasons for the manifestation of personal helplessness of the primary school student.
They can cause nervousness, enuresis, aggressive behavior.
  That is why the discovery, mobilization and activation of the child's internal and external resources play an important role in overcoming trauma problems.
provides.
6. To keep the children busy, including the sphere of living, self-service, which will create a sense of usefulness and self-confidence in the child, to expand the scope of the children's interests.
  These are just some of the goal setting shareware that you can use.
Thus, when conducting psychological work with junior high school students with helplessness, it is necessary to show a comprehensive approach, to work with both parents and junior high school students, to pay attention to the peculiarities of children's cognitive, emotional and motivational spheres.
  To increase the adaptability to the uncertain, constantly changing conditions of modern life.
The steps of the schoolchildren allow all the steps.
  psychotherapies, games, self-regulation, behavioral forms.
