The purpose of reading in a foreign language is to provide a minimum level of so-called "mature reading", which further allows for self-education, knowledge improvement, and the free use of foreign language literature. [1]
The implementation of reading is partly conditioned by the fact that in this particular case the types of reading are implemented in the learning process.
The classification of the types of reading in the methodological literature has been carried out so far, as noted by S. K. Folomkina, based on the organization of work on the text [2].
Ս. K. Folomkina rightly points out that two of the many factors influencing the reading process are crucial: a) the ability to orient in the text, b) the determination of the completeness and depth of accuracy of the information received [2].
In accordance with the above criteria, the following types of reading are distinguished: pop-up (skimming, scanning), detailed, selective, reading for gist.
  The article analyzes each type of reading separately և suggests a number of strategies that contribute to the development of the skills needed for that type of reading.
The classification of the types of reading is in line with the types of reading presented in LII, the advantage of the classification is that appropriate criteria have been developed for each type of reading here [3].
However, the above-mentioned types of reading can be compared to comparative reading and detailed reading to analytical reading.
1. Reading to get acquainted with the general content of the content The purpose of the reader to get acquainted with the general content of the text is to get acquainted with the content of texts of different genres.
  In such a case, the focus is on the development of actions և basic information.
At the minimum level of adult reading for students, this type of reading speed is 180-190 words per minute.
Reading assignments for the general content of the text. To suggest getting acquainted with the following type: • You can display the pictures, offering students to arrange them in such an order that they express the post-development of the text.
After discussing the topic սովոր Title ությունների of the (events) activities, students are asked to read the first և last paragraphs, the first sentence of each paragraph, to find out the general theme of the text.
  You have limited time to complete this task.
 This step encourages students to study the text in more detail.
• The above group includes the so-called “KWL” strategy, the nature, structure and content of which are expressed in the following way [4]. imagine the event described in the text, the hero, the action, etc.
  The following steps can be applied to develop this skill: a) After reading a part of the text aloud, the teacher instructs the students to say what they think.
The teacher reads aloud an excerpt from the text, during which the students close their eyes and try to imagine what they are imagining.
students content.
It is advisable to start with a simple description, gradually moving to a more complex one.
c) During the reading, the teacher instructs the students to mark on the map the sights about which the author tells.
  This helps learners visualize new information visually.
d) In another case, students are instructed to separate a picture that corresponds to what they have read.
2. Skimming reading (skimming, scanning) The purpose of pop-up reading is to get an idea of ​​the most general content, based on which the reader decides whether he / she needs, is interested or not interested in the information contained in the text.
  To determine the need for it, it is enough to read the titles or subheadings, sentences, separate passages, etc.
 In fact, selective reading takes place.
Speed ​​standards for this type of reading have not yet been finalized.
  The limit of 500-600 words per minute is accepted.
To develop pop-up reading, we suggest the following tasks: • Learners are asked to distinguish true-false technique.
  Incorrect confirmations of the content.
When making sentences, the teacher should take into account the fact that the statements / statements should include the main and not the secondary facts of the read text.
do not correspond to the text • In another case, the whole text is presented in the form of incomplete paragraphs.
  Students choose the continuation of each paragraph (one of the two).
In the same way, they read the second paragraph, choosing the correct answer.
Table 2.3. Detailed reading This type of reading assumes that the content here is also remarkable - the minimum level of reading speed (in the range of 50-60 words per minute).
complete perception (100%).
To develop a thorough reading, we suggest the following tasks: • In the case of mind mapping, with the help of students, builds a semantic map, which in the form of a drawing, gradually presents the content of the text.
  The teacher shows the general topic with the Power Point program.
Step 1. Then աշակերտ asks the students what the text is about.
The nature of the questions should be designed so that the students' attention is focused on the word units.
  While the students are expressing their opinions, the teacher or one of the students compiles a semantic map, grouping the hypotheses suggested by the students according to general categories, which reflect the structure and content of the given text.
Step 2. Chart 2. Then the students are shown sections of the text (title, subheadings, ...) in order to clarify some facts.
Students try to continue the semantic mapping, thanks to which the topic of the text is more clearly depicted.
Figure 3. Step 3.
Due to semantic mapping, individual words and concepts are merged and given a complete form, which helps the student to understand, summarize and evaluate the information, making visible the conceptual basis of the text [6].
  All this helps the learner to have an idea about the text.
• An interesting way to develop thorough reading is self-questioning. Through self-examination, students try to answer questions about the text as they read.
  These questions և mixed answers help them to better integrate with the new information contained in the text.
  Application of the following types with the most effective questions: knowledge already available) Multiple questions Multiple questions are used to "develop the ability to understand the text," to test.
The latter relate not only to the information contained in the original text, but also to the learner to read "between the lines".
  They can be applied to a specific word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, as well as to the whole text.
Multiple questions are used as a "key" to help the learner understand this or that linguistic unit, sentence or paragraph of the text.
b) Application of the so-called "Wh questions" "Wh questions" mainly refer to the facts contained in the text.
 However, they can be formulated to make students think.
Answering these types of questions not only teaches students to comment on their own, but also contributes to the development of student-student relationships as they communicate, express, explain and discuss their views.
It should be noted that the content of the questions is conditioned by the structure, style and genre of the text.
The teacher should encourage the students to ask each other self-made questions, distinguishing between the types of questions expressed by the abbreviations F, I, V, E. F - Factual questions, I - Inference question, V - Vocabulary questions, E - Experience questions.
read • Rereading is considered to be one of the most effective strategies by which learners try to clarify the information contained.
  The teacher should teach the students to help the text to cope with the difficulties with the following tasks.
  Re-read in sections: read the meaning better in the text) find the sentence from the given paragraph where ... is spoken about, b) divide the text into semantic groups, c) title each paragraph, d) underline the sentence / thought of each paragraph, f) look for examples, explanations, try the paragraph, Briefly present the meaning of the given paragraph, h) separate the most important parts of the text.
Since not only new information is conveyed through reading, but also a new vocabulary is introduced, it is necessary to implement different strategies of word recognition by re-reading.
in the course of 4. Selective reading The purpose of selective reading is to find specific information, facts, etc. in an unfamiliar text.
This type of reading is aimed at finding specific information in the text.
 That is why the task must accurately reflect the problems to be solved.
In this case, it is recommended to read the text not in detail, but to look և to find the necessary information.
  This work by L. Zukovannag suggested "the following tasks" to search for specific information from the encyclopedia, in which case there is no need to read the entire encyclopedia. [7]
  In this case it is possible to: • The teacher suggests specific questions related to the topic in advance, which students should answer from the context.
  The work can be started from small paragraphs, gradually moving to larger sections.
  The time allotted should be very limited so that the students can look at the text and not read it in its entirety.
Through this exercise students learn to generalize the acquired knowledge and language experience.
• Taking notes Նշcontributes to the development of search reading.
This work helps students to understand, comprehend, and comprehend the information gained during reading.
ևա. To develop this skill, the primary teacher prepares spreadsheets, which are completed by the students as they read.
left group. In another case, the sentence is divided into parts.
Basic Teacher Recommendations, students fill in the sequels of the last ones on the right so that a short, complete text is obtained at the end.
What is the choice of exercises, strategies, as well as test methods conditioned by the implementation of this or that type of reading?
  Moreover, the following should be taken into account. Since the types of reading differ according to the result of the activity, ie according to the degree of comprehension of the content of the text, the level of comprehension of the ևbasic meaning of the information can be defined by combining the complete information.
In the text you can read.
