Preface.
Information on the population of each country or region, its number, patterns of movement, composition and distribution have economic, political and scientific significance.
  And the basis of the process of digitalization of the population is the reproduction, which represents the sum of the natural, mechanical "social movements" of the population.
The aim of the article is to analyze the problems of the resettlement system of Tavush region, to study the factors creating the resettlement system, to evaluate the settlements according to the spatial-temporal living conditions.
The urgency of the topic is conditioned by the need to analyze the resettlement system, as many resettlement problems in Tavush region have not been clarified yet, on the solution of which the effectiveness of the territorial organization of the society and the improvement of the living conditions of the population depend.
  Therefore, this research can be a way to identify and prevent a number of socio-demographic problems.
During the analysis of the resettlement system (hereinafter referred to as TC), it is possible to study the factors that will shape the resettlement system, which have changed over time.
  Resettlement system factors occur in natural, demographic, infrastructural "economic groups, of which those with the greatest impact on the region's IT are presented below."
A number of natural factors influence the formation of a network of habitats.
 Absolute height among natural factors.
 29% of the territory of Tavush region is located at altitudes up to 1000 m, and about 60% at altitudes up to 1500 m [4, page 241].
  Examining the geography of the settlements, it became clear that in the areas with an absolute height of 500 m, 6% of the settlements are concentrated, 63% in 500-1000 meters, 27% in 1000-1500 meters, 42% of the sports area above 1500 meters. There are only 4 settlements in the regions, of which Jermakavan village has no population.
In the Lernahovitner settlements, the population increases as the currents move from the upper reaches of the rivers to the dispenser.
  The region has a linear or chain settlement (Ijani և Noyemberyan regions), as well as a network of settlements grouped near the river valleys, which is more typical of the Tavush region.
Density Demographic factors play an important role in the most dynamic part of the TC settlements, the population is considered to form the network of settlements, creating the connections within them.
The study of the age composition of the population is large, as the majority of young people attribute the high birth rate, high migration activity, increase in the number of marriages, rapid activity of the labor force is also registered in the IT.
  We have reproduced and studied the percentage of the working age population in the settlements of Tavush region.
  In 30 out of 64 settlements of the region (including Berd) the share of the elderly (population over 63 years old) is more than 15%, and in Zorakangyugh of the former Noyemberyan region, now part of the enlarged Koghb community, the total number of elderly people is 28.5% of the population.
 In addition to age, the proportion of the population is of great importance.
According to 2018 data, men make up 48% of the region's population, and women - 52% of the total population.
Table 1. Population trend of Tavush region (1926-2018) Number of population of Tavush region by years 2018-2011 1988-2001 1926 Source: [2 page 400] As a result of own analysis -1988 Over the long period of time, the population of the region has been growing steadily.
  During the six decades, the population of the region has increased by 77 thousand, and the analysis of the data of the 2001 և 2011 census shows that during the ten years the permanent population of the region has decreased by almost a thousand, and in 2018. According to the data, the population of the region was 122.2 thousand, then during the last seven years the permanent population has decreased by 6 thousand [3].
Of great scientific and practical interest to the population is the assessment of the conditions of temporal life activity.
According to the calculations of the communities (hereinafter referred to as the rural marz), the results of the studies և the peculiarities of the marz can be distinguished as the following factors determining the conditions of the rural communities.
absolute 2. The distance of the rural community from the TC, considering that along with the increase of the distance, the conditions of the TPP of the population deteriorate.
3. Conditions for increase from rural community highways.
At the same time, the distance from the transport distance to the population has increased. The condition of the roads connecting the rural community to the transport highways.
5. The overcrowding of the rural community, taking into account the conditions of the population TPP along with the increase of the population in Orlavan.
6. Provision of the rural population In addition to the increase of arable land provision (per capita), the conditions of the population improve.
գ with gardens, having 7. The rural communities' own incomes, taking into account that along with the increase per capita, the conditions of the population are improving.
population budget 8. The distance of the rural community from the Armenian-Azerbaijani border, taking into account that as the distance increases, the conditions of the population improve.
We carried out the assessment of the living conditions of the rural communities by the point method.
  We estimated the impact of each factor on one to four balms.
  Then we got the monetary impact points, which, in our opinion, generally reflects the existing differences in the conditions of the population of the rural communities of the region.
  The highest is Getahovit rural community of Ijjan region (24 points), and the lowest is Aghavnavank rural community of Ijani region (14 points).
The rural communities with severely unsatisfactory living conditions (0-15 points) are mainly mountainous settlements. They are far from the TC ուց from the main highway, the population is small.
 Most of the villages with such conditions are on the border.
Table 2. Regions by spatial-temporal conditionsVillage. Number of communities by population. TCRegionsRegisters Satisfactory0-15 pointsNoyemberyanTavushLetConditionsUnsatisfactory16-18 pointsSatisfactory19-21Goodsgift21 • In general, the population has favorable conditions for TEC • high • Provision of land resources (arable lands).
One of the most important issues for the resettlement of the region is the large number of small rural communities, whose low financial resources do not allow them to deal with the problems facing the community.
  Among the 57 rural communities of the region, the number of small (up to 500 people) և small (500-1000 people) rural communities is 12 և 14, ie 46% of the total number of communities.
In order to eliminate the disproportion of the economic development of the communities, in order to ensure sustainable development, the communities were enlarged.
The provision on the enlargement of communities is contained in the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, which "defines the principles, procedure, definition" of the union or division of communities (Article 110).
  They are defined by law as self-government. ”
Terms of local elections in the communities of newly formed bodies. The enlargement of the communities is carried out according to the following criteria.1. Existence of merging communities.
General Administrative Boundary 2. The center of the newly formed community should be central to the merging communities, with at least 500 inhabitants and infrastructure.
3. The distance of the settlements of the newly formed community from the center of the community should not exceed 20 km.
4. In the newly formed community, the minimum necessary infrastructure for local self-government should be provided և secondary school.
Exercise of powers 5. Existence of roads providing public transport communication between the settlements of the newly formed community.
6. Existence of a former co-management body in the settlements of the newly formed community.
7. Compatibility and mentality of the inhabitants of the developing community [6, page 10].
If we analyze the example of Dilijan community, we will see that the center of the enlarged community, Dilijan city, was annexed to it, it is more than 20 km away from four villages, it has no administrative border.
  At least two enlargement criteria are not met in all enlarged communities. The great distance from the DTC is the lack of a common administrative boundary.
  If a resident in his community can get an answer to his question on the same day, in case of enlargement of communities, this process is prolonged, which may weaken the efficiency of local government activities.
On the other hand, the level of independence of other communities is decreasing.
  They are more dependent on relatively large communities, it is possible to ignore their opinions.
 Another serious issue is the issue of social infrastructure.
Thus, the enlargement of the communities of Tavush region has led to some negative consequences, for example: • financial dependence of small communities on large communities, • disregard for the opinions and positions of small communities;
The problems of the communities, the dissatisfaction of the people of Altavush.
Even the enlargement, of course, did not solve it. In our opinion, the solution of the above-mentioned problems will be more effective if the principles of community enlargement ևmechanisms are revised, based on the will of the local population.
Emphasize the voluntariness of community cooperation by generalizing the principle of different communities from goals.
Give an opportunity to implement joint programs without transferring community powers.
Among the typical areas of inter-community cooperation are: • provision of joint services, • strategic planning և territorial development, • voluntary combination of finance.
Conclusion.
  The resettlement factors, which are vividly expressed in Tavush marz, reflect both the past of the settlement process and the system-building intelligence that allows us to predict the future picture.
  The issues raised during the resettlement system analysis are the study of the factors that cause them to prevent these issues.
  Taking into account the increasing role of social factors in the system-building processes of resettlement, during the resettlement study we use a comprehensive assessment of the spatial-temporal living conditions of the population.
It is necessary to use scientifically substantiated results when developing a resettlement policy.
