The multi-layered intensification of the study of the history of the pictorial movement in Armenia in the Church has a special feature, with a thorough-comprehensive examination.
  In the course of time, many movements have arisen in the history of the Christian Church, the origin of which was not accidental.
  The Armenian Apostolic Church, as a part of the cosmic church, has not been left out of such movements.
  Such events intensified their activities, were public relations, pressures on ordinary people - harassment.
  In the first three centuries, Christians used various images to express their ideas: fish, boat, harp, dove, anchor, especially the cross.
  The latter, in contrast to a number of modern orthodox pseudo-Christian teachings that reject the cross, has a biblical basis (Hmt: Matthew 16:24, Mark 5:34, Luke 5:23).
 There are also many testimonies about images in the Holy Bible, which contain ideological roots of idolatry (cf. Exodus 11:31, 3 Kings 23-24, Ezekiel 10: 18-20).
During the Cold War, Christians denounced Christians, accusing them of materialism.
The Jews believed that Christians worshiped the very image of God as God.
  They ridiculed Christians for respecting the relics of saints.
 They saw in this only respect for bones.
  All those who kissed the image of Christ և Our Lady or any other saint were called idolaters [8].
 In time, power was ascribed to images, and the material with which the image was made became an object of worship.
However, the degree of respect given to paintings throughout the Christian world was unequivocal.
The battles were against evangelical paintings.
  According to them, it was idolatry, depicting Christ, his disciples, and saints in general.
A movement with a penchant for imagery has been formed since the 1st centuries.
This movement, which arose out of the personal desire of the Byzantine Emperor Leon Isavratsi (717-741), as a revival of the pagan worldview, also found its reflection in the world of Armenia.
  The Armenian Church has adopted a moderate approach to images.
  This restrained approach is typical in Armenia. The fighting movement is spreading among the most talented.
  Among such sects were the Mtsghneans, the Pavlikians and the Tondrakians.
to the fathers.
The Church of All Armenians's Iconography in an exclusively scientific way are born in Armenia in the context of the Armenian-Byzantine churches.
  The introduction of such phenomena is appropriate [7].
  It should be noted that the Armenian Church did not go anyway. Nevertheless, it is necessary to maintain the sense of extremism.
  With his approach to images, he was closer to imagery.
  Idolatry, previously influenced by the cult of the cross.
  The reason for the restrained position of the Armenian Church on the issue of icons, according to the popular understanding, "idolatry" is an alien phenomenon, it is typical only of the Chalcedonians.
  This is the reason why the Armenian Church is satisfied with the prevention of iconoclasm, as the propaganda of images foretells, the encouragement of their worship.
According to several sources, we are informed about the manifestations of the iconoclasm movement in Armenia.
One of them is Vrtanes Kertogh's famous work "From the Yaghags image battle".
  Vrtanes Kertogh is one of the historical figures of the Armenian Church.
  Maghakia Ormanyan, based on the name "stripper", considers him a student of the famous Syunik monastic school. [13]
  Yervand Melkonyan mentions in his work "VrtanesKertogh և imagery" that he was described as a "stripper" because of his educational abilities.
 During the reign of Catholicos Movses II of Yeghivard (574-604), Vrtanes was his assistant, and when His Holiness died, he was appointed vicar of the Catholicosate until the split.
  According to the above-mentioned letter, the cross of Kertoghie was held in Vrtaneshargum, in 604-607, when the patriarchal throne was vacant, he conducted church affairs.
 And later, when the Catholicosate of Abraham I was confirmed, Catholicos Abraham I of Aghbatan, Vrtanes, continued to be active in the Armenian Church.
 This was the period when there was a dispute between the Armenian and Georgian churches, which was the reason why the parks of the two churches were intended for the "worship of the glory of the Godhead" [5].
  As we know, the image battles were hostile not only to the images and the relics of the saints, but also to the cross, the images mentioned in the worship.
The themes of the paintings depicted in the churches are remarkable.
  The memory of saints was typical of Armenians.
  Christ, the Cross, and the Virgin Mary were often depicted, having frescoed churches in separate places.
  The image of Our Lady of Hogyats Monastery and the Holy Cross Church of Akhtamar are mentioned as such churches.
The reflection of the images is noticeable on the tombstones.
The color standards were used: red, green, blue, which symbolized the four elements of the earth: light, earth, water and air.
  According to Grigor Tatatsi, gold is also used as a doctrine of color.
  It is considered to be the "fifth essence of heaven", which is above all matter.
In general, our medieval churches, especially those built in the 7th century, were mainly frescoed, which would be disrupted by the establishment of Arab rule in Armenia.
Iconoclasm, as a religious dispute, is closely related to the history of the development of art, as it was inherently opposed to painting.
[7], Mren, Ani S. Gregory the Illuminator embraces the people.
HayPictures, were.
Through images they tried to make the believer understand the divine, the incomprehensible and the invisible.
The aimlessness of idolatry may be due in part to the influence of pagan religion.
  It should be noted that such phenomena would not have taken place if the original, undistorted meaning of idolatry had been preserved.
There is information about the iconography, which has been preserved in the letter of Hovhan Mayragometsi to the Bishop of the Great Parties in Movses Kagankatvatsi's work "History of the Aghvanitskhar" [1].
  According to K. Melikyan's name "Mayragometsi" was an adjective that originated from Mayrots Gom.
  It was the contemptuously used version of the place name Mother Monastery by the Catholicos Ezr I of Parazhnakert (630-641).
  H. Kenderyan gives one-sided coverage about the toponym "Mayragom", և he notes և the author of the clarifying author, Byzantine scholar H. Bartikyan's name.
  He notes that Mayragom is similar to the Greek word "Metrocome", which means "Mayravan", does not resemble the modern meaning of the barn.
In the 7th century, the Armenian diaspora invented false stories about Hovhan Mayravanetsi, an anti-Chalcedonian, according to whom Hovhan Mayragometsi later opposed the Armenian Catholicos, whose reason was first of all his heretical views, and then, with the help of the Armenian Catholicos.
 He was exiled to the Caucasus Mountains, according to the decision made by the assembly, on the forehead of which a "fox stamp" is stigmatized.
Later, however, he returned to his homeland and died of old age in Gardman County.
  In fact, in 633, Karin Hovhannes Mayravanetsi Ezr A. To the Catholicos of Parazhnakert, saying that he overthrew the Armenian Apostolic religion.
 Persecuted by the bishop, he was temporarily dragged to the Kotayk Mayravank, due to which Ezr despised him in Mayragomets.
  Because Mayravank was close, և Hovhannishan was constantly persecuted by Ezri, so he left his native province of Gardman.
  There are different opinions about his return to the homeland.
  However, (we should mean Hovhan Odznetsi) the bishop David of Mayragomets had applied to Bishop David.
This fact is evidenced by the fact that Hovhan Odznetsi was well aware of the sects;
After the joint Armenian-Byzantine meeting, Hovhannes Vardapet's letter containing information about the iconoclasm consists of two parts. The first part presents the modern events that worried Bishop David from Metskven, and the other parts present the propaganda of people named Joshua, Thaddeus and Gregory in Armenia.
  The paper states: "Some accept idolatry, some do not get baptized, do not bless with salt, do not marry a bride. this, if the priesthood is exalted in the earth. ”[1]
Bishop David informs John about the activities of such people and asks them to make the speech understandable.
It is known that Joshua, Thaddeus and Gregory were separated from the church [5] and left the capital Dvin [10] to reach the Sotk province of Syunik for propaganda purposes.
  The Armenian Catholicos Movses Yeghivardetsi returned to his capital, but they rejected the Catholicos' demand.
Then they moved to Artsakh again for propaganda purposes, and riots broke out in the neighboring country of the Aghvans.
Then, at the request of Catholicos Abraham I of Aghbatan, Lord Gardmana arrested them and sent them to Dvin, where they "persuaded" the sectarians.
 The arrest by Gardman's owner speaks of the fact that after carrying out a campaign in Artsakh, they moved further north, to Utik.
There are fragments of the problem that worries us in the "Armenian Codex" collection.
  "Rules of Lord Hovhannis the Armenian Catholicos" J. The definition speaks of baptism. "It is obligatory to bless the priest with the oil of baptism one by one at the time of baptism, by bringing the baptized one closer at the same time, to consume the blessed one, and not to rule the blessed one many times at once. and to anoint the newborn and the baptized with baptism in the pool, and not to give him any other sacrament of anointing. ”[2]
  From this we can conclude that the sectarians of Artsakh refused baptism.
Rule IE of the same canon of the "Codex of the Armenians" clearly states that the main և primary condition for the use of the power of the cross by the people was to anoint and bless the cross with myrrh to this day.
  In the definition we read in particular: "If a person makes a wooden cross or whatever it is, and does not allow the priest to bless and anoint him with the myrrh vessel, not to receive him in honor or to worship him, he is empty and empty of the apostolic and apostolic purity of the church." [2]
 And after performing this ritual, it is worth worshiping.
As Thaddeus, a preacher of iconoclasm in Armenia, he is mentioned in the letter of Hovhan Vardapet, by Vrtanes Kertogh.
  Isaiah can be identified with Joshua.
  These two names were often confused in Armenian texts.
 Nevertheless, it is clear that the two authors are talking about the same movement.
In his speech "Against the Pavlikians", Hovhan Odznetsi, who carried out activities against the Pavlikians, the ideological bearers of the iconoclasm movement in Armenia, also spoke of a movement that was widespread in Armenia, in which ideological ideological tendencies were directly inoculated on the ground of iconoclasm.
  The basis for the spread of this sect was not only the ideological movement, but also the threat of Islam.
  And it is natural that the Armenian Church, due to its non-national Gardabani problems, was able to distinguish between Christian theology and pagan diversity in the same way.
  Odznetsi also refers to the painting of the cross.
  Odznetsi states that they do not accept the image and oppose the cross. [10]
  The cult of the cross was nationalized in the 7th-8th centuries, which had a progressive development.
  In this period, a struggle begins between crusade and "idolatry".
The cult of the cross, which had its initial form in the 6th century, reaching the 8th century, is becoming more popular.
 And the question of the worship of images appeared in this same period, it is natural that the people's struggle will achieve a positive result.
  We were against it.
  They were more widespread, Hovhannes Odznetsi, regional crusaderism, orthodoxy, met the same type of demand of the society, had the same goal.
Trinity as a bearer of imagery was a Gnostic phenomenon, and its ardent followers were ready to mislead the ignorant.
It should be noted that the information about the blessing of the cross presented in the "Armenian Codex" is "varied" in the form of "worship".
The low-level circumstances explained by it.
  The image, the theme.
The work of spreading and developing the idolatry of education was intended to present the life story of Christ and was available to the masses.
  In other words, there was no need to make great efforts to understand the image council.
  This enabled all members of the society, regardless of their level of education, to understand the image. The effectiveness of the image is conditioned not by its realism, but by its advice.
The members of the society who had it also preferred realism.
Acknowledging that some of the pictorial parts have come down to us from paganism, however, miniature painting is already used and manifested in Christianity.
  He made another goal of making the content accessible to the believers of the Christian environment. Decorate the book nicely.
  The tabernacles in the Armenian Church were also presented in the form of images.
  This thought had two preconditions.
The first is the sensual, as if positive feeling, and the second is the hidden meaning of the pictures depicted in the tabernacles, which is the mysterious essence of the pictures.
  With his special approach to images, the Armenian Church was again neither idolatry, nor iconoclasm, but idolatry.
  Iconoclasm was an important part of the church and religion, and later remained unshakable.
