According to the provisions of the Eurasian Economic Community, the integration processes within the EEU presuppose the development of economic sectors, the creation of new economic environments, the expansion of markets, the reciprocal trade of goods of non-member countries.
  To get the real picture, let us present the advantages and disadvantages of the EEU, pointing out a series of arguments.
First of all, it should be noted that the creation of the EEU, as well as the CIS, pursues a mostly political goal.
  Russia is trying to restore the sovereignty of the Soviet years.
  Russia, as always, seeks its political interests in Armenia.
  On the one hand, Armenia is an irreplaceable military base for Russia, on the other hand, Armenia is at a possible crossroads, the crossroads through which Iranian oil and gas can reach Europe.
  Thus, Russia, by joining the EEU, closes that possibility for Iran, which would mean the loss of billions of dollars due to the reduction of Russian gas exports to Europe.
 The EEU could not solve the problem of economic backwardness of the member states, if we take into account that the major burdens of the technological progress of economic development are the USA, Japan and the developed European countries.
  Therefore, if Armenia does not develop economic cooperation relations with these countries, it will refrain from global development processes and technical progress.
 In this sense, there is a precondition according to which the development of Armenia's economic relations with the European Union (EU) has more serious preconditions and prospects.
Armenia's economic and trade relations with the EEU member states are, to say the least, limited within the framework of trade liberalization policy.
The most positive aspect of Armenia's membership in the EEU is the provision of opportunities for the growth of trade volumes through the creation of a privileged (common) customs area.
  In order to substantiate or deny this fact, the statistical indicators of the RA foreign trade for the last five years have been studied.
Table 1. External Trade of the Republic of Armenia with the EEU և EU Countries (Million Dollars) [6, pp. 114-115], [7, pp. 124-125] EEU Countries, including Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan. , or Armenia's foreign trade with EU countries in 2016-2019 mainly had growth tendencies.
 As of the end of 2018, a significant increase was registered in the Armenia-Kazakhstan trade relations.
  It grew as a result of almost doubling exports ($ 9.8 million, compared to $ 4.9 million last year).
The main product exported to Armenia is alcoholic beverages, mainly brandy.
Armenia's trade turnover with the EU had higher growth rates (119.0%) than with the EEU countries (111.3%).
However, in 2019 In the first half of 2018, compared to the same period last year, the growth rates of the index were relatively low for the EEU-Armenia, and for the EU countries, trade fell by 16.6% (in the first half of 2018, the figure was $ 906.8 million).
Moreover, a decline was registered in both the import and export structure.
 Exports fell by 26% (from $ 369.6 million to $ 273.2 million) and imports by 1.1% (from $ 537.1 million to $ 483.1 million).
The study of the RA trade turnover shows that the main direction is the EEU, which in 2019. It had a growth tendency in the first half of the year.
In 2017-2018, both the export and the import of the structure had a dynamic development.
Figure 1. Dynamics of Armenia's foreign trade structure (percentage) Figure 2. Armenia's foreign trade with EEU countries (million dollars) Figure 3. Armenia's foreign trade with EU countries (million dollars) Imports from EEU countries almost twice as much as exports.
 The comparison of the indicators allows us to say that the import from the EEU was more than from the EU, at the same time we exported more than the EEU, or in 2018. Exports to the EEU ($ 689 million), which increased by 20% compared to the previous year, exceeded the index of exports to the EU ($ 684 million).
  This fact is conditioned by the improvement of inter-trade incentives and mechanisms of the union countries.
It is noteworthy that the majority of exports - 684 million. 97% of the dollar (666.5 million dollars) belongs to the Russian market.
The positive trend for the observed period in terms of exports to EU countries is obvious.
2016-2018 The index increased 1.4 times (from 479 million dollars to 684 million dollars).
  However, in 2019 In January-June, exports decreased by 26% (from $ 370 million to $ 273 million) in the previous period, and decreased by 10% in terms of imports (down from $ 537 million to $ 483 million).
One of the preconditions for European economic cooperation is the generalized "GSP +" system of EU Privileges, due to which 6300 Armenian goods are exported to the EU without customs duties.
 This circumstance explains the high level of Europe.
Compared to the market for export. In the last two reporting years, the list of goods exported from Armenia is again led by raw materials և finished products [10].
  Armenia exports the most alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages to Russia, 94% of which is alcohol, mainly brandy and vodka [11, p. 27].
 In this sense, the advantage of EEU integration is often identified with the creation of mechanisms for the export of Armenian alcoholic beverages to Russia on preferential terms.
Except for Russia, all other post-economic relations of the EEU are at a very low level of development at the present stage.
The EEU countries export minerals, fuels and energy products, import ready-made technological products, which proves the low և Uncompetitive level of the EEU industrial potential [12].
It is clear that there are a number of internal and external obstacles to the formation and full integration of the complete market. On the one hand, it is the geographical location of Armenia, the difficulties of road and transport transportation, the economic blockade, on the other hand, it is a matter of conforming to the existing European standards.
 In addition, international economic transactions are currently bypassing large investment projects.
It should be taken into account that Armenia is in a low position among the post-Soviet countries in terms of foreign direct investment.
  In 2017, during the five years, the index had only a decreasing tendency, amounting to 246 million. dollars [3, p. 187].
Examining the distribution of investments by sectors of the economy, we will see that the largest share of Russian investments is concentrated in the energy sector, particularly in the sector, but the main direction in the geographical structure of investment flows in recent years remains offshore countries [5, pp. 515-522].
 Thus, it can be stated once again that this level of electricity production in the regional economic cooperation is still very low in terms of having a positive impact on the economic sector of Armenia.
If we want to strengthen the national economy, then with the economic thinking of the 21st century, we must develop the scientific spheres, that is, think about how to secure our place in the world market of information technologies.
  Although the advantage of the EEU is the stimulation of foreign trade, when domestic goods are exported to the markets of member countries on a preferential basis, without customs duties, they become competitive, at the same time Armenia imports cheaper, that is, without customs, the policy of developing customs is ineffective. especially when mining և metal resources predominate in the sector.
The growth of mutual trade of industrial goods in 2017 amounted to 12.6%, and the growth of food and agricultural exports - 23.7%, which is 57.6% of total exports [1, p. 54].
The study of the financial flows and trade structure of the post-EEU countries only suggests that there is no serious prospect of advanced experience, the influx of innovative technologies, the import and export of scientific products.
Such trade trends mean lagging behind the pace of scientific and technological progress.
Within the framework of the common trade policy, membership in the EEU to some extent deprives member-states of the right to make economic decisions.
Russia's Western-Eurasian sanctions have a dual effect on EU member states.
  It is known that as a result of sanctions, the Russian ruble depreciates and oil prices fall.
  As a result, Russia's post-turnover is reduced.
  At the same time, sanctions can have a positive effect on foreign trade in economic terms, the replacement of banned goods with goods imported from the member states of the Union leads to improved trade balances of those countries.
There are contradictions between the trade agreements within the EEU, the "EU Association Agreement", as each of them implies different legal regimes.
According to the EEU legislative provisions, the relations between the member of the union and other integration structures of the country are required by the decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission.
  The preferential trade regime established by trade agreements with European countries is under attack.
The differences in market capacity must also be taken into account. The EU has 512 million. market with a population, the EEU - 183 million.
The difference in the size of the economy is bigger. As a result of the gross domestic product, the EU is 8.5 times larger than the EEU.
  In 2017, the EU's GDP amounted to 17 trillion. USD [2], and the GDP of the EEU - 2 trillion. dollars [15].
Summarizing the studies, it should be noted a number of positive and negative aspects of the regional integration processes, which stem from the requirements of the EEU structure, the EU-Association Agreement.
1. In the framework of EEU-Armenia trade and economic cooperation, Russia is still not only the main partner, but also almost the only country, especially against the background of the lack of economic ties with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
2. Armenia's accession to the EEU promotes the sale of a number of agricultural products, especially traditional products, including brandy, in Russia.
3. The economic component of the EEU-Armenia integration is conditional, to some extent, of a formal nature.
4. The level of Armenia's economic cooperation with EU countries is at a very low level, which directly indicates Armenia's isolation from the Western world with a developed economy.
5. The positive effect of the economic component is not tangible in the EU Association Agreement, instead the imposition of European norms disguised as human rights is obvious, which contradicts our national value system.
6. Economic rapprochement with the EU can provide real incentives for the economic development of the Republic of Armenia at the expense of investments and scientific spheres.
7. Strengthening trade relations with the EU depends on the level of European standardization.
Based on the above-mentioned protocols, let us point out some conditions for the improvement of Armenia's integration ties.1. Armenia should develop such economic relations where there is partnership - not in exploitation, where the effect of cooperation will work, in other words, the links of the industrial chain will be in the cooperating countries, each country will benefit from the cooperation.
2. The development of the economy at the expense of the IT sector should have become one of the priority issues.
  After all, as a result of the exchange of experience, the opportunities and prospects of assimilation are more in the realm of European integration.
Technology Advancement 3. Prospects for European integration should not be limited to trade improvement.
The vital question is what kind of advanced experience we will gain as a result of integration, how we will use the opportunities provided by that integration, development of the economy, what joint initiatives we will come up with, what part of joining production cooperatives, EU agricultural development programs, investments, etc.
to deepen as much as possible only in the economic field, in the real political field, in migration obligations հանձն in human rights protection commitments it is necessary to show extreme caution, the relations need to Positive Negative Position: How to Use Cooperatively.
Europe should not be the center from which the institutional units regulating the social and political life of our nation should be governed, or Europe should not be viewed as a moral-legal norm, agenda-cultivator, but Europe should be just an opportunity for us to enter a free market, develop the economy. The position of our country in the Western business world.
  And without economic strengthening, the pressure on us from this or that country will continue - the neglect of our interests in the region.
5. Mining investment programs should not be given priority, instead the idea of ​​ensuring green economy growth - alternative energy production - should be given priority.
And, finally, the problems of national economic development of cheap labor suppliers in Armenia will not be solved by economic, trade unions or association agreements, they will not be solved by enjoying the patronage of this or that country, nor will they be solved by signing economic programs, signing documents or implementing strategic plans.
  Before signing agreements, treaties, memoranda, protocols, it is first necessary to create a package of solid state and national programs, in which the strategic program of economic development should have a special place.
  It must answer the following questions: what do we want from the world as a nation, what will we give to the world, how will we become stronger, what weight will we have? What is the role of our country in the context of these complex geopolitical developments and conflict of interests? .
  Because we do not have a national vision, any early threat of integration.
  The national security indicators of our economic-political orientation in the issue of regression of this or that integration unit և The agenda should be the pursuit of our political interests, including the diplomacy to solve the obstacles in our favor to ensure territorial integrity.
  Otherwise, the lack of a worldview position is a dangerous authority.
