One of the typical features of labor relations.
  Accordingly, one of their mandatory compensatory work responsibilities is the remuneration given to the employee.
  However, in addition to the traditional salary, there are other forms of compensation.
There are two main types of remuneration on the international platform: guarantee payments and indirect payments according to a system that was not considered as existing profits, while compensation payments are included in the distribution.
  The latter were in the structure of the salary between the salary payments from the first side, to the salary, which raised the question of distinguishing the list of those payments from the guarantee payments, which were also considered a special incentive.
Therefore, historically they were either included or not in the salary structure.
  The guarantee-compensation distinction was given by the famous Russian lawyer-scientist NG Alexandrov.
  In their turn, A. D. Zaykin և S. I. Criteria for typical guarantee-compensation payments were formulated.
In their opinion, the guarantee-compensation payments differ in purpose and size.
  Attempts were made by the authors to find new criteria to differentiate salaries from other forms of remuneration.
  For example, A. A. Fatu considered labor-related property to be such a criterion that payments, the amount of which is conditioned mainly by other factors, could not be related to wages.
According to the legal grounds of salary, the other remuneration or equalized types of remuneration are defined in the labor legislation of the Republic of Armenia.
By the order of the latter, before the legislative reforms, in contrast to the wage-paying practices practiced in the labor market, a number of laws were much better regulated even by the National Assembly of the Armenian SSR.
  For example, in the case of poultry's fault, the work was remunerated depending on the suitability of the product [3, 5], whereas the current code does not provide for remuneration at all, as there is no distinction between partial defect and full defect [4].
  There are key shortcomings in the draft law of the RA NA on the specific-address-regulatory point of view, in particular the elimination of the minimum threshold for additives and the reservation of the additive size to the parties [overtime, night, heavy, harmful, especially for heavy-duty work [18, 19].
 It is more expedient to set the minimum threshold of labor remuneration and protection by a legal act, as the dispositive legal rule of the relationship can give rise to that imperative arbitrariness, especially the legal regulation by the mechanisms of occurrence of appropriate legal consequences or their regulation.
  One of the possible changes envisaged by the new draft law of the RA National Assembly is that Article 144 of the Code will be supplemented with the following content: Overtime work may be performed with the consent of the parties or in the cases defined by Article 145 of this Code, at the request of the employer [20, 21].
  The current legislation stipulates that the employer may involve the employee in overtime work only in the cases provided for in Article 145 of this Code [4].
  The difference is obvious, because, unlike the current Code, the analysis of Article 22 of the draft shows that overtime work can be established in other cases, except for the cases provided for in Article 145, with the consent of the parties.
As it is known, it is forbidden to involve employees in work on non-working days, non-working holidays.
  Exceptions to this rule are permissible in the case of works which are impossible to terminate due to technical reasons of production or which require urgent repairs, loading or unloading [4].
  The above change can be foreseen in this case as well, as there may in fact be other urgent work, the performance of which will be related to assisting in the implementation of urgent defense or combat service operations; for example, it is defined in the National Assembly of the Russian Federation [8].
  This view was also expressed by the Armenian lawyer-scientist G. Petrosyan [16].
There are a number of other issues, particularly overtime, not overtime1. Article 144 of the RA Labor Code, which defines overtime work, is addressed only in case of the origin of specific relations related to the regime change, the origin of overtime work, of which the content ևspecially the concept.
  In addition, the first part of the article, which lists the cases of overtime work, does not correspond to the content of its title, that is, "Restrictions on overtime work" [4].
  Therefore, it is necessary to define the final concept of overtime work, restrictions, entitled the article "The concept of overtime work - restrictions."
envisage the following series: Turkmenistan (Russia, Tajikistan), working countries2. In contrast to Belarus, in accordance with the legislation of Kazakhstan, overtime pay with the consent of the employee with the provision of additional rest time, which may not be less than overtime hours [8-12], in the RA NA provides for overtime pay only under Article 184 [4].
  In our legislation, the above-mentioned version of overtime compensation can be included.
3. Remuneration for overtime work refers to the cases listed in the first part of Article 144 of the Code.
However, after referring to them and enumerating the restrictions on overtime work, we come across the truth that it is simply impossible to imagine the process of hiring co-workers in overtime work and paying them.
  In addition, there is no regulation in the AAA on hiring co-workers for non-working or weekend work.
  If in the case of internal cohabitation the employee settles with the same employer, in case of external employment co-operation the above-mentioned issue needs to be clearly settled.
  It can be established that a co-worker can be hired on a non-working or weekend day only if he / she is relieved of his / her main workplace duties during the given day.
Relationships in the Code 4. The RA National Assembly, even with a very limited framework, nevertheless envisages the cases of limitation of night work.
  However, "night work restrictions" as such do not exist.
  They are defined in Article 148, which provides for night work, entitled "Work at Time".
  The concept of night work in the Armenian SSR was given in separate articles, which is a more expedient, clarified version [5].
Night work article, Jee 5. According to the RA National Assembly, the duration of night work was reduced by one hour.
  The current code, however, does not provide for such a regulation, which can be considered a violation of the principle of ensuring the right to fair working conditions for every employee, as we believe that night work can be perceived from a physiological point of view, which, however, depends on the nature of work. which was thoroughly taken into account in the domestic legal acts of the studied countries (Russia, Turkmenistan, Moldova, Ukraine) by a reasonable decision of the legislature to reduce the number of night working hours at least [8, 9, 13, 14].
one 6. Night work, other work that differs from normal conditions, has its own legal standard of remuneration.
  However, according to the RA legislation, the regulation on night wages is quite incomplete, as it is necessary to set a minimum amount in the Code, a separate list of persons by law or other categories, for whom higher wages will be provided according to the specifics of the work done.
 An example is the Russian Government's "Minimum amount of increased overtime pay" of 2008. Decision N 544 of July 22, 2006 [15].
To define the guarantees in the Articles, As for the guarantees և compensations, then the heading "Guarantees ում Compensation has a corresponding head in the RA National Assembly".
  The concepts of "guarantee" և "compensation" defined in the Code, which makes the content of the articles regulating them quite difficult to understand.
Compensation is used in different meanings.
  Due to that, it becomes quite easy to confuse them, it is necessary to group the articles according to the affiliation.
In the professional literature, the term "compensation" is used, not "compensation", which is defined as the compensation (reimbursement) of the work done by the employee or the expenses to be borne by him, which he needed or should be in order to perform his duties properly. [16] .
  In addition, according to dictionary analysis, to compensate means to pay, to clear an account, and to compensate means to cover the expenses incurred, to be compensated.
  In this case, it would be right to replace these "compensations" with the notion of "compensations" in the RA NA.
It is also necessary to refer to the following normative-legal act regulating this sphere, the RA Law on Remuneration of Labor, which, however, was adopted in 2010. It has been recognized as invalid since August 7.
  The latter stipulated that the remuneration of the work was the payment made by the employers to the employees for the work done by them in cash or in other forms defined by the RA legislation.
In other words, as another form of remuneration, we are talking about the means of payment.
 A part of the salary, but not more than 20% of the tariff salary (official rate), with the written consent of the employee, could be paid by the employer's own products, at the prices of their release.
 In this case, the written consent of the employee played an important role in protecting the rights of employees.
  At present, the only salary in the Republic of Armenia is the payment in cash (drams) according to Article 192 of the National Assembly [4].
At the same time, it should be noted that the payment of a part of the salary in kind is allowed by the Convention on the Protection of Wages, which was ratified by the Republic of Armenia on October 25, 2004 [1].
 Consequently, there is a contradiction, and according to Article 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, in case of contradiction between the "norms of laws" of the international treaties ratified by the Republic of Armenia, the norms of international treaties are applied [2].
Conclusion.
 The conducted research and legal comparison between both domestic and international legal norms provide an objective opportunity to conclude that a number of gaps and shortcomings in the issues studied in the RA National Assembly, which for incomprehensible reasons have not been corrected or filled in time.
That since July 2018 the Government of the Republic of Armenia has a draft decision entitled "On the Government's Proposal to Make Labor Changes", but here too there is no reference to the above-mentioned legislative issues [23].
