Armenian medieval lyric poetry has fascinated both the ordinary reader and the researchers for centuries.
  And the problems of reorganization, content changes, genre transmissions, problems have not lost their scientific significance, as they allow clarifying the spheres of influence of the main source of lyric poetry, the Bible book, the borders and ways.
  Any connection of the medieval bibliographic monuments with the Holy Bible, in turn, can be used to solve the complex issues of the biblical examination, as well as to clarify the connection between secular literature.
Hinktakaranian "Yergergots" made his allegorical interpretation of his creative origins ակ Grigor Narekatsi transformed the Armenian song with treasure, melody, melody և exhortation (reciprocal) points of the new collection of his caring song "Gandzaran" (or "Tagharan").
  As a result of perfect poetic reflection and creative mastery as much as possible, "Song of Songs" became a source of a new kind of poetry.
  It was through the mediation of Grigor Narekatsi that the charm of the influence of the "Song of Songs" should explain the Armenian medieval "worldly reinterpretation" and the achievements of love lyric poetry [12-30].
This work of Solomon the Wise of the pictorial system of lyric poetry already had supporters of direct perception in the Armenian reality.
  For that purpose, King Gurgen of Vaspurakan repeatedly urges Grigor Narekatsi to write a commentary on "Song of Songs".
  On the other hand, traditionally considered a wedding song, this magnificent texture reflects the love of a woman և a man with detailed descriptions of a woman's external beauty.
  It glorifies the idea of ​​love, because according to Narekatsi, the country has nothing more honorable than the glorification of the love of a man or a woman, so in this work one must look for the deep communication of God's believer.
  This starting point of Narekatsi's poetry had a huge impact on medieval lyric poetry, both psychologically-allegorically and in a direct-romantic sense. [8-63], [9-78].
Grigor Narekatsi's "Commentary on the Song of Songs" միջոցով The Armenian lyric poetry of the future period inherits the whole vocabulary of the "Song of Songs" ("Sweet Song"), the pictorial system ("Birthday Song") and the love mood ("Resurrection Song").
 And later, when the allegory in poetry loses its position, the love motive quickly becomes the loudest string of secular lyric poetry, without losing the connection with its two main sources, the work of the five-volume "Songbook" by Grigor Narekatsi.
The transmission of narrative deposits is clearly seen in the poem "Song of John Garabed" by the anonymous poet (10th century), where Herod's daughter is described as follows: Herk is folded like a prince. His eyes are covered with apricot.
The bead on the slope resembles the flowers of the mountains.
And burning a rose from his cheek, like a bitten pomegranate [10-205].
In this example, the Anonymous poet is not so much influenced by "Song of Poetry", by inventions which, using almost the same identity, testify to Narekatsi's poetic inventions, which are still gradually spreading in the 10th century.
NarekatsiGrigororkan In the Cilician period of the flourishing of the Armenian culture (1080-1375) the caring one gradually gets its rightful place. The science, philosophy and art of the ancient world are re-evaluated.
  The focus is on the interpretations of parts of the human world, such as David's Psalms, Solomon the Wise, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Solomon.
Two famous figures of Cilicia, Nerses Shnorhali և Nerses Lambronatsi, re-evaluating the literary merit of Grigor Narekatsi, contributed to the recognition and dissemination of the author's work.
Influenced by the poetry of Grigor Narekatsi, the bibliographer of the prophecies, Nerses Shnorhali took the spiritual song to a new height with his creative inspiration [17-146-147], widely using the song "Song" in the charming verses dedicated to the Virgin Mary Hripsime.
  In the caption "Song to St. Hripsime", Hripsime, as the bride of the "Song of Songs", is invariably connected with the Bridegroom Christ.
 Each poem ends with a double "oh, St. Hripsime", where Hripsime is sung as a queen, a spring flower, a fragrant rose, the bridegroom's daughter, the bride of solar justice.
The ghost of love longs for the groom with a burning heart, with a burning heart full of love for the groom. The bride is full of beauty for the King of the Son, who is from St. Hripsime [5-254].
Mariam Astvatsatsin is presented in the most delicate colors in the line "Song of the Gospel". Paradise is a flower of God, Lavender is fragrant in the soul, The valley is a bright lily, Aghbyur is a river of four [18-166].
Nerses Shnorhali's hymns, like Grigor Narekatsi's "Birth" poem, are lyric poems within the limits of the importer's illogical perceptions of foreign literature. The woman is compared to the peculiar phenomena of nature.
  The lines of Hovhannes Tlkurants and Grigoris Akhtamartsi are full of such images.
The poetic images of the Virgin Mary as a mother, Hripsime as a historical figure, are a bridge by which the vocabulary of the "Song of Songs" is deeply connected with the secular love lyric through means of imagery.
flowers, become the main symbols of the "Song of Songs" the bride և the main characters of the groom-'s iconography.
  In the manuscripts-photos of the manuscript sources "Song of Songs" is reflected in the form of the Virgin-bride (handwritten no. 206, 1318) [14-914], with magnificent images of the bride պատկեր groom (handwritten no. 2706, 1668-1669) 31-32].
Poetry, like the allegorical image of Hars, begins to be used in secular literature in the genre of historical mourning.
  This type of writing was substantiated by Nerses Shnorhali's "Lamentation Edesio".
 The once lush Edesia introduces herself as a bride, whose wedding ring and sail have been looted, she has lost her son-in-law.
We see the same comparison in the line of Gregory the Younger in "Lamentation of Jerusalem". They drank the milk and wine that flowed from my two breasts ... And they adorned me like a bridegroom [6-281].
The verse penetrates the memoirs of the manuscripts with its sensitivity.
  Poets with poetic skills weave verse memoirs representing beautiful artistic images, some of which have literary value.
  Nerses Shnorhali has rhyming memoirs for the books of Solomon «գ Song of Proverbs. Nerses Shnorhali. The memoir of the singer (" Song of Songs ") is so beautiful (I mean" Song of Songs "), How much does the word of truth enjoy?
The song of Solomon, This is to be called the Song of Songs, That the bridegroom's heavenly lover will marry the bride [19-175].
Even the influence of the "Song of Songs" is noticeable on Solomon's "Proverbs" memoir. The groom descends on a raincoat, kisses the light Arp, calling Kur blind, an ancient city of God [19-388].
CU is a charming example of the interweaving of the genre of "Song of Songs". հմր. 1418 Summary of the memoir of Moses (1280), the further recipient of the collection.
  The pen-poet considers himself a groom, and the manuscript a bride, with whom he is connected by love.
  In this example, the main symbol of the "Song of Songs" is the wedding object [11-500].
  Probably the writer knew by heart how to apply passages from the "Song of Songs" on demand, so we can say that the oral tradition also contributes to the spread and creative mastery of the "Song of Songs".
12th century A psalmist named Khachatur, after hearing about "Song for a song" with "many, many reasons in a living voice", brings together a product (MM. No. 1897).
 It turns out that the clergymen even testified with their own mouths that "Song of Songs" was perceived directly. "Others said to our teachers," If this (Paul), the chief of the wilderness, had in his hand a large number of people who had received this greed, they would have eaten the grass, because they would have tormented the bride and groom. "
 And he rebuked them many times, and could not approve of them ”[16-119b-120a].
13-14th centuries In love poetry, the rose and the nightingale come to replace the other images of the bride and groom.
The influence of both Eastern poetry and "Song of Songs" is noticeable on the latter [1-135, 152].
When, at the end of the 14th century in Cilicia, the literary splendor faded, the role of cultural restoration was assumed by the Tat monastery under the leadership of Grigor Tatatsi (flowering periods: 1365-1415).
  He wrote a solution-interpretation of the song value of "Song of Songs", which probably influenced the son of Tatatsi's sister's student Arakel Syunetsi.
 "Song of Songs" was polished to the touch of the pen of any of our medieval poets և to shine like Arakel Syunetsi.
  The author of the allegorical interpretations of the five parts of the "Song of Songs" referred to both sermons [2-73-74] and poetic inspiration, weaving lines that were perceived as real samples of love poetry, which were highly appreciated and translated into Russian [2-2, 40-67].
  Arakel Syunetsuban's creative heritage is characterized by those created under the influence of "Yergotsots" ("I am anxious about your love", "Behold, I long for you", "Behold the great mountain Jahagin"), in which many parts of love are hidden.
In his memoir of "Adamkbook" Arakel Syunetsi speaks about Grigor Tatatsi with deep warmth, who uses the pictorial system of "Song of Songs" to express himself. I longed for your love, Give me a kiss in my mouth. For my heart is thirsty, Drink your wine [3-2]
If we forget for a moment that we are talking about Rabbi Grigor Tatatsi, then it can be perceived as a love song.
With their delicacy and beauty, as brilliant examples of the poetic mastery of the "Song of Songs", the poems dedicated to the Mother of God stand out.
  The untitled poem "I am disturbing you with my love" is a personal love, the influence of which is noticeable in the love lyric of the later period.
Arakel Syunetsi presented an ayatollah thought entitled "To the truly desirable Christ" to Christ.
  Arakel Syunetsi is making an innovation here. He introduces the essence of "Song of Songs" in the line as the first line of the poetic house.
To the true longing Christ, on Your blossoming mountains, Scented incense, Glowing with radiant light, Snow-vision, whitened [4-1-2].
This form of weaving the "Song of Songs" with self-created poetic passages was widely used in the 15th-16th centuries. To the first lyricist Grigoris Akhtamartsi.
  Allegorically, the love sung without idiosyncrasy shines in the author's poetry with juicy images and fresh breath.
Poem of the Holy Mother of God Even though I am asleep, But I have my heart awake, Burning or in your love, Temple of light, Holy Virgin Mother [7-169].
Grigoris Akhtamartsi composed this poem with the obvious effect of Arakel Syunetsi's poem "Towards the Truly Desired Christ".
 The following lines were created under the direct influence of "Song of Songs": "Song of the Holy Mother of God to Catholicos Grigoris of Akhtamar" ("King's Closed Garden ...") և "Saying of Catholicos Grigoris of Akhtamar" ("Here are our gardens blossomed").
  Grigoris Akhtamartsi presented beautiful poems to the Mother of God, which are mostly influenced by Arakel Syunetsi.
One of the most popular ար most copied works of Grigoris Akhtamartsi is the poem with the beginning "Here is our garden blossomed…", which in most of the scripts has the addition of "Song of Songs" [2-73-74].
  The influence of "Song of Songs" is the strongest in this song.
In a strictly allegorical sense, it is no longer perceived. This poem is the hymn of the feeling of love, the supreme human nature of nature.
  Probably that is why the Vienna Matenadaran in 1604-1626. հմր. The 797 manuscript has the title "From St. Gregory the Catholicos to the Holy Mother of God of Akhtamar", which shows that the writers wanted to emphasize the allegorical meaning of the poem in every way.
There are two layers of "Song of Songs" influence in the poems of Grigoris Akhtamartsi. The first is the direct interaction, when the essence of "Song of Songs" is introduced into the fabric of the song, the other is a weaker effect. Here is reflected only the pictorial system of the "Songbook" mediated by the egg.
  Based on "Song of Songs", these images are no longer perceived as such, they do not become the basis of the whole poem. "Red-and-white apple in the forest, / Jirar's oil is great."
  Or, "I wandered in the middle of the night, / I begged and found the light of my eyes" Gail [13-12].
It is probable that the expressions from Grigoris Akhtamartzurtsus's work from "Song of Songs" are already ready-made signs in the poet's imagination, the use of which was gradually becoming unusual for medieval Armenian lyric poetry վար difficult to distinguish.
  These symbolic images began to be used not so much for the purpose of depicting thematic subjects with bodily phenomena as as means of self-depiction.
"Song of Songs" continues to be a source of inspiration for the caring, secular literature of the late period. We notice the influences of the 16th century. from the second half - 18th century. in the literature [20-81, 147, 166-170, 190, 196, 607], but a huge amount of material from that period is still in manuscript form, not fully studied.
  That is why we leave the examination of the influences of "Song of Songs" for another occasion for the above-mentioned era.
The examination of the influence of Hinktakaran "Song of Songs" allows us to make the following conclusions: The first manifestations of the poetic mastery of "Song of Songs" in medieval Armenian lyric poetry are Grigor Narekatsi's "Commentary on Song of Songs" and the Poems.
Together with the Bible, they revolutionized medieval Armenian poetry, putting into circulation the whole system of "Song of Songs", which was widely used by later lyricists Nerses Shnorhali, Arakel Syunetsi, Grigoris Akhtamartsi and others.
b. The image system of "Song of Songs" is used carefully from the beginning. The poets clung more to the original, creating stable poetic elements by interweaving the natural self-created passages of "Song of Songs".
 Arakel Syunetsi put this poetic circulation in circulation, which was continuously used in the poems of Grigoris Akhtamartsi.
c. The symbols of "Song of Songs" gradually "penetrate" into both iconography and historical carving monuments, manuscript memoirs and historical relics, creating a wide range of imaginative possibilities.
