The urgency of the issue One of the potential riches of our country is the scientific potential, the development of which is borne by the general education.
All social changes affect the education system.
  During the years of post-independence, educational reforms are carried out in the RA general education, which address various issues of education organization.
  In this paper, we would like to point out the effective ways of applying the collaborative methods proposed by the reform demands [4].
  The use of collaborative methods is not an end in itself; they should be aimed at the development of learners' mental independence, sensory abilities, as well as socialization and other skills.
  The choice of method can be influenced by: • learning objectives և problems, • content of the material, • volume of the material և complexity, • interest of students in the new learning և level of collaborative skills, acquisition of knowledge • pupils' age characteristics, • teaching time , • the number of students in the class, • the level of teacher training [5] և etc.
Adequate organization of teacher classroom planning activities is essential for the effectiveness of collaborative learning.
It requires the teacher to: • substantiate the need to organize the lesson in collaborative groups, • determine the principles, forms to form appropriate groups, • prepare the necessary distribution materials, • formulate tasks appropriate to the objectives, • formulate clear instructions for completing tasks, • determine the appropriate volume of assignments.
The main task of the classification will be to control and direct the work of all groups.
Each goal is very diverse, which implies the possibility of changing the method, depending on the goal.
 Each lesson արան grade is unique, so one of the indicators of a teacher's mastery is the choice of the appropriate method [2].
Benefits of Collaborative Learning Collaborative learning to organize student-centered learning, which is one of the key requirements for educational reform [3, 4].
 It should be noted that the methods used in the modern educational process are not the provision of ready-made knowledge by the teacher, but the involvement of the student in the acquisition of that knowledge.
Collaborative methods allow you to master the new material more effectively, to develop many skills of independence, collaboration, research work, for example, information retrieval, collection, processing.
  However, the acquisition of these skills by students is the result of long-term work, and while giving the teacher the opportunity to improve, enrich his methodological approaches to solving various problems.
Today the methodological arsenal of pedagogues is quite rich, but their use is completely different.
  As a specialist in geography of the Shirak region of the Ministry of Education and Science, he frequently monitors various schools in the Shirak region.
Many methods are used by teachers during the classes, but they almost always do not reach the logical end of the lesson, or the time frame fits, the groups are not homogeneous, the group work is not successful, not everyone is active, or the necessary requirements or They do not understand, or they do not fulfill it.
During any new work, many defects can be revealed, which are corrected and corrected as a result of repeated repetition of work.
Research Methodology The work is a suggestion of the well-known method to enrich the methodological approaches of teachers.
I propose to geography lessons the opportunity to use the "Tri-'s one-lock" method, which we often use in the lesson comprehension phase, as an effective way of understanding, analyzing, differentiating the main from the secondary, substantiating one's own opinion, generalization, and developing collaborative skills [1,2].
  The method of expediency teaching, which are quite extensive.
Out of the limited volume of our article, the method suggested by us is given in the example of the 9th grade lesson "Vegetation դ Fauna" [6] with the following steps in the lesson plan:  Instruct students to count 1-5 ավորում in unified numbers to form an appropriate number of groups.
Բաժ Divide the materials to be studied into groups: Group I - Causes of RA flora and fauna diversity (p. 63), Group II - Characteristics of desert-semi-desert zone (pp. 63-64), Group III - Characteristics of mountain arid-steppe zone (p. 64), Group IV - Characteristics of the forest zone (pp. 64-65), Group V - Characteristics of the sub-Alpine zone (p. 65).
Գրել Write the name of the method on the board: "Three keys և lock",։ explain the process of working.
 The groups should discuss the pre-individualized part as the "keys", bring out the main three sentences of the given section, formulate one concluding thought, which will be the "lock" of the group.
Explain the content expressive instructed  Introduce the evaluation criteria.
  Groups will be judged on their preferred presentation (prose writing, explanation, mapping or schematic, poster presentation, for example, with pictures of locks and keys, etc.), clarity of speech, instruction, logical sequence, rational use of time, etc.
 Given during work.
Աշխատանքը The group work will be presented by the student selected by the teacher.
Համար To determine the degree of mastery of the sections presented by the groups, students will receive a descriptive test assignment compiled by the teacher for the whole class.
Descriptive test 9th grade Topic-RA vegetation և fauna Number of tasks-101. 120 species of RA plant representatives are found only in the country և is called. 2. How many high quality plant species are found in Armenia?
3. It is an endemic animal species in the Republic of Armenia. 1) boar 3) bezoar goat 2) grizzly bear 4) jackal 4.
(wolf, fox, 5. Match the columns. 1) Desert և Semi-desert zone 2) Mountain-loving zone 3) Steppe zone 4) Forest zone) Masrenib) Sizakhotg) Jangyulumd) Sosi 6. In which zone are relatively many rodents?
1) in the deserts 3) in the forests 2) in the steppes 4) in the alpine zone 7. It is the main tree species in the Northeast of the Republic of Armenia. 3) millet, 4) maple, 5) field mouse, 6) boar, 7) weasel, 8) goat 9. Nature is widespread.
In the north-south-south-regions? 1) mountain-dry 3) steppe 2) forest 4) alpine 10. What is the significance of the forests of the Republic of Armenia?
1) industrial 3) water conservation 2) land conservation 4) climate regulator արդյուն The results of the task will reveal the collaborative work of each of the groups և the quality of the presentation, based on which the evaluation of groups or individuals will be done.
Of course, when using the method for the first time, there are no disadvantages, so after some success, the use of the method համար to increase the efficiency of its use by students ցանկ it is desirable և to use it repeatedly.
The above-mentioned method has been used many times in the 9th "c" grade of the "Photon" college in Gyumri, Shirak region, in the 8th "a" և 6th "a" grades.
Use the self-assessment chart, which provides instructional data after each experiment.
  The teacher can find ways to correct and improve the method դեպքում in case of continuous repetition, the method can be more effective.
The disadvantages of finding the results of the analysis will be as follows: Our proposed table will look like this:
Criteria for Assessing Teacher WorkLesson Numbers of ClassesHomogeneity ofGroupsEgree of Collaboration of Members in a GroupPresence of a Pupil (ies) in the GroupClarity of Task ReconciliationTask Fitness We have the following results: "9" points - 6 students "8" points - 7 students "7" points - 4 students "6" points - 4 students "5" points - 4 students in the 8th "a" grade, where 24 students study Students, while studying the topic "Economy of Western Europe", we got the following results."9" points - 6 students "8" points - 7 students "7" points - 7 students "6" points - 2 students "5" points - 1 student "4" points - 1 student in the 6th "a" grade, where There are 24 students studying, while studying the topic "Natural zones of the Earth" we got the following results: "9" points - 3 students "8" points - 6 students "7" points - 6 students "6" points - 3 students "5" points - 3 pupil "4" points - 3 pupils Conclusion 1. In the 9th grade the method was used to study the topic "RA vegetation և և quality animal life" the progress was 68%."9" points - 3 students "8" points - 6 students "7" points - 6 students "6" points - 3 students "5" points - 3 students "4" points - 3 students Conclusion 1. The method was applied in 9th grade The progress made in studying the topic "RA vegetation և և qualitative animal world" was 68%."9" points - 3 students "8" points - 6 students "7" points - 6 students "6" points - 3 students "5" points - 3 students "4" points - 3 students Conclusion 1. The method was applied in 9th grade The progress made in studying the topic "RA vegetation և և qualitative animal world" was 68%.
  It can be said that the mentioned method is highly effective, it is effective for high schools.
2. In 8th grade, the method was used to study the topic "Western European Economy"; the qualitative progress was 83%.
  The proposed method is more effective when teaching cyclical subjects of economic geography.
3. In the 6th grade, the method was used to study the topic "Earth's natural zones"; the qualitative progress was 62.5%.
 The method is less effective for lower grades.
4. The application of the method in the three grades of the basic school led to the conclusion that it was generally effective in teaching school geography.
