Preface.
  In recent decades, many studies have been conducted on accent-related issues.
  The most up-to-date studies, which are carried out on a pragmatic basis, using the problem of verbal influence, which, most importantly, the human factor.
 It is known that verbal influence is impossible to separate from the accent.
  It is on this basis that sound engineering has emerged, which has received special attention in recent years.
  The main problem of practical linguistics, according to L. According to Fomichenko, it is the discovery of the patterns of speech that are used by society և individuals to influence the human mind, emotions և psychic world, which ultimately affects human behavior.
  The speaker tries to energize the audience, and the audience expresses an evaluative attitude towards the speaker, using what the speaker says, how he says it, and what his performance style is.
 It depends on that assessment, to what extent the offered information will be accepted or rejected, to what extent the transmitted information will affect the listener's position, further actions, etc.
  Given the importance of verbal "syntactic means", it is necessary to note the special role of rhetoric in the formation of verbal practice.
  Forming a definite attitude towards the content of the spoken word that affects the audience with the correct and clear accent is very important for the perception of the speech [13].
Being a relatively new field in line with pragmatic linguistics, phonology emerged on the basis of phonetics, emphasizing the importance of the linguistic factor.
  The involvement of practice in phonology is about the possibility of expanding the field of phonological research only, about the possibility of penetrating the structural-deep spheres of the's, to discover the superficial-deep mechanisms of influence on the knee.
  In that sense, your accent is invaluable.
The speakers of antiquity valued not only the ability to construct the content of speech logically, but also paid special attention to the spoken word, to every kind of rhythmic structure, to change the pitch of the tone, to increase and decrease the sound, to slow down, to pause.
It is possible to evaluate the sound of the word by the perceiving subject, depending on how aesthetically pleasing the impression of the sounding text is, how significant the informative meaning of the text is, how much it corresponds to the expressed emotions, which are expressed in a pronounced quality. , because it is this correspondence that makes the process of perception more enjoyable.
It is quite possible that different addressees use different meanings when using the same words under different circumstances.
  And all the questions about how it is possible, what is the connection between a specific word meaning, certain circumstances of the word, the meaning the speaker meant when pronouncing the word, his intentions, actions and the thought expressed as a result, are answered by the expert (http: // www.
//plato.stanford.edu/entries/pragmatics/).
  In order for the addressee and the addressee to understand each other correctly in the given communication situation, it is necessary for them not only to master the lexical, verbal-semantic structures, but also to perceive that knowledge on the basis of accent, in practical terms.
It turns out that the meaning of the word, which is primary for the addressee, fully reaches the addressee.
 So, not what is said is used, but how it is said.
  That is, the pragmatic direction of the word is used.
 Moreover, the speaker plans in advance what effect the speech will have on the addressee, that is, he can guess what the addressee's reaction will be.
 In this case, it is difficult to say which function prevails in public speech, communication or influence (in connection with the phonological concept of the issue (see 9-10).
At present, it is believed that through melody it was possible to remove the interrelationships of the meaning expressed in the word և the preconditions conditioned by the situation, as well as its specific communication intentions և their distinctive features [8].
The expressiveness of the speech or the meanings of the speakers are different due to the accent.
 The accent should not be ignored, as it is especially due to the latter that the addressee's speech fully reaches the addressee.
V. Artyomov considers the accent to be the basis on which the tone and the word are embroidered.
The eloquent means used in speech create an opportunity for the audience to act, they can even change the personal orientation of the listeners.
  Such influence is very often deliberate in nature; it serves as the ultimate goal of defining a certain attitude towards the information provided [9-10].
  It is only through the skillful use of pronouns that it is possible to make full use of it in a particular situation, with the main emphasis on the underlying words, that is, the ones that carry the most important information.
It is possible to judge the speaker with an accent: temperament, ability, mood.
Through the accent, the speaker manages to make the unspoken meaning accessible to the addressee, as well as to make him a communicator of his thoughts and comments.
The accent not only expands the meaning of the word, but also gives it special nuances.
 The same word can be pronounced with many letters.
  The word "ordinary", as indicated by I. Andronikov can be said to be malicious, sharp, intimate, dry, gloomy, tender, indifferent, timid, arrogant, self-confident in other ways (http.
//www.scienceforum.ru/2014/pdf/1002.pdf).
Due to the variety of etymologies, the expressiveness of the spoken word increases sharply compared to the written word when conveying thoughts, feelings and mood.
 As Bernard Shaw points out, there are fifty things to say yes or no (http: // www.
//www.scienceforum.ru/2014/562/1155).
  And according to D. Crystal: No one has yet been able to describe all the nuances of meaning expressed in tone.
To sum it up, one pause occupies a special place in the accent components.
  Functionally, it is superficial, it is physically unique, it is an empty space [12], which, however, in oral speech can always be filled with facial expressions, gaze, etc.
  It allows the addressee to gather the thoughts, to make the word more purposeful, and the addressee, to have time with intense movements and movements, to better understand the direction and meaning of what is said.
 More often it is described as a pronunciation pause.
  As Kipling points out, one can speak with pauses (http.
//www.edgarcaysi.narod.ru/karnegi_kvu_6.html).
  Properly placed pauses testify to the mastery of the speaker.
The success of public speaking as a means of oral communication depends to a large extent on the pronunciation, because, as it has been repeatedly confirmed, the correct interpretation of the content in the speech is realized by the audience especially through the accent.
There are many words in public speeches that stand out with emotional-expressive emphasis.
 According to L. V. Shcherba's emotional-expressive emphasis conveys an attitude of the word, which materializes the positive or negative attitude of the speaker towards this or that species.
  Emotional-expressive stress is often used to emphasize contrast.
 Undoubtedly, it affects the frequency of the main holiday, the change of the intensity of the duration.
The purpose of political speech is to gain and maintain political power.
  The internal political discourse of linguistic literature is presented as a multifaceted "multi-plane phenomenon" (Sheigal, Baranov, Yudina, Kostomarov ևaylq).
 V. F. Demyankov considers that political speech, which is at the crossroads of different branches of science (political science, social sociolinguistics, etc.), is a complex subject of study, related to the content, problem, content of political speech, which is used in certain political situations.
  The general description of a political speech helps to define its features and functions.
Linguistics, Psychology, Politicians are accustomed to the frequent use of rhetorical expressions, especially to emphasize information, so that it is available to a wider audience, so that it can attract their attention, connect with the audience, sympathize with the outside world, as it is known in the world.
 Their speech is also rich in rhetorical questions, in which the speaker invites the listener to share his / her concerns about the existing issues, to pay attention to certain thoughts, ideas, etc.
characterize the orator's speech with great expressiveness.
Their speeches are often directed at the feelings of the addressee, which in turn influence the intellect and consciousness.
 In order for the word to serve its purpose, it must stand out with the right և beautiful accent, beautiful և full sound.
  The eloquence and expressiveness of the speech give an opportunity to the emotionally captivating, to promote the comprehension of the content of the message, not to the non-critical approach.
Sometimes the speaker seeks help from the audience to give nature to the speech or to draw attention to some thoughts.
has a role in the domain.
Brahman և Marquez's focus on how idioms help to distract the listener's message during political debates [1].
  Motsikonachi is widely examined - relationships that exert influence.
  The meaning of the word includes the accent, the accent, the tonal features, the tempo of the speech, the pauses, etc., and the emotional tone of the speech is expressed in joy, sadness, anger, excitement, etc. [6].
  Examples of self-expression are audacity, sincere emotional application, etc.
  In addition, the speaker can use other logical։ rhetorical means.
  All these idioms make the word a complex, diverse and powerful communication weapon.
  Undoubtedly, a more elaborate word is required in the public sphere.
Clear pronunciation, sufficient volume of the voice, fluctuations of the volume, non-smooth tone, correct accents and pauses, speech pace, smoothness, appropriate organ diversity, expressiveness are very important for the speaker.
 Personal qualities include the speaker's involvement, enthusiasm, personal attractiveness of the speaker, calm, balanced speech, personality, positive attitude, sense of humor, self-confidence, conviction.
 The speaker should be able to communicate with the listener, he should be sensitive, respectful towards the latter, and not forcing his point of view.
The task of a politician is to provide the audience not only with information about this arbitrary phenomenon of public life, but also, more importantly, to persuade the listener to accept this or that position, to receive the support of the citizens.
  In fact, the political speech has a subtext of pro-government.
  The speaker aims at the trust of the beneficiaries, which determines the main functions and means of implementation of the speech.
  As H. vividly presents. Apresyan, although the orator is a poet-painter, he should not turn his speech into a reading, but should work on the goodness of the word, the correct use of his own voice, not distorting the meanings of the words, clearly pronouncing them.
  As the pen is the poet's weapon, so is the voice the orator.
Political speech is especially important because the social activities of leading politicians have always played a special role in the life of the society.
The role of a country in the international arena, its relations with other states, its role in the activities of the world community depend on a certain political position and situation.
  Political leaders play a major role in determining the country's image.
  Through speeches, politicians have the opportunity to address both the citizens of their country and the international community.
Consider B. Obama's 2011 Excerpt from the speech of the British Parliament on May 25 (full speech at the following link: https).
//www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/barackobama/barackobamabritishparliament.htm).
First of all, the speech is remarkable in that B. Obama is the first American president to be honored to address the British Parliament from Westminster Hall.
B. Mentioning the names of former honorees, Obama jokingly says that this is either a very high bar or the beginning of a very funny joke - ˈ ˈhave ˎknown ≀ funny ˎjoke.
  The beginning of the speech has already been successful և the world's most targeted audience.
  The positive disposition of the addressee is already ensured.
  The whole hall expresses the satisfaction of the speaker.
  His self-confident speech, clear accents and pauses, weighty down-to-earth tones inspire confidence and respect in the most capricious audience in the world, which is almost impossible to satisfy.
reacts violently.
  He repeatedly tries to emphasize the fact that the connection between the two countries is the oldest, the strongest that the world has ever known.
  It is a special relationship (ˈa pecialspecial reˎlationship), and when a slight tension arises, it immediately becomes the subject of discussion and analysis - developments.
The speaker's speech is dominated by downward tones, but by uttering the word overanalyzed in a downward-upward tone, he tries to emphasize how important these relationships are for them, trying to make the addressee understand that they are equally important for them, which they should also try. to cherish those relations.
B. Obama mentions some failures in their relationship: Of course, ,all relationships have their ˈups and ˎdowns. 'Sit's been msmooth ailsailing ever since.
  He uses the word mittedadmittedly in a down-and-down tone to make it clear that the cause of the upheaval was Britain, but alleviates it with the use of an equal holiday → may, then adds a humorous tone to his words, noting that their friendship has been smooth since the 1812 war. to have a process.
  Due to the smooth transitions, the skilled speaker manages to maintain the already positive attitude towards the audience.
Among the many commonalities (language, culture, partnerships, etc.), the speaker especially emphasizes that their friendship, due to the common faith և values, has united the two peoples for centuries: Our re lationship is ˈthrough the ˎages, which sounds more convincing Due to the downward tonic application.
He made a special reference to the Charter of Freedoms, emphasizing its role in the issue of fundamental human rights and freedoms, noting that it was especially inspired by the settlers across the Atlantic.
  Referring to Winston Churchill, he states: Declaration of Indeˎpendence.
  By skillfully glorifying the British, while at the same time emphasizing the power of his country, he gradually strengthens his position.
  The British Parliament is following every word with complete silence.
 This is the non-linguistic basis that does not give Obama self-confidence - electrification among members of all walks of life. "
  Emphasizing the need for the United States and Britain in particular to promote values ​​such as tolerance and self-determination that lead to peace and dignity, he emphasized the idea that the US-Europe Alliance would continue to shape a world in which the sacred is deeply rooted. Human freedom and dignity are preserved, and such an aspiration is neither American nor inspiring.
  You were neither British nor Western. It is universal, it touches the hearts of donkeys, it enables nations to flourish and prosper.
  His mind sounds more convincing with the use of clear accents, pauses և downward tones.
Continuing, Obama is working with allied countries to establish a state of peace.
This speech of Obama is a brilliant speech from the phonological and idiological point of view.
  The message clearly reaches the goal.
  His word is balanced and self-confident.
  The topics discussed (economic issues, nuclear proliferation, education, etc.) and the tone of his speech are appropriate for a skilled, far-sighted, powerful statesman.
  There is "strength", "restraint", "warmth", "obvious respect" in Obama's speech.
  The eloquent evidence of his success is the standing ovation of the British Parliament.
Conclusion.
  Thus, political speech is a persuasive art of speech, which can be achieved through the use of figurative expressions, such as special prepositions.
  Emotions are typical of political speeches, because in order to achieve their goal, as well as to make a strong impression on the listener, politicians use the words's discourses, serving the listener for their own purposes.
  With the emphasis on basic words, as well as with the use of the appropriate accent, it becomes a powerful weapon for the speaker to achieve his own goals.
It should be emphasized once again that in the above-mentioned style the functions of "transmission" and "influence" are used, but the function of influence is somewhat dominant here ժամանակ at the same time together with the function of transmission it forms a common antagonism, that is, it cannot exist in public.
 As for the pronunciation contour, when performing a conveying function it is neutral, ie the neutral neutral accent prevails here, and when performing the effect function the emotional / expressive accent is pushed to the fore, which goes beyond the syntactic accent, including figurative speech, figurative speech.
