Among the external factors affecting the health of the population, great importance is attached to food.
  Both quantitative and qualitative characteristics of food, which depend on the climatic-socio-economic conditions of the place, are equally important for the normal functioning of the organism.
The analysis of national cuisines from a medical-geographical point of view allows to find out the impact of different types of food on the health of the population.
  It is manifested by the size of the population's obesity, various diseases of the digestive system մեծ the size of the symptoms.
  There are many developed methods of research of national foods (Pokrovsi A., Frumkin I., Alekseva T.) others), which evaluate it from different angles [4, 5, 6, 7].
  The national cuisine is first of all considered as the wealth of the given nation, in which it is the national history, traditions, national character and spirit [4, pages 251-255, 271-274].
Kanmethods - developed various questionnaires, survey-balance methods to study the composition, quantity, preferred foods actually consumed by the population.
  Such balance sheet, budget, [7, pp. 93-95].
  These methods have both advantages and disadvantages, for example, the questionnaire method allows to conduct a large population survey at the same time, but its accuracy is quite low, as people answer questions in general, can not contain the size of the food consumed.
  There are standards for different types of food, on the basis of which food baskets are developed [6, pp. 207-222].
The aim of this article is to create an image of the place of the Armenian cuisine in the geography of food, to present the originality of the traditional cuisine due to the peculiarities of the Armenian nature and population, as well as to discuss several issues related to national food health.
The nutritional structure directly affects the organism.
  One of the first signals of the impact is the high rate of obesity in the population.
 Excess fat accumulates in the body, which can be due to the intake of high-calorie foods, especially when there is a lack of active mobility.
  Obesity contributes to the development of diabetes, gallstone hypertherosclerosis, disease, or "Food Diseases" [3, p. 438].
  Due to food, alimentary diseases (Latin: alimentarius - related to food) are distinguished.
  These diseases are caused by a lack or excess of vitamins, minerals, protein and energy in the diet.
  The most common are anemia, weight loss (iron deficiency), infertility, bone formation disorder (manganese deficiency), endemic shingles (iodine deficiency), dermatitis (nickel deficiency), etc.
 There are also nutritional causes - hypervitaminosis (hypervitaminosis), for example, hypervitaminosis A can occur when eating foods rich in vitamin A, such as pork liver, caviar, egg yolk, etc.
Each national cuisine is distinguished by dishes typical of the given world.
  Wherever a given nation lives, its organism is already adapted to both the climatic conditions and the animal plant nutrients present in the place.
  All kitchens have their own peculiarities. they are distinguished by taste, smell, originality.
  Medical-geographical analysis of kitchens creates a picture of the features of the kitchen և the health of the population.
  Many national cuisines stand out for their health, that is, they are dominated by items and dishes that have a healthy effect, and the population has a small incidence of foodborne illness.
 Such cuisines are Japanese, Chinese, French, Ethiopian, Indian, etc.
Japanese cuisine has unique features: a large amount of vitamins and minerals, fresh vegetables (pumpkin, cucumber, cabbage, broccoli, etc.), sea.
In Japan, food consumption does not exceed 1.5%, and the average life expectancy is the highest in the world - 82 years.
  No less healthy is the Nachin cuisine, which is facilitated by the very high fattening of the climatic "consequently" food and plant resources in the widespread use of the steam-fed population, the general diversity and the high mobility of the population.
Vegetables, fruits, legumes, whole grains, etc. make up two thirds of the daily diet.
  They contain vitamins P, B, E, mineral salts.
  Obesity in the population is 1.8%, and the average life expectancy is 73 years.
French and Scandinavian cuisines stand out in terms of health in the European region.
  Chocolate with a fatty structure and different types of meat have a large part here.
Foods: cheese. The population is quite small and is due to the fact that there is no so-called "percussion", ie small meals before the main meal, in addition, the portions are small.
obesity is close to the African region The health and originality of the Ethiopian cuisine stands out.
  All the dishes here are served with local bread, which is like a cookie and is made with tefa flour, which has an unusual taste, and this increases digestion.
  Meat and dairy products are local and ecologically clean, which is also very important.
Unhealthy foods are very nutritious, contain a lot of fat, are very spicy, sour, etc.
  German, Czech, Hungarian, American, etc. are among the unhealthy cuisines.
 German cuisine is distinguished by a variety of meat dishes, which are prepared mainly by frying.
  Vegetables are used, and most importantly, they eat almost nothing without traditional beer.
The Czech cuisine is also distinguished by the extensive use of fatty meats, potatoes, baked goods, appetizing spices.
  Excess weight of more than one third of the population here.
    Almost the same analysis can be made about American cuisine, as here the population has similar problems, but here, unlike in other regions, the so-called "fast food" has a great use, which is definitely an unhealthy food.
What is the Armenian cuisine from the point of view of attracting?
National food health foods have many features. One of them is its high irritability and bitterness.
  Under the heat of the food, the irritability of the food center decreases, it becomes necessary to promote nutrition, which is possible by the use of irritating emollient, spicy spices.
As a spice, chives, garlic, cumin and various spices are used.
  Dietary salt is widely used in food.
  This characteristic line has historical roots.
  Salt is so vital to human nutrition that in ancient times it was even worshiped in some respects.
  In hot, sufficiently humid climates, salt consumption is of health importance, as it increases its insufficient temperature, accelerates the pulse, heat stroke, etc.
However, there is another peculiarity that the population of the mountainous regions consumes less salt than the population of the lowland steamylands [2, p. 19].
Research on national cuisines reveals what foods are used in different cuisines. dishes about 20-30%) և etc. [7, pp. 96-97], and in Armenian cuisine are very common in the composition of soups: meat, vegetables, grains, different combinations saturate the food with substances necessary for the body, for example, vegetables and potatoes enrich it with minerals իտ With vitamin C.
spices.
Various productsArmenian cuisine has long been used for winter products: fruits, vegetables, both dried and processed, dairy products, including butter with egg yolks, special jars, and pressed eggs (pressed into different types of heat-stained eggs). ), as a large variety of acids and reptiles.
  Sour fruits, berries, vegetables are well processed and acidified under special conditions.
  This process should take place at a temperature of 15-22 ° C.
 At 15 ° C it slows down the growth of lactic acid bacteria, which inhibit the growth of germs, as well as the growth of other bacteria that make the acid unusable [2, p. 175].
high will contribute to 22-25 ° C - There are many methods for determining the specifics of national food (Pokrovsky A., Frumkin P.) և etc.
  If we analyze the Armenian cuisine, for example, by the balance method, which represents the amount of food consumed per capita, it becomes clear that the consumption of basic foodstuffs consumed by households of certain foods is per capita per year (kg). In Armenia it is quite small.
Table 1. Consumption of basic foodstuffs by households [1, p. 108] Food Wheat bread kgBridgeBeefProck meatPoultryPoultry milk -Cream cream -eg Egg, per item, 2013-2014, under the Ministry of Health, under the Ministry of Health to the corresponding indicators of the food items included in the food basket.
  According to it, the annual norm of catheter consumption is 73 kg, eggs - 182.5 pieces, meat products - 36.5 kg, etc. [9].
  There are other approaches, for the normal functioning of the organism the amount per capita is 164.2 l / year (or 450 g per day), meat - meat products - 74.8 kg / year, eggs - 340 pieces, etc. [6, p. 233] .
Different food products from the population (Pokrovsky A., budget method of consumption, types of Frumkin, etc.) allow to find out the state of life of individual families, that is, how much share is allocated to different types of food.
  2013-2017 in Armenia More than two thirds of food expenditures are bread 21 21.2-19.7%, meat 21-22%, fruits 17 vegetables 17.1-18.4% [1, p. 108].
  The energy value of daily food is also very high, which can be maintained in the case of a relatively large number of uniform foods, without taking into account the necessary amount of vitamins, microelements and minerals necessary for the body.
In Armenian cuisine, in addition to everyday food, festive dishes are accepted, such as khash, barbecue, various fish dishes, harissa, etc.
  Ingredients of all dishes have both health and disease effects.
  Let's talk about some of them.
Armenian khash is a unique dish, which is attributed many miraculous qualities - strengthening bones, sobering the body, it has a high nutritional energy, which is why eating in cold conditions.
    It is necessary to make khash, legs, guts, garlic սխ radish.
  It contains a large amount of calcium, chondroitin, microelements, which contribute to the rapid healing of fractures.
  Garlic is considered very healthy.
  It contains calcium, magnesium, copper, phosphorus, vanadium and a number of other elements.
  Garlic is used to prevent colorectal cancer, colds, to reduce blood sugar levels, to soothe allergies, especially those that affect the airways, etc.
Eggplant has a beneficial effect on the body.
  These vegetables contain vitamins C, B, potassium, calcium, iron և phosphorus salts (predominant basic salts), glycosides, proteins, enzymes, etc.
    It promotes detoxification of the liver և helps to cleanse the blood of toxins and excess substances, prevents urinary tract infections, promotes weight loss, promotes blood circulation and metabolism.
  The radish also has some contraindications.
  It negatively affects the health of people with gastric and duodenal ulcers, gastritis, high acidity, enterocolitis, liver and kidney diseases, pancreas, thyroid diseases.
for.
Barbecue is one of the festive decorations of the Armenian cuisine, according to the makers. How safe is it to eat it?
  The possibility of barbecue will have a negative impact on the health of those working. They get cancerous substances into their body, which increase the risk of internal organs.
  The number of dangerous compounds that have penetrated the human body with meat and vegetables is much higher.
the risk.
  Barbeque 37%, and coal - for skin cancer.
in the conclusion.1. The national cuisine combines the features of the formation and development of the given nation, the natural and socio-economic conditions of the place of residence, which make it unique and unique.
2. The health of the national cuisine is conditioned by the structure of the food used, the cooking methods, the amount of food energy movement.
3. In unhealthy kitchens, the dishes are prepared mainly in a fried way, they are very nutritious, they contain a lot of fats, they are rich, they are sour, which stimulate the appetite, the person starts to eat incomparably more.
4. Armenian cuisine is distinguished by a great variety of flavors, products used, methods of processing, which is due to the local climatic conditions.
5. The balanced, budgetary method developed for the structural analysis of the national cuisine reveals the amount of food consumed per capita, which creates a picture of the food preferred by the population or directly available in terms of price.
6. The Armenian national cuisine has mainly health features, but there are also some dishes that are dangerous for the organism, but they are almost daily, they are eaten only on holidays or weekends.
7. It is required to pay a lot of attention to healthy, even therapeutically significant dishes of the Armenian cuisine, և to make them the main components of the resort's menu.
I saw many activities.
