Preface.
  A preschooler is like a whole sense of humor. perceives։ feels every detail, is always ready to respond և to participate emotionally in the surrounding events.
  The world around the child - through the characters, which leave a deep mark in the child's life - is never forgotten, so it is very important to promote the moral upbringing of children from the pre-school age - the development of social feelings.
The issue of moral education should always be of interest to pedagogical theorists, who have tried to group the problems with moral ethics.
  Representatives of the Soviet pedagogy worthy of attention: V. I. Loginova և P. G. Samurokova's approach to pre-school moral education, which emphasizes the need to develop moral consciousness, or in that case the results are often not visible to achieve the goal.
  Problems of moral education, according to V. I. Loginova և P. Գ. According to Samurokova, they are carried out with a certain logic և are divided into three groups in the following order: • problems of development of moral consciousness, • problems of formation of moral behavior, • problems of moral feelings և establishment of relations.
Modern pre-school pedagogy, accepting in principle V. I. Loginova և P. Գ. The Samurokova classification approach emphasizes the method of organizing problems. [6]
In the modern classification, the problems of moral education are divided into two groups: • problems aimed at the formation of the components of the mechanism of moral education, • problems aimed at the formation of personal moral qualities.
The problems of the first group are stable, unchanging, contribute to the self-development of each component of morality in the child.
Education's former education, society more The problems of the second group are changeable and attentive in nature, they define the demands of the given society in the direction of developing the personal qualities of the citizen of tomorrow.
In the current period of development of patriotism-internationalism, diligence ոլ collectivism's personality, such qualities as humanism (kindness) և tolerance, entrepreneurship և active attitude towards life, citizenship, creative abilities կարող self-love, creativity and patriotism, creative-creative attitude and creativity. - everything that leads to the development and formation of social emotions.
The process of self-determination in preschool age is aimed at the development of a sense of happiness, which is expressed in the high mood of the child, confidence in the owners, willingness to communicate and cooperate [4, p. 161].
L. I. Bozhovich notes that in adulthood, kindness and humility are personal inner feelings, and in preschool, the child's mental activity is driven by actions and relationships.
Criteria: Universal The theoretical foundations of moral education are derived from ethics, which studies and "develops" the moral ethics by comparing the ethical requirements of society.
  Morality is a degree of awareness of moral behavior, norms and rules, an internal subjective attitude towards the world.
  The main criterion of morality in public relations is characterized by the following universal values: derived from the moral code of values. it • With kindness, humanitarian behavior, kindness to the outside world.
• In fairness, behavior is characterized by a true և objective assessment of one's own actions.
• With beauty, with a behavior in accordance with the principles of beauty, with the ability to distinguish the beautiful from the ugly.
• Tolerance, forgiving behavior, acceptance of the possibility of making mistakes.
The effectiveness of moral education is conditioned by the pedagogical mastery of adult educators of all social circles of the society [1].
Potentially, moral education is a purposeful process of communicating the child with universal social values.
 It is organized and managed by adults.
    At the pre-school age, the child is extremely sensitive to any influence, he / she perceives like a sponge the social-social adults, the standards typical of life, the outbursts [2, p. 161].
By imitating human action, the child's attitude towards the outside world is a set of moral feelings, ideas, and behaviors, which, in the sum of moral habits, are the quality of moral camaraderie.
  In fact, moral quality is a complex moral quality, it is the result of a developed moral consciousness.
It is described as "then morality is nurtured, traits are formed in the process, morally personal education - independent of the most moral consciousness - are transformed into social feelings.
 Such qualities are, for example, kindness, humanity, friendliness, patriotism, purity.
  Gradually, the child realizes and "values" the mentioned feelings, which complement the moral quality.
  Both sides of moral education presuppose pedagogical participation և support.
  The pedagogue acts as a "social guide" during moral education.
diligence, morality Moral education is carried out by certain means.
  In preschool age, artistic means are used effectively, which contribute to the aesthetic accents of children.
  Literature should be singled out from artistic means.
The actions of the heroes of fairy tales are perceived by children with great emotion, leaving a deep mark on their moral feelings and ideas.
  The heroic characters of fairy tales are moral examples worthy of imitation.
The role of invaluable nature during the moral development of children in moral development, the positive emotional charge received during the contact with nature.
The means of moral upbringing is the child's independent activity - play, work, fine arts, constructive-educational.
  However, M. I. Lisina և A. G. Ruzskaya's special role in childhood activities - independence in dealing with peers [5, p. 48].
And finally, the atmosphere around the child, the social environment where the child lives and grows up, is a powerful means of morality.
  A friendly atmosphere based on love and mutual respect, friendly mutual relations stimulate the process of moral upbringing, promote the development of social feelings.
Thus, in the process of developing moral qualities, the child acquires three important features: moral awareness, moral attitude towards the outside world, and moral behavior.
 These features help to build a system of valued relationships based on the principles of morality, aimed at the formation of social feelings.
