Speech therapy, in the form of conditioned speech disorder, presupposes the development of speech, the restoration of speech disorders.
Speech therapy work involves speech research, assessment, speech therapy classes, monitoring, completion of work (exit).
 Speech therapy also includes paperwork, collaboration with other professionals, members of the speech therapist family, and the dissemination of speech therapy knowledge for the purpose of raising awareness and preventing speech disorders.
 And in this whole process, the family of the child, the parents, can play a significant role.
  Because the information provided by the parent is very important for the child's speech examination and filling in the speech card, the multifaceted participation of the parents և family is a mandatory, unchangeable element in the correction process.
Relevance of the topic.
  It is known that the role of the parent is invaluable in the development of the child's speech, verbal communication, ensuring and maintaining verbal activity.
When working with any group of children, educators should organize and carry out the work in such a way that each member in the correctional process is fully "fully involved in the process," especially the family and parents.
  Effectiveness of the correctional process և Positive changes are possible only in the case of a collaborative approach - with the participation of a speech therapist, psychologist, educators, especially parents [1, 2].
The aim of our study is to use the role of a parent as a possible link in the development of one's own child's speech.
The methods of conversation, viewing, and questionnaire were chosen as the method for our study.
If parents are not able to properly assess the situation, they do not want to participate and play a role in the children's correctional process, then the specialist should help the mentors, help them to become very interested, active initiators [2].
 Only in this case it is possible to achieve a positive result.
  Every parent is able to influence the positive process of the child's's work together.
 It depends on the parent's attitude towards the child և the child's problem, level of knowledge և awareness, life experience, life principles, pedagogical skills [2].
  Because of this, working with parents և work is considered a very important point in this whole process.
From our practical experience, we can say that in parenting a decisive role is played by noticing the child's speech disorder, making a decision to turn to a specialist, accepting referral by a specialist to another specialist or specialists, fulfilling the tasks assigned to a specialist, and other issues.
Collaboration, parent-parent upbringing, child relationships are very important for children with speech disorders.
  It depends on a number of factors how the child will behave in society.
  In the family where a child with a speech disorder lives, a specific atmosphere is created.
 The parents of these children often feel overwhelmed, և asking themselves the same question over and over again. "Why my child?"
  And these conversations definitely affect the child.
  There is no good basis for further corrective work, because in addition to the problem in speech, the child has a number of psychological complexes, feelings of inferiority, inability to overcome the problem.
Too often the family is unable to provide the necessary assistance to the child, many parents do not understand the main problem with the child - the secondary problems arising from it.
They can't turn to the right specialist at the right time.
  Most of them think that the child is lazy, does not want to train, is stubborn.
In this way the relatives develop complexes - negativism, the child's problem becomes more complicated, - further work can no longer be considered easy [2, 3].
  And to avoid the consequences of all this, it is a precondition for the speech therapist to explain to the parents how important their role is in overcoming the problem.
 In the future, he must be persistent so that the parent does everything possible to support the child.
  Parent-speech therapist cooperation is a continuous, mutually agreed process, which must be carried out every day, be bilateral, each party must be proactive, persistent, willing to support each other, having one goal - to overcome the child's verbal problem.
  If one of these two parties is not ready for cooperation, support, mutual understanding, the efficiency of the work will sharply decrease, the picture of the expected end result will change.
In parallel with the method of conversation and observation, we have used philology, which has somewhat clarified the picture, confirmed or denied a number of theoretically put forward views.
  We conducted the research through questionnaires, which contain both closed and open questions.
The study was performed by e-speech therapists and parents of children with speech disorders.
  10 parents և 10 speech therapists took part in the survey.
  The charts below show the results of a survey conducted with parents, according to which 66.7% of respondents answered that they are fully involved in the process, 16.7% partially participate, and 16.7% think that they are almost non-participants. , just accompanies to a specialist.
Chart 1. Participation of parents in the process of overcoming the child's verbal problem in percentage.
33.3% of the respondents mentioned that they fully fulfill the tasks given by the speech therapist, and 66.7% mentioned that to some extent.
  All respondents indicate that their participation is corrective and effective.
75% of respondents make suggestions in the correction process. They point out that the role of the parent is possible.
 The remaining 25% do not make any suggestions, noting that only the correct work of a good specialist is a prerequisite for a child's verbal problem.
91.7% of the respondents mentioned that they notice a difference when working with a parent at home, and 8.3% think that there is no difference.
  Parents rated their participation (in a 5-point correctional work with the system): 25% rated it excellent, 25% rated it good, 41.7% rated it unsatisfactory, and 8.3% rated it 2 points.
Chart 2. Assessment of children's participation in speech therapy work as a percentage.
Non-participation in the correctional process is due to the fact that the majority of parents, almost 77.8%, work, do not spare time, 11.1% fully trust the specialist, participation does not work, 11.1% have another problem.
Chart 3. Reasons for not participating in the correction process in percentage terms.
Specialists are partially involved in the process of overcoming their child's speech disorders.
100% of the thinkers, 50% of the respondents state that the corrective process makers make suggestions, and 50% mention the opposite.
  They note that these suggestions are different: parents try to fill the gap that, for example, we can not in the speech therapy room or do not manage to do during training.
25% of the surveyed speech therapists state that only their correct work can be a precondition for overcoming the child's speech problem, and 75% think that the role of a parent is a possible precondition.
75% of speech therapists state that parents spend 5-10 minutes to complete their tasks at home, and 25% state that they spend 30-40 minutes.
Chart 4. Percentage of tasks performed by speech therapists as a percentage.
100% of speech therapists mentioned that they notice differences when working with a child at home.
  Speech therapists rated the parents' participation in the correctional work on a 5-point scale: 50% rated 5 points, 25% rated 3, and 25% rated 2.
Parenting և Chart 5. Assessment of parental involvement in correctional work by speech therapists as a percentage.
Experts point out the following suggestions that may encourage parental involvement in correctional work. Ծ Parents will be informed, will realize and will understand that they are very important in the development of their child.
Raising parental responsibility, according to which, in addition to feeding and dressing the child, the parent can play a major role in the child's daily speech development. What he saw, heard, felt Gyle.
Thus, analyzing the results of the study, we can say that both professionals and the parents themselves are involved in the process of overcoming the parents.
Willingness makes the work even more productive, gives a positive end result.
  Speech therapy work is ineffective without the child's family, parental participation.
