In our previous scientific publications, the fact has been proved1 that the value components of the identification of the Armenian coexistence are original, they are not repeated in the case of other civilizations.
  Therefore, they individually provided the necessary coexistence and interaction of the necessary co-creation and interaction of the system-structure of civilization, which was a sufficient condition for the formation of the Armenian local civilization.
levels.
In other words, all the components of the system - territory (T), (H), genealogy, culture (M), statehood (P), "objective reality" and "subjective consciousness" appear in the Armenian-like form, shaping the Armenian civilization (HC).
Linguistic thinking (L), faith (Ծ), Note that according to the theory put forward2, if as a result of the development of unique components of value identification the state type of coexistence is formed, through deinstitutionalization it is possible to raise them to the level of civilization.
  Therefore, in the case of cursing coexistence, the post-logic. The Armenian coexistence, having the etymology of value identification, original self-linguistic thinking, in the conditions of statehood, had the opportunity to reproduce them in a coordinated way and to fully realize them.
Culture), (territory, faith, 1 See Nersisyan A., The problem of national identity in the context of geopolitical notions, Scientific Bulletin of the University of Yerevan 2016, № 1, B issue, page 2 For a new theory of civilizations, see Nersisyan A., Basics of "Civilization" scientific category
Experience of scientific interpretation of the concept, Scientific Bulletin of the University of Yerevan 2017, № 1, B volume, page 5665 Н. ВековецЮ. В. Civilization.
  walk and wake up. М. Institute of Economic Strategies. 2008.
For more information on theories of civilizations in general, see Yura Muradyan, Geography of Civilizations, Yerevan, Tigran Mets Publishing House, 2011.
As a result, it has risen to the highest level of coexistence, the level of Local Civilization.
Thus, in the spatial-temporal logic of the existence of the Armenian statehood, one must look for the independent existence of the Armenian local civilization.
  The life cycle of the latter and the level of realization of the values ​​of civilization were not only a necessary component of the life-activity corresponding to the local civilizations, but also ensured the integrity of the world civilization of this type.
Consequently, in the case of Armenian coexistence, the formula for the formation of eloquent civilizations is clearly functioning: HC = HP (HT x HJ x HL x HK x HM), according to which the Armenian civilization is one of the function-building components of the system - arguments.
  In the formula, each argument has its clear place, the functions of which are clear in reality, with spatial-temporal expression.
  Since arguments are represented in the formula as products, they are interdependent, which is of a dual nature.
The first interdependence is expressed in the magnitude of values.
  Each argument, as a producer, has a value, therefore, the higher that value, the higher the total.
 That is, the Armenian civilization, as a product, is directly dependent on the value of the producers (system-building components).
  The higher they are, the stronger the Armenian civilization. On the contrary, their weakness (low value) reduces the potential of the Armenian civilization.
The next interdependence requires the real existence of arguments, because the absence of each of them at the same time proves the absence of a common product. If any producer is zero, then the whole product becomes zero.
  Let us emphasize that such assertions are real in their entirety, they apply only in the case of civilization.
  That is, in the absence of the latter, the system-building components (arguments) can exist independently, even in isolation.
  But in that case only the relict state of coexistence is ensured, when in the absence of one's own civilization it is not assimilated by other civilizations.
As the formula shows, the component of statehood stands out from the first five components of the system.
  If the former appear as ordinary arguments, then the statehood stands out և is considered as a generalizing law, subject to universal regularity.
In other words, the statehood itself depends on other arguments, moreover, on their individuality and unity.
  Therefore, the following formula is also real. ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀՏ x ՀԾ x ՀԼ x ՀԿ x ՀՄ) և Simultaneously: ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀՏ), ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀԾ), ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀԼ), ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀԿ), ՀՊ = ՀՊ (ՀՄ ).
For the Armenian statehood, such a process makes the obligatory change of the components in the above-mentioned resolutions in time, which have the consistency of the discussed functions, in reality their inverse functions function.
  For example, the above functions will be combined with HT = HT (HP), AS = AS (HP), HL = HL (HP), HK = HK (HP), HM = HM (HP).
  In other words, each function of the Armenian statehood at a certain level of development itself becomes a stronghold for the development of its arguments.
The same logic applies in the case of civilization, but only in terms of the component of statehood.
Because, as we mentioned before, the state allows the system to rise to the level of civilization.
 Thus, the following formulas are applicable: Institutionalize the components HC = HC (HP) - when the Armenian civilization is in direct dependence on the power of the state.
  At the same time, the formula "HP = HP (HC)" works, where the Armenian civilization is a base (argument) for the development of the component.
By generalizing, in the case of coexistence, we can register the formula for the formation of other non-Armenian civilizations, which proves the existence (possibility of existence) of the local Armenian civilization.
reduces the absence of an individual's self-categorization with the Armenian civilization is possible only in the case of simultaneous identification of all components.
 Otherwise, the identification takes place at lower levels - at the level of nation, people, race, clan, family.
  That is, the level of identification of each component.
  Moreover, in our opinion, it is expressed in a clear order, from territorial to state.
 Of course, today, throughout history, there are cases when individuals and groups have been identified at a higher level without having the minimum relevant sub-categories.
  For example, to carry out Armenian culture and other similar manifestations without the unification of territory, language, faith.
 However, time has clearly proved (and still proves today) that it is not only temporary (one or two generations at most), but also hinders (hindered) the unification of civilization.
  Therefore, in the future movement of the Armenian civilization, the existence of such problems must be ruled out in order to ensure the possibility of that movement.
Thus, at the level of this family, faith-religion, value-genealogy-genetics of the Armenian individual, the system of identification is expressed in its entirety: territory, homeland, language, culture, state.
Linguistic thinking, the Armenian individual is completely identified with the components of civilization.
 The absence of any of them does not allow the Armenian individual to be fully realized.
Therefore, the Armenian statehood must ensure the separate, simultaneous existence of these components, which in turn will ensure the "fullness of the Armenian individual" and the "Armenian fullness".
