Preface.
  Conflict resolution is considered to be one of the major challenges facing the world community today, with disagreements over ways to resolve it: "Political activism can be seen as a compelling argument that conflicts are not only diverse" but also affect the interests of many states.
At the beginning of the 21st century, one of the most complex issues of concern to the world community, the Arab-Israeli conflict, remains unresolved.
  Emerging in 1947. As a post-Israeli-Palestinian issue, the conflict grew into an Arab-Israeli one over the years, directly or indirectly involving almost all Middle Eastern countries, as well as world superpowers, which have their strategic interests in the region.
  In this regard, the efforts to resolve the conflict remain on the agenda of international diplomacy, and the issue under discussion continues to be one of the global priorities.
The purpose of the article is to present the historical significance of the Camp Didi agreement in the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the problems that arose during the signing of the agreement in the period following it.
 The importance and significance of the Camp D-Deal agreement should not be underestimated, as it was a precedent later, in 1983. on May 17, 1994 in Israel-Lebanon, and in 1994. on October 26, 1945, for the conclusion of similar separate reconciliations between Israel and Jordan.
 In addition, Camp D-Road paved the way for Madrid in 1991. [11] in Oslo, 1993-1995. [12] at Wayne Plantation in 1998 [13], at Camp Jade in 2000, and at Thebes in 2001. [14], born in 2003. [15], Peace talks in Sharm el-Sheikh և 2000 - Clinton [17], 2006 Italian-French [18] և 2011 for Israeli initiatives.
  An attempt is made to show the US leadership in the process of signing the agreement.
  The study of the Arab-Israeli conflict was carried out by the prominent representatives of the Armenian, Russian, Western and Arab-archeological schools.
  The issue in question was referred to in their works by N. Hovhannisyan, E. Abgaryan, S. Avanesov, A. Topalyan, R. Karapetyan, Sh. Karamanukyan, H. Sargsyan, A. Hovhannisyan.
[16] 1973, local 2005. After the end of the October war, the factors that spoke in favor of a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict were clarified.1. During the war, the growing power of the Arab countries increased.
2. The oil embargo announced by the Arab countries was intended to reduce both oil production and exports to Western countries, which in one way or another supported Israel.
3. The defeat in Vietnam forced the United States to increase its position of easing international tensions [3, p. 128].
The United States is taking steps to redeploy Israeli-Egyptian troops to Syria, which, according to Kissinger, "was intended to" ensure the protection of Israeli-occupied territories "[2, p. 129].
 There were more and more tendencies on the part of the United States to push the USSR out of the Middle East settlement, and Egypt was more inclined to cooperate only with the United States.
  E. Մ. Primakov notes. "Justifying their course at the Geneva conference, US officials said there were no conditions at the time, no conditions at all for a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
 That is why it was necessary to follow the path of partial solutions.
  The supporters of that path accused the USSR of violating the measures according to the stages "[1, p. 82].
1973 An agreement was reached on December 21, 1974. The Israeli-Egyptian agreement on the partition of troops was signed on January 11-18, 2011 at the 101st km of the Cairo-Suez Highway.
  A similar agreement was signed in Geneva on the partition of Syrian-Israeli troops.
  The part of the Golan Heights, Quneitra, was returned to Syria on the condition that a demilitarized zone be created and UN armed forces be deployed.
that here in 1975. A new conference began in Geneva on September 1, 1945, and on September 4, Egypt and Israel signed the Sinai Agreement.
  It provided for the passage of the Israelite Pass through Egypt.
In retreat, Milta դի GuideEgypt returned 10% of Sinai.
  Israeli warships were allowed to sail freely through the Suez Canal.
  In the second document, the United States undertook to achieve the inviolable implementation of the agreement by Egypt և to ban its participation against Israel [4, p. 194].
  After the signing of the agreement on the processes, changes were made in the policy of Sinai after the US-US Secretary of State.
  "Cards և Secretary of State S. Vance came to the conclusion that the step-by-step solution had exhausted itself և to look for ways of a comprehensive settlement ”[2, p. 159].
  These US imitation tendencies were due to the following factors.1. First, it was necessary to maintain close relations with the Arab conservative regimes.
2. Given the bitter experience of the "oil embargo", avoid repeating it.
3. It was necessary to take into account the fact that the Palestinian issue needed some progress.
4. The United States understood that without the participation of the USSR it was impossible to achieve a serious settlement in the Middle East.
On October 1, a joint Soviet-American statement on the Middle East was issued: "Immediately settle the Arab-Israeli conflict, withdraw Israeli troops from the territories occupied in 1967, and ensure the rights of the Arab population."
    The conference was to be attended by all interested parties, including the Palestinian side.
 It seemed that the United States was returning to positions of cooperation with the USSR, but events took place in the Middle East that "buried" the joint Soviet-American statement.
In Israel in 1977 The "Likhud" bloc, which won the parliamentary elections, M. Begin led an extremely tough stance on the Palestinian issue.
  1977 In July, Begin met with Carter and received assurances that Carter would no longer speak of the withdrawal of Israeli troops, a "Palestinian homeland."
Begin refused to freeze the construction of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
  The "Herut" party led by Begin վում was guided by the idea of ​​creating "Greater Israel".
  They called Resolution 181 of the UN General Assembly a resolution on the partition of Western Palestine.
Foreign Minister Dayan demanded that the phrase "Palestinian homeland" be removed from circulation and that the KGB conference be excluded in any way.
A joint Israeli-American statement was issued.
According to Brzezinski, the US President's National Security Adviser, that statement also infuriated the Arabs.
The next factor was the letter of Egyptian President Sadat to Carter, which said that "nothing should hinder direct talks between Egypt and Israel."
  And finally, the most important factor that forced the United States to slide into separate positions of questioning in the 70s. Recently, there has been a tendency for the United States to leave the course of easing international tensions in US foreign policy.
  It should have been reflected in the Middle East policy.
The above-mentioned factors contributed to the fact that the United States would support the separate settlement of the Palestinian problem in any way possible, with its "flagpoles" minimizing the participation of the USSR in that process.
 US Secretary of State Vance presented to Egypt his own plans for the Palestinian issue - a referendum to determine the final future of Gaza, the West Bank, not to mention the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied territories of the KGB.
    Joint Israeli-Jordanian rule was to be established on the West Bank during the transition period.
  Some influential Israeli politicians, I. Alon, Sh. Peres and others were in favor of establishing permanent peace on the West Bank by establishing relations with Jordan, but not through their direct annexation.
The United States wanted to show that separate negotiations are not its goal, but Israel's goal.
  On November 19, Sadat traveled to Jerusalem and addressed the Knesset.
Maintaining the left wing, the United States was still talking about the "concentric part of the Geneva conference, but at the same time pushing for Israel" to normalize relations, first with Egypt, then with the Palestinians in Jordan, and finally with Syria.
  1978 During the Begin-Carter meeting in Washington in March, the President of the United States announced that Israel's demands would end with "6 points". Israel does not want to leave the West Bank.
  2. The construction of new Jewish settlements in the occupied territories is not stopped.
 3. Israel will not leave Sinai or 4. will not leave under the auspices of the UN and Egypt.
  5. Israel does not accept that Resolution 242 applies to the West Bank and Gaza.
6. Palestinian Arabs will not be given a chance to decide their future.
1978 Negotiations between Israel and Egypt began on September 5 in the United States at Camp Deed, which lasted 13 days.
Begin's goal was to bring the most powerful Arab country out of the united front of the Arab world through reconciliation.
 Sadat, for his part, hoped to get the Sinai Peninsula "ready to turn a blind eye" to Israel's ambitions in the West Bank, Gaza.
  But Sadat had to hide it all.
 The cards, on the one hand, persuaded Sadat that reconciliation would bring Sinai back, and on the other, persuaded Begin that reconciliation would increase Israel's security.
The main obstacle during the negotiations was the question of the future of Gaza on the West Bank.
  On September 13, it was decided to remove the phrase "inadmissibility of occupying territories through war" from H.Res.2242.
The text of Resolution 242 was simply annexed to the Middle East Peace Framework.
This paved the way for the Second Document, entitled "Framework for the Reconciliation of Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty".
  The letters of the leaders of the three countries were attached to those frameworks as official documents.
  The card said: "In every paragraph where the phrase 'West Coast' is used, it must be interpreted by the Israeli government as 'Judah և Samaria.'
Manipulated cases.
The anti-profit movement also worried Sadat. During a three-day siege in Iran, Vance agreed that Sadat refused to set a specific date for the elections in the West Bank, but made a new demand. "Introduce autonomy in Nakhchivan."
  The launch of the Iranian playing card yielded results.
  1979 A peace treaty between Egypt and Israel was signed in Washington on March 26, 1979, and entered into force on December 25, 1979.
 According to the contract: 1. Peace is established between Israel and Egypt.
2. Diplomatic relations are established between Israel and Egypt.
3. Israeli troops withdraw from Sinai.
4. The sovereignty of Egypt is recognized within the borders "which were the borders of the Egyptian-Palestinian territory.
5. Israeli ships will sail freely from the Suez Canal in the Gulf.
  Aqaba sailing belt.
6. The Egyptian government has the right to have one division 50 km east of Suez.
7. An area of ​​20-40 km west of the Gulf of Aqaba will be under the control of UN forces.
8. Israeli troops will not leave the West Bank և Gaza, but will be deployed in security zones.
9. The autonomy of the population should be ensured in those territories, not territorially.
It should be noted that this last point was mentioned not in the text of the contract, but in the joint letter of Sadat և Begin to the Cards.
  Of course, the treaty of American diplomacy
It was a big victory, but not the final solution of the issue.
Thus, the following conclusion can be reached.1. The Camp D-Day agreement split the Arab world, Syria, Lebanon, Algeria, Iraq, Yemen, the KGB announced, and severed diplomatic relations with Egypt.
that it is illegal, 2. 1978 The Iranian revolution in Afghanistan in 1979, the Iranian revolution in 1979, forced the United States to establish a military base in the Sinai Peninsula, which is of great importance in the Sinai Peninsula. to conduct joint US-Egyptian military exercises.
gave, 3. In addition to the above, the Camp D-Deal, the United States' comprehensive ability to defer the Middle East to the Middle East, to maintain influence over its European allies ակից Japan, which was heavily dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
