The holding of events for many years has polished the infrastructure of Yerevan to prepare a large flow of people for the capital, which still has to take place in other cities and villages of the Republic of Armenia.
  The decentralization of celebrations creates a great opportunity for the settlement, especially the economic one.
  In order not to exhaust the city, it is necessary to organize the event in advance to control the risks.
 This work mainly discusses the problems and their possible solutions that arose during the Independence Day in Gyumri, Vardavar.
Decentralization of RA state holidays will have a positive impact on the residents of the settlement.
  At the same time, the large influx of tourists to the settlement can cause inconvenience, due to which tourists will get a bad impression, which in the future will be a reason not to visit the settlement once again.
One of the inconveniences is that the large influx of people without prior preparation can lead to food shortages, which will cause inconvenience to both locals and tourists.
Another issue is the staff և training of the service sector of the settlement.
  During the holidays, service restaurants, cafes, bakeries are forced to carry out large-scale work with the same staff, which leads to a reduction in the quality of service, causing dissatisfaction and financial losses.
The following measures can be taken to avoid a number of similar complications.
Centralized management of tourist reception arrangements by city or regional governments.
Establishment of main tourist attractions in public squares.
A vivid example of such information is the call to the ambulance service, as most people know about the phone number 1-03, but in case of a call from a mobile phone in the regions, that number joins the Emergency Service [2].
map, emergency The city և regional և regional governing bodies should also carry out the training of the service sector staff, especially the middle և service unit.
  As it was mentioned, working with the same staff is full of difficulties during the large influx of tourists.
 A possible solution to this problem may be the training of temporary staff.
  In order for the temporary employee, not knowing the nuances of the case, not to create more confusion, it is necessary to recruit those who want to ել train in a specific place, a few days before the event, as a result of which a staff will solve the problem.
  It is possible to include students, especially from different courses of service or tourism, who already have more or less experience in such work (it will be an internship for them, additional funding).
showed September 21 Another problem of the service sector is the control of property.
For example, in Gyumri, tourists took the blankets and cups of hot drinks with them when leaving the restaurant due to the strong wind and cold.
  As a result, those organizations were left without utensils, unable to serve other visitors, depriving them of possible income.
  In such a case, tourists can be useful, they will be able to leave their recovered organizations before leaving.
Information will be returned to the centers, items that can be filled by the lack of employees in the information sector organizations, especially those who study related tourism, professions.
  Implement students in a practical work format.
"Involvement of service management service" can benefit from the coordinated actions of the city and regional authorities - those citizens of the given settlement who are ready to receive a tourist overnight, but have not had such experience before.
  Even indirectly, by presenting the information in the form of brochures, it is possible to prepare the population for the tourist reception.
In cases when a large number of tourists are expected to visit, it is possible to use an online platform, where they will be able to book overnight not only in hotels, but also in apartments.
  It is true that hotels are relatively comfortable, but staying overnight in a B&B format has its advantages, in particular, it allows you to spend the day like a local.
և, most importantly, the price, the cheap in the conclusion.
  The development of incoming tourism in the Republic of Armenia, which takes place through the decentralization of state holidays, the construction of the necessary Tourist Information Centers, the supply of necessary materials will facilitate the tourist's entertainment, will make it safer, more secure.
to direct.
Exactly how the training of the temporary labor force, the population to the large influx of tourists, will contribute to the increase of comfort, as it will have a direct economic, moral and psychological impact on the population.
Acknowledging the fact that the infrastructure in almost all cities of the Republic of Armenia բավարար sufficiently prepares the population for the full implementation of such measures without the current local government management bodies, in order to put the work being carried out in the right direction.
