Everyone knows the role of the means of artistic thinking, the content-stylistic value, with the skillful use of which the creator ensures the most effective artistic influence, influence and impression.
  Reflecting on this problem, the researcher writes: "The source of the power of speech is first of all in the linguistic observation. The deeper the thoughts are, the more valuable the value of the word, the greater the power of the influence of speech", but the thought itself, without the writer's artistic thinking [which is the writer's personal [7, page 331].
  Consistent with aesthetics, it consists of the means of thinking] cannot express the power of the rightly chosen means.
  And finding such means is the mastery of the writer.
  They, by matching the thoughts that interest the writer with the feelings that pervade him, solve the most important issues of the word - "evaluative" and "emotional".
It is known how important the role of the adverbial verb is in speech in general, and especially in fictional speech, because 6, p. 262].
 It remains to be seen what skill is required of the writer, or what artistic value the sentence does not contain, which in the language of fiction, both prose and verse, has such a familiar frequency.
  Let's discuss the well-known Teryan image of autumn. "Daluk fields, mercantile forest… - Sad life of a mortal. Rain, wind, arch… Heartbreaking sobs ”[8, p. 28].
  A brief, accurate և Capacity image of a landscape, created with a preferred word և with correctly selected overlays.
  The valuable landscape itself, however, becomes a depth of emotional state, of revealing the situation.
  The combination is aesthetically perfect.
  The part following the interval gives new value to the "image" and emotions. There is a movement [dynamic word], the color is emphasized, և, և the sob evokes an attitude. it is heartbreaking և the reader could not be indifferent.
 When such "faceless sentences" appear in abundance in "independent" complex sentences, solving the questions of the most important virtues reserved for the artistic word - brevity, emotion, diversity, etc., such as "And forgotten, unforgettable tales, Sounds of light, Bright sounds in the world "[8, p. 32], or" A foreign country, a foreign land, sad dreams, Mildness fades away, irreversible admirations "[8, p. 85].
It is not accidental for us to apply to Teryan. His language, as it is known, in the history of Armenian literature, is still perceived as a standard of artistic language.
  In the example above, it is obvious. Not only the mastery of vocabulary, but also the special tone of the words turned into emotionally rich, aesthetically perfect sentences, whose born emotions educate the soul, nurture the taste, fill the hearts with gratitude that their feelings are presented, not to mention R. Ishkhanyan's opinion, how ենք We can not express V. Referring to the use of Teryan's faceless sentences in "Twilight Dreams".
  He notes that "a considerable number of them are mainly explained by two circumstances: a) the desire to create a short speech, b) more emotion-mood, at the expense of judgments, the tendency to express" [3, p. 342].
 The linguist rightly states that "especially nominal faceless sentences have an element of unusualness, thus imparting poetry to the word" [3, p. 342].
But let's turn to S. To Gyulbudaghyan. he states that nominative-definite objects or phenomena և confirm their existence at the moment of speaking ”[1, p. 143].
Let us be sure by referring to relevant examples from Hamo Sahyan's lyre, such as "Loraget… A small river, A small muget, crazy and humble…" [9, p. 169].
  The native Loraget, who came to life in the poet, the image became a sentence in a monologue environment, and the description with the subsequent addition given to the small ground opens a contagious world of tender emotion.
  Love and longing for the homeland are manifested in the opposite words: "Crazy," "Humble", "Landscape", the combination of mental feelings, gives birth to a person, ennobles a person.
  Here. "Telik-melik stream, bead-bead rosehip. Visitation Troubles [9, p. 87].
  Any two-sentence sentence would limit the edge of inertia.
  The metaphorical words, the mastery of poetically perceiving the native edge և depicting it with enviable grace, the magic combined with the real-unreal, paint the troubles blue.
  Sahyanilazur is endowed with such a picture-monosyllabic sentences, but often the complete lyric.
The poems are made up of a series of faceless sentences, the search for which is just a few words, and they are not in themselves aesthetically pleasing poetic rhymes with unusual composition, amazing conciseness, and a very spacious emotional atmosphere, such as "Tsmakn i varkhonav khoter, Khonuri hot, M A handful of my grandfather, a handful of rest near the Earth, the smell of Mormok, the smell of tears, the smell of incense ”[9, p. 111].
    In just a few words, Sahyan has created a unique feature of the native land, with characteristic colors and aromas, a trembling of remembrance, an ancestral memory, a more sanctified land with that memory, a mournful tear, incense, which is joined by the melody dripping from the sky. "At the foot of the hill Wavy, Swallow-grass And swarming, A lost wandering kid running down the cliff, A crooked path under the foot of the crook" [9, p. 30].
Let's compare two parts dedicated to the cradle.
  Sahyan writes. "Mountains of the Orphan, Mountains of the Father and the Wild, Tired and Tired of the Mountains of My World" [9, p. 81].
The reader has plenty of reason to think of the "orphan" widow, then the descriptions of father and wilderness, which, as is clear, are verbal synonyms, contrast the positive meanings of the slopes with the former, but the subsequent tired "tiredness" with the impression of "happiness". With the word he revives the history of the highland և its inhabitant.
Apa Charents earned new formations. "Oh, my distant, blue mistress, immortal country, bloody and ruined" [12, page 12].
  The image of the dying homeland, which has become more beloved, has caused alarm, it is embraced with the consciousness of beauty, the blue-eyed, the emotional poet. The artistic invention of mystical lyric poetry, blue, has substantive relations with orphans, bloodthirsty.
Noticeable generality in the use of faceless noun phrases. There is mainly opposition in them. if it does not have a complete external appearance as an artistic means, then the semantic contradiction is noticeable.
  This strengthens the presented emotional mood.
  Consider the example below. "O thou barbarian, mad, sorrowful, Sometimes wise, sometimes beast, Magical herb burning worlds, Fortune-teller that builds worlds, - Demonic spirit by the swamps, About nothing-sacred prayer … »[12, p. 30].
The semantic-stylistic role of the contrast becomes especially noticeable through the exclamatory tone, by which the reader becomes a communicator to the purpose of the word.
  In the same way, here is "Death, crime! Bloody night" [12, p. 232].
  This kind of tone of the sentence is generally characterized by the continuity of emotions, և in particular, the feeling of the extent of the inclusion of feelings in the nominal face.
 The speech of a great Lori resident turned into a folk saying is one of the vivid examples. "Sword in the back, water in the front, Mourning, anger, agitation" [2, p. 275].
  No long description is a sentence made up of an expanding word.
The impact is incomparably strong.
 That's how he launches, with little difference.
 Bakunts writes. "Dzyunaberd… Dzyunaberd…" or "- Tcha lao" [1, pp. 153, 146].
From time immemorial, Mets Isahakyan uses the tone of imperative emphasis among other means to emphasize the purpose of the speech, such as "Blood, blood, bottomless pains. Holy children, our mother and sister Hrin, on the water And blind to the sword, Start, start, So much, How can I take so much… "[5, p. 292].
  The question expressed in the last sentence emphasizes the tragic condition of the native house.
  Let us cite an example from Gurgen Mahari as a typical foreign language of prose. "Come on, come on" [7, p. 272].
In fictional speech, nominal faceless sentences are formed with the help of adverbial words.
 Such structures mainly solve the issues of brevity of speech, provide extensive content with little resources, create visible images, influential, unforgettable.
  Let's turn to Hovhannes Tumanyan. "But until then, horrible way, Here is violence, dishonored honor, Here is sighing, tears of salt, here is jealousy's bargaining for love" [2, p. 14].
Bakunts: "Here is a field with a stone wall" [1, p. 144].
The tone of the nominative monosyllabic sentences serves to express the meaning more, denying the content of the situation և the authoritative attitude towards it, such as "No murmur, no murmur…" [8, p. 34] և etc.
Wise, curse, greeting, farewell, thank you expressions are mainly formed by nominal faceless sentences, which provide the emotionality of the word, the necessary arrangement, which are necessary means for the poeticization of the word.
  Let us give examples confirming what has been said: "Greetings to you, O happy, free, Gone are the days of my childhood" [2, p. 20], "Woe to the cockroach, to the cockroach! He blessed His mother's heart "[2, p. 117], he said:" Peace be upon you, our lucky grandfathers… "[2, p. 9] և" Good night, dear friends "[12, p. 43].
to facilitate the construction of a short word, to avoid repetition and ambiguity, to ensure the dynamism of dynamism, such as "Where are you from?", "From Siberia" [12, p. 189], etc.
The unique influence of the word on the human mental and spiritual world has been realized, valued in the ancient world, means and tricks have been discovered in all times of human history to strengthen that influence.
  At first glance, the derby anthology does not have such a function at all, it is not an adequate linguistic means, which should reflect the nuances of the author's thoughts, feelings, emotions.
  Derbykdrs և What are the evaluative-emotional functions?
To answer, let's turn to P. Սևակի. "What to do? How? Spin thick or thin?"
 / Vaccinate the vein of a full day on Sunday, quarrel with the sea, Be ashamed of the fire, Chushanal, do not hurry / "[10, p. 586].
It is obvious that the words are united in the frames expressing the general ideological attitude with the exclamations in tones.
  The polls, ironically, certainly had more explicit content layers than the descriptions would.
 This is the meaning of the researcher who writes: "We know by tone of voice that the interlocutor commands, asks, dreams, wants something" [1, p. 126].
Especially imperative faceless sentences are short, in some cases only composed of verbs, sometimes accompanied by one or two additions.
 This is understandable. Polyphony weakens the severity of the command.
In the poem "Armenian Dantean" the order of the genocide is terrible, catastrophic. "… And he could not stand the genius of the Armenians, Anjar muttered," Erase the Armenian nation "[13, p. 127].
Such is the order of "Turkoglu", born of hatred for the Armenian, intellectual values, which is not expressed in the word "commanding Armenian", is formed by a negative egg and a question mark, which animates the tragedy of history. "How not to cut the throat of the evil one, Who can suddenly scream in pain…" [10, p. 182].
  Turkishness is exposed It is ridiculed with a verbally faceless sentence expressing a question.
  In prose, of course, there are externalities that grab the reader's attention, such as Mahari's question "To what should he attribute?" [7, p. 272].
Content In such cases, the content of words, sentences in the literal-artistic-semantic environment, the content, which expands with tone, stylistic value.
  With such a sense of the aesthetics of speech, masterpieces made from verbal anthologies were created in our literature [Teryan, Charents Jayl].
gives in to the unrecognizable longing "Sister, soar and go like a bell, Enchanted and meekly soar… From heaven to heaven, in the evening breeze, Incorporeal, to go soaring…" to the dream of leaving reality Properly used language tools have created an atmosphere of beauty անց the reader's soul to him [11, p. 103].
  Wrap with the desire to cross the border.
  Probably a moment of self-forgetful inspiration, the Master wrote: "… This is the power of art. It enlivens you, touches you, influences you, feels you, inspires you. ”[4]
verb), in which time there is a single spiritual value.
