Educational changes - Radical changes in the reconstruction of educational activities, both in improving the quality of students' knowledge in the educational process, as well as in the implementation of educational work.
  In this connection, the demands of the state, which refer to the main result of its work, the improvement of the quality of the child's education and upbringing, are becoming more and more important.
As we know, by the RA National Assembly in 2014 The amendment to the Law on General Education of December 1, 2006 confirmed the need for universal inclusion, which came into force from this academic year.
          The latter presupposes equal assessment of all children's educational needs, in parallel with the implementation of the general education policy of the degree of their involvement in the educational, cultural, community events of the school: a "teacher's assistant" entered the educational institutions.
Raising.
Accepting universal inclusion of pedagogy as the main condition for school democratization, and democracy, according to P. I. According to Pidcasity, "the goal of school modernization, transformation, is the means and guarantee that should affect all aspects of school life" [2, p. 119], however, it should be noted that most teachers in today's schools face an underdeveloped system where there is no psychology. professional consultants.
 It should be noted that in the practice of pedagogical theory, there is some inconsistency between the strategy of developing a qualification system for the need for pedagogical development.
 In connection with the above-mentioned, it should be noted that although pedagogical assistants have already started their activities in our educational system this academic year, there is a contradiction between their "professional functions" and their "real opportunities" of commitment to work with a certain number of students.
  The point is that up to 150 students are provided with one pedagogue's assistant, who, according to the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia (April 26, 2018 N 525-N), must simultaneously perform a number of official duties, including professional "community awareness" training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training, training. c) to promote students' self-government; d) to assist teachers in the preparation of teaching materials for all students, including students with special educational needs; e) to monitor student learning issues in the classroom, according to the institution տնօր teacher's goal;Analyze them. Teachers: support the state standard of general education, subject standards and programs, for students with special educational needs, the process of acquiring at least the minimum required knowledge, skills (skills), using the methods of teaching (effective teaching methods). On the basis of the application, to participate in the work of the coordinating և advisory bodies, as well as in the support group within the framework of the social case. h) to participate in the participatory and executive activities, if the law stipulates the requirement of pedagogical participation.To support teachers in the state standard of general education, subject standards and programs, for the student with special educational needs, the process of acquiring at least the minimum mandatory requirements for knowledge, skills, skills, using effective teaching methods, and the development of social services. Participate in the work of the coordinating և advisory bodies, as well as the support group in the framework of the social case. h) participate in the participatory and executive activities, if the law stipulates the requirement for pedagogical participation.To support teachers in the state standard of general education, subject standards and programs, for students with special educational needs, the process of acquiring at least the mandatory minimum requirements for knowledge, skills and skills defined by the IEP, using effective teaching methods and technologies. Participate in the work of the coordinating և advisory bodies, as well as the support group within the framework of the social case.e) on the basis of the application of the regional social assistance agency (department), to participate in the work of the coordinating սոցիալական advisory bodies, as well as in the work of the support group, with the participation of the child, in accordance with the law; demand.e) on the basis of the application of the regional social assistance agency (department), to participate in the work of the coordinating սոցիալական advisory bodies, as well as in the work of the support group, with the participation of the child, in accordance with the law; demand.as well as the work of the support group. h) Participate in participatory and appropriate administrative activities, if the law requires pedagogical participation.as well as the work of the support group. h) Participate in participatory and appropriate administrative activities, if the law requires pedagogical participation.
According to the decision of the juvenile student's government of the Republic of Armenia, listing the responsibilities attributed to the teacher's assistant, it must be agreed that the implementation of such work is unrealistic even in the presence of a great deal of work readiness and experience.
  How contradictory is the ratio of students և teacher օգ assistants արդյունավետ to the effective implementation of these responsibilities with such a large number of students, as it is not possible to overcome the various difficulties that arise in a number of classrooms with a small number of teacher assistants.
 It should be added that a specialist performing such responsibilities must first obtain his / her qualification in higher education, having a clear idea of ​​his / her functions, and be able to apply them in practical activities.
  While the full elaboration of the methodology of our educational system, it is immediately put into use հետո after a number of years of failed experience, there is a setback, the failures are recorded և the negative results.
  The same thing happened in the case of 12-year education, which, as the experience of the students showed, did not justify itself.
Let 's agree that any innovation in education should be substantiated through barriers to professional development, justify the need to develop and test technology that helps to .
In connection with this, we should mention that, studying the scientific literature, we see that today, within the framework of the higher education abroad, there is an experience of training such specialists to provide consulting staff to the institutions.
  Various moderators-advisors of scientific-methodological guidance related to Yaroslavl Imastun State School-Innovative processes in Novgorod, learn the methods, methods, provisions և means of pedagogical counseling, individual supervision [5, p. 7].
  In England, the ideas of pedagogical support are expressed in terms such as "tutoring" - guardianship "personal and social education" - personal և social education.
  [2, page 15].
  The school of counselors-pedagogues can also function in Armenia, who, receiving the highest care "- pastoral care, qualification, և acquiring relevant professional knowledge in the school through group acquaintance, will act as pedagogical assistants.
In the framework of our article, we will refer to the consideration of teaching-methodological technology, "Pedagogical Counseling", as a guide for the implementation of the functions of an assistant teacher entering the educational system.
There are a number of formulations in the professional literature on "pedagogical counseling".
  According to H. Burks և W. Steffler: "Counseling is the professional attitude of a qualified consultant in consulting" [4, p. 11].
  Cress describes counselors as sources of influence or certain social mechanisms that shape the counselor's behavior [5, p. 62].
  According to these formulations, holistic pedagogical counseling is not the communication of the individual counselor on the preparation of a certain problem, but the instruction to him / her to formulate the approach in different situations.
 Introducing the brief pedagogical counseling, we should mention that it has a wide range of questions, from which it can be particularly distinguished.1. Pedagogical counseling of the child և family, which will be carried out through individual educational talks, group discussions, individual group work with parents.
Adolescents "difficult" 2. Professional, didactic advice, the main purpose of which is to enrich the theoretical knowledge about the forms, methods, technologies of teachers' professional activity.
3. Consultation with the pedagogical community, which will be carried out through group debates, debates, discussions.
Pedagogical counseling in group-individual ways, during which a number of models are used, including therapeutic (collaborative), barrier-implemented (barrier) models.
It should be noted that different pedagogical situations may create the need for counseling, especially in the context of universal inclusion, when most of the difficulties are pedagogical reactions.
  The importance of counseling is due to the manifestation of bullying in children (which may include children without parental care, children with disabilities, living in poor social conditions), who, when acting as a "child problem", require pedagogical support.
It should be noted that the culture of counseling develops in schools where the pedagogical community is aware of the need for counseling, and is ready to engage in open discussions of a variety of difficult situations, as both counselors and counselors can take on.
  The philosophy of counseling culture implies a broad context of the development of that school և education: the problems and processes of childhood.
to develop an accurate model of counseling pedagogical-professional behavior.
It should be noted that the current assistants of the pedagogue will carry out their professional activities more fully, if they pass certain training courses, during which they will get acquainted with the principles, functions, methods, methods of implementation of pedagogical counseling.
Peculiarities, Taking into account the fact that, according to P. I. The content of pidcasist, general education, on the one hand, reflecting the needs of society, is the most important condition for students 'educational-cognitive activity, on the other hand, it is a tool for building that activity [3, p. 427], which can be achieved by ensuring students' participation and cooperation. Recognizing that these indicators should guide all implementation processes, it can be said that their implementation will become the main focus of the professional activity of pedagogues, pedagogical assistants acting as their co-advisors.
