About 340 thousand farms created after the land reforms in the Republic of Armenia, most of which are small, limit the sustainable development of the sector and hinder the introduction of intensive technologies in the sector.
  The path of sustainable development of agricultural agriculture should be considered with the enlargement of lands and the development of cooperation, which is an opportunity to increase.
The purpose of this article is to provide solutions to the problems hindering the development of cooperatives in different regions of the Republic of Armenia և ways to eliminate the causes.
  The basis of the article analysis was the conduct of surveys with production, consumer and agricultural cooperatives.
According to the data of the 2018 sample survey, round production cooperatives are registered [1].
    67 consumer, production and agricultural cooperatives were selected for the study of agricultural products, of which 15 ceased to operate, 5 changed direction, did not implement, and 16 could not be contacted.
As a result, 26 cooperatives took part in the survey.
The activities of the Ministry of Agriculture have been registered in a state of exhaustion, but 5 are the best. The existing problems in the RA agriculture cannot be solved by the farms alone.
  One of the obstacles to the other problems is cooperative cooperation in agriculture.
The formation of cooperatives will solve the issues of intensive use of resources, purchase of goods and services, improvement of the process of opportunities, promotion of exports, replenishment of working capital, efficient management of agriculture.
Surveys conducted in several consumer and consumer cooperatives operating in the Republic of Armenia revealed the existing problems.
The list of cooperatives participating in the survey is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. List of cooperatives that participated in the survey N / A RegionCommunity Name of the cooperative1. Aragatsotn Byurakan "BYUR-AKN" G / C2. AragatsotnArteni 3. AragatsotnAruch 4. Armavir Aygevan "Artin-Dried Fruit Production" Agricultural JSC "Aruch Agricultural Association" JSC "Sale of grapes, fruits, vegetables" "Horticulturist" JSC "Lukashin Agricultural 5. ArmavirLukashinasotsiatsia "consumer cooperative 6. ArmavirNoravanasotsatsia "consumer cooperativeS / K" Noravan agricultural 7. AraratAralezS / K "Aralez Agricultural Association" S / K "Nor-Kyanq Agricultural 8. AraratNew Life Association "Consumer Cooperative" Dashtavan Agricultural 9. AraratDashtavan Association "Consumer CooperativeS / K10. GegharkunikDprabak "Agricultural mothers" G / K11. Gegharkunik Pool 12. KotaykNor Geghi "Gardman" consumer cooperative S / K "Nor Geghi Agricultural Association" S / K13. Lori 14. Lori 15. LoriArevatsagKurtan "Clean food producers" S / C "Raspberry WORLD" C / KMets Burning "Gardeners 'Union' C / KTavushSarigyugh" Sarigyugh Agricultural Association "S / KTavushBerdavan" Berdavan fruit-growing consumer cooperative "S / KTavushTavushAknaghbyur" Aknaghbyur "Agricultural S / burn" Lchkadzor »S / KTavushPtghavan 21. Vayots DzorGomq 22. Vayots DzorAghavnadzor "Ptghavan Agricultural Consumer Cooperative" JSC "Vankadzor Agricultural Association" JSC "Aghavnadzor" Agricultural Association "JSC 23. Vayots DzorZedea "Angel Agricultural Association" S / K24. Vayots Dzor 25. Vayots Dzor26.
The agricultural, consumer, production cooperatives operating in the Republic of Armenia were established mainly on the principles of voluntary participation and democratic control over the activities of the members.
  According to the results of the survey, cooperation is necessary because they create material goods, unite people around the same idea, which gives an opportunity to solve social problems.
Joining the cooperative has had a positive impact on the process of reducing the cost of products and organizing the sale, providing both free access to the market and facilitating the sales process compared to similar products in the market.
Main products According to the results of the survey, cooperatives sell their products to other farms of their own members.
vegetable peaches, apricots, grapes.
  Some of the mentioned fruits are sold both fresh and processed.
84% of the cooperatives in the market, and 16% - export to Russia, France and Belgium.
The main obstacles to the effective organization of cooperatives are the lack of financial resources, the underdevelopment of internal and external infrastructure, the lack of refrigeration facilities or their lack of optimal distribution in the region.
  As a result, the products produced in cooperatives, in particular, are small in size, corresponding to the internal market capacity.
Line 1. Export of Cooperatives' Products 58.3% of the surveyed cooperatives have non-specialized own vehicles, so the sale of products is organized on the spot, and in order to reach the wholesale or Yerevan markets, they use the services of intermediary transport companies or rent vehicles.
Line 2. Use of vehicles In addition, cooperatives have identified competitiveness (packaging, certification, quality, etc.) as an obstacle to exports, and the lack of compensation mechanisms in the case of a systematic process.
Cooperatives make up for the lack of working capital mainly through loans and payrolls.
  75% of the surveyed cooperatives do not use state support, and 58.30% 33.30% 45.80% Own vehicleRent VehicleTransportation rates of intermediate transport companies use the remaining 25% of the information on the subsidy provided to the "Agriculture" program.
  The main reasons for not applying to the programs are the lack of information in eco-operatives, the difficulty of dealing with the relevant structures and the demonstrated indifference.
Conclusions: Insufficient barrier to the activities of various agricultural and eco-operatives Insufficient access to farms, insufficient information in farms, incomplete information-consulting system, as well as the process of financing and cooperation.
  Cooperatives need the following information: accessibility, barrier to accessibility.
g • Clarification of the idea of ​​cooperation, • Vocational training, • Legal acts, • Grants, • State support programs, • և etc.
state support. Thus, until 2019. The state support programs did not mention the preferential terms given to the cooperatives, and the changes in the programs from the current year և introduced the preferential terms of the cooperatives to the sectors.
  The only purposeful state support was to provide advice to cooperatives and to organize trainings.
  RA Government 2018 In the "Promotion of Cooperation in Agriculture" section of the Ministry of Agriculture և Priority Objectives ծրագրի Priority Objectives of the Action Plan նշ It is mentioned that the order N 92-A on approving the "State Program for Support of Agricultural Cooperatives" has been developed and approved by the Ministry of Agriculture in 2018. 5 trainings were conducted on the topics related to the Minister of the April report, in which 35 beneficiaries participated, which, however, was considered sufficient ող unable to yield results.
Recommendations: From the requirements of the RA Law on Agricultural Cooperatives to the proper development directions of the state program for the implementation of cooperative support, which are mentioned in the 6th paragraph of Article 29 of the above-mentioned law [2].
Agricultural: - Organize regular training with the Department of Agricultural Consulting, Innovation and Monitoring of the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Armenia together with the National Agrarian University of Armenia on the idea of ​​cooperation, principles of extension, regional administrations.
Involving cooperatives ատիվ - Insurance implemented in the Republic of Armenia »Pilot involvement of cooperatives' property insurance in Ararat, Armavir, Aragatsotn, Tavush, Kotayk կար Hail in Vayots Dzor marzes։.
In the program, it is obligatory to provide loans to the members of the cooperative at the interest rate of the interest rates on the loans provided to the "Agriculture" sector.
"Subsidizing" program - between the enterprises of processing enterprises ձեռնարկ cooperatives, the contract "Subsidizing the interest rates on loans provided to the agro-processing sector for the procurement of agricultural raw materials", the maximum repayment period in case of concluding a contract for purchasing a crop.
