Preface.
  Conflict resolution is one of the major challenges facing the world community today, with disagreements over ways to resolve it "political activism can be seen as a compelling argument that conflicts are not only multifaceted" but also affect the interests of many states.
Emerging in 1947. As an Israeli-Palestinian issue, the conflict escalated into an Arab-Israeli one, [4] directly or indirectly involving almost all Middle Eastern countries, as well as new superpowers and global strategic interests in the region in the following years.
  Turkey, one of the main influential powers in the region, which aspires to the status of a regional superpower, is no exception.
  And since it is impossible to imagine any state's relationship with Israel without a position on the Palestinian conflict, then we have tried to view Turkish-Israeli relations through that prism.
However, the establishment of a new quality of relations between the President of the country Nasser and Turkey "Israel" in the early 1990s was due to the following circumstances.
  The dialogue between the Israeli-Palestinian Liberation Organization (KLP) [6] (referring to the Palestinian Liberation Organization, established by the Arab League in Jerusalem in May 1964 by the Arab League in Egypt).
  There were 11 organizations in the KGB, the most famous of which was Fatah, founded in 1958. By Yasser Arafat in Jordan) seems to have provided decades of guarantees of stability and peace in the region.
  In the context of such an international conflict, Turkey has already sought to establish good-neighborly relations with both sides.
  This can be explained by the fact that Turkey had to take into account the change of positions of its senior partner, its main ally in the US region, Israel.
 These countries recognized the KGB, and the latter became involved in the negotiation format.
  Turkey also expected the support of the powerful Jewish lobby in the United States, not only in the United States, but also in the issue of normalization of relations with the EU.
  1991 Naturally, Turkey's cooperation with Israel was somewhat forced by the idea of ​​a Palestinian representation in Turkey, as the Kurdish Workers' Party in Turkey was supported by Iran, Syria and Iraq, and Turkey had serious disagreements with the latter two over the use of water resources.
The Turkish-Israeli consulate was elevated to the level of consulate, and in 1992 the Turkish consulate in Jerusalem was reopened.
  The United States, which has begun to implement the RAND 2 development program, is in every way encouraging closer ties with the New Greater Middle East.
  1996 On February 23, the two countries signed an agreement on "training and cooperation of specialists in the military-technical field", and a little later on "an agreement on the implementation of free trade".
The first of these agreements was especially possible, which allowed Israel to use Turkish airspace for its own military aircraft, to upgrade the Turkish air force with new electronics, and to jointly produce missiles.
"Refah" - some political circles in Turkey in 1996 In the summer [7], when Erbakan's "Prosperity" party, which advocated a return to Islamic values, came to power, it became more inclined to cooperate with Israel as a counterbalance to a possible change in foreign policy.
  Erbakan paid official visits to Iran, Pakistan and Libya and assured the leaders of those countries that he was committed to Islamic values ​​and hated Zionism as an ideology.
 But under pressure from President Demirel's Army, he resigned in 1997. In April, he had to receive the Israeli Foreign Minister D. Levi [21].
  The Turkish military leadership started 2 RAND or Research and Development, a center of American strategic research, at the public-private level.
  Deals with US National Security և Strategic Planning.
  It was created in 1948. For aircraft, rocket programming in Santa Monica.
 Works by state order of the American government.
Erbakan returned to the political arena back in 1987. և headed "Refah", "Welfare" announced the review of relations with Israel, the withdrawal of NATO from the improvement of relations with the Karabakh countries.
  Erbakan was the first Orthodox Muslim to become the Prime Minister of Turkey.
  However, later in the Islamization of the state, the Turkish Constitutional Party banned its activities, and Erbakan was forced to resign.
1995 The pre-election party.
The propaganda court accused Prime Minister Erbakan of explaining the value of "welfare" to Israel for national security in terms of cooperating with Israel.
  To reaffirm their loyalty to Israel, General Karaday, Chief of the General Staff of the Turkish Army, resigned in 1997. During a visit to Tel Aviv in February, he stated that "Turkey will not provide military information or military technology to Israel to other countries."
 As a result of a mutual visit to Ankara in 1997 On June 11-13, 2010, Israeli President Weitzman called on Turkish President Demirel not to succumb to Arab pressure to continue co-operation.
  [24]
 The response was not long in coming, with representatives from Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Libya, Iran and Greece calling on Turkey to reconsider its position.
  Turkey not only did not change its position, but in 1997. The last new Prime Minister, Yilmaz, announced that Turkey was choosing the Israeli option to eliminate inflation.
Israel promised in return.
 The development of Turkish-Israeli relations was especially effective in 1998.
  Israel showed great interest in the Ataturkian dam being built by Turkey on the Euphrates.
  The purpose of this construction was to modernize the agriculture of southern Anatolia.
  Possessing modern technologies in the field of agriculture, Israel expressed readiness not only to transfer its experience to Turkey, but also decided to build a modern dairy processing plant in the south-eastern regions of Turkey.
The construction of the dam has purely economic implications, bilateral non-compliance, and major grievances have arisen in Syria, which has significantly reduced the Euphrates River entering Syria.
  In the face of the growing demands of the Israeli Consul General in Turkey, Shakerijr, the construction of a dam, the use of new technologies will allow to save water, and to optimize it.
According to him, Turkish-Israeli relations in the Middle East were in harmony in the context of Georgia-Azerbaijan policy, military-economic cooperation with the two Transcaucasian countries.
  That cooperation was further strengthened in 1998. After the summer, when Iran tested the "Shahab-3" missile, which was capable of hitting Turkey, Israel and Saudi Arabia.
After the Pentagon announced that the Iranian missile test should be of more concern to Turkey, the latter tended to cooperate with Israel at a faster pace.
A meeting entitled "Turkish-Israeli military dialogue" was held in Tel Aviv, as a result of which it was decided to establish a joint Turkish-Israeli missile defense system.
The culmination of the cooperation between the two countries was the Prime Minister of Turkey M. Yլlmaz paid a visit to Israel, Palestine and Jordan, as a result of which an economic agreement was signed, which allowed Turkey to use the Israeli port of Haifa.
  EconomicI in the Turkish government. Celebi announced that the agreement had been approved by the United States in advance.
  Yլlmaz met with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Weitzman, stressing that cooperation between the two countries is a guarantee of "stability and peace" in the region.
  Well-known Turkish political commentator S. According to Cohen, the two countries are united by the fight against terrorism, the supply of weapons to Turkey, the Syrian threat, and the positive attitude of the United States towards that cooperation.
  Well-known American political scientist, professor of Harvard University G. According to Fuller, who served in the US State Department for 20 years, Turkish-Israeli cooperation, although a strategic alliance, has significantly weakened Turkish-Arab relations, especially Turkish-Syrian relations, which could hamper the Middle East peace process.
  1998 The Arab-Foreign Ministers' Summit convened in Cairo in September 1945 discussed the issue of Turkish-Israeli cooperation, but, oddly enough, did not adopt a Lebanese-drafted resolution condemning Turkey.
  Jordan, Omani Representatives, KGB Leader Y. Arafat stated that Turkish-Israeli cooperation was not only dangerous for non-Arab countries, but that this danger was exaggerated.
In our view, Arafat նման նման նման նման անի։։ ան ան անի ՈՒ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
 In addition, the Turkish Prime Minister managed to organize explanatory visits to some Arab countries.
  But countries that came out strongly criticized.
 1998 At a meeting of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in Tehran, the "Turkish-Israeli Entente" of Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia was described as a structure aimed at reviewing the political map of the Middle East.
 That accusation sounded more natural in 2001. After the events of September 11, 1945, when the Turkish side called on the United States to support the Turkish-Israeli alliance as a pillar in the fight against terrorism.
The situation has changed dramatically not only in terms of Turkish-Israeli relations, but also in terms of Turkey's stance on the Palestinian issue since the early 2000s.
  These two issues are closely interrelated.
  2000 The Camp Jade Summit, organized by US President Bill Clinton on July 11-25, 2006, did not resolve Israel's main "Justice Issues: The Status of East Jerusalem, the Status of Palestinian Refugees" and the Jewish settlement.
  Moreover, in late September and early October, clashes broke out between Israeli troops and the "Palestinians", which was described as the second intifada.
4 Turkey's position changed in 2002. Erdogan has stated that Israel views Israel's position on the Palestinian people as "Sharon's terrorism".
  However, Turkey was not going to make any changes in Turkish-Israeli relations.
  The reason was that the Palestinian people in Turkey and the KGB leading their struggle had different dimensions.
 Considering the KGB a force cooperating with the Kurdish-Armenians, Turkey until 1979. He did not know that structure.
  Even in 1988. Recognizing the Palestinian Authority, Turkey did not cooperate with the KGB.
To these two double-minded first intifadarites, when in 1994 The Prime Minister of Turkey T. Chiller visited the representatives of the Palestinian Authority in East Jerusalem and condemned Israel's actions against the Palestinian people.
  The government of the page և President A. Sezer strongly criticized Israel for its second intifada criteria. At the end of the 19th century, an Arab uprising called the Intifada began in the Gaza Strip.
 This revolt had a strange course; somewhere it did not even coincide with the classical conception of the term "rebellion".
  The uprising was accompanied by demonstrations, clashes, throwing stones at Israeli soldiers and civilians.
 The Israeli government took cruel steps, which were criticized by the UN, even the United States.
 1988 On November 15, 2006, the Palestinian National Council in Algeria adopted a declaration on the independence of Palestine.
  In the above-mentioned declaration, the KGB reaffirms its commitment to the principles, demands and protection of human rights, and on the other hand reaffirms its commitment to remain part of the Arab League, to coordinate relations with Arab countries, and to intensify efforts to end Israeli occupation.
  At the same time, the declaration emphasizes that Palestine is a peace-loving country and agrees with the principle of peaceful coexistence.
  In fact, the declaration of independence can be considered the culmination of the intifada.
  That idea is expressed in the declaration.
The commitments were reaffirmed by the Armenian lobby of the people in the wake of the "Palestinian genocide" and even defended a resolution criticizing Israel at the UN.
 2002 "In April, the Turkish Prime Minister criticized Ejit for submitting to Israel."
 At the same time, in 2003 In the spring of 1918, when the United States launched military operations against Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, the new Turkish leadership refused to cede territory to the US military.
  Israel took the opposite position, but after the US overthrew Saddam, Turkey undertook to improve relations.
"During the Erbakan government, this time" the Turkish military elite declared in favor of continuing Israeli cooperation, "in 2003, in order to overthrow Hussein. In August, joint military exercises were held with the participation of the United States and the President of Israel M. The ax.
  In mid-2004, Turkish-Israeli relations deteriorated again in the wake of Israeli crackdowns on Palestinian leaders by Hamas.
  In addition, there were rumors in the American press that Israel was establishing Kurdish militant groups in northern Iraq.
  The situation was so bad that even in 2004 At the NATO Summit in Istanbul in the summer of 2006, US President George W. Bush had to make some efforts to improve relations with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Israel.
Turkey was reminded that the trade turnover between the two countries is $ 1.4 billion, that Turkey has a 20-year contract for the supply of 50 million cubic meters of water with Israel.
  Nevertheless, Turkey continued to support the Palestinian Authority; in late 2004, it signed an agreement to provide $ 1 million in non-refundable financial assistance to Palestine. Gul announced that there would be such assistance in the future.
Abbas' 2005 proposal to become Mahmoud's US Prime Minister's Map of the Palestinian Authority's roadmap for the settlement of the Palestinian conflict [20] provided new opportunities for the settlement of the Palestinian conflict, and in this case Turkey even provided mediation functions by providing space for negotiations.
It provided opportunities for work to normalize the relationship.
  Turkey tried to normalize relations with Israel on new grounds.
The Turkish Foreign Minister's visit to Israel meant that from now on Israeli-Turkish relations will be conditioned by the effectiveness of Israel's efforts in the Palestinian conflict.
  2005 In the middle of the year, before Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo ։an's visit to Israel, it was announced that the latter had "diplomatic success in the suitcase in connection with the settlement of the Palestinian conflict."
Thus, Turkey's position on the Palestinian conflict can be conditioned by the following factors.1. Influenced by the US position on the Palestinian conflict, 2. With a strategic military-technical alliance with Israel, which is a counterbalance to Syria and Iran3. Recognizing and supporting the right of the Palestinian Arab people to self-determination, 4. By striving for the status of a regional superpower.
