In 2012, Nairi Publishing House published the French translation of Grigor Narekatsi's "Book of Tragedy" translated by Annie Jean-Pierre Maher, with a preface and footnotes.
The dead were engaged in the whole creation of Grigor Narekatsi for many years.
  The culmination of their research was the large-scale work "Grigor Narekatsi և his Book of Tragedy" published in Paris in 2002, which was translated into Armenian in 2004 [8].
In addition to the introduction to the "Book of Tragedy" published in Yerevan in 2012, it has a very brief preface, which is rich in facts.
  Yerjanyan's publication is based on the two-volume original of the Book of Tragedy translated by Mahener in Leuven, which was published in a small pocket book, summarized, and the philological and professional observations were removed.
 Completely preserved Gr. The original of Narekatsi's work, which is translated according to the "Matian" examination original published in Yerevan in 1985, compiled by Poghos Khachatryan and Arshaluys Ghazinyan [1].
 Chapters 34, 75, 92 և 95 of the book are divided according to Garegin Trabzonetsi, published in Buenos Aires in 1948.
Special attention was paid to the structure of the poem, the short title of the chapters of Grigor Narekatsi's work was preserved, "A word from the heart from the heart".
Many people have written about Grigor Narekatsi's "Book".
  The scientific bibliography of the genius poet's work is now available.
 However, what Mahener writes both in this preface and in their special study presents completely different approaches and assessments.
  According to them, this is an irritating, at the same time keeping a person awake book, written in 1002 by a lonely monk who confesses his sins.
Confessing so many and unbelievable sins, he reminds us in his book of the nightmares depicted by Hieronymus Bosch.
At the end of the second millennium, Christendom was awaiting God's judgment.
  This is the voice of the greatest comforters of mankind, such as Buddha և François Assis, և Narekatsi's book still has a unique place in Armenian literature.
No poem in Armenian literature has that momentum of thought, "lyricism has never been found in such an individual field".
Armenian bibliography unanimously recognizes this poetry.
 Grigor Narekatsi lived and worked in Narekavank, the Armenians called him "The Book" "Narek", which is directly connected with the author's name. This letter sounds in my voice, as if it were shouting at me, the hidden one will spread, the sound will be heard, the feeling will be heard. The apparent, let the dialect be spoken ... [10-88-3] For more than a thousand years, Grigor Narekatsi's book has accompanied Armenians in various circumstances of their lives.
  It is synonymous with the Gospel, it is read to the sick, taken on long journeys, parts of the book have become words of charm.
  Jean-Pierre Mahenschnsht is familiar with the work of his teacher, Frederic Faydi, "The Christian Charms of Armenia", in which there are many facts that testify to the transformation of parts of Narekatsi's "Book" into charms.
 [4-65] According to Mahener, he had no books among the Armenians except the Bible.
  The uniqueness of this poem is similar. [2-5]
  During the most festive period, it can have the human explanation of its century.
  Addressing the countless Christians of the world, he confesses all the sins of man, from Adam to his last descendants, because all people, dead or alive, are under the gaze of God.
  At the same time, when Grigor puts his exact confessions at the end of the memoir, he puts the exact date and circumstances of writing the "Book".
Basil the Great was the emperor in Byzantium, Armenia was at peace, but the Armenian Church was disturbed by the sectarians.
In the Preface of the Bagratuni of Hayk there is a separate reference to the role of the Narek school in the life of Grigor Narekatsi.
  In the book "Armenia Proof of Centuries" published in Paris in 2005, Mahener spoke about the Holy Cross of the Great Vaspurakan and the Akhtamar Holy Cross Church built by the latter.
  [9-64-65] In this passage it is reported that Grigor Narekatsi was born in 940, his father was Khosrov Andzatsi, he had two brothers. The eldest is Sahak, the middle is Hovhannes.
  He lost his mother very early.
 He confesses about it in the 51st episode of "Matian". Did my mother go to heaven, If charity was stopped while retreating?
 [10-308] His father, Khosrov Indzatsin, became a bishop after his wife's death, being a hereditary prince.
  Narekatsiologist Hrachya Tamrazyan Grigor Narekatsutakanner P. Khachatryan [5-10].
Putting his birth in the vicinity of M., Abeghyan մբ Smbat Movement.
ZarehavantsiTondrakyan sect և is examined in this preface.
 Hovhannes D. During the Ovayets (833-855) Smbat from the village of Zarehavan in Tsaghkotnagavar became the founder.
The people of Tondrak had no intention of overthrowing the church government, they wanted to uproot the church completely.
Grigor Narekatsi had two teachers, KhosrovAndzatsi, his father, անի Anania, the abbot of Narek monastery and the head of Narek school.
 Both the father and Anania Narekatsi had theological and philosophical works.
  Ananias The Narekatsukhrats are real training exercises that require intense competition during Jesus' continual rebuke.
  The monks of Nareka Monastery, in parallel with their theological researches, supported the sectarians.
to fight against.
  It is appropriate to remember the following remark with the narrator Poghos Khachatryan on this issue. Narekatsi considers it unforgivable even for the people of Kchav, the sympathetic attitude towards the people of Tendrakats, as they have stated about the sectarians that "they are not of the apostate creed", they even wanted to return to the state of those who "fell in love with those who longed for them". from the sword "[7-99-100].
In the Preface, Mahener speaks of Narekatsi's interpretation of the "Song of Songs" written in 977, commissioned by King Gurgen Artsruni of Artsrunyats.
  In that interpretation, the bride, the church, is perfected by the word of the bridegroom, Jesus.
 By the order of his teacher Anania, Narekatsi wrote the poems, treasures, melodies, which were sung during church ceremonies.
 Narekatsi wrote Naberbogyans, the most famous of which is "History from the Aparan to the Cross" [11-913], and "Circumstances in Hazarbazm chronicles the" Book of Lamentations ", in which he collects the reflections of his whole life" [2-11].
To compose his most famous work, on the threshold of the historical Deaths, they briefly present that Narekatsi's life exists in the "Book".
  In the outskirts of the Byzantine Empire, Armenians and Greeks continued to engage in profound theological disputes.
  The Tondrak sectarian movement worried not only the Armenian Church, but also the Byzantine Empire.
  In 1000, the Byzantine emperor Vasil II (957-1025, from the Macedonian Armenian wealth) spends the winter in Tarsus, when he hears of the sudden death of his once-defunct David Kyurapaghat.
The emperor immediately crossed the Melitene with his large army, took it and returned to Constantinople.
  During his campaign, he met the Tondraks in Hark or Manazkert, who were the enemies of the church.
In the two chapters of the poem "Book of Tragedy", 34 և 75, the province is glorified, the church's Christianity is glorified, and the mistakes of the sectarians are pointed out.
  The deaths emphasize that for the first time Narekatsi presents his works not on the orders of the king or the bishop, but on his own initiative.
Some parts of the book present the poet's daily thoughts, but, without a doubt, there are thoughts that he did not keep in his book.
 The dialogue between God and man is found in the scriptures.
Reader Note that in many pages of the sacred book of the Zoroastrian religion, the Avesta, Zarathustra asks a question to Ahura Mazda, and the latter answers.
  We see the same in the famous Byzantine mystic Simeon of the XI century.
In his speech, Gregory chooses the repentant egg of the prophets' psalms.
 Sometimes his words to God receive personal confession.
The "Poet և Bible" section points to copies of Christian scriptures.
  Narekatsi appropriated the books attributed to Solomon in the Old Testament. [2-15] This is Solomon's supplication of hope in my example, For no one is more sinful than he is to me.
 [10-283] Chapters 61-62 simply come from biblical psalms.
  Narekatsi has a strong allegory.
  Gregory's thoughts penetrate the inner world of a person.
 Large space arises among human "others".
  Truth tells man how to climb that abyss.
Also interesting is the "Bible Images" Unconscious Prototypes section of the preface.
 The poet writes: What kind of example is this most convenient for you? I owe it to you.
My punishment is Sodom, the rebellious prosecutor of Nineveh, the barbarian of Anar, the woman of the south;
 [10-11] Examples of this self-aggrandizement grow with a caring egg.
 Eve asks Jesus: If a whirlwind of unrighteousness suddenly blows. The earthly sea of ​​man made of flesh, Calm down from above, steers this wing belonging to You.
 [10-26] The human body is a boat that floats in the toast, and Jesus is the sailor.
  This idea is also present in Mesrop Mashtots' repentance hymns.
  The anonymous author, who explains the medieval symbols of the Matenadaran after Mashtots, also has the following: "The sun is Christ, the sea is my world, the ship is the explanation.
Narekatsi updates the biblical commandments.
The dead are completely innovative when they talk about the architectural horse of the "Matian" prayers.
  They view the "Book" as a symphony in which the music rises and falls.
According to Mahener, Grigor Narekatsi used his book to build a Christian temple, a wonderful structure.
 A stylistic episode can be a guide.
  Narekatsi Cathedral has the same simplicity as the Armenian Church - a horse, which confirms the description of the VIII century.
  The church is allegorically compared to Noah.
  [2-26] It is the same as the ark, consisting of three niches.
  The church consists of three parts: a vestibule, a temple and an altar.
 Those who entered Noah's ark were saved, as well as those who are true believers in the church, will be saved from drowning or drowning.
The preface of the deaths ends with an unforgettable conclusion, the title of the last section is "Grigor" his book. a one-time teacher և a dead eternal living. ”
The preface ends with a precise conclusion, according to which Grigor Narekatsi believes that his book will be heard on the lips of an innumerable crowd, praying to God on his behalf until the last judgment.
  As for his compatriots, his covenant is fully heard.
 Armenians have not become literary critics, but have a connection with him, who instructs ecology, clairvoyance, he is a caring teacher who empowers Armenians, guides them to understand the true grace of the Gospel.
  "Narek" is a real peak, to penetrate into the most intimate, the most unique care of Armenians.
