In this article we will try to present the scientific and pedagogical experience of different countries with advanced educational systems on the problem under study (Great Britain, USA, Russia, etc.).
 Accordingly, the approaches and tendencies of a number of articles will be analyzed and presented.
First of all, we were interested in the question of whether it is possible to develop the learner's thinking skills in general through teaching, what are the scientific approaches in this field.
    Accordingly, the approaches of Sukhomlinsky, Diana Halpern, Arthur Chapman (specialist in the history of the Institute of Education of the University College London, with whom he collaborated within the framework of the National Program for Excellence in Education), Lerner և other approaches.
The purpose of this article is to offer students the means to develop the skills of analyzing cause-and-effect relationships, assessing facts and phenomena, which are themselves part of critical-historical thinking.
  Can the learning provided through the open-ended questions posed contribute to the development of these skills?
is Modernity.
 In the modern world, mastering information but valuing it in the conditions of rapid inflow becomes the most important task not only in the appropriate situations.
  This problem exists in almost all spheres of public life, when people, without being grounded, make unfounded conclusions, give one-sided assessments, without analyzing the opinions of others.
  Our task is to teach them to think objectively, to develop certain transferable skills of critical thinking (hereinafter referred to as CM) through the subject.
Deepening into the causes of events During my pedagogical activity, the focus has always been on the development of students' creative and critical thinking skills.
  The various tasks performed by the students during the year showed that much higher results are recorded when performing tasks that assume a neutral reproduction of factual material, answering more easily the questions that imply knowledge of this or that historical fact or phenomenon.
  However, it is difficult to compare the facts, find the causes and consequences of historical events.
  In many cases, students fail to express their point of view, to prove it with the necessary arguments, to make reasoned judgments, to evaluate facts and phenomena.
  All this is possible due to the development of skills.
Critical thinking is a system of thinking used to analyze facts and events, enabling reasoned conclusions, reasoned assessments, commentary, and applied results in other similar situations.
  Components of critical thinking's global thinking և are considered components • determine the goals of learning, • lead to the overcoming of stereotypes, • contribute to the overall perception of the world, • contribute to the recognition of the world in all its aspects, • ensure openness to alternatives, develop problems.
Sukhomlinsky considered the development of students' thinking to be one of the most problematic school problems.
Diana Halpern tries to reveal the connection between education and knowledge and thinking.
  Thinking helps us to apply previously acquired knowledge to build new ones.
  This type of thinking is applied when solving problems, evaluating the facts of conclusions, when making decisions.
    The word "critical" has an evaluative component.
  Sometimes a negative nuance is conveyed under that word.
 But the assessment of Pitilin is constructive, expressing "positive" and "negative" attitude.
 CP is also called purposeful thinking because it aims to achieve the desired result.
First of all, we were interested in the question of whether it is possible to develop the learner's thinking skills in general through teaching, what are the scientific approaches in this field.
 Is there any evidence that thinking can be improved?
  A number of studies have been conducted, the results of which allow us to conclude that it is possible to develop CM through training, especially when learning is aimed at developing skills and abilities that can be applied in different situations and in different scientific fields.
It is difficult to find an area of ​​the CP that is impossible to master.
American college students report that they have significantly improved their critical thinking skills after teaching thinking skills.
  They began to evaluate higher with some of their criteria, such as making judgments without undue haste, being able to evaluate opposing arguments, to evaluate comprehensively, to take into account the factor of uncertainty.
  They also noted that they use different heuristic approaches to solving problems, such as excluding unnecessary facts and assessing the reliability of the source of information.
Researchers have come to the conclusion that knowledge, the acquisition of which provides general rules of thinking, can be transferred to other areas of activity.
Lerner offers interesting approaches to the development of historical thinking.
  The teacher can show the student the patterns between the facts with a concrete example, explain this or that phenomenon.
  However, the learner may be concerned with any information and may have to find answers on their own.
  It is necessary to develop the activity of the learners and to make them always feel the need to make sense of broader facts and phenomena.
Such an approach to problem solving at the same time shows the ways of solving other worldview problems in general.
  As a result, the learner develops a general approach to analysis in general, which leads to the understanding of certain social problems լուծ the solution of certain problems.
As examples, we explore the capabilities of causal analysis and facts.
The latter are considered to be important components of the concept of "historical thinking".
  As a means of influence, it is preferable to use the following types of open-ended questions: Why? What are the consequences? How do you assess J.?
Critical Thinking Studies to Evaluate the Facts In which, through these three types of questions, a logical whole chain of causal relationships is constructed.
  I should mention that the students' activity in answering these questions corresponds to the upper levels of the degree system developed by Bloom [7]; it presupposes evaluation, grading, and evaluation.
  According to Sanders, in the Transformation-Interpretation-Application-Analysis-Comparison-Evaluation system, these questions are considered to be the highest level of inquiries.
Cognitively active Thinking, a purposeful process, begins with certain questions.
    In logic, the question is formulated as a question of some information.
 In other words, the question is interpreted as a motivating sentence.
  The more information you have, the more you can distinguish between primary and secondary.
 In this regard, it is possible to ask questions.
Open-ended questions have a number of advantages over closed-ended questions.
  They allow to express one's point of view without any restrictions, to single out the most essential, to raise such issues that even the questioner did not think, to discover the existing contradictions, to look at the phenomena and facts from a completely different point of view.
  The question is a peculiar microscope, a certain system of knowledge, which in one part (question) defines what we already know, քում underlies the knowledge, and in the second part (answer) there is a decision, that is, what we want to know [1 ].
It is possible to fix the knowledge that has been acquired in the process of recognition, but it is necessary to fix what we do not know yet, it is subject to be found out.
  Such are the questions.
  In order to understand the structure of the issue, we must first single out what we already know.
 Based on what we know, the question can already be formulated.
  The question, as a cognition, is a way to find out the unknown, based on some known fact.
Learning through questions will allow the student to find the answer to the question, applying his / her knowledge, information, ask questions, apply his / her own worldview.
In this respect, the role of the teacher is quite big.
  His task is to contribute to the development of students' thinking through correctly formulated questions.
  An appropriate educational environment should be created, where the learner does not avoid expressing his / her point of view, finds the patterns, defines the historical meaning, is ready to listen and accept opinions that may not coincide with his / her point of view.
In this case, the student's task is to prove the legitimacy through reasoned judgments or, accepting the other person's arguments, to make changes in his position.
  By evaluating different facts and phenomena, the student learns step by step to evaluate his own activity.
  As a result, more complex cognitive skills are formed.
the nature of the processes.
  They are in conclusion.
  Thus, in teaching history, we use the fact that the learner thinks about the content and significance of historical science.
The analysis shows that it is possible to develop CM skills through training.
  To this end, open-ended students' interest in the topic is preferable; they can have a motivating meaning.
  The learner tries to look for new ways of solving the proposed problem.
  Open-ended questions prompt the student to propose a hypothesis of facts, develop a clear orienting approach to the most important issues of the current topic.
 As a result, through the analysis of historically relevant material, students develop transferable skills that allow them to draw sound conclusions, predict possible consequences, be prudent in assessing, look at facts and phenomena from different angles, and do not rush to make judgments.
