Preface.
  During the introduction of information society and the latest technologies, the role of pedagogical communication in the organization of the educational process and the individual development of students is more than emphasized.
  Through live, direct communication, not only educational, but also social, cultural, moral and aesthetic values ​​are transmitted to the new generation.
 During communication միջոցով through communication the teacher's educational influences on the consciousness and behavior of the students are exercised.
Therefore, it is possible to find out the pedagogical features of the teacher-student, student-student relationship through research, to observe the conditions of modern means of communication in general education activities.
The aim of the work is to study the conditions of pedagogical communication in the field of education, to identify problems, to outline the possibilities of their solution.
We have used a number of sources of literature in the framework of the topic defended by the master's thesis "Communication of modern means of implementation", at the same time having the same typotype in the basis of the research.
In presenting the manifestations of pedagogical communication, we used N. Hakobyan, S. From the "Pedagogical" Modern Pedagogical Approaches "manual authored by Gorgyan և others.
 In describing the implementation of pedagogical communication in the educational process, we used key theses from Aleksanyan's book "Implementation of interpersonal communication in the educational process."
When analyzing the means of pedagogical communication in the Armenian reality, the basis for us was the general education system և "Educational Transformations in Armenia" National Human Development Report.
According to the book, the modern information society is developing at an unprecedented rate.
 Knowledge develops much faster և finds application in life.
  The task of such a rapidly developing society is to bring the education system in line with the new requirements, to change the educational process, to apply the latest pedagogical technologies, teaching methods.
The formation of stereotypes, the emergence of a person who is quickly oriented in the current stage of the Reforms, finds creative solutions in different situations, strives for self-improvement of the initiator, first of all, is preceded by his ability to communicate.
Nowadays, the problem of effective communication is becoming more and more emphasized, because in the conditions of growing role of the Internet, expansion of social networks, information, knowledge creation and rapid dissemination, it is impossible to achieve results without communication.
  The first step in solving this problem is to clarify the ideas of the surrounding studies.
Implementation of communication Various manifestations of communication have been studied since ancient times, and in the 70s and 80s of the 20th century, the subject of special scientific-pedagogical research was pedagogical communication, the object of research of which is the preparation and implementation of educational communication.
Still in mystical debates, the use of unique communication tricks and methods and mastering the art of communication were used.
The philosophers of the time had a unique way of communicating and organizing in the ancient period.
  Thus, the sophists (artful, wise), the "traveling teachers", taught to speak beautifully, to formulate their own thoughts correctly, to express and substantiate, as well as to conduct dialogue, to persuade, to argue, the secrets of art.
  They organized discussions in which the students took an active part.
Already in the 20th century, there were demands on the educational process to identify and realize the possibilities of communication, as well as its socialization through communication, as a full member of society.
  All this was possible especially due to the organization of adequate communication in the educational process.
Internal communication, as a multi-layered process, has different perceptions. Thus, the transfer of information from person to person, which presupposes communication between "individuals" and "groups of people", is a unique form of "interaction of working people", during which not only information is directly transmitted, but also attitudes, knowledge and emotions are exchanged.
Communication in the process of cognitive development.
"Communication is the process of transmitting information, which is done through meaningful movements (gestures), words, electronic expressions, messages, the Internet, television and other ways." [1]
Thus, communication is a process of interaction between public entities (person, social group), during which the exchange of knowledge, skills and results of activities.
The international name for the word "communication" comes from the word "to communicate" (to participate, to make common, to communicate in common, how to unite, to communicate).
According to V. Zheluyko, "Pedagogical communication is a professional communication between the teacher and the student during the class and extracurricular communication, which has a certain pedagogical favorable psychological atmosphere, the stabilization of educational activities within the educational group" [2].
Teacher-student relationship functions, that is, during communication և և energy through communication is done on the consciousness and behavior of learners.
Unlike the previous 20th century, which symbolized an unprecedented technical and technological development, in the 21st century there is a transition to an information society, where the creation and dissemination of knowledge become decisive.
  If in the 20th century a child could be discovered and realized, then in the 21st century modern society needs an active, creative, creative, self-directed, changing self-improvement, respecting the rights of others, civilized, developed person who can manage as his own as well as external influences, setting the task of self-development.
  In the 21st century, new demands are being made on the organization of educational communication for the self-development of a person striving for self-development.
Our research shows that today's theorists and educators tend to develop a new model of pedagogical communication, which can be presented in the form of "orienting subject - self-developing subject" model, in contrast to the previously used "subject-object", "subject-subject models".
  In this model of interpersonal communication, the pedagogue acts as a orienting towards self-development.
Development of pedagogical scientific bases for the operation of the "orientation-subject-self-developing subject" model in the educational system, especially in school.
  It is necessary to develop new ways and technologies ով fixation by education system, that is, state care is needed, which is provided by the educational policy.
In order to study the model of pedagogical communication in the educational system of Armenia only, it is necessary to take into account that on the one hand, as a post-Soviet country, our educational system is aimed at the formation of a new national mentality, which pays attention to maintaining the national value system.
  On the other hand, a policy of integration into the European educational area has been developed, which has led to a number of transformations in the field of education.
  However, the most difficult factor to change is that the Soviet-inherited model still operates in secondary schools, with the "subject-object" model prevailing in the Soviet education system, with strict regulation and control over the consciousness of the rising generation. Teachers avoid change.
The national report on educational reforms in Armenia states: "Armenia's education system was not flexible in responding to innovations.
  As a result, educational institutions continue to pursue the goals of a non-existent Soviet ideology.
  In particular, the provision of ready-made knowledge to learners prevails, rather than the training that engages learners in knowledge building. ”[3]
  And in order for the students to take part in the creation of knowledge, they must be active.
in the process of communicating with public demands.
An important component of a person's communicative activity is his / her communication skills, knowledge, abilities and skills.
The communication system of the school's general education is defined, which the schoolboy must master.
  As a result of the learning curriculum, each learner should acquire communication skills and abilities [4]: ​​the ability to listen, comprehend, express an adequate attitude, b) debate, construct orally-written logical speech, և expressions, d) understand և use non-verbal means of communication correctly, e) use modern means of communication, etc.
Communication capabilities do not create an unchanging system. they can be constantly evolving, in turn contributing to the development of the qualities of a person with different abilities.
  Thus, if the child acquires the necessary skills for communication, he / she is able to participate in various discussions, actively and freely express his / her opinion, to express himself / herself freely, to come up with different reasons, not to be constrained in various relationships, to acquire new knowledge and skills.
To study the peculiarities of pedagogical communication, to carry out research work for the modern purpose of pedagogical communication.
We conducted the studies in 2 secondary schools of Shirak region (Torosgyugh, Goghovit) հիմնական in Gyumri N 11 basic, high schools of Yerevan State University.
 54 teachers և 50 students participated in the study (see Appendices 1, 2).
Discoveries Our observations show that teachers 'knowledge of communication skills is deficient, they do not have the basic skills and methods needed to develop students' communication skills.
  Most of the teachers admit that they have acquired communication skills while working on their own in-service training courses.
  Therefore, means should be used so that the basis for the discovery of communication skills մտ skills is formed during the school and university years.
Based on research work, we can state that the level of communication is not established in many schools.
They are more open and willing to cooperate in the comparative community schools than in the city schools, especially the representatives of the older generation avoid taking 3-4 minutes to participate in the survey.
We found out that the analysis of educational reforms in Armenia should include ways to improve the conditions for pedagogical communication, because, as our survey showed, most teachers consider pedagogical communication technology to be only technical means, that is, there is no clear idea of ​​the phenomenon.
In an experimental study to identify the factors that determine effectiveness, we also set a task to find out whether teachers and students in our communication schools use the possibilities of new technical means in pedagogical communication, and how effective the use of online educational platforms is.
We have studied 2 well-known and used online educational platforms in Armenia: dasaran.am և imdproc.am websites.
Dasaran.am website is an educational environment with 1,107,346 users, which unites all students, parents and teachers of Armenia դպրոց in Artsakh secondary schools in one platform with the aim of making education accessible to all.
թeducational "Dasaran.am's mission is to provide alternative learning opportunities, a secure telecommunications platform for Armenian students in Armenia, Artsakh and the Diaspora from the position of modern transparency of access to education." [6]
և Geographically, the Independent Instruments Index completes teachers' topics, assignments, and grades on the site as in the booklet. Students and parents can view it by logging in with special passwords.
 The site has separate sub-sections: competitions, games, "Health" sub-sections, opportunity to learn English online.
  And most importantly, the site allows student-parent communication through chat, which is similar to popular social media chats - a unique and up-to-date out-of-school communication platform.
We can state that the site enables interesting, effective teaching and communication with educational games, online competitions, facilitates and strengthens the teacher-student-parent connection.
However, as our surveys show, not everyone uses the site. Many are simply registered but do not enter, and the teachers are "forced" and dissatisfied to fill in the sections, and will be reprimanded accordingly.
  The teachers complain about doing the same thing twice (considering the additions to the book և dasaran.am) and offer to leave only one of them.
 Students are instructed to check grades, study only a portion of the encyclopedia, participate in various school competitions, or play logic games (see Figure 1).
It is not a secret that every innovation is difficult to accept, especially by the older generation, it is always criticized, but it is a fact that there is a platform for self-education, the acquisition of knowledge, which requires educational reforms.
"My School" (imdproc.am) website is an online educational tool for preschool children, schoolchildren, students, teachers and parents, has been operating since 2015.
It is currently considered the top educational platform for tens of thousands of schools.
  It is also used in Belarus, Germany and Austria.
 "My School" helps teachers to teach students electronically to do class and homework և to check them.
  Student Opportunity In Ukraine, in the process in Latvia, it is an electronic database of tasks for the Cross-border Exercise platform.
"The electronic database of" My School "website currently includes tasks from 9 subjects.
  It is the largest "petition book" in Armenia "[7].
According to our surveys, there are fewer teachers and students registered on this site compared to dasaran.am, but we think it will become more applicable in the next 1-2 years.
We can say that the educational platform is an opportunity to analyze the understandable and complex topics, to make the teaching interesting for the students, և of course, it is a wonderful way to use the Internet effectively.
Studying the use of new means of communication in the Armenian pedagogical reality, we must record that today the communication between the teacher and the student begins and ends at school.
  We can mention that the platforms for acquiring online skills and knowledge in Armenia (dasaran.am, imdproc.am) more or less meet the requirements of educational reforms, but are difficult to implement among both teachers and students.
  The picture is different on social networks, which are used by almost all of them - "partner-classmate", "teacher-student" and the most widely used is Facebook.com (see Figure 2, 3).
 It should be noted that in addition to communication, most students and teachers use the Internet to acquire new knowledge and skills.
In communication, it was possible to understand the extent to which multimedia is used in the classroom, it turns out that many teachers use the latest technical means. Non-users do not use it mainly because of lack of technical means.
It became clear from the surveys among the students that decisions, new students are mainly for active acquaintances, but they have problems with speaking freely and freely at events, presenting their opinion in a group, and assuming the role of a leader.
  Therefore, it is only necessary to create conditions for effective communication for them, and therefore to contribute to their formation and development as individuals.
Interviews and inquiries are not in conclusion.
 Summarizing the research work, we must state that in the schools where we have conducted pedagogical observations, the communication is carried out in a way that is not sufficient for the educational requirements, and the modern means of communication are used according to the possibilities.
 However, there is the issue of underestimating the role of communication in the work of open-minded educators in developing communication skills, as an individual in educating the learner, which must be addressed by leveraging the knowledge of the new generation of educators and conducting appropriate training for senior teachers.
And in order for the problem to be solved in the coming years, the conditions for the implementation of the Pedagogical Communication means to be effective and sufficient, it is necessary to work today, starting from school and university.
  In our opinion, the effective implementation of pedagogical communication is the basis for educating the learner as an individual, ensuring his / her development and promoting the expression of self-independence.
Today, the development of new pedagogical bases for communication in order to improve the effective organization and implementation of communication in the educational system will suffice.
  Most teachers do not have a good idea of ​​communication effectiveness կապ communication skills և skills development և.
  Therefore, from the highest levels of organization of systematic education to the general education of trainers.
