H. The last period of Tumanyan's social activity (1921-1923) is relatively little studied.
  In the framework of this article we have tried to fill H. The history of Tumanyan's social activity, a relatively little-studied period.
  By comparing and analyzing the information provided by archival documents և other sources, using historical-comparative and orthological methods, we have covered, presented and evaluated the great Armenian poet H. The last years of Tumanyan's social activity (1921-1923), which were connected with the period of establishment and establishment of the Armenian Relief Committee (AOC).
Hovhannes Tumanyan, the most genius of the Armenian people, who crystallized the best features of his character, presented his native people, worldview, worldview with the images of his literary heroes, was loved and respected, indisputable authority and genius everywhere, in all spheres.
H. Tumanyan is the pride of the Armenians, the devoted son of the Armenian nation, who served the wholeheartedly with all his heart and soul, in word and deed, in his entirety.
All Armenian poet H. Tumanyan took the first steps in engaging in socio-political activities in the late 1880s [1, p. 51].
The figure was actively engaged in public. In his later whole conscious life H. Tumanyan continued his social-political activity, selflessly and wholeheartedly served the homeland and the Armenians.
Tumanyan's abilities were more fully and comprehensively demonstrated during the critical years of World War I and the aftermath.
  Soberly assessing the situation, he directed the work of the National Bureau, effectively organized the rescue of the stateless Armenians and the elimination of the tragic situation [2, pp. 11, 3, 4, 5, 6].
 Tumanyan was a prudent figure, he imagined the historical period in a unique and insightful way; he treated the Armenian representatives of the region with great caution. in October-November.
  Deputies from Tbilissi (Georgia), Yerevan, Baku, Akhaltsikhe, New Nakhichevan, Armavir, Batumi and other Armenian-populated areas took part.
  The aim of the conference was to take advantage of the favorable situation created by the post-Balkan wars of 1912-1913 to reach a solution to the Armenian question.
  A Temporary Bureau consisting of 7 people (S. Harutyunyan, A. Khatisyan, A. Kalantar, H. Arakelyan, A. Podosyan, H. Tumanyan, N. Aghbalyan) was elected to manage the current affairs.
  During the First World War, the National Bureau organized Armenian volunteer regiments to deal with the issue of providing food and accommodation to the Armenian-Armenian migrants.
  1917 After the establishment of the Armenian National Council in October 2006, the National Bureau ceased to function.
national issues.
  1916 In the fall of 1918, Tumanyan began preparations for the establishment of the Haigazian Society, especially as chairman of the Union of Armenian Patriots, and in 1918-1919, he headed the Commission of Inquiry into the Armenian People after the World War4.
The poet is pro-national. [7]
1921 Chairman of the People's Council of Soviet Armenia People's Commissar for Military Affairs Al. At the invitation of Myasnikyan, the poet comes to Yerevan to establish a committee to help Armenia.
A number of public figures, prominent intellectuals concerned about the deplorable state of the country in 1921. They apply to the People's Committee of the Armenian SSR to create an organization with a social basis, to develop Armenology in 21917. On April 22, in "Horizon" newspaper, H. Tumanyan writes about the goals of the Haigazian company. The company, which will be called Haykazyan,'s supposedly goal, is to form an "Armenian Academy", to put the Armenian University in the most comprehensive study of our world, our old and new life, our literature and art, its history and modern life, safe artists and writers.
  At the same time, the Haykazyan Company will follow the activities of our cultural institutions when they need support. ”
31917-1918 There were "Patriotic Unions" in almost all Armenian-populated communities and colonies, which were engaged in helping, repatriating, collecting donations, negotiating with various organizations, and supporting the needy.
  In order to centralize these works with purposeful and correct organization in 1918. The "Union of Armenian Patriots" was established in Tbilissi (Georgia) in March 1945. Tumanyan was elected a member of its council.
41918 At the sitting of the Central Council of the Armenian Patriotic Unions chaired by Hovhannes Tumanyan in Tbilissi (Georgia) on October 31, 2010, it was decided to elect a commission to draw up a memorandum by the Armenian people at the Paris Peace Conference.
 The all-Armenian poet is elected chairman of the "World War Investigation Commission" established on November 21.
 The commission, headed by him, carries out heroic work in a short period of time: collects, groups, brings to law a huge amount of factual material, provides them to the delegation of the Peace Conference to be convened in Paris.
and with the request of the thousands of victims of the famine, which, first of all, should have provided the means to save the people from famine and epidemic.
 1921 On September 15, the People's Council of the Armenian SSR adopted a decree on the establishment of the Armenian Relief Committee (AOC) [8; 9; 10, p. 21].
  The founding members of the AOC are 77 people, who were prominent state and public figures, doctors, prominent intellectuals. Abeghyan, Al. Bekzadyan, S. TerGabrielyan, D. Demirchyan, A. Yerznkyan, H. Tumanyan, S. Kasyan, R. Melikyan, St. Malkhasyants, Nar-Dos, M. Saryan և others.
 The statute (charter) of the AOC is approved by the 1921 Council of the Armenian SSR September 15 [11].
On September 20, at the last sitting of the founding meeting of the AOC, Al. Papovyan read the circular edited by the presidency, and H. Tumanyan presents the call edited by his own presidency, in which the following is said in particular. "Armenian people scattered all over the world by the decree of (28) Listen!
He is calling you from the Armenian Relief Committee.
The meeting of Armenian figures and literary critics convened in the capital of Armenia invites you.
And perhaps you have never heard their voices so united.
And such great advice for a second.
Listen.
After centuries of struggle, Free and Independent Armenia is rising with great effort from the turmoil of catastrophic waves and catastrophes of the world war.
… Now, listen, Armenians, wherever you are, from Europe to America, from Egypt to India,, everywhere, listen to the voice of the homeland that calls you, hurry to help with everything you can, so that tomorrow you can have what you dream of tomorrow. I for centuries - free late homeland "5 [12; 13; 14, pp. 411-413].
H. Tumanyan is offered the position of committee chairman.
He asks to be released to engage in literature, 5 The Call published in the "Red Star" newspaper undergoes some editorial changes; it does not differ significantly from the Call published in the ELJ.
But walking through the streets of Yerevan, seeing heavy and cruel images, the poet, according to Leo, says: "When a people starves in the streets, they must leave everything, forget everything, go to save it" [15, p. 104; 16, p. 253].
Thus, Tumanyan became the chairman of the AOC.
 This was the last thing Tumanyan managed to do for the homeland.
  Thus, the first honorary chairman of the AOC General Board was the great Armenian poet Hovhannes Tumanyan, who, however, living in Tbilissi (Georgia), did not have the opportunity to assume the direct leadership of the AOC.
 The direct leadership of the AOC is entrusted to the Armenian SSR Land Committee A. Yerznkyan.
 At the founding meeting of AOC A. Yerznkyan was unanimously elected Chairman of the AOC-Central Board [17; 10, page 22].
Through the efforts of Drael Tumanyan in 1921. A branch of the AOC was opened in Tbilissi (Georgia) in October 1945 [14, p. 665], "the immortal people of Lori contributed with selfless devotion to the establishment of the AOC and the recovery of Armenia."
  1922 Local branches of the AOC are established in Moscow, Baku, Tehran, then in Batumi, Kiev, Kharkov, Odessa, Tsaritsyn (now Volgograd), in the North Caucasus and Central Asia, in almost all Armenian-populated cities in the USSR, France, Greece , In Germany, in the United States, in a number of Latin American cities, in the Middle East, in Iran (Tabriz), in Egypt, in Algeria, and elsewhere.
  The revenues of the AOC came from donations, membership fees, publications, wills and sources.
The periodicals of the AOC and other publications played a significant role in uniting the Armenians around the Diaspora.
1924–1925 - Homeland - H. was huge. Tumanyan's contribution to raising the prestige of the AOC and ensuring great trust in the Armenians, especially the Diaspora Armenians, in the AOC.
  The genius poet and great philanthropist Tumanyan, who was already in Tbilissi (Georgia), had an unhealthy opportunity - direct work, however, H. During Tumanyan's presidency, the AOC provided the majority of the population of the AOC with the task of establishing a multi-leadership system for the Soviet establishment.
  Within the framework of the implementation of the goals set by the Diaspora, it helps the hungry population of Soviet Armenia, supports construction, strengthens relations with the Armenian-Armenian communities of Armenian deportees scattered around the world, unites them around the homeland.
Immediately after its establishment, the AOC Central Committee immediately set out to establish contacts with the Diaspora Armenian communities through circulars sent to the Armenian communities of the republics, urging the AOC to help the motherland as soon as possible.
  For that purpose in 1921. In the fall, the AOC organizes H. Tumanyan JE. Taghianosyan's business trip to K. Constantinople.
  1921 in October H. Tumanyan writes a letter to Av. Isahakyan and A. Chopanyan, urging them to participate in the work of establishing AOC branches in Europe [10, pp. 23, 27].
 H. Tumanyan acted with great enthusiasm, was optimistic and confident in the effective activities of the AOC.
 This is especially evident from the following lines by Tumanyan. "It is a significant phenomenon that, independently of each other and unaware, such bodies [ie branches of the AOC - A. M.] come forward և in our colonies.
  This means living Armenianness.
He is alive and strong.
  From Yerevan to distant colonies he moves to the homeland.
No matter how many obstacles and obstacles, no matter how many difficulties and obstacles he encounters on the way, he will reach his goal.
He will build his free and abundant land on the free land of Armenia, he will develop his national genius on the Armenian plateau, he will tell his word to the world "[11; 18, pp. 431-432; 14, p. 415].
H. During Tumanyan's presidency, the AOC provided significant assistance to scientific and educational centers, such as the public library and museums.
Contracts were signed with science, literature, artists, who in their works were to present the theaters, universities, various spheres of Soviet Armenia in order to acquaint the world with the achievements of Armenia being restored [19, pp. 203-205; 20, pp. 169170].
1920s [10, p. 89] Provides medical care to repatriates [10, p. 89]. construction, drying up of the swamps of the Ararat valley [10, pp. 49-51].
In Armenia, how the pre-school institutions did not escape the attention of the AOC.
New buildings and kindergartens, clothes վելFood was provided to them [19, p. 202].
Furnished to be built in 1922. The presidency of the AOC is given the budget for the renovation of schools in the villages of Imanshalu (now the village of Mkhchyan) and Ulukhanlu (now Masisqaghak) in the Zangibasar region, asking for 1816 rubles.
  The request is satisfied, the schools of the above-mentioned villages are being renovated.
1922–1923 The AOC regularly provided assistance in the form of clothes and stationery to the schools of Ashtarak and Oshakan, and supported the construction of a school in the village of Kosh.
1923–1924 The AOC provides a large number of goods and financial aid to the library, Yerevan University, adult workshop, orphans, the poor peasantry of Aparan, Zangezur and Karabakh light departments, and other educational and cultural institutions [23; 10, p. 47].
  The central board of the AOC sought to provide the Public 6 Named after the village of Evjilar (now Arazap, Armavir region of the Republic of Armenia).
  The canal originates from the Araks River and irrigates mainly the lands of the Etchmiadzin region of Armavir region.
7 The canal starts from Akhuryan river, near Kaps village of Shirak region of RA.
  It was built in 1922-1925.
 Irrigates about 9.8 thousand in Shirak region. land.
  The opening ceremony of the canal (June 21, 1925) was attended by the famous Norwegian explorer, scientist, public figure, great friend of the Armenian people Fridtjof Nansen.
to support the Armenians of Karabakh within the borders.
 It is noteworthy that the AOC, in fact, considered Karabakh an integral part of Soviet Armenia; it provided aid to Karabakh schools.
  1920 It is clear from the minutes of the meeting of the General Board of the AOC held on November 10, 2006 that a large amount of stationery was provided to meet the needs of Karabakh schools [19, p. 198].
Thus, H. is significant. Tumanyan's contribution to the effective implementation of the AOC goals.
 H. During Tumanyan's presidency, the AOC, within the framework of its goals, carried out activities for the needy population to purchase and distribute food, clothes, medicine, other basic necessities, strengthen ties between the Diaspora and the Homeland, repatriate Soviet cultural initiatives, repatriate repatriates.
In fact, the AOC has greatly contributed to the recovery of Armenia, the revitalization and development of economic, scientific, educational and cultural life, has contributed to the creation of new jobs, the expansion of construction work, overcoming hunger and epidemics, the spread of literacy, preservation and development of culture.
Construction in Armenia. Tumanyan, ignoring his unhealthy and weak condition, continued to help the homeland.
 Throughout his conscious life, the great humanist remained faithful to his own message, proving by his creation and behavior that the work is immortal.
  Yes, he will live by his work forever.
 He was immortalized by his cheerful and attentive attitude, spreading light and warmth everywhere until the last breath, endowing it with light and kindness, comforting ("shout") those around him.
  All in all, Tumanyan belongs to the whole humanity, he is a genius who has no sense.
 He came to Man, numbered and created mankind and humanity, and Man went pure.
