  The well-being of the population of Armenia largely depends on the availability of plant resources, which are strategic resources for the country.
  From this point of view, biodiversity, having high characteristics ensuring the stability of ecosystems, is at the same time a precondition for the economic development of the country.
  Endemic wildlife conditions the development of agricultural areas such as crop production, pharmaceuticals, and some branches of the light food industry.
The beneficial properties of wild plants growing in proven areas are obviously high, due to which their collection is increasing year by year [1].
in mountainous, orland landscapes.
 In Shirak region, in order to study the diversity of growing plants (herbs) of the Karkachun River downstream, to find out the importance of wild herbs in the population of the area, as well as to study the collection of herbs by the population. Evaluation.
Features: From early spring to late autumn, many wild-growing herbs were collected from the study area, whose populations are shrinking, widening, decreasing, increasing depending on the growing conditions near or far from the Karkachun River (detailed in our map մերexplanatory part).
The most significant tributary of the Akhuryan in the territory of the republic is the Karkachu (Kagrano) river (in the upper streams it is also called Mantash before the Artik water tributary), the average annual flow of which is relatively small compared to the size of its catchment area (does not exceed 55 million m3 per year).
 Karkachun starts from the north-western slopes of Aragats massif (3150 m above sea level) և Gharibjanyan և Shirak region մոտ Akhuryan river flows near the border of Getk villages, 115 km away from the estuary.
 The lands of the lower stream of Karkachun river are meadow-shallow, medium eroded soils.
  Frosty weather here in winter.
  Different plant species grow at different times of the year in the lands of the area - different well-known Armenian medicinal plants.
The plants of the area are quite numerous in the summer, which is conditioned by many factors, such as air temperature, "relative humidity, light rain, slope, etc." [2] in autumn (July-September).
Collect և We have studied 9-10 species of wild herbs, which are mostly collected վումUsed. These are: creeping thyme - Thymus serpyllum L., nettle - Urtica dioicaL. Plantago major L., Achillea millofolium L., Mentha longifolia (L.) Huds.
 [11]
In studying the plant species collected by the population, which make up the diversity of the area, we have taken into account the fact that some species of herbs are of great interest among the population of the region, in our opinion, they are quite important, as the population gathers plants from early autumn to late autumn.
The map of plant populations in the lower reaches of the Karkachun River. The map shows the spatial arrangement of plant populations.
  The creeping river (Thymus serpyllum L.) (2nd marked on the map) blooms from June to July, especially under the bridge on the dividing line between the Gharbjanyan and Getk villages.
  Approaching the territory of Azatangyugh, they spread in small, fragmented populations.
 The mentioned 3rd herb is a bitter ocher (Artemisa absinthium L.), which blooms in July-August և is spread in the landscapes along the lower reaches of the Karkachun River.
  The 4th herb is a herbal pharmacy (Teraxacum officenale Welg.). It blooms in May-June, the fruits ripen in August-August.
  Autumn blossom blooms again.
  In the area it is found in autumn with more hops.
  Khatutik populations in moderately moist soils.
  The 5th is common in chicory (Cichoriumintybos L.). It grows on the banks of the river, far from the adjacent wheat fields.
  The 6th is the common oak (Onopordon acanthium L.), blooms from June to September, grows throughout the area, with scattered populations.
 The 7th is the ox tongue (Plantago major L.).
 In the area of ​​Karkachunget, there are medium-sized plant species, it blooms in May-June, the fruits ripen in summer.
  The plant grows in this area with scatterbrain.
  The 8th is the Achilleamillofolium L., which blooms from June to September, the seeds ripen in September.
  9th Mint longifolia - Mentha longifolia (L.) Huds. which grows in relatively moist soils near the river.
The importance of herbs in the collection of large herbs among the population of the area.
  For that purpose, we compiled questionnaires, attributing the area's surveys to the sociological population, and drew attention to the small-herb meeting to evaluate, organize, and analyze the data collected as a result of the collection of plant species, their impact and effectiveness among the population.
100 residents of 2 villages (Gharibjanyan-Getk) were surveyed by us.
 The results of the questionnaires revealed that the majority of the villagers collect and use: 70% - mint, 12% - chamomile, nettle, turmeric, excess, 15% - ox tongue, twig, and 3% - mentioned such herbs that are rare in the area (popularly called ghantapa ա maremkhot).
Some results of the questionnaire. Figure 11. “90% of the villagers who asked the question what herbs from the area answered: mint, 2% - millet, 4% - spruce, 4% - nettle.
Attributing herbs to the population of the area, we drew attention to another issue: the collection of herbs and their proper protection by the population.
While organizing meetings with the local population և schoolchildren, we made sure that they were familiar with the experience of using the area's wild plants as a remedy for various diseases to their family members.
  Many of them told us about the miracles of different plants through the examples of diseases, but most of them were not aware of the correct organization of the rules of collecting and drying plants.
From the meetings with the population of the area and the schoolchildren of the two neighboring villages, we were convinced that the residents mostly pick herbs by the roots, because, according to them, it is easier, especially when collecting mint.
                                                                     Figure 2 Conclusions և Recommendations.
  The wild plants growing wild in the Karkachun Getistor stream are of great economic importance to the population of the area.
  However, by being subjected to irregular and illegal gatherings, the opportunities for growth and its necessity are ignored.
    Since plants are not inexhaustible in orphanage, valuable wild herbs must be kept under separate control.
 The "Red Book" of the International Union for Conservation of Natural Resources states that 15% of the plant specimens of our republic are in danger of extinction.
Taking into account the difficult social situation of the population, we find that by organizing special protection against the plants of the Karkachun River downstream, the local self-government bodies can conclude a contract with the pharmaceutical aseptic procurement organizations of our republic, collecting the
Procurement of processed medicinal raw materials, processing of herbs is one of the important sources, which will provide the growing demand for the production of medicines in the country.
Nutrition of bioactive materials. The plants of the area can be used for making refreshing "medicinal teas", which are in great demand in Armenia and abroad, so for interested organizations, the plants of the area can gather useful plants in the area, even with small production raw materials.
այել Intelligent and versatile service նպատակով նպատակով In order to properly maintain the drying rules of the wild-growing herb collection առաջարկումWe recommend that կառույց guidebooks, cards (as is customary in many countries) provide information on plant conservation, especially during the collection period.
  This process can be organized through the Shirak regional administration, involving relevant specialists, including specialists of the Department of Geography, Biology and Chemistry of the Yerevan State University, students who are concerned about the issue.
