Ani, the capital of Bagratuni wealth, has been and remains the subject of interest of civilized humanity with its ruins, without exaggeration.
  Medieval Armenian historians, starting from the Golden Age, spoke about Ani.
  Among those narrators are Yeghishe, Ghazar Parpetsi, Stepanos Asoghik, Aristakes Lastivertsi, Samvel Anetsi, Matteos Urhayetsi, Mkhitar Ayrivanetsi, Vardan Arceltsi, Kirakos Gandzaketsi Jurishner.
  Aristakes Lastivertsi rightly calls Ani a "space-famous city".
Ani, which has been in ruins since the 18th century, has become a subject of interest for European and Russian travelers.
to study.
  It is enough to remember the English traveler Sir Robert Kerporter, who visited Ani in 1817, and in the voluminous travel book published in London in 1821, speaks with admiration of Ani.
  The volumetric volume is dedicated to King George IV of England.
 This book is very relevant because at the beginning of the XIX century Armenia was under the rule of Persia, while the Europeans continued to recognize it as Armenia.
 Today, Anin is located in Turkey and is presented as a Turkish cultural heritage.
  In response, the English traveler writes: "We saw one of the palaces of the kings of Armenia" [6-173].
  At the same time, he adds that he has never seen such magnificent architecture of the X-XI centuries as he saw in Ani, and parallel to that century, neither abroad, nor in the most famous Catholic churches in England [6-173].
The greatest role in the falsification of historical ideology belongs to the French-Armenian Marie Felicite Brosse, who from 1860 to 1861. He published the two-volume work "The Ruins of Ani".
The greatest scholar of Ani was the famous Armenologist Nikoghayos Mar, who in 1893-1917. He was engaged in the excavations of Ani և is considered to be the number one aniologist.
 Her observations are summarized in the book "Ani" written in Russian.
Marr refers to both Armenian and foreign sources written about Ani before him, leaving nothing out. He singles out Jond Alishan and his work "Shirak" among all the names Ani researched.
  This was the first monumental work of Alishani historical-geographical nature, which was published in 1881.
  It was followed by "Sisuan" (1885), "Ayrarat" (1890), "Sisakan" (1893).
  Unlike Mar, Alishan had not seen Ani, as he had done Greater Armenia and Cilicia, but with a detailed study he presents Ani's past accurately.
 He writes that after Brose, no historical independent research of Ani was created, or almost nothing was done in that direction.
According to the insight, Alishani's work from the "Shirak" historical-geographical Mekhitarists of Venice was a great impetus for the public recognition of the powerful Ani.
 One third of the book is dedicated to Ani [3 - 20].
Marr says that "Shirak" long-suffering is written with the longing and romanticism of the deported Armenians.
  In all cases, the foreign-Armenian scholar has widely used Alishan's work, giving him unscientific confidence.
  According to Nerses Shnorhali, the three vowels of the word "Ani" allegorically mean the Trinity of God. Your beauty is amazing, To bring a triple letter. To advise the Trinity, To always worship you ... [3-232] Vardan Arceltsi carefully explained the Unword.
It is known that one of the temples of Ani, now preserved, was built by the efforts of Tigran Honents, an Armenian, but the Turks not only keep silent about it, but also do not consider it Armenian.
 The following fact is very relevant today: Mar's work "Ani". "The Armenian merchant world (XIII century) had its brilliant representative in the hands of Prince Tigran from the Honents dynasty" [8-63].
Marr gives interesting facts about Vahram Pahlavuni, the 11th century ruler of Armenia (unknown - 1045 BC, buried in Marmashen monastery). "One hundred and fifty years before Queen Tamara, Georgian soldiers sang songs about the exploits of the Armenian military commander Vahram Pahlavuni, presenting his exploits as a demigod" [8-63].
In Alishan's book "Shirak" we are interested in the poetic passages, which sometimes as mourning, sometimes as pride, artistically presented the destruction of Ani's glory.
Alishan և All the Mkhitaryans were proud of Khachatur Abovyan's person and work.
  In the novel "Wounds of Armenia" by the great enlightener, Ani is presented with her magnificent ruins.
Aghasi, robbed of the temples of Ani, feels more pain for the unfortunate present of Armenia and when he leaves Ani, he says his verse lament, a part of which Alishan quotes in the book "Shirak". My heart, I will gladly give you my soul, That I may leave my body in Him.
Eyes, sneeze, whether in Balkh or not, you will not see the blessed land of Anu. In Balkh, if I die in this grief, my land will not be lost ... Even if my body is under a stone, in your lap, I do not need paradise ... [3- 104], [1-201-202] Another line of poetry used by Alishan is called "Song on the city of Ani, in the color of Peyat".
[3-105] This is a bayat.
  Abovyan widely used this type of literature. "I wrote Bayatik with the thought that in the chunk mejlis, they say such things on Turkish bread. A good Armenian should say it in Armenian so that the language becomes sweeter little by little ”[2-189].
Stepanos Malkhasyan considers the word bayat in the "Armenian Explanatory Dictionary" to be Persian-Arabic, which is a sad way of Oriental music, a loud lament with a crying voice [7-323].
  As for the fate of Ani, because, as Nerses Shnorhali writes in the line of "Lamentation of Edesia", it is very appropriate for the verse. But I invite you to this, my eastern city of Ani, if you are attached to my voice, it is not a consolation to me. [9-84, 88] The verse published by Alishan is a lament of a monk who either saw the ruins of Ani or heard about them և, of course, Nerses Shnorhali's "Lament" was written Under the influence of "Edesio" strip.
It is emphasized in the lament of the monk that Ani was "a garden in the flowery Shirak field", and later became a "robber lair" [3-105].
In "Shirak" research, Alishan presents Ani's splendor ց the shocking impressions of the voyeurs of other travelers to Tavernier, Ker-Porter, Bore, Texie, Brose and others.
  Travelers are so impressed with the ruins of Ani that their testimonies turn into a unique thought and prose poem.
  Let's bring three of them.
  Hamilton writes of the architectural art of Ani that, passing through the main gate of the city, they saw the city spread on all sides with stone walls, that the walls of the buildings were not as numerous as they thought, but they were very impressive; they saw an almost terrible Christian city.
The city had a unique architecture, as it is known in modern Europe.
  The ruins were in almost the same condition as those left by those who destroyed them eight centuries ago. [3-106]
 On November 4, 1837, a British Englishman, Wilhelm, described Ani with such grim images, saying that it seemed as if no one ever entered the once crowded streets of the Armenian capital.
  A solitary shepherd stood by the half-ruined buildings, while a small flock of mountain goats waited under the ruined arches of the nearby baths.
 The shepherd and his scent are very visible on the surrounding desolate landscape, worthy of the brush of Salvador Rosa as a painting.
  The appearance of the Aniawers was a sad thought.
  When I saw that desert city, I was deeply moved by my impressions.
 The abandoned churches were a reminder that a mighty Christian nation had been annihilated by the onslaught of the barbaric barbarians of Asia at the behest of Christian criminals.
  The remnants of the building depicted loneliness, և the human eye was looking for a hint of life [3-106].
The French traveler Boreihusher about Ani is also influential.
 He writes that he passed through the old door of Ani with great longing, which was festively opened for the begging citizens, but an emptiness resembling a grave was opened in front of his eyes.
  There were traces of stone blows on the walls, "sculptures and inscriptions of buildings".
  Everything in that city seemed like a unique novelty and freshness.
It was as if the city had been attacked yesterday, և the winner was taking the robbery.
  The growing grass, scorched by the sun, covered the ruins lying on the ground.
  The shepherd was watching his flock, և in some city, he seemed cursed.
  On the western side, the royal palace, pierced, destroyed, bent, was bent over Tsakhkadzor, which was dry and deserted.
  On the south side, on the plateau, the citadel with ruined walls was rising, on the east side, the roar of Akhuryan could be heard, the river was sounding the mourning of nature in the world with a rocky bottom.
  The lone stranger, wandering alone in the ruins, asked the stones to find out the places he had seen, the ethnic group he had once lived there.
  He was afflicted with sadness because of his indifference to his brother, a human being from the ruins, because man should be treated with peace and gentleness [3-107-108].
Alishan reports that after Ani invaded the Russian Empire, some churches were renovated and monks were established in the houses of God.
  Hovhannes Kyurkchyan, a resident of Tbilissi (Georgia), painted the walls, buildings and inscriptions of Ani for many months and published them with special notes.
 His companion, Hovakim Geghamyan, seeing all this, changed the words of Julius Caesar's famous report to the Roman Senate: "I came, I saw, I won", with his brief report, "Come, see, mourn" [3-109].
Archimandrite Alexander wrote a simple but heartfelt lament about the city of Ani, in which the Armenian boy draws attention to the sad present of Ani, hoping that future generations will bring Ani out of that situation. Ani lives in the city of Ani, saying, Mi la la, mi la. If they say it is not enough, let it remain.
Ah, when shall I hear? Do not weep, do not weep. I am burning with sorrow in the heat, I do not have a faithful man, To come to misery, to say nothing. "Do not cry, do not cry."
 [3-109] To these simple lines Alishan adds another passage. He does not know when those sad lines were written.
  It is somewhat clear that the emigrants of Ani found themselves in Romania and suffered the impossible sufferings, constantly remembering their native Ani.
 [3-109] Without naming Aristakes Lastivertsi, J. Alishann quotes from his story the anthem of the former glory of the city of Ani, created in prose by Old Armenian.
  It is the following content of "History" translated by Aristakes Lastivertsi, translated by Vazgen Gorgyan. "Once upon a time, this country was opened to travelers as if it were a dense, green, leafy, fruitful, beautiful and happy paradise, because the princes sat on the throne with a cheerful face, and in front of them, the song of spring-like flowerbeds and the soulful love of other people. They were filled with joy and gladness, the elders sat there, adorned with honorable and glorious waves, and the mothers, embracing the children, weeping with motherly mercy, forgetting the sad time of labor pains from infatuation, were always rejoicing with their new-feathered cubs like doves. 110].
This glorious picture of worldly life is accompanied by the glorious state of sovereignty and the description of the magnificent churches.
The former luxurious and luxurious condition of Ani ագա further ruined appearance is presented in another line referred to by Alishan, which is called "Andorrank Anvoy".
Ղ. Alishan speaks of a church on the occasion of Ani, the canopy of which is supported by four pillars, beautiful and graceful [3-111-112].
The Gentiles say that on August 5 or 20, tears flowed from one of the right-hand pillars like tears, and they even saw fires in the same place, causing the animals to not approach the ruined church.
 Alishanna testifies that a monk named Garabed saw with his own eyes the red sticky substance flowing from the pillar, which he touched with his hand.
According to the eyewitness, there is a relic of a saint hidden in the cap of the pillar, the red material flows from there [3-112].
According to Movses Khorenatsi in "Armenian History", the unknown author of the rather extensive work "Andorrank Anu" is well aware of the historical past of Armenia, Ani's ruined state with difficult historical episodes, starting with the miraculous ancestor Hayk. His temple ... [3-111] The enemies who attacked the Armenians are mentioned: the Persians, the Scythians, but it seems that the cross was forever guarded by the Armenians. And where the cross guards forever, He is forever shameless.
 [3-111] Armenia was attacked by the Assyrians of Babylon. See Banel and Assyria ... [3-112] Even Christian countries like Athens were not part of Armenia.
 Lucky to move the capital of the Armenians from Dvin to the glorious Shirak. Before leaving the ascent of Dvin, the Baghdad bakery in Shirak ... [3-112] The capital of Armenia becomes Ani, which is proclaimed all over the world.
[3-112] Ani is rich both with its buildings and its happy inhabitants.
But the enemy is attacking the ancient Armenia, which had become "Shahistanats's Shahistan". Suddenly the enemy's robbery and robbery rush. and Van ... [3-113] Ani was among the defenders of the beautiful Aytsemnik, whom Alishan calls the "mother of courage" [3-110].
The author of the line emphasizes that Ani had a thousand temples and many palaces.
  He considers Ani to be Torgom's energetic grandson, who fell from his splendor and glorified her eyes with tears, և she became a stepmother.
  Ani's grief is shared by the Akhuryan River flowing near the city.
  The strip ends optimistically.
The domes of the Armenian Ani will get a sky-high sky again, the lily will blossom again, and the Armenian will greet the new Ani. Your eyes are glorious. Elder Mkhtamrunch.
Put your hand on the slope of the Armenian… Here is the dome above. Behold, the lily will stand. I will greet you, Nor Ani.
 [3-114] A source of inspiration for the accepted poets.
  The reason is the realization of the fact of statehood of the American poet from the homeland, which prevails in the building of the country's capital.
In this sense, Ani is one of the most praised capitals in Armenian literature and glorified verses and poems.
 The construction of Ani meant the prosperous state of the Bagratuni kingdom.
The first significant poetic praise of the city of Ani was given to us by Nerses Shnorhali in "Lamentation of Edesio".
  Of course, Shnorhali was familiar with Aristakes Lastivertsi's "History", in which there is a prose poet dedicated to Ani, the fact that Anineghel was a cosmopolitan city.
  The important thing is that Lastivertsin witnessed the decline of Ani's fame.
  Giving such a great place in the history of the capital of Ani in the "Shirak" volume, Alishan aimed to infuse the Armenian generation with patriotic impulses, so that they would think of restoring the Armenian statehood, giving the next generation a new Ani as a guarantee of the Armenian people's survival.
  In this respect, the commandments concerning Ani in "Shirak" are always modern.
