Personal development is not possible without social contact.
Only through social interaction և practical activities the child's speech and mental processes develop [4].
  Speech helps to develop mental processes such as consciousness, imagination, action planning, logical "figurative thinking", of course, communication.
  It is one of the most powerful mental processes of a person (VP Belinin 2003).
Relevance of the topic.
  It is known that in the child's personality system a special place is occupied by the development of sound, sound, which is closely connected with the mental development of a person.
Disorders of grammatical, fine motor skills are a serious obstacle to the development of a child's speech at preschool age.
  Speech development in upper pre-school age is a fast indicator of school attendance.
  Speech disorders concern not only professionals (speech therapist, psychologist, educator), but also people around the child.
The aim of our study is to study և the most effective ways and tricks of working as a speech therapist with preschool children with developmental delays և.
Problems related to the topic  Analyze ել study the data of professional literature,  introduce the features of speech developmental delay in speech therapy work,  identify the patterns that contribute to the development of children's speech.
We used the methods of conversation, interview, viewing, bread survey for our studies.
It is a complex functional system.
  Man is born of a wordless resource.
  The main means of communication between parents and relatives during the first months of a child's life are emotional outbursts.
  Each period you had a role in the development of speech, without them the development of speech can be disrupted.
  During the first months of life, the child produces sounds "unconsciously", gradually preparing the articulatory apparatus for speech.
From 9-10 months to 1-1.2 years old, the first words appear, which can be "correct" with "flaws", maintaining the general syllable structure and rhythm.
 The child is able to pronounce words with simplification.
The word uttered by the child at this stage refers to the whole situation. With the same word he can describe the object, the action, his attitude, the feeling.
  That is, in the initial period the word is ambiguous, besides, it also expresses the whole thought (word-sentence).
  This period coincides with the new stage of mental development, when the child begins to walk.
 The active manipulation activity of the hands develops, the thumb and forefingers begin to participate in the wrist grip.
  There are some differences between boys and girls. The first words of girls appear at the age of 8-9 months, boys - at the age of 11-12 months [1].
The reasons for the delay in speech development are the social factor, which includes the child's micro-social environment, ie the family, where the child's speech development is not stimulated, the child's active speech environment is not provided, the child's emotional communication is present. communication և etc.
The attention of these children is unstable.
  The game action is not purposeful.
  Children with this problem mainly have poorly developed hand movements, such as grasping, tearing, pulling (T. A. Dateshidze 2004).
Sometimes a child can pronounce a syllable or fragments of a word instead of a word.
 Basically, their words are not expressive.
Sometimes the words of the children may not be understood by the other person.
  If there is a lack of speech at all, it does not matter, there is a certain vocabulary in the child's passive vocabulary, which he has accumulated through his verbal experience.
The peculiarity of ADF is that when a child utters a word with an incorrect sound structure, it is reinforced in this way.
  Later there will be difficulties in corrective work.
 Using the ontogenesis of speech development, especially in children with ADHD, we conducted a self-survey to find out to what extent parents are aware of the specifics of speech development and what causes them.
The survey involved 16 parents of children with speech retardation և 20 speech therapists working with children with ADHD.
68.8% of the parents participating in the survey are aware of the peculiarities of speech development, and 31.3% are not.
The age of the children participating in the survey varied between 3-5 years old.
  50% of them attend kindergarten, 38% - development center, 6% other clubs, and the other 6% do not attend any institution.
 70% of parents say that due to time they spend very little time with their children, and the other 30% - 2-3 hours a day.
The chart below shows that 50% of children spend most of the day in front of "similar appliances" on the phone, TV, 40% spend 4-5 hours, and the other 10% say they do not use these appliances ( diagram 1).
Chart 1. Child employment during the day by technical means as a percentage.
75% of children do not communicate with their peers, and in 25% of cases they do.
Chart 2. Peculiarities of communication of children in percentage.
Analyzing the results, we can say that the children said their first words after 3 years old.
  75% of parents turn to a speech therapist-psychologist to understand why their child's speech is late, and the other 25% did not turn to any specialist.
The parents mention that the main disturbing symptom is the lack of speech of the child.
78.9% of speech therapists did not experience speech delay, combined with other disorders, and 21.1% did.
  In 90% of cases, this problem occurs in boys և rarely in girls.
  In case of this problem, the specialists are in favor of team work, they consider that it is necessary to cooperate with a psychologist.
Development Using teamwork, we should mention that the role of the facilitator is 95% of the problem in overcoming the respondents.
