At present, in the context of high rates of tourism development, there is an activation of inbound and outbound tourism flows, which are mostly directed towards nature.
  With this in mind, we plan to assess the recreational-tourism opportunities of water resources in the three northern regions of Armenia within the framework of the program.
(Shirak, Lori, Tavush) The water resources of the study area are mainly river, therefore the work done is mainly aimed at the study of the river network and the discovery of tourism and recreational opportunities of the rivers.
The rivers in the study area are mainly mountainous, although some rivers are diverse in different parts of their flow.
  Debed has a mountainous-plain nature, Dzoraget ակը Pambak has a lowland-mountainous nature.
  Akhuryan is similar.
In general, the river network in the study area is more developed in the Kura basin, which is distinguished by humid climatic conditions and deep fragmentation.
  Due to the arid climatic conditions in Akhuryan basin, the river network is relatively poorly developed.
  For the best assessment of the river valleys, we have examined the oh-valley eggs, as it is possible for the passage of tourists.
  Two types of river valleys have been distinguished: U-adz և V-adz.
Fig. 1 Typological map of river valleys of Northern Armenia (Shirak, Lori, Tavush).
  Currently, there are many transport routes through the river valleys, besides, the river valleys themselves are of interest for tourists; the most pedestrian routes pass through the river valleys.
  At the same time, due to geo-morphological features, it is an object for some types of tourism (mountaineering, rock climbing, extreme tourism, etc.).
The ArcGIS 10.4.1 software system was used to compile the cross-sections of the river valleys in the study area.
  The numerical model of the relief formed by the SRTM30 satellite was used as the digital basis for the relief of the transverse sections of the river valleys.
 The ArcGIS software environment uses the 3D Analyst toolkit to create cross-sections of river valleys, through which the main sections are made.
  The main points of conducting the extracts shown in Figure 2.
Fig. 2 Extension sections of the river valleys of Northern Armenia A total of 54 extension sections were drilled.
It is difficult to present the recreational-tourism opportunities of the entire hydrographic network of Northern Armenia in one article, so, as an example, we have selected separate sections of the three largest rivers, for which an assessment of recreational-tourism resources has been made.
Fig. 3 The section of the Akhuryan river valley in the Gorshaberdite section Figure 3 shows the widening section of the Akhuryan river valley in the Gorshaberd section (see Fig. 2, № 1).
  The analysis of the latter allows to say that it is suitable for both transport and pedestrian tourist routes.
The maximum depth of the valley in this section reaches 120 m, and the fall of the river at 5 km is 43 m, which makes it possible to carry out Class I rafting 1.
 However, the most convenient time for rafting is spring, when the river starts to flood.
 The latter begins in the first ten days of April and ends in June.
  In general, the maximum flow capacity of the river is 70-82 days [2, page 100], which is more than favorable for rafting.
This part of Akhuryan river valley has favorable conditions for mountaineering. The slope of the right valley is 69 °, and the left one is 61 ° in the valley.
 Eco-trails can be constructed in the lower parts of the valley, parallel to the river.
For rock climbing.
1 There are two rafting classification systems: international Russian.
  Our assessment is based on the international classification [1].
Fig. 4 Pambak river valley section near Vanadzor Figure 4 shows the Pambak valley below Vanadzor և (№ 30).
  The latter has relatively gentle slopes, which are almost completely forested.
Fig. 5 Aghst ահով river valley section The slope of the left slope of the river valley near Vanadzor exceeds 40 °, which makes it difficult for pedestrians to move, but it can be used for rock climbing.
  The slope of the right slope of the valley reaches 40 °, it is partially sloping, which facilitates pedestrian crossing.
  There are favorable conditions for rafting.
 The fall of the river at 7.72 km is 223 m, the slope is 28.9 ‰.
  These indicators meet the requirements for II rafting.
In contrast to Akhuryan, the flood period is relatively short, averaging 65 days [3, p. 185], when the river flow reaches 109 m3 / s.
    In general, it can be said that the Pambak river valley in the middle stream is favorable for the development of several types of tourism.
An analysis was made with the same indicators for the Aghstet River valley, the extended section of which is shown in Fig. In 5.
  In this part the river stands out with a wide valley, the slopes are gently sloping, almost completely forested.
The river valley is suitable for both pedestrian routes and electric communication.
  Both right and left slopes allow climbing for non-sporting tourist groups.
  The fall of the river in the section at 4.66 km is 47 m, and the slope is 11 ‰, which allows to carry out class II rafting.
  In contrast to Akhuryan և Pambak, the overflow of Aghst lasts longer, which is conditioned by the large area occupied by forests in the river basin [4, p. 70].
   Aghst ունի has quite a wide area in this section, which is very convenient for organizing rafting during spring floods.
  The most favorable period for the organization of the latter is spring, when the Aghst flood begins.
  Among the rivers compared to the scope of this article, the Aghst overflow capacity is the longest, about 120 days, which is more than favorable for the organization of rafting.
For the tourism-recreational assessment of the three river valleys, we used a four-point scale, where 0 points was provided in case the given resource was missing.
The maximum score was 3.
  The tourism assessment is given in Table 1.
Taking into account the fact that the rivers of Northern Armenia are mainly of I և II category from the point of view of rafting, the duration of the flood was the basis for the assessment.
  This is due to the calculation of the profitability of tourism companies.
 Therefore, in order to be profitable, the minimum working time must be at least 90 days [5, p. 57].
  Based on this indicator, on the proposed scale, an estimate was made for the three rivers presented in the article, which is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Recreational-tourist assessment of Akhuryan, Pambak "Aghst" rivers.
River Valley NameTourismAssessment Type (Score) Total (Score) Maximum (Score) AkhuryanPambastAlast և Rafting ԺClimbing Mountaineering աֆClimbingClimbingRafting ԺClimbingRecline
  The rock slopes are taken as a basis for rock climbing.
  According to the results of the field research conducted և Analysis of data by GIS system, Akhuryan valley slopes have a significant slope within the marked section. The slope of the left slope reaches 40 ° at the top and 61 ° at the bottom.
  The slope of the right valley is even greater, reaching 69 °.
Table 2. Recreational resource evaluation table.
Type of recreationRafting Indicator Up to 70 days70-100 days More than 100 daysClimb climbingSports (amateur) IndexUp to 25 ° 50 aboveThe indexUp to °20 ° 30In the slope section, the slope of the Pambak valley is 40 °.
  In the Aghst valley, the slope of the left valley is 30 ° at the bottom, which is favorable for non-sport groups for touring routes.
 The slope of the right valley of Aghst is relatively small at the bottom, 26 °, which allows you to organize health walks.
  The slope of the same valley at the top of the river valley is quite large և is 50 °, which is favorable for mountaineering ռ rock climbing.
is 60 °, which can be Conclusions.
  By analyzing the results of the research, certain conclusions can be made.1. Northern Armenia has a well-developed river network, which is for the development of certain types of recreation and tourism.
2. The relatively large rivers of Northern Armenia have for rafting, which has a pronounced seasonal nature here.
opportunities are in order և 3. The spring months are the most favorable for rafting in Northern Armenia, when the floods of vultures begin, moreover, during the flood period, rafting of III-IV categories is also carried out.
in streams possible above the river 4. Most of the river valleys of Northern Armenia are young, it creates steep slopes, which can be used for sport climbing, as well as for amateur mountaineering.
The research was carried out due to the financial support provided by the University within the framework of the scientific topic № GSPI 01-SCI-2017.
