Preface.
  The development of medical science brings with it a rapid growth of its names.
  In this respect, eponyms are more interesting.
  Terminological units based on special names are a special layer of words.
  Special names not only participate in the creation of the national-linguistic image of the world, but also form unique combinations in different languages, which is explained by the differences in the traditions and cultures of the peoples.
  Eponyms are lexical units, on the basis of which semantic omissions give rise to vivid cognitive perceptions conditioned by the national factor, which reflect the ethnic features of the world (Rylov 2006).
298).
 Since medicine is one of the oldest fields of human activity, medical terminology is a continuously evolving field of science.
In connection with the intensive development of medical-chemical, medical-technical knowledge, medical-biological-supplementary, the inclusion of terminology in language-specific units is increasing, և in addition to the emergence of new scientific concepts և terms, older terms are beginning to undergo certain changes.
That is why in our study we paid special attention to the medical terminology units formed based on special English names.
We have tried to discover the cognitive value of term-names by considering the substantiation of the names, the arguments, the use of the term, etc.
   The lexical-semantic-semantic features of the examination, the changes of the components of the term over time, the semantic features typical of the Greek-Latin terminological elements typical of the medical language.
  The lack of a little study of the mentioned vocabulary of the English medical terminology vocabulary becomes essential and relevant for the study of the proposed questions.
  There are scientific schools in the world, which are characterized by the use of this or that historically originated, sometimes less common terms.
  This may cause the doctor to spend a lot of time trying to find out the meaning of the nominal terms.
  For this reason, professional bulletins are created, which give explanations, explanations, morphology of organisms, structure, names of diseases, expressions of symptoms, medical terms, eponyms, vocabulary terms, to be communicated by appropriate means.
և Through syndromes.
Necessary information for the use of stratigraphic terminology - weak names The examination of the problems related to the terminological cognition of the beginning of the third millennium is of central importance, which allows to review many provisions of traditional terminology.
  According to the experts in cognitive terminology, the terms are non-petrified, mobile units, which originate in the vocabulary varieties of professional speech. As a result, the naming of development activities is subject to change in the naming process - upward (Beysenova 2009, 15).
The patterns of human processes, including both linguistic and eloquent linguistic terminology, have been analyzed from the standpoint of cognitive terminology, according to Academician V. Մ. Leichik, cognitive terminology is the fifth stage in the development of borderline terminology of the XX-XXI centuries (Leichik 2007, 124).
The developmental nature of new methods, technologies, human thinking, the variability of views, the revision of existing views, the in-depth understanding of processes, and, accordingly, the use of research equipment in the language of nomenclature provide guarantees against scientific stagnation and conservatism.
 E. V. Bekishyan finds that mastering the professional terminology of a specialist, creating linguistic signs for marking in professional speech, building the ability to "interpret" and use them is demonstrated and the transfer and storage of scientific information is carried out in separate contexts (Bekisheva 2007).
In terms of cognitive systems, Facial medical terms are named after prominent writers, philosophers, painters, and many other fields who have studied the material, published it, or just described the symptoms of the disease.
Accumulation, storage և transmission of information, which contributes to the development of this or that branch, its significant acceleration in the given field.
In the field of developments, the demand for naming achievements in the field of modern science and technological processes has sharply increased, complementing the terminological vocabulary.
 To create and regulate the process of creating a professional term within medicine.
  There is a need to study linguistic-cognitive problems related to the issue.
concepts.
ություններինThe notion of terminology arises. Needs when needed in the field. V. Bekishyan describes the terms resistance as a reflection of the type of person in clinical terminology, emphasizing the term-nouns that are formed with the participation of the special name next to the common name (Bekisheva 2007,26).
This can be explained by the factual material of our research. In this case, the special names - Asherman, Bellentine, Bendle - are combined with the syndrome / 2 / / ring of simple nouns, providing a more understandable perception of the phenomenon.
 In fact, the terms-eponyms acquire cognitive value, as they directly indicate the field in question.
Along with the classical terms-names, which were used in the XVI-XIX centuries, new terms appear, which reflect both the stages of development of new fields of medicine, as well as the priority of this or that scientist, the new facts of the country.
 In the early stages of clinical discovery, the problem of eponyms is not only considered historical-medical, although it is difficult to imagine the progress of clinical thinking և medicine in general without the knowledge of medical eponymous terminology typical of that period.
   Linguists note that the rare use of development in the scientific literature in medical practice was due not to a lack of interest in it, but first of all to their lack of interest.
  It should be noted that the reason for the negative attitude towards the term-eponyms was not the terminological-semantic substantiation, which is explained by the specialists of the field with the meaning of special names, such as Holjiikomplex / complex /, Stokes' law, Sukhar's third.
Recent work, such as the practice of teaching a professional language, has shown that terminology significantly facilitates the proper understanding of medical language, facilitates professional communication, as it has an international significance in different languages ​​(Cole-Cole diagram, Muse sign).
  The fact that the question has gained significant importance today is evidenced by the amount of work done in the field of terminology / Bleicher W. М., Завилянская Л. I., Gjonchev V., Magilini G. /.
Complexity of units in the same form - clinical terms, Different symptoms, combination of symptoms Kurlin ulcer, Kuznetsov-Pensky sore, Sally weather, Virkhov metastasis, Ashoff's gallbladder, Fallo trinity).
A large group consists of clinical terms that refer to individual parts of an organ, tissue, cell names, the most common methods of study, or well-known scientific discoveries (Goethe-oss, Holgi cell, Rouge membrane, Charne tissue, Peklinigre, Runche, tendon, Weissberg cartilage, Gill).
  It should be noted that nominal terms also play a special role in the training of physicians.
 Today it is difficult to find a medical field where the terms-eponyms are not used to a greater or lesser extent, which accurately represent the issue.
Combine certain medical skills, interventions, and tricks with obvious medical speech from the discussion of examples.
Smellies' maneuver (Mauriceau-Levret manipulation) - This method shows the back position of the fetus հետ the same position where childbirth is too important for the position of the fetus.
Zavanelli's maneuver - obstetric intervention, when the head of the newborn appears, the shoulders are fixed, "childbirth becomes already life-threatening for both the baby" and the mother.
Sim's position (James Marion Sims) is a stone removal position that facilitates vaginal examination.
  This position was named after the American gynecologist James Marion Sims.
  He is considered the forerunner of American gynecology.
  In the above example, the physical condition of the newborn after birth. This unit is named after Virginia Abgar, a New York anesthesiologist.
The use of eponyms determines in these names the efforts of scientists և doctors of different countries of the world to understand the peculiarities of human activity և etc., through which the transfer of scientific knowledge in time և space, without which the successful structure of modern science և is impossible.
  For example, the following terms may be used: Fallopian tube - a pair of tubes connected to the uterus - the very path through which the sperm passes to the floor of the uterus.
 This term is named after the famous 16th century Italian surgeon Gabriel Falopio.
Syndrome /.
 This syndrome is characterized by the development of the vagina, menstrual cycle, and the ovaries and fallopian tubes are located in the back of the abdomen.
Absence / 6 monthsTerm-eponyms make up a large percentage in medical terminology.
  Of some interest are the eponymous synonyms for diffuse toxic shingles, Botkin's disease - infectious viral hepatitis, etc.).
(Bazedov-Grace-Perry disease. Some terms-names have several synonyms.
 In some cases they number up to fifteen.
It should be noted that the term eponyms also have a special emotionality, expressiveness both positively and negatively (Alice in Wonderland, the jewel of Venus, the pearls of Elsiphe, the dance of St. Vitta, the castle of Linberg, etc.).
Recently, there has been a transfer of the term eponyms from one layer to another (the term "Malgipi net" has been replaced by "miracle net" and the term "gallery nail" has been synonymous with "bird stimulus".
There is a large proportion of nominal terms in the language that use more than one of the names of physicians (Jacobson-LaskaBechter-Kendner-Henda-Schüller-Christian-Letter-Zive ախտ symptom) that simultaneously describe the symptoms or symptoms of the disease.
  These terms in medicine describe the signs, symptoms, diseases, symptoms, are the interconnectedness, the constant development և the transmissibility.
It should be noted that often the name of the same author is attributed to two or more diseases, symptoms and syndromes that he described (Hippocrates' oath, face, mask, nail, chair և hat: Pirogov aponeurosis, Pirogovigypsi bandage, Pirogov, amputation according to Pirogov!
Conclusion.
Medical terminology is professional.
  The national-international cognitive-cultural information, which is accumulated in the names, becomes a source of social knowledge, which is necessary for the communication of specialists.
The most powerful means of communication TERMIN-JAPANESE IN MEDICAL TEXTS.
