Preface.
  The bibliographic material for the work was the works of Garegin Hovsepyan, Serik Davtyan, Armen Malkhasyan, Hayk Ter-Gondyan, Vigen Ghazaryan, Tatyana Izmailova և others և List of Manuscripts of the Matenadaran after Yerjan Mesrop Mashtotsyan Manuscript volumes.
  The works of the mentioned authors gave an idea about composing double sets.
  The work aims to fill the existing gap in the field of double study.
  One of the goals of the work is to discover the pictorial and technical features of the double sets.
  The Cilician collection kept in the Matenadaran has been partially studied, so the possibility of scientific work on this topic is topical համար useful for different circles.
KilikyanKilikyanmaking silversmithing, a part of Armenian silversmithing, lacks research.
Our article refers to the silver copies of the manuscripts kept in the Matenadaran after Mesrop Mashtots.
  The choice of the topic is conditioned by the gap in that sphere.
  Numerous articles refer to Cilician silversmithing, but the field of duplication is not well studied.
  In Cilicia, silversmithing was quite developed, as evidenced by the specimens that have come down to us.
  There were many silversmith centers in Cilicia, each with its own characteristics.
Among those centers are Hromklan, Skran, Drazark, Akner և Sis.
Different silver processing techniques were used: sada, fragment, engraved, twisted, granular.
  Silver covers were made with the mentioned techniques [1].
Silver doubles have two meanings: 1. protective, 2. artistic.
  There are many cases when the manuscript was moved from place to place and was robbed.
  The composition is the final stage of the manuscript.
  For the manuscript covers, in addition to leather, silver and gold were used, from which double covers were made.
  The appearance of the double sets is compared to that of Etup.
  We see a rather interesting comparison in an article published in "Echmiadzin" magazine, where it is mentioned that the notebooks of manuscripts - staples, presses - were kept in canvas packages in ancient times, covered with fabric or leather, put in a wooden, metal or ivory box.
  It is mentioned that the expression "gathered in a box" is often found in the memoirs of the collections, for that reason the composition was given the appearance of a box with two leaves, a back and a door [5].
  Duplicates are usually added later.
  It often happens when donations are made of precious stones, which are attached to the manuscripts.
  Different images are made on the cross (of the cross, of Christ, of John the Baptist, of Mary, etc.).
  The double sets are often attached with metal balls so that as a result of contact with the manuscripts of the table, the bookcase and other items, we can refer to the 4 manuscripts kept in the Matenadaran after Mesrop Mashtots in Yerevan, which are under the following numbers: 7690, 7691, 7770, 197.
not to be damaged.
  The manuscript under our number 7690 is a Gospel dated 1249.
  It belongs to the school of Hromkla.
The Gospel was created by the order of Catholicos Constantine.
The pen of the Gospel is Kirakos [4].
  A duplicate of this manuscript was created in 1255.
  Cutting technique was used to create the double.
 The silver double has 2 sides.
 One face depicts Christ with the Virgin Mary և John the Baptist.
 In the center is Christ, with Mary on the left and John the Baptist on the right.
  The earliest example of a deacon's scene is seen in the Gospel of Trabzon.
    Mariam և John the Baptist are depicted as beggars.
  The right hand of Christ is depicted with a blessing.
  The folds of the clothes of the dancers are quite skillfully made.
  The faces are also well-designed, which speaks of the master's power.
  The characters are included in the circle.
  All the records at the edges of the circle - informational, artistic.
  The protocol is as follows. "THE MOTHER OF HIS MOTHER, THE CATHOLICOS OF COSTANDIA, WAS BROUGHT TO HIS BROTHER AND BROTHER. TUCHD. "
  The opposite side depicts the 4 evangelists.
The first depiction of 4 evangelists is found in the Armenian miniature gospel in the Gospel of Adrianople, which dates back to 1007 [7].
  Here the evangelists are depicted on two pages.
 There are two evangelists on each page.
  We find the iconography of the four evangelists in the manuscript of 1018.
  The next manuscript depicting the four evangelists is from the year 1033.
  The series of these manuscripts can be continued, but we showed the earliest examples of Armenian art where we meet the images of evangelists.
  Here too.
  We think the hunting characters are taken in a circle.
 This framework is a protocol at the same time.
  Here in the upper part the left is written on the left. "HE WROTE THE GOSPEL AND ORGANIZES THE HOUSE IN MEMORY OF CATHOLICOS CATHOLICOS HIS BIRTHDAY AND HIS BROTHER AMM."
  It is interesting that the evangelists are depicted here not in the traditional way, with the depiction of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, but on the contrary, John, Luke, Mark, Matthew.
  The third, toned character here is Luke, but Mark (Mark) is written above the image.
 This is a reason to believe that the silversmith և the artist were different people.
  Probably the silversmith, not knowing the traditional painting, placed the silverware in the opposite direction.
  It should be noted that the evangelist Luke is still depicted in Tonsor in the Milky Way.
Luke's portrayal of Luke was quite common.
It is interesting to note that in the art of Sargis Pitsak, not only "Lukasne tonzur" but also other characters from different scenes, like him, the other evangelists [6].
In our article we have placed the image of the evangelist Matthew, where Matthew is depicted in tonzur.
  As for the imagery of the evangelists of 1249, the folds of the clothes are skillfully designed, the faces have similarities, they are quite similar to each other.
The two sides of the double are connected by hinges.
There are metal balls on the door, which were probably placed for protective purposes, so that the composition would suffer relative damage.
The next manuscript is kept under number 7691.
  It is a shrine.
  It was created in 1307.
  The flourishing is the monk Ogsent (1451), and the recipient is the priest Vardan [3].
  The scene of the crucifixion of the cover is depicted.
 Inside the cross is a picture of Adam's skull.
  To the left of the crucified Christ is Mary, and to the right is John.
  The body of Christ is given S-love.
The body is plastic.
  The costumes witnessing the 1268 features of Toros Roslin in Mariam ով Hovhannesikerparnerlin are masterfully designed.
In the above-mentioned Malatya Gospel miniature, which also depicts the scene of the crucifixion.
  There are also small balls on this manuscript, which, as we mentioned, are designed so that the composition is not damaged.
  Cutting technique was used.
The other manuscript is kept under number 7700.
 It belongs to Ssi school.
 It was created in 1237.
 The pen is Grigor [3].
 There is not much information.
  The double is made with fastening technique.
  A large cross is attached to the copy of the manuscript.
  Stones are attached to the 4 corners of the cover.
  Let's see the presence of stones on the cross.
  The cover is attached to the other side with fasteners.
Here we witness the above-mentioned metal balls again.
  Here their application is clearer.
  They are everywhere.
  Precious stones are protected from damage.
 This double, compared to the above two, is uniformly more primitive.
  This is due to the fact that here, unlike the other two, the images are missing - instead it is a large cross, but it also retains its artistic significance.
Next is Gospel number 197.
  It belongs to the Akner School է was established in 1287.
  The recipient of the pen is Uncle Hovhannes.
 The cover is brown leather with metal ornaments.
  Here, the technique of fastening with the help of nails was used.
  Additional information about the duplicate is not stored in the later added memorandum.
A cross is presented here, and small metal balls are attached to the edges of the cross.
 This manuscript was probably looted or damaged before reaching the Matenadaran, as evidenced by its current appearance.
Examining the duplicates of the 4 manuscripts listed above, we come to the following conclusion.
  The characteristic features of Cilician silversmithing, which have been preserved over time.
The images of the doubles are made with great mastery, which speaks of the development of that branch of art.
 The faces of the characters are influenced by the given period.
The folds of the clothes are also masterfully made, which is typical of the art of painting.
  Giving the body an S-shape speaks to the connection of miniature art.
 In the copies of almost all the manuscripts we saw the same commonality: the use of metal balls.
  It can be concluded that donations were widespread in that period, which is evidenced by the presence of precious stones.
  Our study does not consume all the material, it is more comprehensive, we will try to conduct a more comprehensive fact-finding study on Cilician manuscripts in the future.
Conclusion.
  The study of the relics comes to show once again the development of Cilician silversmithing.
  Preparing doubles was a separate branch and was distinguished by its schools.
  Duplicates are influenced by the period from the point of view of depicting faces.
The imagery of the duplicates is directly comparable to the imagery of the miniatures.
  The images have stylistic features.
They contain geographical material.
