Preface.
  The issue of domestic violence has been at the center of attention in the "remaining" sciences.
  This issue has not been raised in Armenian historiography before, but the practice of domestic research violence, which is now a major issue in the history of everyday life in Soviet Armenia, was widespread in Armenia in the 1960s.
  It is natural that the authorities were silent about the hunt, the press of the time was silent, these issues were also mentioned in the various reports of the state party bodies and in the reports.
  At best, domestic violence is viewed in context, ignoring the particular socio-psychological potential that gives rise to it, and undeniably criminalizing these crimes in the factual context.
The reasons for silence.
  The article dedicated to the study of these reasons, in which we tried to view domestic violence as a social phenomenon of the Soviet-Armenian reality of the 1960s.
  The research material was mainly the indictment materials of the People's Court of Soviet Armenia, in which remarkable details about the motives of the abuses and the public perceptions related to them.
We also referred to the policy adopted by the Soviet authorities in matters related to the family and the effects of that policy on the prevention of domestic violence.
General models of social-psychological behavior, mentality and ideas were widespread in the 1950-60 family relations.
  The cases of domestic violence during the mentioned period were mostly manifestations of jealousy.
  Moreover, jealousy was not only a powerful psychological motive for the use of violence, but also an expression of a unique way of thinking, of patriarchal perceptions in family relations.
  For example, in 1966 in the village of Gegharkunik in the Kamo region, the husband stabbed his wife to death, killing her newborn child on suspicion that the child was not his.
  In his testimony to the law enforcement bodies, he said that if he doubted the woman's fidelity, then he was not guilty of her murder [4, p. 19].
 In fact, for the criminal, jealousy was not a mitigating circumstance, but an exclusionary circumstance, he considered himself completely innocent based on his traditional views on the morality of women.
  The other incident took place in 1969.
  The couple lived in Parakar village of Etchmiadzin region, in the house of her husband's brother.
  For some time, the couple suspected the woman of having an intimate relationship with her brother, took him to Yerevan and killed him with special brutality in the area near Hrazdan gorge, throwing the body into the canal [5, p. 66-69].
  The interesting thing is that after the murder he went to his relatives to tell the crime to his other brothers.
 One of the brothers even helped him to cover up the traces of the crime.
  This case is quite interesting in the sense that the aggressive attitude of the criminal was manifested exclusively towards the woman, and with the brotherhood with which he suspected the woman, in fact, he was guilty.
  Here, in fact, the patriarchal tradition forbade raping a brother, but did not prevent the killing of an "immoral woman."
After killing the woman, one of the residents of Lanjaghbyur village, Kamo region, had to turn to his relatives for protection, but in this case, neither his sister nor his father helped him.
  The latter even told him that he would not receive the murderer in his house, that he should immediately report to the police officers his confession, which his son had done [2, 83-88].
does not work.
  Murder One of the residents of Verin Chambarak village of Krasnoselsk region in 1964. He had killed his ex-wife և children.
  Still in their family since 1955, the quarrels over the grounds of her husband's unfounded jealousy eventually lead to a monstrous crime that does not fit into its human cruelty.
  After being separated from his wife for many times, after wandering in Russia, the husband returns to his native village, where he settles down every day. When he comes home from work, he brings brandy with him and drinks until 3-4 o'clock at night.
  When the woman asks him to turn off the radio, he replies that it no longer makes sense, because he will soon kill everyone.
  He soon carried out his monstrous intent, shooting first at the woman with a shotgun, then at his six- and four-year-old sons (the father suspected that these boys were not his, the woman had them from another man).
After killing all three, he was handed over to the law enforcement bodies.
The same psychological attitude towards one's own deed, that is, the complete absence of remorse, the acceptance of one's own jealousy as a circumstance justifying one's guilt, is also present.
  When he commits a crime, the still wounded woman (the wife is not awakened so that the children 1 Do not publish some information related to the events described in the article, the day of the incident մարդկանց the names of the people involved in the incident for ethical reasons.
dies from blows in the hospital) is taken out of the room on a stretcher, the man even helps to open the door of the stretcher door, making the following expression: "Unfortunately, the dog did not die" [3, 83-84].
միջ Familiar interference in such recognizable conflicts is mainly explained by the traditional.
The relatives were trying to settle them.
  It is observed not to publicize, not to hide conflicts within the family, not to think so as to avoid the so-called "disgrace" in the minds of relatives.
  In all the cases we have studied, the innocence of the victims has been confirmed by the testimonies of relatives and friends.
  Despite some exceptions, women generally adhered to traditional marital values.
  In contrast, the low social and moral responsibility of men is more emphasized in the everyday life.
  An example of this is the case that took place in 1966. Happy.
 The couple registered their divorce, the next evening the husband and his mistress visited his apartment, where he was staying - his ex.
  A dispute arose between the wife և mistress երբ after the woman reprimanded her husband's mistress with the following expression: "Yesterday we will get divorced through the funeral, it is still possible to join.
Why did you come and destroy someone else's family? ”
  The husband intervened in the dispute, hit the ex-wife, his mother կեր girlfriend, killing everyone [4, p. 22].
It can be concluded from the crimes that, among men, irresponsible attitude towards the family was more frequent, which was often expressed in the case of physical revenge.
  For example, in 1963. In Martuniavan, Martuni region, after the woman tried to prevent her from leaving for Georgia, the husband hit the woman on the head, causing serious incompatible bodily injuries.
  Leaving his wife helpless, he left for Georgia և even when his relatives telegraphed him about his dying condition, he did not return.
There he married for the second time with a clear conscience - after returning, having great hatred for the children he had from his first wife, finally he killed them together with his second wife [4, p. 1-9].
  The other incident took place in Kolageran village of Kirovakan region.
  Despite the respectable history, the husband has been in an intimate relationship with many other women, after many reprimands of a lawful wife, he decided to get rid of her once and for all.
  He carried out this intention in 1958 with the brutal murder of a woman.
 First he threw the woman down from the balcony, then he started to strangle her, and then, seeing that the latter had not died, he tortured her to death with happy blows [1, p. 1].
about.
  Indictments, Examined materials show that abused women did not have the opportunity to protect their children.
  This is especially the case when the mentioned crimes are registered in their social and legal protection, they show that no effective steps have been taken by the local authorities to prevent these crimes.
  We do not see a case when a woman appeals to the police, complains against her husband, we do not see local prevention work with families with such problems, we do not see an effective educational effect on men with anti-social behavior.
  Such behavior is declarative in nature, criticized in propaganda statements.
In all the cases presented, hatred towards women had the same development of rage from suspicion to murder.
  It should be noted that the particular cruelty of these crimes is not due to the sadistic tendencies of the criminals.
  The conclusion of the forensic medical examinations contained in all the indictments is that these men are mentally sober, aware of their own actions only with general mental problems and the gravity in the publications of the representatives of the authorities.
 The murders were committed mostly under the influence of alcohol, but judging by the circumstances of the actions, they used alcohol to gain courage, and the crime was committed in a sober state.
The murders were crimes born of jealousy or the intention to get rid of the unwanted.
 This circumstance gives us the opportunity to conclude that the reasons for hatred towards them were deeper and conditioned by traditional approaches to marital issues. [7]
The despotism of men in this case can be considered a reaction to the patriarchal tradition in the society2, տես scenes of jealousy, violence have been the constant companions of these families.
Attitudes towards women in rural societies were based on the traditional notion of their social status, their disenfranchised, voiceless family responsibilities in the family.
  Such a situation limited a woman's powers to the level of domestic responsibilities and, of course, made her vulnerable to the often misrepresented by a man.
  The state acted only backwards, judging the criminals, mostly imposing maximum punishments, but in fact, it had no effect on the causes of the crimes.
  This had its reasons, which were mainly conditioned by the policy pursued by the Soviet authorities on women's issues.
 Let us consider some aspects of that policy.
In particular, Ivan Geronimus, a family psychologist, in his article, referring to domestic violence in post-Soviet and post-revolutionary Russia, gives a key role to the patriarchal culture in classifying its causes.
  The materials we have researched generally allow such a research hypothesis to be considered acceptable in the case of Soviet research.
Thus, if in the 1920s the Bolsheviks, enthusiastic about the abolition of the old bourgeois society և with the new, socialist "ideology of the state," approaches were revised.
  The Soviet powers gradually renounced the principles of "social activism" and the so-called "revolution of life" proclaimed by women, as opposed to the challenges posed to the state in the 1930s.
  In the 1930s, women's social activism began to have a negative impact on the birth rate, and the country, given the tense international situation, needed soldiers.
  According to the Stalinist constitution, abortions were banned in 1936, the state began to play a greater role in family relations, and free marital relations were no longer encouraged.
  1944 By the decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR on July 8, 1945, the state recognized the rights and responsibilities of the spouses only in the case of a registered marriage, and the unregistered families were deprived of state support.
Other subsequent decrees made it very difficult for the state to encourage divorce, which was considered a symbol of the moral instability of the Soviet citizen.
It is not hard to see that these changes made women vulnerable in many issues.
  First, the lack of opportunities for household responsibilities, economic dependence on men, the normal upbringing of children, and the difficulty of deepening their work 3 The principle of the "household revolution" was to free women from housework through the development of the service sector.
  The food was to be served in canteens, laundries, the education of the children, the nurseries, the schools.
In fact, it was only possible in the family to make ends meet, as they did not want to lose their livelihood. They avoided divorce, which, by the way, was a public scandal.
  It is natural that the conflicts born in the family in this case were either settled at the expense of women's self-sacrifice or led to violence against them.
  If we add to this the traditional patriarchal notions of family, which were characterized by the exclusive monopoly of dictating and directing men in family relations, it becomes clear that in Soviet Armenia in the 1960s the concepts of protecting women's rights and increasing their public role did not work.
The Family Problem in Relationships, Violence Finally, let us add that this article, of course, is not exhaustive, which needs comprehensive, in-depth further analysis, given its low level of research in Armenia.
  Therefore, for further research on the topic, we consider the more comprehensive use of sources, as well as the consideration of the issue from the standpoint of customary law.
The base of Soviet-Armenian realities in the 1960s.
