Preface.
  The most active in the language system is the vocabulary, the word complexity is one of the main ways of enriching the word structure of the language.
  In linguistic literature, complexity is defined as a composition composed of two or more basic terms or words or phrases with a common emphasis.
The peculiarities of the Armenian word formation will be examined both in the studies representing the complete structure of the language and in the composition devoted to the original composition.
The perception of the divisibility of words is noticeable even early [6, 8], but, as he notes in the works of grammars. Hovsepyan, "according to the scheme adopted in Armenian grammar, the issues of word formation were not separated in grammar manuals, but were examined with the description of each word, among the accompanying grammatical features" [5, p. 5].
The first of the authors representing the grammar of Ashkharhabar, the previous ones, examined the word-formation realities as separate and independent manifestations of the language system. Abeghyan [1].
mostly unrepeatable, irEd. Aghayan M. In Abeghyan's theory, he considers it more unacceptable that the latter referred to the relations with all their types as "complexity" in all their types, as well as the original complexities, as a result of which the structural differences of the compound words were obscured.
  He calls "complexity" only those words which represent the union of two or more basic elements in one word, ևspecially the basis for the definition of real complications is the obligatory existence of two constituent bases in them [2, p. 271].
 The seed base is the part of the word to which a root or suffix is ​​added, the constituent base is the part of the word that is added to the seed base.
 The constituent basis in the sequence of bases is always the last component [4, p. 15].
  In the real complexities peculiar to the Armenian language, the verb-basis acts as a constituent basis, expressing the main meaning [3, p. 219].
From the point of view of the variety of templates, the possibilities of the templates are quite old with enough lexical possibilities.
  In the present article, we have referred to the orderly description of the real complications with the emba-based ending քերի the bases underlying them.
The complete picture of Grabar's word-formation system is presented in the book "Grabar's lexicography gives L. Hovsepyan irkazmat "in the work.
We, having a specific goal, which is to present the morphological patterns of real complexities on the basis of the verb component, have left aside the basic + suffix template.
 We have left aside the formations in which we have combinations of bases, but there is a suffix (s), that is to say, in order to give the description of the basis in the real complexity, we have relied exclusively on the templates with primary bases, bases which cannot be segmented from a word-formation point of view.
  These are the SjS, SS basic templates with all their sub-templates in which we have root change or grammatical alteration.
The study is based on the vocabulary of bibliography handed down to us from the 5th century, taken from the "New Haykazyan" dictionary.
 When presenting the orderly և structural compatibility of word elements, let us use, if necessary, the conventional signs accepted in lexicography. S-initial (base vowel modified form: S), a-suffix, f-grammatical particle, j-joint, c-link, p-preposition, C-noun, A-adjective, T-year, D-pronoun, B-by, M-macbay, N-antecedent, Sh-link, D-pronunciation.
Determining the order of belonging to the components of complexity often causes difficulties due to the nominative root homonymy, not being proven separately by the roots or having acquired a different value in the mold, not being literally differentiated from different parts of speech, through mass transmissions or other realities.
In such cases, following L. Hovsepyan, to be guided by orderly affiliation, direct (see the A + Basic Principles template) by the semantic relations of the components [5, p. 141].
In Grabar, the verb was supplemented by nouns, macabres, derbies, adjectives, pronouns [9, p. 88].
  Naturally, the verb that appeared as a preferred (my last) component in the real complexity will receive additions expressed in the mentioned parts of speech. The real complexities of syntactic connections in general, speech-language viability as a subordinate member of a word is directly proportional to its viability as a subordinate component of complexity.
and thus, the predominance is the C + B component.
  In general, the noun և verb is in the first կր second place from the point of view of absolute word-activity, the noun ի as the primary component, the verb ի as the last component, due to the fact that the main meaning of complexity in Armenian-specific compounds is expressed by the second component.
It should be noted that the complexity is mainly articulated, with a variety of intrinsic relationships of components, often problematic (patriotic, hail-bearing, rocky, swampy), also occasional (abyss, rain, fate, geographer, night owl, female speaker).
Adjectives are mostly formed with this morphological pattern.
  As a result, the resulting nouns are noticeably less, moreover, these often have A / C equivalence, or later they have existed. mountaineer, illuminator, illuminator, sparkir, khamamok, crusader, koghatsin, potter, leader.
  As L. rightly noted. According to Hovsepyan, the similarities are mainly based on the verbs "gorts", "kir", "kal", "var" [5, p. 151].
As for the A + B template, this template is implemented only when there is an identification on the one hand of the adjective և macba, on the other hand of the adjective և noun, that is, of the adjective's macabre և nouns respectively.
  L. In this case, Hovsepyan is guided by the principle we have followed in determining the first component of speech.
  This refers to the syntactic compatibility of the components [5, p. 141].
  But mainly the noun and the macabre are compatible, the G + B և M + B templates are accepted, regardless of the fact that the descending basis, taken separately, is an adjective.
  In other words, the adjective taken in the noun becomes equivalent to the noun, macabre. Note that the use of adjectives is more frequent. fortified, slow-moving, well-groomed, short-tempered, silent.
  Let's bring examples using macabre.
The adjective of the adjective complementing the basis of the word: benevolent, green-eyed, truth-loving, evil, virtuous.
In the first case, the composition as a whole can be said to be exclusively adjective. In unique examples, according to the data of the National Bank of Armenia, we have A / G verbal mass disparity. eloquent, rude, in the second case, predominantly adjective (see examples above), less - A / G different word. ancient, foreign-born.
  It should be noted that the adjective used macabrely is conditioned by a case relationship, the adjective taken by the noun is conditional.
 In the latter case, the constituent is mainly an intransitive verb.
literally, outside M + Bio-viable template noticeablyThis "yet" (still, most often in part), "always" (always, always), "always" (always, always), "yar" ) are the pioneers.
  The relation of the components of the complexity is natural, it is accidental, the structure is in a characteristic sense.
is.
By the way, the noun + verbahimk և makbay or adjective + verbahimq with macaban usage are also included in modern Armenian [7, p. 224].
Templates D + Bd Formatting is a problematic component (a unique example of an adjective relationship with a case-by-component relationship, that is, where).
  The pronouns "very much" (most loving, most loving), "other" (changeable, transformative), "all" (all-inclusive, all-inhabitant), "self" (self-invented, self-playing) և "same" (same-sex, same-age).
Note that other pronouns in this template are grammatically different from the direct one (template: Sf). Imaginative, possessive, cynical, self-centered, one-sided / one-sided.
The B + B template has a low functional load, the compositions in which the ratio of components is subordinate are more favorable.
  Let's bring some examples. industrious, greedy, harmful, beggar, trapped.
 It should be noted that in this template, as a basic component, the verb "love" is expressed, expressed in a pure consonant. became a lover, a lover of reading.
The T + B template is rare, the complexity has a recurring value (unique examples have been identified, such as single-hermit, double-diameter), birefringent, dual-dwelling, seven-eyed, centrifugal, single-born, four-stemmed.
Note that the ratio of components is mostly problematic.
Overload in Conclusion.
  From the factual study we came to the conclusion that the verb bases are presented with flexible word-formation possibilities.
 Acting as a preferred component in a real complexity, it is combined with different parts of speech.
  With decreasing frequency, functional և M + Partitions.
First of all, adjectives are formed from the combinations of parts, because they first express a characteristic relation, appearing either in a subjunctive or in a relative derivative sense.
  In addition to the fact that the resulting nouns are noticeably few, the latter often have A / Value.
  That is, we should act with absolute dominance with the adverbial compositions with the verbal-mass value of the adjective, when the verbal mass values ​​of the complexity և its constituent are not the same.
