H. The observations on the manifestations of cultural-literary archetypes and archetypal motives in Tumanyan's works are the result of searching for new points of study in Tumanyan's science.
  The purpose of this article is to reveal the peculiarities of the use of archetypal motifs of hunting and dragon fighting in the works.
As a general ethnocultural (universal) observation of the great name of the writer, these are the typical Armenian motifs, through which several essential aspects of the content of the author's worldview, aesthetic and moral ideals are revealed.
In order to achieve the above-mentioned archetypal archetype of el-motives, our task was to turn around some of the ideas expressed in the theory of modern literature.
  We have emphasized that the archetypal motive of hunting has been revealed both by writers of different nations of the world and by H. In Tumanyan's works.
  In the field of literary analysis of Ishkhan Tatul's dream "Tmkaberdiyarum" in the field of literary analysis, we have mainly noticed the poem "Tumkaberd Arum" from the works of the writer's prose, some quatrains, "Arjaors", "Yeghjeruimut", "The Deer", "The History".
in the field.
The above-mentioned works of Tumanyan ("Ed. Jrbashyan, H. Tamrazyan, M. Mkryan, A. Yeghiazaryan, R. Vardanyan) were analyzed by the motives of the writers (Ed. Jrbashyan, H. Tamrazyan, M. Mkryan, A. Yeghiazaryan, R. Vardanyan), but were not commented on from the point of view of dragons.
In addition to this, in the past "Archetypes" archetypal motifs were found by H. "Tumanyan's works" was not the subject of special study by musicologists.
We made one of such first attempts in modern Armenian literature in our article entitled "Cultural-literary archetypes in the works of Hovhannes Tumanyan" [7].
This article is a logical continuation of that.
The motive-archetypal theme "Unique ideological manifestations of hunting in Tumanyan's works" is derived from the framework of an archetype with complex content.
  However, it has its own preconditions and scope of discussions.
  First of all, we consider hunting to be an archetypal motif, because in the theory of modern literature "Archetype is often identified or correlated with motive" [10, 569].
  From the point of view of Eurogeneological research, the village was enriched by the necessity of hunting, almost to the point of "death".
  It was seen as a means of obtaining work and food, an opportunity to study the species of the aesthetic animal world with pleasure.
  Hunting was the development of a person's physical and mental abilities.
Bring courage, overcoming the dangers of human energy, overcoming the advantages of human intelligence, etc.
  Nevertheless, hunting gradually developed the human mind's thinking abilities in the process of world cognition.
  In such an activity, people's vocabulary is related to words that express the corresponding meanings of actions.
  The symbolic perceptions of hunting have even become a theoretical system of concepts.
The description of hunting and the concepts related to it have been widely used in cultural history in their direct and symbolic, allegorical meanings.
  They have been manifested in everyday life, in the philosophical judgments of literature.
 In everyday life, in different situations, we use, for example, such expressions as "to follow a girlfriend", to follow in her footsteps, to catch her love, to catch the girl / boy's look or heart, to search for a new idea in science, to do research, to search, to sing in rhythm and poetry. to hunt (M. Metsarents), to hunt in songs (E. Charents).
 It is not accidental that the nickname of the genius troubadour-poet Sayat-Nova is translated by some philologists as "song hunter".
  It is safe to say that hunting ություններն the concepts associated with it in the literal or symbolic sense are still perceived and used in various areas of our lives.
MethodologicalHow to say, in the form of science, in the field of hunting. Here is a literary critic, a prominent researcher of Greco-Roman aesthetic thought in terms of revealing the high, philosophical noble meaning of hunting. Los clarifications on the interpretation of the motive-symbolic meaning of hunting in the dialogues of the famous Greek philosopher Plato.
 Making concluding remarks, he writes: "Thus, the pleasure և the pleasure, the Truth, all this is the object of hunting for Plato, in the same sense as the hunter pursues his prey" [11, 278].
  Moreover, according to A. According to Los, Platonic dialectics is a "way" of thinking և a "method" [11, 280].
The beauty, the virtue, the wisdom of the good of hunting, the motive of the expressions of hunting in Russian quite carefully studied by the well-known contemporary literary critic A. Bolshakova [9].
Posted on the Internet "Ancient as an archetype.
  from Pushkina to Solzhenitsy "is the 4th among the ten lectures devoted to the depiction of hunting in the Russian literature of the 19th century (" Motifs of love in Russian literature of the 19th century ").
The literary critic speaks in detail about the artistic depiction of various manifestations of the motive of hunting in the works of Russian classical writers (A. Pushkin, I. Turgene, L. Tolstoy, etc.), referring to the philosophical meanings from realism.
symbolic, while in Armenian literature the image of the hunter of the archetypal motive of hunting is depicted in a unique way with interpretations.
 Hunting will be described from different angles. Alishani, Raffi, L. Bashalyan, Nar-Dos, A. Aharonyan, V. Mirakyan, A. Bakuntsi, Av. Isahakyan, E. Charents, V. Ananyan, H. In the works of Moses and others.
Here are some notable examples.
  By creating images of Armenian people hunting in the field of Armenian modernism, some writers present them in the context of their relations with the national liberation struggle.
  In "Sparks" (1883-1887), Raffi created the hunter Avoyikerpar, which is one of the possible ideologies of the novel.
  One of the supporters of the liberation struggle is the sponsor of the "propagandist" youth (Karo, Aslan) who prepared it and, in the author's words.
  It is noteworthy that L. The hero of Bashalyan's novel "The Covenant of the Priests" (1890) is Akop-Ter Mesrop.
  Describing the pleasure of hunting with a shotgun նկար Describing the pleasure of hunting with a shot, the author in his person has added to the list of Armenian human figures using weapons in contemporary Armenian literature.
  The hero of Avetis Aharonyan's novel "Bashon" (1896) is an impressive character of the village peasant Jzro, who is engaged in hunting and has an exceptional sense of honor.
  He bitterly confessed that if his prey was wild animals, then the Kurdish prey in the Ottoman Empire, unfortunately, are Armenians, including his son.
    The murder and kidnapping of his daughter-in-law pushes him against the Kurds, who are sponsored by the vengeance and are generally hostile to the Armenians.
  And here in the novel "The Killed" Nar-Dos (1889) Ruben Tusyan's incident of mere hunting for pleasure is depicted as one of the episodes of the artistic situation that contributes to the promotion and enrichment of the content of this bi-plot.
  And this expression, which came from the victim of a hunting pigeon, became the title of the novel, symbolizing on the one hand the main heroine, Sara, and on the other hand, more or less the newborn child who was killed by her.
The Armenian writers of modern times wrote about the hunters of the Turkish hunting and the symbolic significance of its motive.
Interesting are A. Bakuntsi, E. Charents' references.
A. In Bakunts' story "Mtnadzor" (1926), villager Avin is engaged in hunting.
  The request of the forester Panin to send him as a hunter, through real hunting, ends arbitrarily almost tragically for a helpless villager.
He used the symbolic meaning of hunting purposefully and figuratively in one of his rubies. Charents.
  By imagining the poet as a song hunter, he used to write not for the poet's ability to write much, but, in fact, for him to make accurate discoveries of social and individual problems that resonate with everyone.
 Therefore, he wrote: Every poet comes, brings with him a neglected arrow, And takes the arrow, meditates-hunts in songs. But he becomes a poet not with the size of an arrow, but with the abundance of a sign that geniuses grow.
The motive of hunting, its direct manifestations in everyday life from the point of view of gaining the aesthetic pleasure of knowing the world of animals and their species is depicted in the memoir of the well-known writer, real hunter Vakhtang Ananyan, especially in hunting stories.
The theme of hunting songs and poetic expansions has also become the collection of poems "Seventh Hunting" (2013) by the contemporary poet Hagop Movses.
Hunting of ideas, in the sense of a symbolic "Bear hunt" with its sides, hunting The motive of hunting in its real and symbolic meanings H. In Tumanyan's works.
  The "Deer Death" of everyday life was reflected in the writer's prose especially in "The Deer".
  In the context of this motif, the writer's attention was focused on its manifestations, which revealed the characteristic aspects of the humanistic worldview and in Tumanyan's works, the motif was expressed as a description of realism, as a means of depiction, as a means of imagery.
principles.
In any case, in the above-mentioned stories of the writer, the motive of hunting is presented mostly in everyday life, in nature as different ideological approaches.
  In "Arjaorsm" (1899, 1913) aesthetic hunting, endangering the depiction, the realistic author describes the bear hunt, objectively observing its manifestations in the rural life living in the Lori canyons.
  Hunting is an opportunity for a villager to make a living in the wild on the one hand (such as the narrator's intention to get the honey of wild bees), on the other hand the animals he keeps - pigs, wild beasts, in this case bears - a way of life.
  Due to the pig-stealing, the incident related to the bear hunting reveals the narrator's ideas about the bear's character, ingenuity, and the courage to go alone against the wild beast.
  However, escaping from the clutches of the bear, he severely wounded him with a gun during the second attempt, but the fear of the fury of the wounded beast was so great that he did not pursue it to finally take control of the prey.
 If in this story the Tumanyan author's attitude towards hunting is carefully pushed into the background due to the objective nature of the story, then in "Deer Death" (1898), in "Deer" (1909) the author's approach to hunting is expressed The "beautiful beauty of the forest", a deadly wounded deer.
  An expression of such an approach is the author's desire to understand the mental state of a severely injured deer, to endow it with the ability to "feel" and "remember" it to a certain extent.
 Attributing some human-psychic traits to the wild animal through the literary trick of empathy, he deeply regretted that the hunter had shot that uncanny creature of nature.
 Man had thus destroyed the beauty of nature with his own hands.
in a way.
"Deer Death" can be found here. Tumanyan is already guided by the idea formed in the worldview that man should be able to live not only with his human life, but also with animal life.
  The immense humanity of the great writer and thinker was spread by the observation of wild animals living in nature.
 Such an approach revealed in him a convincing animal lover, even a man concerned with the condition of wild animals.
The idea of ​​thinking about the life of animals, of preserving the animal world's beauty, has been expressed artistically at a high level and fully expressed in the writer's story "Deer".
 Here the author himself is a "narrator", a literary character who, at the suggestion of hunter Osep, goes with him to hunt deer.
  Osep from the village is an experienced, practically thinking hunter. He also tends to enjoy hunting, to taste the meat of the hunter, and to make the narrator the communicator of those processes.
  And here is Bostanchi Ovagim is a person endowed with a unique soul, endowed with a sensitive soul by the example brought from his life experience.
    The painful expressions of the mother deer and her cub's killing the deer from the side, the parallel parallels of her dead grandson and her mother mourning serve that purpose.
  Ovagim, by telling the legend of the hunter Pirum, confirms the idea of ​​being hunted.
 In the story, unlike the realistic character of the hunter Osep, the gardener Ovagim's owl is a gentleman.
  He is a type of villager with a poetic temperament and a tendency to sing troubadour songs.
At the request of those present, Bostanchi even performed a song "from the fairy tale of Kyaram և Asli" with "his old horse", and deer hunting was condemned.
The narrator-author who participated in the deer hunt with Osep was a well-known poet, with a poetic spirit, a person who appreciated the beauty of nature and its living creatures.
  The horns that suddenly appeared against him in the hunting ground enchant him with his natural, animal beauty and eye-catching look.
  "I," the author writes, saw deer in the wild for the first time.
 He came out with a peaceful pride, noble and wonderful, like the owner and king of all the beauties of nature.
  Kisov, still standing in the woods, put his puffy snout on the ground, then raised his head, curled his long neck with savage grace, and looked at me.
The most beautiful look I have ever seen in my life "[4, 89].
Tumanyan, after finding the deer that was severely wounded by Osep's shot, perceives the torment of the deer with a sensitive attitude at the moment of slaughter, the deep pain caused by the fall of a wild animal endowed by man with natural beauty.
  In this situation, not only is the successful completion of the deer hunt not pleasing to him, but the destruction of the king of "all the beauties of nature" turns into a man-made ugliness and cruelty, which contributes to his generalization of human existence. "I turned my face as if I were looking at the mountains.
 I heard a muffled moan from behind… and, I do not know why, I started thinking about life and death, կյանքը life seemed so ugly to me… "[4, 90].
The more animals with philosophical insight.
In the last two volumes, Tumanyan presents the relations between the representatives of self-preservation, Man մարդու nature, man և fauna from the point of view of his broad humanitarian ideas.
 He was convinced that man should live not only in his own way, but also in the lives of animals, caring for and caring for them.
  After all, the idea of ​​the "intelligence" of the instinct to take care of certain mental feelings inherent in human beings is manifested in their mental attitude towards their offspring.
  In particular, Tumanyan's negative approach to deer hunting, with the socio-historical existence of our people during our lifetime, with the unregulated, elemental nature of hunting.
  That is the reason why Vakhtang Ananyan, a professional hunter and writer on the moral-practical aspects of hunting, taking into account the acceptable demands on the morality of hunting among the people, in 1944. wrote in his published article. "By that morality (according to morality - G. Kh.) It is a sin to raise a weapon on a cub, it is a sin to kill a mother, it is a sin to disturb an pregnant animal, it is a condemnable greed to kill more than 1-2 animals, it is a sin to kill an animal while drinking water." "The old hunters, in the wrath of heaven, threatened the people who broke this tradition" [1, 394].
  The application of these ամ other reasonable requirements under state control in the 1950s. During his stay in the Socialist Republic, he wrote about it in his memoirs.
Returning to Tumanyan's ideas, let's say that he was concerned not only with the fate of the natural beauty, the deer, but with all the creatures of my animal world.
  Since animalism was a constant component of his worldview, he expressed his heartfelt attitude to the condition of the bird that had been injured by his beating. one-songwriter-sensitive, expressive in his own artistic way. He flew and went wounded.
                               It always flies in my mind, bloody and lost.
In fact, within the framework of the archetypal motive of hunting, the writer's social and aesthetic ideals, one of the principles of which was the ultimate desire of man to live a great life in nature.
  But man, as we know, has not yet reached the ideal of the innocent man dreamed of by the poet.
  According to Tumanyan, humanity should use the feeling of animal love along with the desire to achieve the ideal of universal solidarity, brotherhood and friendship.
  Moreover, according to the imagination, man should not only be in complete harmony with the animal world, but should also continue to be interested and live the life of the whole universe.
 And since he noticed in public life, aspirations among progressive people, so he wrote: "In him (among the developed individuals and nations of his time - G. Kh.) The deep and sublime feeling of animalism is gradually determined, emphasized and confirmed, which leads to the great cosmic life" [5, 170].
  While making judgments in this direction, literary critic A. Yeghiazaryan adds that according to the writer, "the popular life of a perfect man is a great life, a cosmic life" [2, 15].
  The basis for such a conclusion is the above-mentioned works of Tumanyan, which discuss the archetypal motive of hunting.
with a hunting goat with an eyebrow.
  In fact, from the point of view of that great life, Tumanyan expressed his negative attitude in some cases, the expression of the attitude towards animals, the famous tale "The False Hunter" (1910).
  In the previous illustrations depicting the motive of hunting, the writer, as we stressed, described real hunting.
 And here is the "False Hunter" fairy tale.
 It is known what Tumanyan thought about the fairy tale genre. "It," he wrote, "is the highest expression in literature, all of which are eternal symbols" [6, 472].
  Therefore, in these two, created on the basis of a folk tale, the writer, in fact, used the symbol of hunting, referring in the context to his ideas and aesthetic ideal of living in cosmopolitan life.
  Therefore, in this fairy tale, the boasting of the hunters about the hunting events is ridiculed through a ridiculous story.
Եւ և etc. ”[4, 216].
It is noteworthy that Tumanyan uses the episodes related to the archetypal motive of hunting as a metaphor to make his words figurative.
  An impressive example confirming our idea is the following part of the preface of the poem "Tmkaberd Arum". Hey, be well, listen, let me tell you something now, my word, see where it goes, like a brave hunter's gull.
We think that by comparing the troubadour narrating the events of the poem with going "like a brave hunter's gull", the poet meant the real hunter he imagined.
And such a hunter not only fires accurately, but also follows the principles of hunting morality that have been prevalent among the people for centuries.
  In other words, the great writer and thinker is not against hunting in general, but he is against the version of hunting that occurs naturally, bypassing the traditionally accepted notions about animal-loving hunting morality.
Thus, the motive of hunting can be interpreted differently due to the unchanging variant of the cultural-literary worldview of the archaic motifs (variant of the invariant).
 Hunting, rather than simply depicting hunting, is often expressed by the symbolism of the hunter-writer, with the peculiarities of artistic thinking.
which is due to the fact that in the life of the writer's life, in the meanings, is "Taking Tmkaberd" Now let us refer to the archetypal motivation of the dragon fight (1905)
  In our opinion, in the VIII part of this poem, which is of high value from the point of view of Tumanyan's horse և content, the archetypal motif of the dragon fight is presented in Tatulieraz, the prince of Tmuk fortress, with a unique literary elaboration.
 The episode on the stage of the dream to the famous Tumanyan scholars, in particular academicians Ed. Jrbashyan և H. Tamrazyan was interested, but from different angles.
  Thus, for example, Ed. Jrbashyan writes: "The scene of Tatul's dream before the plague (Chapter VIII) is taken from the arsenal of fairy-tale poetics, or, admittedly, this is the only part that does not add anything significant, even partially seems to be out of the rapid development of the poem." Tamrazyan.
 He objected to Jrbashyan and wrote: "But no.
 This is not an ordinary description, but a vision that makes aesthetic peculiarities both in the poetic structure and in the psychological atmosphere ”[3, 290].
  Then, developing his thoughts on Tumanyan's ideas about the meaning of dreams in human life, their use in the writer's works, the literary critic adds: "Tumanyan [8, 364].
  He did not agree with this view, he was a dreamer, he found great meaning in visions, which are the response to the mysterious feelings of man.
 Isn't that right, the peasant girl's dream in "Anush"? It was as if the unfortunate Saroyanter sheep was playing in a dark valley with a human voice, and the shepherd's mother "took their first bow and danced."
This is how a number of passages from "Depi Anhuni" are.
  These dreams are echoes of the pressure of vital phenomena or a kind of continuation of feelings.
  This is the genius response of this same story is Tatul's dream "[3, 290].
Restricted performance In general, agreeing with H. To Tamrazyan's above-mentioned point of view, we want to present our ideas about Prince Tatul's dream scene.
  Note the following that there is a significant difference between the dreams described in the poems "Anush", "Towards Anhun" և "Taking of Tmkaberd".
  The dreams of the heroes of the first two poems, so to speak, belong to the type of individual dreams.
  They are connected with the anticipation of the tragic destinies of the heroes of a single song (Saro in "Anush", Hasmik in the poem "Towards Anhun").
  Meanwhile, in Prince Tatul's dream, we believe, the author consciously or subconsciously presented an archetypal motif of a dragon fight (or snake fight), presented and interpreted with his own unique depiction.
  Prince Tatul of Tmuk Fortress, ostensibly the main character of a poem belonging to the lyrical genre, a heroic character, nevertheless does not speak much in his own words (only once, in response to Nadir Shah).
 The dream theater helps to present such features of the hero's inner world և character, which can contribute to a new discovery of his as a literary character, a psychological description.
In addition, the ancient motif of the hero's battle against the dragon or monster - the battle of the dragon - has been revealed in the past in the folklore genres of different nations of the world (fairy tale, epic, legend, etc.).
  The motive hero of the dragon fight fights for the interests of the people, as well as for the protection of high cultural values, and the monster symbolizes the ecosystem, the evil in life.
  Tumanyan's poem, as it is mainly a literary elaboration of a legend, so Tatul's dream is related to such a universal super-problem.
  Because of the betrayal of his glorifier, which Tatul predicts in the dream at the last moment before the catastrophe, he is unable to fight against the monster of the dream, and in the artistic reality of the poem, against the army of Nadir Shah.
  Until that moment, the patriotic prince and his army, who are bravely fighting against the enemy, are destroyed.
  The question remains as to whether it is possible to defeat evil in principle, evil, in its various manifestations in life.
 In fact, the answer to this question reveals the main aspects and ideas of the content of the poem.
According to the fate of the heroes, Tumanyan did not offer a final and inviolable solution to the above-mentioned problem.
  However, the answer to the question was presented by the author in a different way, using the morality of dying in the artistic whole of the poem, of having the ideal of an innocent person.
  Therefore, considering the structural and substantive layers of the poem, we can say that according to Tumanyan, the evil, the enemy can be defeated in principle, if the people fighting against them act in solidarity, they do not obey the will of the enemy, his provocations.
  This principle confirms the logic of the events depicted in the plot of the poem in their entirety.
  In the face of the enemy, in fact, the circumstance of having a reliable, solid, strong back is supposed to mean as a precondition that Tatul gives a bold answer to Nadir Shah. Many clouds will pass in Gilkhov, the mountain is always unshakable.
In addition, the author wanted to establish the idea that, in principle, it is possible to defeat the evil ones, even a powerful enemy, if those who oppose them defend their homeland.
  To confirm this idea, you can refer to the following passage. Iran, Turan have come alive, Tatul is invincible, invincible, Zork and Baba have sunk, Nira fortress is always standing.
Tatuli also inspires the love of his wonderful wife.
 In the struggle against the invading forces of Nadir Shah, the patriotic prince and his army are defeated only when the prince's glory is seduced by the promises to become Nadir Shah's conqueror through the song of the palace troubadour, drunk Tatul and his soldiers, open fire against the enemy at night.
The protagonist's struggle against evil either fails due to the traitor's fault, but it does not remain without a trace.
  The brave behavior of the prince who fights against evil has a different but profound effect on the perpetrators of evil, the Shah Tmkatiruhi.
  And indeed, it seems that the Shah was not happy to capture the fortress, which had not been conquered for a long time, through the betrayal of Prince Tatulik.
  For a moment, the powerful dictator was overwhelmed with grief over what had happened, he thought about not believing in anyone in life, even "the cup given to a beloved woman."
The tragedy that followed her crime aroused a deep feeling of remorse in the soul of Lady Tmka.
  Eve seems to awaken in him an unconscious masculine beginning (according to K. Jung's theory, the Animusarchetype);
He was braver and more handsome than you. He was a tall and honest man. He had never taken a castle by betraying a woman.
  In other words, answering the question, we must say that the actions of the main hero, his self-sacrifice and courage do not eliminate evil, but his courage, honesty and patriotism can not but positively affect people, even those who contributed to the heroic destruction, their personal, selfish. to fulfill desires.
Thus, H. Both Tumanyan's works related to the archetypal motif of hunting and the use of the archetypal motif of the dragon fight in the poem "Tmkaberdiarum" in the article in the context of aesthetic and moral ideals.
  We have pointed out the relations of the works with the above-mentioned motives with the literary tradition of expressing the corresponding motives in the Armenian-world literature.
