 The word or phrase expressing concepts typical of economic, political, cultural life, technical life is commonly called term 1 (scientific word, title, in Armenian: term, term), and the "section dealing with various issues of application of terms" - terminology "(terminology).
1 Հ. Petrosyan, Patriotic Dictionary, "Hayastan", E., 1987, p. 578.
 See A. Sukiasyan, Modern Armenian Language, YSU Publishing House, E., 1999, p. 170 և Ed. Aghayan, Fundamentals of Linguistics, YSU Publishing House, E., 1987, p. 424.
 Terminology is a branch of lexicography that deals with various issues of term theory և application.
  The term terminology is sometimes used in this sense.
  If terminology is a doctrine of the totality of existing terms and systems of terms, then the meaning of the term Terms are mostly one-meaning words (although there is a term-term ambiguity) , which is based on the scientific definition.
  Ed correctly noticed. Aghayan that "the meaning of the term is a precisely definable concept" 2.
Terms are completed in terminology 3.
 The terms are coordinated according to the relevant field, terminological fields, disciplines, professions, scientific branches, as well as within them4, that is, in the intra-system classification and subclassification.
  Terms in any field are coordinated in a certain hierarchical order և can be represented as complete, general (macro-) or partial, small (micro-) systems, classified from top to bottom և or vice versa.
(Subordinate (AA) Language is a living, developing organism, which means that the development and progress of socio-political life, science, technology, art and literature will first of all lead to the growth and supplementation of the terminological vocabulary of the language, its improvement, which It presupposes not only the expansion of the linguistic terminology system, the emergence of new subsystems with their general (macro-) systems, the development of terminology (improvement), the creation of new terms.
  Developments in the modern Armenian-linguistic term system are conditionally conditioned by the appearance of words expressing the concepts of subsystems, with the emergence of terms, but by term construction.
  Terminology (terminology, terminology) is a related field of terminology, which, according to the scientific, socio-political, cultural, linguistic basic science, is considered a subdivision of lexicography, sometimes as an independent field, linguistic discipline or branch of theology. page 424).
 The term itself is ambiguous, but when the same term is used in several systems (inter-system terms-AA), in this case we are dealing with term-term ambiguity (for example, the term utterance as a literary, linguistic (grammatical) եքստ textual term. ).
2 See Ed. Aghayan, Mentioned work, page 432.
3 Հ. Petrosyan, Mentioned work, page 579.
4 Հ. Petrosyan, In the same place.
With the progress and development of sound-word-sentence in sports, a new stage of development passes, as a result of which the language is supplemented with new professional words - terms.
  For example, if in traditional linguistics the systems of modern Armenian are presented in degrees, then now it has been replaced by the four-level system of sound-wording-text ", because textology (textology) 5, text stylistics have become a subject of linguistic study, which in turn has influenced (and continues to influence) on the linguistic terminology system, supplementing the latter with new textual, textual-stylistic terms and terminological connections or with new semantic applications of the existing terms (inter-system or systemic terms).
Before the science of text, the textology of textology, was substantiated, linguistics focused its research on the sentence as the most voluminous unit, in this case not referring to the sequence of combinations.
  However, from the first decades of the 20th century, the adoption or understanding of textology as a separate discipline (department) of linguistics became an occasion for the creation of textual terms, the use of existing terms in new meanings (intra-system terms-AA), and the foreign-Armenian versions.
  In parallel with the created Armenian versions, new ones were created (և continue), as equivalent, equivalent terms, by which the content of the concept and expression would be more fully and accurately expressed.
As a later known field, textology, the terms utectology remained in the shadows, while this field - See G. Jahukyan, F. Khlghatyan, Armenian language, E., "Luys", 1994.
  և: L. Yezekyan, A. Sargsyan, R. Sakapetoyan, Armenian language, textbook for the 10th grade of high school, Y., 2009.
5 Given the wide-ranging approaches to text comprehension, at the textual level անք we should have the same terminology (textology և textology; in the first case we will have a linguistic system, in the second case a language subsystem, section), which we have at the lexical level (terminology և terminology).
  Probably in order to avoid such disagreements, T. Shahverdyan uses the term linguistics of the text.
There are many terms in the province with their macro-micro systems.
  If we consider textology as one of the sections of language, the largest - super-syntactic or super-syntactic "(sound, word, sentence, text), then in the textual subsystem we will have terms such as line, paragraph, sub-basis, utterance, text, context (context, original, text, text). , preface and reference, title and background, preface, introduction and ending (the latter as textual elements), list, summary, footnote, appendix, text stylistics, textual linguistics, originality, etc.
Structurally, of course, newly formed eggs sometimes become extra eggs.
 Thus, in parallel with the word context (Latin attachment, connection, connection), today in the textual subsystem four Armenian variants are used with the same meaning: context, vocabulary, folklore, original6.
In the textual subsystem, if we try to represent the micro-system in a downward (top-down) or bottom-up (up) classification, we can have the following classification: such as text-context-complexity-paragraph-sentence-syntactic sentence-paragraph-context / downward / other subsystems of textual terms to be translated from the text "as a matter of principle" (ascending).
  Instead of the same super-syntactic or super-syntactic terms, T. Shahverdyan uses the connection of the maximum structural unit of language, adding: "It contains the units of other structural levels: sound, word, sound և sentence" (See T. Shahverdyan, Stylistics, "Lusak", E., 2010, p. 226).
Տ The term context expresses the mentioned textual reality more comprehensively and comprehensively, in contrast to the other parallel forms, which express the content of the term context one-sidedly. For example, the original term is perceived from the literary point of view, the terms folklore or vocabulary from the linguistic and stylistic point of view.
6 See A. Avagyan, Textological terms. Newly created articles, additional versions, collection of materials of the Republican Conference "Issues of Linguistic Terminology" (October 25, 2019).
// Kh. ASPU after Abovyan, Laboratory of Linguistic Research, Yerevan, 2020, 7 pages (in press).
such as the system of structural elements of a text: context-title-preface / introduction-keyword-summary / summary-list-abstracts-appendix or text-context-preface-reference-utterance-subtext այլ other similar subsystems in the textual terminology system.
Hyper-diversity From the point of view of creating and using textual terms, G. is remarkable. Jahukyan 's approach.
  Instead of the term text, the linguist uses the base tense, and the full-form, tense / paragraph /, / in the paragraphs, the variant combinations / 7, utterance, formulation և defines as follows: "By the name of the full text we mean the highest unit of the base / text /, that is, the text as a complete set of paragraphs, which consumes everything that is said by the author or authors.
Plurality There is approximately the same relationship between a parity / tradition / և plurality ինչ as there is between a simple sentence / utterance / ամբողջ the whole (fullness /) of a sentence, except that in this case the relationship is more complex 'multilateral' 8.
Գ. Jahukyan usually presents his research through templates or formulas.
  In this case, the linguist did not refrain from presenting in detail the paragraph templates from the key subsystems of the textual subsystem, talking about the concepts of template "inter-template", attention to homogeneous-heterogeneous templates.
  The above-mentioned can be viewed separately as textual terms, it is another thing to find in them new creatures, which become additional, often, without being used, are left out of the active system of terms / A. A. / by completing the passive terminal layer / A. A./.
7 Գ. Jahukyan, Syntactic Studies, E., NAS RA, H. Acharyan LI, "Asoghik", E., 2003, page 71.
8 In the same place.
 See Mentioned work, pages 6; 8.
The source of terms is the vocabulary of different stages of language development with the terminology of its cooperative vocabulary words, as well as borrowings, and new forms are created by Armenian word-formation means and methods. "The main means of Armenian terminology is the internal Armenian-military capabilities" 9.
The separation of new subsystems in the language, the definition of the subject of the study, implies the "birth" of a new term or the usual literal terminology of the existing vocabulary, which is considered a more preferable reality than the use of a borrowed or foreign term. Aslanyan wrote that "foreign terms also have their negative sides. a) difficult to understand, difficult to master and remember, b) impede the purity of the language.
  Արտ Otartermins are often borrowed unnecessarily համակարգ Systemic terminology systematics.
  "Mass borrowing does not enrich the language with terms, it pollutes it."
 That is why any language strives to create terms with its own word-formation means and methods.
 In this respect, it is noteworthy that in the case of suffix-terminology, the most active suffixes in Armenian, although there are many pre-suffixes (an-, ap-, art-, ger-, sub-, hak-, ner-, ver-, tar-).
 If before the 80s of the 20th century more than 150 suffixes were mentioned in the scientific-technical terminology (such as worm, ich, uk, un, an, ak, ik, ani, urd, ots, ovi, q / ylqarq /, avor, and then, in the modern stage, along with their application, new viable forms are used.
As a linguistic term, nouns and adjectives are mainly used, so “the most active participants in the composition of linguistic terms are mainly nouns. Sukiasyan, Q. Sukiasyan, M. Felekyan, Modern Armenian Language (Phonetics, Vocabulary), E., YSU Publishing House, 2017, p. 207.
Ա See Essays on the terminology of modern Armenian language,, Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences Press, Yerevan, 1982, p. 215.
։ See Essays on the Terminology of Modern Armenian Language, p. 181.
և Adjective suffixes.
  One of the first suffixes is -ած, -ակ, -յալ, -յուն, -ություն, -ում, -ույթ և etc.
In recent decades, many new terms have been circulating in the linguistic terminology system, in which the suffixes (stylization, antithesis, antithesis, word, tradition, speech, etc.) stand out in terms of composition and vitality.
 We have had many linguistic terms with this suffix before, but in recent decades the hypersensitivity of the suffix has been observed.
  If special terms were formed at the time of the suffix -yt, then this suffix became active in the Armenian linguistic terminology from the Soviet period, and since the last decades of the 20th century it has been super-viable in the formation of linguistic-textual terms.
  It is noteworthy that L. Ghazanchyan's observation that "the so-called -yut-'s-terminology approach of modern linguistics, with a noticeable two-level approach, is the opposite of the underlying structure of the language's unit, their concrete expression in speech.
In fact, the suffix -yut indicates the structural nature of different linguistic units.
  Thus, for example, sound, sound, word, writing, saying, currency, inclination, wisdom, attachment, sequence, noun, circumference, range, division, grammar.
11 The viability of this template (word or component of a word + uyt), according to L. Ghazanchyan, it is proved by the fact that in case of translation of many foreign language terms, the suffix -yt is mainly used as a lexical means.
  With the mentioned suffix G. Jahukyan has put into circulation the words (word base), class (word), news.
The linguist also gave their explanation, as follows: "նվազ the minimum expression of the word - the simple word - root, the least expression of the lesson - the zero-sided lesson (the word) - the word, the series without additions - the lesson" 12 which reflects the 10 L. Ghazanchyan, Systematic-Semantic Analysis of Armenian Linguistic Terms, Language-Style Issues, vol. IV, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR, E., 1977, page 286.
11 Լ. Ghazanchyan, Mentioned work, pp. 288-289.
12 Գ. Jahukyan, Syntactic Studies, page 13.
  With other suffixes (-um, -ak were also viable suffixes in Armenian linguistic terminology (creation of linguistic terms A.A.), such as discount, subjunctive, stylization, time, weather, fish) եղանակ word-formation methods ևterminates are formed, terminals are created and are created connections (for example, complex syntactic whole, textile linguistics, maximum structural unit of language).
Copy also plays a role in the creation of the term (as an indefinite (non-personal) direct word, impersonal primordial) 13.
  In the textual subsystem, for example, there is a complex syntactic connection of the term connection, translated from Russian, where the above-mentioned։ paragraphs are linguistic realities that are different from each other.
  It is sometimes not only difficult, but also impossible to differentiate these Armenian-language realities from each other.
  A complex syntactic whole is considered a structural-semantic unit, the paragraph is considered a stylistic unit.
Այս With this semantic and functional difference, the Armenian linguistic terminology system has been supplemented with these.
Thus, developments in the linguistic terminology are conditioned by the emergence of new subsystems in the relevant field, which in turn implies the creation of new terms on the one hand, and the creation, revision, and use of existing terms in the necessary subsystem (e.g., the term term is not only grammatical. in the textual subsystem), which gives rise to intra-system և sub-system terms, or becomes a reason for the creation of new, additional forms, and in the modern language-terminology are active - the suffix, word formation, term connections (connection terms - A.).
  The latter 13 P. Poghosyan, Fundamentals of Speech Culture and Stylistics, G. 1, YSU Publishing House, E., 1990, page 90.
 See A. Avagyan, Textological terms. Newly created articles, additional versions, collection of materials of the republican conference "Issues of Linguistic Terminology" (October 25, 2019).
// Kh. ASPU after Abovyan, Linguistic Research Laboratory, Yerevan, 2020.
 See G. Gareginyan, Modern Armenian Language, YSU Publishing House, Y., 1991, p. 368.
They are mainly created by alienation or copying.
