To reveal the ideological significance and symbolism of the toast tree image with the purposeful illustrations of the article.
 The topic is topical, as well as thorough analytical works on the imagery of toast trees, which are often found in the artistic compositions of orthography.
  Therefore, in the framework of this study, an attempt was made to present the problem artistically և to give some clarifications.
In the absence of the field, the stylized toast tree motif found in different branches of art was formed in Mesopotamia in BC. Appeared in the 4th millennium, and in the 2nd millennium in other ancient Egyptian cultures [21, p. 161].
 The decorative symbol of the toast tree is known from the ancient Mesopotamian seals (a tree, the base of which is crowned with a fork or a crescent, a toast tree with crossed branches ending in fruit).
 This simple picture often changes from a tree to a fruit, a bush, etc.
  Assyrian BC In the monuments of the 10th century։ later in the monuments the image of the living tree becomes a more complex և symbol, with human-like images in a mirror position on both sides [22, p. 6].
In the art of the Millennium Kingdom of Van, the tree structure, style and ways of depiction are different.
  The three-part structure of toast trees is more widespread: original, naturally emerging branches, fruits crowning the branches or plants.
This type of tree from the middle of the second millennium, with conical wreaths, pomegranate fruits or palm fronds, is characterized as a late Assyrian motif [21, p. 163].
  Along with the strengthening of the Neo-Assyrian kingdom, it spread throughout the Middle East and was preserved in art until BC. Data on the ideological significance of the 1-inch painting were not preserved in the Mesopotamian written sources.
The various trees of Urartian art are represented either by whole trees or by the images of tree branches depicted in the hands of the deities.
  In the Erebuni-palace compositions, archetypes ending in fruit-bearing branches are presented (Figs. 1, 2).
  A fragment was found in Erebuni, a realistic tree with branches emerging from the nest is depicted in blue (Fig. 3).
Schematic depiction in the branches of the usual painting kingdom.
  Schematic primitive images of a tree with branches originating on the Vanihamalior have been used in natural Urartian hieroglyphic symbols [5, p. 8].
 The prototype of this type of toast tree in the Armenian highlands in evergreen paintings [5, p. 50, salt. 16, fig. 1].
  See a rock-cut toast This primitive horse of Geghamakareli is also repeated in an Urartian seal found on the Red Hill [14, p. 57, fig. 43].
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Stylized decorative ornamental trees and plants depicted in the frescoes give a clear idea of ​​the Urartians' imagination and color thinking.
  The pictorial types of trees in art were formed from the knowledge of people about trees in ancient times and as a result of visual empirical experience.
  In ancient Eastern art, the various stylistic features of trees were conditioned by symbolic functions.
  The document of the ancient Mesopotamian notions is found in the epic poem "Gilgamesh և Khuluppu Tree" in the epic novel "Gilgamesh" [10, p. 174], where the goddess Inana, who grew on the banks of the pure Euphrates, uprooted and took it home .
  It is known that ancient Mesopotamia imported high-rise timber from the Armenian Taurus Mountains to the high-altitude region of the probably arboreal trees.
  The peoples of southern Mesopotamia were familiar with only one species, the palm tree [15, p. 65], the Phoenician species being the prototype of the Mesopotamian toast tree [11, p. 47].
 Evidence of this is the toasts of Mesopotamian palm branches [23, p. 154], և probably under their influence the image of a palm tree was introduced to the kingdoms of Van.
  Evidence of tree worship in the Armenian Highlands is the use of plane trees in the landscaping of religious buildings [1, p. 510].
 The importance of tree worship in ancient Armenia is evidenced by the sacred alder grove in Armavir, where fortune-telling was practiced by the lord of the tree lords [8, Books A, I].
    The worship of trees was inextricably linked with the deities, as one of the symbols of the deity of Khald in Urartian iconography was considered to be the branch or the lord of the tree of life [12, p. 194], "perhaps the tradition of divination by the lords of those trees was transferred to Europe."
It is noteworthy that the words denoting a temple among Germanic tribes, according to the famous German philologist, linguist Y. According to Grimmient, they were associated with the ancient tradition of considering forests as sanctuaries [17, p. 111].
  Some European peoples worshiped trees, and the word sanctuary was originally էլ equivalent to the Latin word "nemus".
The worshipers of sacred parks and trees disappeared from the Germans among their descendants [17, p. 111].
 In Uppsala, for example, there was a sacred park where trees were considered divine [17, p. 111].
 The worship of trees existed among the Slavic pagans, where even the branch of a tree was considered sacred, which was forbidden to be cut.
  The worship of trees was widespread in Greece and Italy.
 In ancient European tribes, there was a custom of priestly rites and sacrifices at a sacred tree.
 The roots of the trees served as a pulpit for the ritual and ritual system.
for the worship of the deities by means of the groves of the trees.
  It is not ruled out that such an event took place in the kingdom of Van.
  In the Urartian compositions, the tree surrounded by relics is presented in the symbolic ritual of fertilization.
  The tree, as a fruit-bearing creature, like the woman և mother, is worshiped in Vanikaեղtegh, East Africa, where it is forbidden to cut down trees, as the tree is associated with motherhood, the creature that provides them with life and food [17, p. 112].
This symbolic connection between the "female fertility" of the tree is confirmed in the Kingdom of Van by the pre-Urartian female idol-statues found in the Red Hill, the surface of which is decorated with schematic floral ornaments [13, p. 115].
This phenomenon is at the symbolic basis of the image of a branch of a gold medallion found in Toprak-kale, the hand of the goddess Urubainin (Fig. 4).
in artistic decoration: Picture 4 related ևelyanH. According to Martirosyan, Uarubaini was a great-grandmother, a pre-goddess, the mother of Khaldi և Teisheba, like the goddesses of celestial spontaneity [4, p. 77].
  The statues of the goddesses of fertility and vegetation in various ancient cultures were decorated with plant motifs, placed near grain wells or pools, used in agricultural, natural awakening ceremonies.
According to some preserved information, the pagan Armenians donated tree branches to the goddess Anahit [2, pp. 35-36], which are comparable to the branches depicted in the Urartian art in the hands of Urubaini.
It follows that in some compositions the idea of ​​a tree is associated with the fertile function of the female, it can be concluded that in the middle of Urartian imagery it is the symbolic act of tree-fertilization that is performed by male characters.
with vines.
According to some studies, the worship of the sacred tree in Babylon in Assyria was associated with the supernatural deity, and in Akkadian culture with the sacred cedar tree of Deity, with the name of the deity inscribed in the core [22, pp. 6-7].
  In ancient Egyptian mythology, for example, the cult of Osiris was associated with a tree, and in Greek, in the kingdom of Dionysius Vanity, a mural depicting a mural with grape clusters preserved in the vase of Erebuni 65].
The grape-growing attitude of the people of Urartu is also reflected in the references to some agricultural rituals, such as grape growing, grape drying, and grape harvest [3, pp. 76-78].
  In this regard, it is noteworthy that in decorative art, the idea of ​​a toast tree can be expressed not only in the image of a tree, but also in the form of stylized floral patterns [4, p. 2].
  It can be concluded that the tree, which is considered to be the main symbol of agriculture, was a symbol of dying and resurrection or of deities of love and fertility [7, p. 212], embodying the important phenomena of nature.
  Stylized toasted trees, or simply floral ornaments, have always been associated with the idea of ​​growth ղ fertility, as flower ornaments (varsanda-fruity organs) people expected the fruit expected from the flower in different centuries [6, p. 5].
  This is evidenced by the evolving line of life evident in the stylized tree paintings: birth, growth, fertility [16, p. 396].
 In the longitudinal picture of the bronze belt found in the Red Hill, the generalized idea of ​​the toast tree is expressed in stylized floral ornaments, which delimit the successive images of the supreme deities (Khaldin on a lion and Teisheba on a bull) (accentuated seed) .
Figure 5 Thus, it turns out that in Urartian art the tradition of toast կեն ritual fertilization ևs և can be associated with the main deities of the mythology.
 Its vividness is the tradition of rituals of donating to the deity of Khald in the temple of Ayanis [19, p. 65].
In fact, in the Urartian culture, the branch of the tree of life was given a ritual significance; in artistic compositions, it was depicted in the hands of both male and female deities.
Thus the idea of ​​fertility is associated with the four stages of life: life, growth, degradation, death [13, p. 396].
  In mythological "religious systems" the growth of life is emphasized by the flowering of the tree, the ripening of the fruit, bearing the secret of life and immortality.
 In some cultures, the toast tree is often used in conjunction with the equestrian as a bearer of fertility [16, p. 397].
In Urartian iconography, the bearers of this fruitful power are the male deities, who are probably the saints who form the common idea of ​​a woman and a tree giving birth.
