In the first level of higher education, according to the bachelor's degree program, the course, graduation or diploma thesis, thesis or report are considered research.
  And at the master's level, the research work and practice increase, which ends with the defense of the final thesis.
  In order to do such work during the study, the student needs certain theoretical knowledge և skills of conducting research, formulating and presenting [1].
Experience in teaching literacy requirements and practical skills development methods to conduct research work for students.
We propose a series of sequential steps, their teaching and promotion, appropriate approaches to the positive result of the performance of research work.
1. Desire to learn something new, to work.
This seemingly unusual requirement is the best guarantee of success.
  Because it is a fact that it is constantly proved in pedagogy that it is almost impossible to teach something to someone who does not want it.
  Therefore, the potential task of the supervisor is to interest the student in doing research work.
2. Choice of topic.
When choosing a topic, we suggest to be guided by the preferences of the supervisor or researcher, the scientific orientation of the given structure, the development prospects of the given field, the challenges, the issues still to be studied in the given field, the problems specific to the given area.
The topic should definitely indicate the specific scope of the research.
The following steps can be taken to develop the theoretical skills needed to do the practical requirements needed to do the research.
  Assign students in advance to formulate all the requirements related to points 1-7 from the teaching methodology (or other field) to the topic of the research topic և below, in order to work on the next lesson.
  Then, all the presented steps should be discussed in the classroom, taking into account the indicated requirements.
  As a general approach to editing, we suggest discussing deviations from the instructions in the relevant paragraph, starting with the topic title.
The version will be organized, a discussion will be organized, the title will be edited with justifications.
For example, submit a topic entitled "Organizing Biology Lessons Using Modern Methods."
Considering the fact that the notion of "modern methods" used in postgraduate teaching with post-independence requirements in the pedagogy of textbooks, the need for cooperative editing can be justified by the fact that emetics are difficult to relate (interactive) mainly in the classroom. topic selection.
  For that, the title should clearly indicate the scope of the research.
2) No method has a statute of limitations, և both traditional and collaborative methods used today are modern, գրեթե moreover, almost no collaborative method was born today, except for methods using computers օգտագործ other modern technical devices.
  Today, only methods have been named, which simply makes it easier for everyone to recognize and use them, but can be used for the same purposes in non-traditional teaching.
As a result, the title can be reworded, for example, as "Biology Teacher X's Changing Essence, with Relatively Collaborative Methods (or Another Principle)".
3. Formulation of goals.
The formulation of the goals should correspond to the title, so the more successful the title will be, which will contain a dominant word indicating the goal.
Objectives should justify why the work should be done, be commensurate with the researcher's capabilities and resources, point out the direction of the research steps, and the expected results.
(to resources) In case of more than one goal, they should be constructive, continue, complement each other, complete the goal.
When setting goals, it is desirable to show the following (or similar) actions: - to promote, to teach, to improve, to support, to supplement, to add, to develop, to to enhance, to strengthen, to unite to accredit, define a strategy, further development, predict directions նախ etc.… [5].
Suppose a topic entitled "Collaborative Lesson as an Effective Learning Tool" is suggested or edited.
  The goals of doing research on this topic can be formulated as follows: 1. Develop the skills of students (or other target group - lecturers, teachers…) to plan and organize collaborative lessons.
2. Improve the student's applied skills of collaborative teaching methods.
3. Improve the quality of teaching, learning, etc.
The similar denials that we have encountered in various sources.
For example, are they worth it? Study collaborative methods.
The refusal can be justified by the fact that what you have formulated is a problem, not a goal.
  In addition, it does not indicate any expected development outcome.
 Or: 2. Develop the process of studying the "X" topic.
This formulation must be rejected, first of all, for being illogical.
 In addition, it is difficult to imagine the geography of the study. where, by whom should the research be related, etc.
4. Formulation of problems.
In essence, the formulation of problems is a "scenario", where all the "staff" are connected with each other by causal connections. They have the same direction, they lead to the same goal.
The problems are the concrete, measurable, achievable, realistic, corresponding to the general goal, presupposing a definite implementation period, which must thoroughly answer the questions of what sequence of steps, how to carry out the work.
When formulating problems, it is expedient to use the following (or similar) verbs: to study, - to define, to create, to develop, to plan, to prepare, - to apply, to conduct, to test, to organize, to include, - to discover, to confirm, to analyze, to evaluate, to suggest, to present, etc. [5]
In the example of the previous example, point 3, "Develop the collaborative skills of organizing students (or other target groups, lecturers, teachers…)", the problems related to the logical formulation can be presented in the following formulations:
2) Study collaborative lesson plans taken from the sources.
3) Create a collaborative lesson plan for any topic.
4) Organize lessons with that plan during the pedagogical internship or practical course of the relevant course.
5) Conduct discussions with the students participating in the class.
6) Identify the successful և unsuccessful aspects of the lesson plan.
7) Improve the lesson plan.
8) Draw conclusions and recommendations.
5. Methodology.
From a mix of research goals and objectives.
  By what means should its formulation suffice, what should the principle get?
Methodology is formed. organizing skills.
In our practice we often encounter such formulations as: - making lesson plans, - organizing lessons, - doing analyzes, - etc.
There is no such expression, relevance.
  In fact, they are merely expressions of the means, pointing out the problems, not directing the realization of the goal.
The final results of the rejection of the mediation, Qanior6. Content of the work.
In contrast to the more common notion that content can be formulated after graduation, we find that in order for a job to be successful, it is necessary to have a clear idea of ​​what the original content should be formulated first.
  Which means it's about to be the most delusional time of the year, as well.
Therefore, the steps, all the content of the research work should include the names of all the structural parts required by the employer կանոն regulations և the pages corresponding to them in the work.
 Example: Introduction (pointing to the page) ……………………………… General information on the topic or the employer's regulatory requirements can be provided here.
For example, the justification of the choice or relevance of the topic, research problems, methodology or some of them, etc.
Implementation Objectives, Main Part Different employers may refer to this part differently. for example, "Literary review", etc.
  This part includes the heads.
  Each chapter և its sub-chapters must be logically connected և together complete the objectives.
 For example, they should have titles that need to be covered.
  In that case, we suggest pointing to the page of the chapter, in other cases it is possible to bookmark only the sub-chapters.
Subheadings with consecutive double subheadings corresponding to the chapter, the titles are presented, the pages are pointed.
must be numbered 1.1. Advantages of collaborative learning ……… 1.2. The history of collaborative learning …………… .1.3. և etc.Chapter 2. Collaborative lesson planning 2.1. Principles of Collaborative Planning ………………………………………………………………… 2.2. Samples of encyclopedias from the original ………………… ... ………………… collaboratively taken 2.3. և etc.This chapter may be the first subchapters.
Chapter 3. Own Research (Methodology) Outcome Analysis Depending on the topic, this chapter may have subchapters.
3.1. What is the topic of the collaborative lesson plan (indicate the title) created by us ………………………………… .. …………… 3.2. Tasks for organizing a collaborative class (indicate the title) ………………………………………………………… ... քում In sub-chapter 3.2, it is desirable to indicate the tasks according to the steps and goals of the lesson plan.
3.3. Lesson Discussion Analysis ………………………. ………… 3.3. In the sub-chapter's essay, the participants' oral opinions or lesson transcripts, suggestions, conclusions about the lesson plan, organized lesson advantages and disadvantages, and further corrections can be presented.
Conclusions և Recommendations The "Conclusions և Recommendations" section of the Regulatory Requirements submitted to the researcher may be combined or separately.
Conclusions should include analytical observations on the results of the work.
  Suggestions should point to alternative ways of improving such work or eliminating errors.
In order to formulate, it offers a principled approach, conclusions from the problems.
  The conclusion should provide information on the outcome of the implementation of the objective task (each of them), contain an analytical statement on the justification of the outcome (why did it turn out, did the result correspond to the expectation or what ensured the outcome corresponded to the expectation, what was the reason for the discrepancy, etc.) .
In case of intentional request, the conclusion should indicate in the conclusion the reasons for such an outcome (for example, inconsistency of method, timeliness, lack of directness to the main purpose or problem, purpose of independent research or other reasons for problem).
Based on the analytical evaluation of the results, recommendations can also be made.
For example. In the example of point 3, the conclusions on the 1st goal "Develop the skills of the target group of students - lecturers, teachers" (or other co-organizing ") can be formulated as follows: lesson planning և 1. Student-centered scheduling activities. lack or insufficient level of theoretical material, or other….
And this suggestion can be formulated as follows: 1.1 Review the curricula, improve the requirements of the taught theoretical knowledge, comply with the standard requirements, add practical lessons for the study of the topic, or other….
2. Insufficient skills to plan and organize collaborative lessons by teachers or lecturers are due to the lack of knowledge of theoretical skills or little application in practice.
The proposal (s) corresponding to the conclusion can be formulated as follows.2.1. It is necessary to identify the problems of teachers through monitoring, to provide methodological support through the organization of frequent classes, master classes, seminars.
2.2. It is necessary to organize continuous thematic trainings for pedagogical staff in order to teach the requirements of general education reforms, to improve the pedagogical-methodological skills.
List of used literature The list of literature is completed again according to the regulations provided to the researcher by the employer.
In the process of completing the work, as a way to collect the sources used, we suggest: 1) In parentheses next to each link, indicate all the regulatory requirements for the source.
  At the stage of finalization of the work, move them to the "list of literature" section, arrange them according to the regulatory requirements.
Move the corresponding serial number to the reference page of the worksheets. Get rid of the unsolicited information.
For each source 2) And for the accuracy of the information on the Internet, after sending the source, indicate the date of its availability.
For example: https.
//arinj.schoolsite.am/educational/methodological reports/ -available 01.02.20197. Public Presentation of the Work In addition to the formulation of many research works, the public presentation of the work (defense, defense, conference report, etc.) is an important stage, which gives an idea not only of the work done, but also of the indicators of different qualities of the researcher.
  The fully formulated work is considered ready for presentation.
  It must have a Title Sheet, the technical requirements for which are provided by the employer, together with all other regulatory requirements.
For the presentation, the researcher can create posters, tables and graphs or present a slide show.
Leaving the aesthetic side of the latter to the individual, several desirable requirements for the creation of a slide show for research work can be suggested.
 For example: 1. all slides should have titles թեմ corresponding to the given information, so that the information in them is concise, schematic, without narrative sentences.
The following will be presented: 2. job title, place of work or employer name, names of the executor և manager, year of execution, 3. research goals, objectives and methodology; conclusions and recommendations.
And for the "objectivity" of the reliability of the final evaluation of the work, it is recommended to develop evaluation criteria in advance և scale requirements, which և it is desirable to provide to the researcher together with other regulatory requirements.
  Criteria may include, for example, points 2-6, such as the presentation of a slide show, the free, easy presentation of the language, the degree of mastery of the material, the degree of independence, the ability to communicate analytically with the audience. , the quality of the answers to the questions related to the work, etc. [2].
As a summary of our work, we are hopeful that with the following guidelines, after organizing the necessary number of practical classes, the audience will be responsible for respecting the regulatory requirements during the implementation, will have the knowledge, abilities and skills to work hard, increase success and increase experience.
Sufficient theoretical and practical work of any university will definitely increase the quality of teaching and learning.
In the present methodical work is proposed.
