Barsegh Sargisyan (1852-1921) is one of the prominent figures of the Mekhitarist Congregation in Venice.
This grateful person of Armenology has often appeared in "Bazmavep" magazine with articles of pedagogical and educational value, which are still relevant today.
One of those articles was published in January-February 1890 in "Bazmavep" [2, 3].
The title of the article is "The Impact of Past History Education and the Necessary Means for Its Study."
The history of the Armenian historical past. Sargisyan wrote his article on the occasion of a publication of the "Mshak" periodical (No. 81) in 1889, in which the author made a strict study. It can have an educational effect on the present.
  The writer of "Mshaki" asked the following question: "Do we have a past that, being cleansed of the dust of antiquity, removed from behind the veil of history, can be accessible, has an educational impact on the people who seek to study their past?"
  In response to this, he proves himself. "No, we do not have such a study of past historical life" [2-].
The writer of "Mshaki" partially repeats the dissatisfaction that Raffi expressed in the prefaces of "Samvel" novels.
  That is, the ancient Armenian historians provided dry and land information, spoke about princes and individuals.
Such questions of "David Bek" շ "Mshaki" are connected with certain demands of the newspaper's founder-editor Grigor Artsruni towards literature.
 Back in 1868, in the article "Which of the two is better?" Published in "Haykakan Ashkharh" magazine, Artsruni emphasized the educational significance of literature. "Now we can answer the question of what the works of literature are written for.
In order to do that, they will teach the society to think, to examine their own life, that is, to strive for depilation, for the betterment of my life, for progress [2-10-11].
գրվումեննոքա, որԲ. Sargisyan considers Mshak's columnist's underestimated view of Armenian ancient historians to be pessimistic and exaggerated.
He is aware of the admiring opinions of foreign Armenologists: A. Ժ. Saint-Martin, M. F. Brose, Ed. Dulorie, F. NZ, Fr. Koniber Zurishner, who highly valued the ancient Armenian medieval historiography.
  He refers to the great English poet Byron, who said of the Armenians that there is no nation whose history can give as many virtues as the history of the Armenian nation. [2-5]
In the Fifth Century of Evil, Armenians surpassed "the literature of a great ancient nation like Persia" in their historians.
Sargisyan's approach is very modern in terms of history. he demands to critically assimilate the past, to reap the useful from it, to learn from the mistakes so as not to repeat them.
 It is worth remembering what Yeghishe was saying when he was mercilessly beating Vasak Syunetsi, who was initially with the Armenian rebels, but at the decisive moment left Vardan Mamikonyan and the people. If he hears this, he will know the curse and read it with him, and he will not be interested in his deeds. "[4-283]
The Armenologist considers obligatory the examination view of the writer-historian on the history of the Armenian people.
  It is necessary to present the background image impartially and scientifically accurate.
Hovhannes Tumanyan also had this demand, who wrote "Parodia" of Hovhannes Hovhannisyan's poem "Have you seen my homeland?"
Hovhannes Hovhannisyan Have you seen the village alone in the valley? And the magnificent gardens spread around, And the golden ears և a peaceful stream, Have you heard the songs of sweet art.
[7-18] Hovhannes Tumanyan Have you seen the village alone in the valley and the old piles of garbage scattered around it?
 [5-270] The Armenologist states that our historians and writers sometimes do not know the exact history of the ancient Armenian life, they leave it to strangers, who sometimes criticize mercilessly.
  This provision is very topical, because by transmitting Turkish-Azerbaijani ancestral cultural values, historiography completely distorts the historical past of Armenia, the territories, the bibliography, or destroying the still preserved monuments.
  If anyone knows the past of his people with any facts, he will lead his nation to progress according to the requirements of the time. This is Sargisyan's demand.
It is obligatory for a philologist, historian, teacher to research, examine, and distinguish right from wrong.
  This demand was put forward in the Golden Age by the historian Movses Khorenatsi, who was illegally transferred by foreigners later, in VI (Z), VII (E) and VIII (H) centuries.
B. Sargisyan strongly emphasizes the existence of scientific journals and their regular publication.
Many national scribes lament that we do not have the magnificent wealth of European Matenadaran.
  He cites the example of Jond Alishan, who, according to the facts reported by ancient authors who had never seen Armenia, carried the world of Armenia on his shoulders.
Diodorus The Assyrian The history of the ancient world is known to science for the love of Herodotus, Beros, and literature, in which there are possible facts about Egypt, Assyria, Marastan, and Persia.
  However, they did not, and European archaeologists began archeological excavations.
  Their results were astonishing.
The tablets of Thebes, Nineveh, and Persepolis were excavated, and Egyptian symbols and cuneiform were deciphered.
If Herodotus, who could not know the secret of the Egyptian priests, did not know the signs, then the Europeans read their signs today.
  He alludes to the fact that Napoleon Bonaparte's soldiers during the Egyptian invasion found a stone on which was inscribed in three languages.
  The original Egyptian symbols were painted on the stone in Greek.
  This stone is known in science as Rosetta.
  It was found in Egypt in 1799, sent to Paris, and 23 years later the French philologist Jean-François Champollion (17901832) found the key to reading Egyptian symbols in Greek [9-65-66].
B. Sargisyan talks about the mummies of Egyptian pharaohs Ramses I and his son Ramses II.
The Armenologist is convinced that the Christian Armenian historians "voluntarily" forgot the pagan past religious-cultural values ​​of the Armenians.
  Archaeological excavations in the territory of Great Armenia can fill that gap.
Of course, B. After Sargsyan, archeological excavations were carried out in the territory of Soviet Armenia, present-day Armenia, but they are not enough, because the territory of independent Armenia is only one-tenth of Greater Armenia.
  Anne-Jean-Pierre Maherner's book on the history of Armenia (from its inception to the present day) has a great deal of insight into this very important issue.
  They write that the secrets of the Armenian land in the territories of Turkey and Iran, unfortunately, are not available to Armenians.
  There are also Armenian monuments in the border areas, which are inaccessible to Armenians [8-12].
The coins of the Armenian kings will greatly contribute to the correct idea of ​​Armenia's past.
 It is necessary to find out why 4 royal families are recognized for Armenia, which was already state-owned 2000 years before the birth of Christ.
  It is necessary to carefully read Movses Khorenatsi's ոդHerodotus descriptions about Armavir, Artashat, Nakhichevan և and other benefits.
The exact Armenologist warns that the question he raises should not sound like a sound in the caves of deserted rocks, otherwise the seed should fall into the fertile soil.
 Archeological meetings in Stockholm, Vienna, discussed the many cuneiform inscriptions found in Ayrarat ում nothing else.
In order to truly present the historical past of Armenia, it is necessary to have a capable government, an educated "deserving society".
 He regrets that in 1890 he did not have an Armenian statehood, but they have rich merchants, through whom it is possible to draw the attention of archaeologists like Schliemann to the rich past of Armenia.
Armenian intellectuals thought of opening national antiquities in Tbilissi (Georgia).
  However, in that Etchmiadzin the ideas of the museums were not brought to life.
Plutarch testifies that the Armenian king Artavazdus was a lover of writing tragedies in Greek.
Movses Khorenatsi, Agatangeghos, Zenob, Pavstos, Koryun about the world-building of the emperors, the construction of Andria, the victorious inscriptions and many other things [3-56].
ArshakunipatumenB. Sargisyan mentions the protocol of Dareh Vshtaspyan found in Persepolis, which is known as the Behistun protocol, in which there is Armenia, Armenia as a state [3-57].
Indeed, the concern of the devotee about the Mekhitarist Congregation is completely understandable.
  He concludes his article with the fact of Schliemann's discovery.
 If Homer poetically described Troy, which was destroyed ten centuries before Christ, ավ found Trojan Schliemann buried under twenty meters of soil 19 centuries after Christ, does not this warn the Armenians that it is necessary to excavate the capital of Armenia, Armavir, which mentions Ptolemy ].
  He ends his article with an emotional application, saying: "Armavir, come abroad, stand up and tell us about your past" [3-57].
The goal of the Armenologist is scientific. It is necessary to find out the national past in order to develop the present and the future.
Today, of course, the ruins of the city of Armavir have been studied.
 Armavir is the first capital of Armenia, it was founded by Aramayis, the founder of the Ararat kingdom.
  BC IV-III centuries was the capital of the Yervanduni, preserving the name of Armavir.
  It was also the main center of pagan worship of the Armenian state.
  There are finds from ancient Armavir in the State National Museum of Armenia [6-234].
B. Not only have the provisions of Sargisyan's article not become obsolete, but they remain relevant because the historical Greater Armenia, Cilicia, Armenia retain traces of their legitimate land structures, which are considered a universal human heritage.
