Trafficking in Labor, because the modernity of work, the discovery and evaluation of socio-geographical features is one of the greatest evils of today's society.
Various sources of information while working, including printed books, information manuals, guides, reference-reports, websites (government agencies, RA National Statistics Committee, RA Police, public reports, training aids, media, youth, media, television) with Ani Makaryan, an expert on trafficking and forced labor.
Both in the world and in the world, the anti-human phenomenon "Trafficking" has passed a long way of development, has an ancient history, a wide geography, spread in the Republic of Armenia.
 It can be described as a form of modern slavery, accompanied by the most serious human rights violations, such as labor exploitation, the sale of human organs, tissues, and the involvement of children in anti-social activities (including begging).
According to Kevin Bales, a leading expert on modern-day slavery, more than 27 million people in the modern world are in slavery [1, p. 5].
Human trafficking was first raised in the Republic of Armenia in 1999, when a study on trafficking in human beings from Armenia was conducted with the support of the Armenian Office for Migration.
Great increase in both general crimes and trafficking cases in the Republic of Armenia, which can be imagined from the annual reports of the RA Police and the US State Department.
The following cases of trafficking have been registered in Armenia. 1. Exploitation of Armenian citizens in other countries (foreign trafficking), 2. Exploitation of Armenian citizens and foreigners in Armenia (internal trafficking).
Armenia for labor, sexually trafficked men, women, and children.
"Endpoint" "Starting Point" Country A growing problem is the trafficking of women, children, sex and labor, as well as cases of involving children in anti-social work within the country.
Criminal cases initiated on the characteristics of trafficking in the Republic of Armenia in 2008-2017. 436, the maximum number of criminal cases was 65 in 2009, and the minimum was 29 criminal cases in 2014. [2]
Diagram 1. Directions of External Trafficking There are several directions of human exploitation or trafficking.
  RA 2008-2017 As a result of the analysis of the cases, we have singled out 6 directions of external trafficking, which are presented in the form of a diagram.
 The main three cases of external trafficking fall into the first three areas [see Figure 1].
51 detected cases of foreign trafficking are of sexual exploitation registered in the Republic of Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
In the Russian Federation, in Georgia, the "victims" taken from Armenia to Armenia were mainly subjected to labor exploitation.
One of the 62 criminal cases filed in 2012 concerned the taking of human organs and tissues, in which case Sri Lanka was the "end" country.
Another criminal case was initiated և revealed in 2009 according to the features of Article 168 of the RA Criminal Code - "Sale and purchase of a child", in this case France was the "end point", in which case the victims were 4 [2].
In recent years, the number of internal trafficking cases has also increased, to which the citizens of both Armenia and other countries fall victim.
5 cases of exploitation of foreign persons in the Republic of Armenia in 2008-2017 have been revealed, 3 of which are cases of exploitation of citizens of the Federation from Russia and 2 cases of exploitation of persons who came to Armenia from China and Thailand.
  In all the mentioned cases, the foreign citizens were sexually exploited in Armenia.
Diagram 2. Forms of Trafficking Detection (according to the survey) In order to reveal the level of awareness of the youth in the period of April 17-20, 2018, we conducted a sociological survey on Kh. Abovyan Armenian University ան among students of Chemistry և Geography, Education, Biology, Psychology և Sociology, Foreign Languages, Mathematics, Physics.
  50 students took part in the survey.
During the survey of the faculties of pedagogical informatics we tried to find out what are the manifestations of trafficking in Armenia.
  In the sociological survey we recorded the following data: The majority of respondents, 78%, believe that there are cases of forced labor begging in the Republic of Armenia [see Figure 2].
Sexual exploitation promotes the formation and spread of trafficking in the Republic of Armenia, in particular: unemployment, low socio-economic level.
Socio-economic factors, urgent Unemployment in the Republic of Armenia is one of the main issues that need to be addressed with its negative consequences: poverty, emigration, increase, psychological problems, etc.
 The following facts are about that.
According to official data, the unemployment rate in 2016 18% or 220,200 people, of which 116,900 or 53% are men, 103,300 or 47% are women.
  In 2016, the economically active population of the Republic of Armenia was 1226,300 people [4].
Among the regions of the Republic of Armenia, the regions of Kotayk, Shirak and Lori stand out with the absolute value of the unemployed, where in 2016, respectively, the indicators with the unemployed were registered: 24 000, 22 200 և 13 500.
  The lowest indicators were observed in Vayots Dzor / 1900 people / և Gegharkunik / 2800 people / marzes.
  More than 50% of the total number of unemployed in Armenia falls on the capital Yerevan.
Unemployment rate itself leads to population growth.
  According to the RA National Poverty Level Statistics, the poverty rate in Armenia was 29.4%, compared to 27.6% in 2008 and 29.8% in the previous year.
According to the service, compared to the previous year, it decreased by 0.4%, but the poverty rate did not change statistically.
Among the factors contributing to the development of trafficking is the number of divorces, which is justified by the fact that the majority of victims of trafficking are divorced women.
  In 2017, the number of divorces in Armenia increased by 28.5% compared to 2006.
  Along with the increase in the number of divorces, there is a decrease in the number of marriages, the average age of the couple (instead of 27.1 in 1995, the average age of the couple is now 30.8 years).
Diagram 3. Conditions of occurrence of trafficking (according to the survey) As a result of the analysis of the factors of trafficking development in the Republic of Armenia, it became clear that the highest indicators were registered in the capital Yerevan, Lori, Kotayk marzes.
  Relatively low indicators were registered in Vayots Dzor and Syunik marzes.
  The indicators have been developed by us.
In parallel with the analysis of the official data, during the above-mentioned survey we tried to find out the opinion of the respondents on the causes of trafficking.
Among the reasons for the occurrence of trafficking, 15 respondents mentioned the unemployment of the population, poverty, the socio-economic level of the country.
  16% of respondents think that 14% of them think that divorce is a condition for trafficking [see Figure 3].
Infrastructure, air, road transport, all means of communication, taxi services, etc.
In the promotional series we can single out the spread of trafficking in hotel houses by RA drivers, the analysis of the official data published by the RA Police արդյունքում as a result of our own observations the table shows the causes of trafficking in the Republic of Armenia և its consequences [see Table 1].
Table 1. Causes of occurrence of trafficking and drahetevanknere of umPATCHARNERHETEVANKNERTntesakan chgnazhamAshkhatashukayi ankayunutyunGortsazrkutyun, aghkatutyunArdyunavet and iratesakanherankarneri batsakayutyunOrakyal sexual education yevaroghjapahutyan not matcheliorak not chishtdastiarakutyunKoruptsiaStverayin tntesutyunIravakan and judicial teratsumnerMigratsiaTsatsr irazekutyuntrafikingi vtangnerimasin, emotsionalanhasunutyun, angragitutyunKaghakakan, social, economic kayunutyanpakas, easy money vastakeludzgtumBrnutyun entanikumKhtrakanutyun and kartsratiperAvanduytnerHogebanakan traumas, genderayinanhavasarutyunPetutyan Anti-trafficking strategy is implemented by the Ministry of Education and Science, special attention is paid to the fight against anti-trafficking in the educational system.• International cooperation with different countries is strengthened.
• The "Human Trafficking։ Exploitation" teacher's manual is guaranteed as supporting literature.
• The topic is included in school curricula (grades 8-12).
Human trafficking is a matter of concern for the whole society, the causes and types of its occurrence are many and varied.
 It is necessary to be vigilant in the direction of "work to prevent the occurrence, why not to eliminate it".
Conclusion.
  The issue of human trafficking and exploitation has become a matter of concern for the whole society.
  According to many, the phenomenon is a thing of the past, modern history proves that it is still widespread today.
The Republic of Armenia is both a transit country and a source and destination country for trafficking.
Turkey, Russia and the United Arab Emirates are the main destinations for foreign trafficking.
  In the general volume of external trafficking, cases of sexual and labor exploitation prevail, to a lesser extent, cases of child trafficking, extortion of human organs and tissues.
The most common forms of internal trafficking in the Republic of Armenia are forced labor exploitation, sexual begging, and the purchase and sale of children.
"In the Republic of Armenia, the state has developed a strategy to combat trafficking, which needs to be improved year by year. և To try to eliminate one of the great evils of humanity, the exploitation of people, from Armenia.
