Modern rhythmic gymnastics is distinguished by its rules for each Olympic cycle անընդ constantly changing the refereeing system, the adaptation of which is quite a difficult process for athletes, coaches և the refereeing team.
  This process, being continuous, is aimed at reducing the subjective aspects in sports, increasing the objectivity of refereeing, which, of course, improves the athletic qualities of athletes.
  The results shown by the athlete in important international competitions depend not only on the sports-performance qualities, but also on the availability of modern sports equipment over time, as well as on the full mastery of the refereeing rules.
  For example, the removal of the 10-point limit on exercise complexity now allows athletes to maximize their opportunities, [3] which has made the sport even more spectacular, and the complexity of female athletes' exercise has grown exponentially.
Due to the pace of performance, the current state of work and artistic gymnastics in Armenia։ reveals potential problems for the sport։.
The purpose of analyzing sports on international platforms in Armenia Rhythmic gymnastics originated and developed during the years of the Soviet Union.
Despite the continuous development, along with the formation of the Third Republic of Armenia, as in other areas, the number of sports was also critical, which had a negative impact on our results in the international arena.
  In fact, we managed to fill that gap only in the last years.
  The starting country is constantly improving its position in the World Championships in Europe.
  It is noteworthy that currently Armenian athletes participate in many prestigious international tournaments, becoming winners and prize-winners, which raises the country's rating in the international arena.
Achieving the rating of the Youth Olympic Games was unprecedented for the sport in Armenia. At the Olympic Games in Buenos Aires Vadapyanova - the 5th place recorded in multi-fight, and with a separate instrument (ball) she is the 2nd place.
Since 2010, Artistic Gymnastics has been divided into individual and group sports, which, in fact, are considered separate Olympic sports.
  If the post-Soviet years were critical for individual artistic gymnastics, the group horse could not be said to have functioned in Armenia.
  The last 5 years can be considered an awakening period for the group horse, and the first serious competition in the international arena in 2015. The participation of the Armenian youth group team in the European Championship in Minsk.
The issue of group horse development is very urgent, as the country can participate in team competitions at the official European Championships of the European Gymnastics Union (UEG / IF) at the official European Championships (FIG / IMF) if it competes in both group and individual [1, 2 ].
  The above is aimed at promoting the development of group horses in all IMF member countries.
It is noteworthy that in 2019 For the first time, the World Youth Championship was held in Moscow for group, individual and artistic gymnastics, which is a very big step by the IMF for the "massification" of the development of the sport.
(1-sport Currently, there are adult gymnastics sports clubs for adults in the Republic of Armenia in four cities: Yerevan (7), Gyumri (3), Kapan (1), Kajaran (1), as well as private sports clubs. It operated only in Yerevan և Kapanak cities, since 2000 in Gyumri և since 2011 in Kajaran.
The total number of artistic gymnastics clubs is from 4 to 20 years old. More than 1000 athletes.
 In the last three years, about 80-100 female athletes have participated in the RA championships (as masters of sports (masters of sports)), which has doubled than in previous years, speaks of the continuous development and popularization of sports in the republic.
It should be noted that the spread of sports և development in other regions of the country և in cities is very important, artistic gymnastics was created to maintain and maintain the health of women և girls, at the same time being a means of active entertainment և satisfying aesthetic needs, including dance և sports.
  Expanding the geography of sports is a specific problem in some respects, as the decentralization of specialists to regions or other cities is a complication, in turn, the lack of sports facilities and professional property does not allow professionals to invest their efforts in another place.
Despite the great work done by the Armenian Gymnastics Federation to develop the sport և to make the country recognizable on international platforms, Armenia has very serious problems, in particular, sports schools, where gymnastics generally do not meet the standards of the sport. carpet), the absence of the latter has a direct negative impact on the performance of competitive performances.
Despite this, as another urgent issue, we can single out the need for group development of full-fledged artistic gymnastics in the Republic of Armenia.
Armenia has not yet come to terms with the steps taken by the adult group in the international arena, which, in turn, is demanding from the point of view.
  Group artistic gymnastics has been included in the program of the Olympic Games since 1996 (Atlanta). "The development of this branch of sports will allow it to fight for the Olympic ranking."
Thus, in Armenia, the acquisition of specialized sports equipment, the need for post-individual horse group gymnastics in Armenia, and the need for the development of sports in Armenia are among the priorities facing both individual and group gymnastics in Armenia.
 The existing gap can be filled through the training of coaching specialists, on the other hand, group development will contribute to the popularization of sports in the country.
