 Preface.
  Social work, as a professional activity, has emerged, developed «developed to improve human relations, interactions, և through" skillful intervention "to promote their transformation and development process [1].
Social work is aimed at supporting the solution of the needs of vulnerable individuals and groups who have lost their full participation in social life, their reintegration into public life.
  Social work is a so-called "national-national" analysis of the need to establish order in the life of a society with the intention of establishing a political, social representation [2].
  In order to improve human coexistence, in recent years in Armenia, the scientific and international community has carried out a series of studies on the process of formation of civil society, along with socio-economic and other peculiarities.
  The objective and subjective obstacles to the involvement of civil society in the process of involvement in the development of civil policy [4, 5] have been studied [7, 5], the impediments of the development of non-governmental organizations as civil society, etc.
  In favor of "social work" video science in Armenia, the needs of various vulnerable groups should be studied, ways of overcoming should be developed, the intertwined correlation of social work and social policy should be analyzed, and the theoretical bases of social work practice.
Improving the components, analyzing the risks of significant improvement in the consciousness of household groups. Their main part.
  Changes in economic, political, and social life in the post-Soviet space led to the recognition of the problems of transcendental conditions, the deliberate action of solving them, and then the radical collapse of social predictability in the problem of what was done and what was expected, to see the unexpected and uncertain directly present in their lives.
  The most socially vulnerable groups - individuals, families, groups and communities - who could not adapt to the changes were in the most unstable situation.
տեղի Adequately responding to the local The newly independent Armenian statehood's unpreparedness for the phenomena that arose in social life և all of this arose only as a result of confusion over a number of perceptual problems, from which everyone chose to owe their power to a powerless, unstoppable or unstoppable problem.
The state exercised selectivity of the problems of social life both from the quantitative and qualitative point of view.
  He provided the necessary assistance not on the principle of adequacy, but as far as he was concerned with the reduction, from the point of view of "economic convenience."
  However, in all of this, along with the insufficiency of state resources, there was a lack of understanding in understanding, defining and arguing the need, the size of the aid, the size, the method.
  When did he become more aware of the vital problems, the need for more help, the recognition of what was being done by others as "less than required" due to his insufficient resources?
  Such a confession, on the other hand, would mean that the state would recognize and, in principle, undertake the duty and obligation to supplement the insufficient confession it had made if it had subsequently recorded economic growth in its reports.
  Such a confession would mean that the state would at the same time undertake the obligation to reflect on all those realities identified and assessed as "needy" in the conditions of the utilization of capabilities և, that is, immediate "necessary training", "preparation" for future care [2].
In principle, the state structures, as well as the state structures, as a result of the nature of the problems, the approaches dictated by the diversity of the approaches chosen by them, and the adoption of the methods of activity, noticed deprivation of liberty.
  The realization was born in various state instances that non-governmental organizations (NGOs) could be "allowed" to deal with such problems.
to fix the problems of the people, for which the EPAs are the basis for the formation of a civil society.
  The right of NGOs engaged in need-supporting activities in newly independent Armenia was recognized by state structures, which was enshrined in legislative acts and norms.
  And it was noticeable that there was a difference between the state structures, the NGOs were more free to reveal the problems that arose, to examine them from the perspective, to choose the methods and methods of working out the solutions.
What is meant by "non-governmental organization"? What is meant by the term "non-governmental organization"?
According to the Law on Non-Governmental Organizations, we meet the definition of non-profit. The non-profit (non-commercial) organization is a non-distributive (non-commercial) organization among the participants, based on the common interest of non-governmental organizations, foreigners, stateless persons].
  In my opinion, NGOs are associations of people motivated by common goals, goals, values ​​and interests, fulfilling the mission of social love, coexistence and culture, social, educational, health, other, soul-supporting and life-saving problems.
In the past, a number of international organizations began to operate in Armenia, with the exception of non-governmental organizations [8], which included social work aimed at diverse individuals, groups, and diverse communities.
The emergence and expansion of charitable organizations ացումը The realization of social work are fundamental and fundamental factors for the development of civil society և with self-improvement.
  Why?
Here it is essential to define, with reinterpretation, the notion of "civil society" and the human reality marked by it.
  The perception of civil society as a social phenomenon has undergone a long process of development and transformation, these issues have been addressed by the greatest philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle Cicero, Locke, Hobbes-Kant, Hegel-Marx.
  According to Yu. According to Irkhin, "civil society" is understood as a complex of non-state, social, spiritual, religious, moral, family, national and other relations, the sphere of self-determination of individuals and voluntary organizations, which is protected by law from direct interference by state structures.
  In the Armenian political discourse, the term "civil society" is commonly used as an arena outside the family, state structures, social institutions, organizations or institutions, organizations created on an individual or collective basis, aimed at protecting public interests. [12]
In my opinion, however, the civil society is a collective achievement committed with the free will of human identities, a coexistence of state coexistence, a caricature that is mutually deepening and growing, and one that is instilled and cultivated in a benevolent and introverted manner.
Civil society should be primarily perceived as a subject of political, social, economic, legal and other relations, as the initiator and creator of the construction of those relations, which, in fact, continuously improves the system of law, the structure of the state. NGOs, always providing the developing opportunity, ությամբ offering various programs aimed at improving those relations through their creative activities.
 Of course, civil society is not only a subject but also an object of those relations, structures and organizations.
  However, the "civil society" becomes an object bearing the activity and energy of state and non-governmental structures, not completely subordinating the forced violence of those structures to the system of law, but only assuming rights and responsibilities towards all those structures that were created.
  This means that the possibilities of civil society-society self-organization are not structured.
Civil society is limited to this state of affairs. Civil society as such is presented first of all by its caring-civilizational quality, which is based on humanism որպես as a caring feeling, որպես as a caring IDEA.
  From the ever-deepening understanding of humanism in the history of mankind arises a new perception of justice, which is reflected in the system of legal-state structure. [13] և In the fields of social construction.
  And this means that the civil society does not present itself as isolated from the state-social structures it has created, but, including them, presents itself as a civil and civilized society with the unity of all that, in which, however, these structures must, in principle, contribute. In the spheres.
… ensure the ever-improving and evolving existence of human identity and coexistence.
  These structures should be a guide to the coexistence and vitality of human identity, not to suppress, that is, to suspend, disrupt, hinder the existence of civil society as a free creative entity, thus affirming only their self-purpose for their own self-interest.
All man-made structures should not, in principle, be an end in themselves, treating man and society as a horrible object of their own action and influence, thus annihilating civil and self-centered civilized society as such.
Everything created by man, the state and social structures, are civilizational achievements and culture itself, only if they liberate man, increase the degrees of freedom to self-improving human identity and way of life, not test and enslave man to the very purpose of their existence.
  A civilized society is such if its right to assume its freedom of choice is protected in all the issues of the initiative, creation and participation in the state and social construction of human interaction.
  The civilizational quality of the structures created by the civil society depends, in principle, on the very ideas of humanity, the consequent structure of which, which defines the concept of human life.
  And this means that the most important civilizational task is the purposeful activity of the person, his general way of life, to "change his personal way of life", to enable, promote and ensure well-being.
Sociological, called the improvement of human coexistence, since its inception, has not been able to change the human identity of any individual, particular family, vulnerable group, or nation. Theoretical, as an applied sociology with the possibilities of realism, remaining in a purely theoretical realization, remaining inert in the cultural-civilizational work of changing the identity of human life and preferably improving it.
Benefit from people through self-improvement or counseling. And change the very definition of social work (support) to the principle of cooperation and improve the human identity and way of life, and through the legislative initiative, the general way of life, which you achieved in daily activities.
  The most difficult of all the creatures of the natural world is man, և the most difficult to achieve human change in the daily activities of social work, this is a proven fact, which յուրաքանչյուր is related to, knows and reaches every social worker.
  It should be noted that this problem is also practiced by philosophy in the field of ethics, only psychology, social welfare and social psychology are aimed at changing and improving the inner self.
 Pedagogy is directly related to the problems of the formation of human identity.
  And it is known that in his activity, along with reinterpretation, he has the achievements of those sciences.
  Social work's originally necessary for this much-needed task of implementing the spiritual and civilizational development of mankind, the mission of human identity and life improvement in Armenia, has "primarily and to this day" developed in non-governmental organizations, only to be included and operated in state structures.
pokhgortsuneutyunumashkhatanknhasnelunpataknunisotsialakanirmardkayinHasarakakanpetakankarutsvatskneri cooperation on the basis of a civil sharknshanakali gortsonner.kazmakerputyunneriev • • kaghakatsinerihasarakakanhasarakutyankarutsvatskayinkazmakerputyunnerizargatsatsutyune number, direction, values ​​underlying activity nerendgrkvatsutyunehasarakakan irakanatsvoghsotsialakan organizations, educational, cultural, environmental programs, masnaktsabar • kaghakatsiakanhasarakutyansotsial-kaghakakanazdetsikutyune state power operation.
Conclusion.
  Social work is more pioneering in the issues of the needy, overcoming the needy, in general, in helping the needy or caring than the state and the public consciousness, presenting itself as a pioneer in the most essential, complex, difficult and unknown sphere.
Social work is called for human care - moral-psychological, educational, cultural, professional ..., անձ for individuals and groups who have lost in the system of well-being and prosperity to participate in social life, by changing the principle of adequacy as needed, empowerment and supportive capacity. to re-engage in social life in a vulnerable, endangered or insecure status.
"Social work" video-practical science, as a targeted scientific-professional activity of human identity, lifestyle and bioremediation, in accordance with its title, has become more established, continues to develop and develop mainly within the framework of NGOs.
  Considering the establishment and implementation of a civilized society based on the principle of complementarity of social work, social administration, social policy processes, the possibility of service, more comprehensive implementation of the needs of social workers, adequate support for the identification of consultants.
