 "The ability to communicate with people is the same product as sugar and coffee.
I'm willing to pay more for that ability than for any other product in the world.
John Rockefeller Social communication is the use of language in a social context.
  Social interaction, social recognition, pragmatics Development of verbal material [10].
  This fact, which concerns professionals, parents and teachers, has been the subject of many studies.
The development of a person's social communication has always been the focus of philosophers, pedagogues, psychologists and sociologists.
In the social center.
is the urgency of the live topic.
  It is known that the number of children with speech and communication difficulties all over the world is increasing due to lack of communication, digital technologies entering the child's life, family situation, ecological, physiological and other problems [ASHA-Social Communication Disorders].
  In the 21st century, communication is especially important through the acquisition of information, the exchange of ideas and experiences, and so on.
  However, this issue is always relevant for people with speech disorders, as these people have different problems of communication, both verbal and non-verbal communication.
The power of active socialization has been expressed in the works of a number of such educators as Y. A. Komensky, J.-J. Rousseau, A. Disterverg, K. D. Ushinsky, V. Ն. Shulgina Tsaylq [9].
The transition to the problem of formation of social activity of preschoolers It is necessary to understand what personal qualities a socially active person assumes.
  They include responsibility, independence, morality. A combination of other such qualities.
Features, many of which are Independence of children's activities is one of the main principles of the whole didactic system. "The teacher's task is to prepare the students for the already solved intellectual-intellectual activity for their solution" [7].
Do not study, direct. The purpose of our study is: 1. Analyze the development of social communication skills in the norm from the point of view of speech therapy, 2. To find out the essence of social communication of preschool-primary school students, 3. to decide during the work on the formation of social communication.
Nature Skills Speech Therapy For the above purposes we have set the following tasks: 1. to study professional literature on social communication, 2. to get acquainted with the methods of research of social communication disorders եղանակ the ways of possible correction.
For our research, the methods of interviewing, viewing, and the following tools were used: a questionnaire.
Conversation, the term "communication", according to Harper Douglas.
 "Communication".
 According to the Online Etymology Dictionary, it comes from the Latin word "communico", which means to make common, to connect, to communicate.
 The purpose of communication is to transmit information, which can be done in a variety of ways.
  Communication is the process of transmitting information, which is done through meaningful movements (gestures), facial expressions, words, press or e-mail messages, telephone, radio, television, etc. in other ways.
It is from these sources that children hear, see և take the information, with a certain vocabulary, grammatically correct և transmit the connected word to the environment.
Communication is a process of interaction of public entities (person, social group), during which the exchange of information, experience, knowledge, abilities արդյուն արդյունs the results of the activity [10, 11].
    What does it mean to be able to communicate?
  It means being able to recognize people, to assess their practical capabilities և, using communication based on it [1].
  One of the main directions of psycho-pedagogical work is to develop children's communication skills from pre-school age, to build relationships with them.
  Communication skills involve the child's quick orientation in different situations, the free use of verbal-non-verbal means of communication.
  In our practical experience, we often meet children in whose families the development of childbearing skills is not possible.
  This allows us to justify L. once again. S. Vygotsky's idea, according to which a child's speech is formed in social communication, in an active verbal environment.
  In this case, the emphasis in speech therapy work should be on the psychological protection of the child, his comfort, the need to create emotional contact with peers.
  In order to develop communication skills in the educational process of speech therapy work, it is expedient to enrich the vocabulary with words expressing emotions.
socialSocial communication, oral speech, written speech have a complex interaction.
  Social communication skills are needed for the expression and comprehension of language in both written and spoken language.
  Written տալիս oral communication enables effective communication in different social contexts, with different goals [10].
  This fact must be taken into account especially in our day, when communication through written word becomes more relevant.
Disabilities such as social contact, such as eye contact, facial expressions, body language, and gestures due to socio-cultural and individual factors [Curenton & Justice, 2004; Inglebret, Jones, & Pavel, 2008].
  There is a wide range of accepted norms for the above, depending on the individual characteristics of the given person, family իհարկե, of course, nationality.
According to the American Speech Association, social communication disorders are characterized by verbal-non-verbal communication difficulties used for social purposes.
  There are no social communication problems when the person: 1. It is communicated for a social purpose, which is specific to a specific ecological social situation.
2. Changes the communication mode to suit the "needs" of the listener.
3. Follows the rules of dialogue and monologue.
4. Understands the context or ambiguous word.
5. Understands what it is about, even when the academic is not clearly emphasized in the other person's speech.
Disruption of social communication can lead to distant problems: finding social status, relationships with friends, achieving success, success at work.
 All this is done in order to promote the development of social communication of children in the stage of speech development.
  The development of social skills begins in infancy, when the child begins to know the world around him.
  According to the American Speech Association, social communication disorders may be a separate disorder or may be associated with other problems: mental retardation, 2. Developmental disorders 3. Learning Disabilities 4. Oral speech disorders, 5. written speech disorders, 6. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 7. Brain injuries (children և adults), 8. aphasia, 9. weakness, 10. Injuries to the right hemisphere of the brain.
There is a wide range of autism spectrum disorders, which include impaired social skills, limited interest, and repetitive activities.
  It is manifested in the significant features of these children, but the main role is played by disorders of socialization and communication skills.
Disorders do not have significant social communication characteristics in the case of autistic spectrum disorders, which are accompanied by limited, stereotyped, social communication disorders can be diagnosed in the context of autistic spectrum disorders [8].
by behavior.
  Thus, there are certain rules that we repeat when we talk to them, depending on the situation we are talking to.
 An active social position in the most obvious social activity.
"Adults" and "children" can have problems using the rules of social communication of preschool children.
  Let's present a situation when you invited your friend to dinner.
  Your child, seeing how he tries to take cookies, says: "It would be better not to eat it, otherwise you will gain weight."
    You do not believe that he could say such a thing.
Or another situation? You talk to the neighbor about his norm car.
  He finds it difficult to continue the conversation. He deviates from the topic, talks about his favorite TV program.
  He does not look at you while talking, he does not even laugh at your jokes.
  He keeps talking even when you look at his watch, reminding him that it's too late.
Finally you leave, thinking how difficult it is to talk to him.
 Both your child and your neighbor speak well.
 The point is that they have problems of social communication, mastery of social abilities.
These and many other examples sometimes lead to misunderstandings.
  Such disorders are confused with intellectual, mental, etc. similar problems, while the communication problem requires comprehensive correction work due to the lack of skills of a speech therapist with the participation of a psychologist.
  3 main groups of social communication skills separated in the literature.
Use of language for different purposes: • To greet. "Goodbye, goodbye."
• For information. "I am going to the theater today."
• To demand. "Give me water."
• To plan: "I'm going to buy you a cake."
• To apply. "Please give me water."
Changing the conversational style depending on the situation ից of the speaker: • with a child և an adult, • with a person unaware of the topic աջ well-informed, • at home, in the classroom ակում on the playground.
Following certain rules in a dialogue's something to say: • Know when to speak, wait your turn.
• Introduce what you are going to talk about.
• Do not deviate from the topic.
• If someone does not understand you, then formulate the same idea in a different way.
• Use gestures և body language when speaking.
• Maintaining a certain distance between interlocutors.
• Mimicry անումը Maintaining eye contact.
Of course, these rules are different for different cultures.
People who have communication problems may: • Demonstrate inappropriate behavior when speaking incorrectly.
  For example, when talking or starting to talk about something else.
laugh • Tell irrelevant or pointless stories.
• Use the word sparingly, start the conversation without saying goodbye, do not say thank you, just say what they want.
According to I. Մ. According to Korotkov, the formation of a child's social communication needs can be presented in 4 main stages. երեխայիthe emergence of the child's interest in the adult is conditioned.1. By expressing the child's emotional expressions towards the adult.
2. Initiative actions by the child, attracting the attention of the adult.
3. Adult attitude նպ for the purpose of assessing the child's sensitivity.
4. The sensitivity of the child for the purpose of assessing the attitude of the adult.
In the end, children have a great desire to communicate with their peers in the first years of life, they like to be in the company of other children, even though they do not play yet.
  From the second year of life, communication with peers expands, համար for a 4-year-old child it becomes one of the leading needs.
  Uniformity increases, that is, behavior becomes more purposeful.
  On the basis of the child's communication needs, there is a need for recognition (peer development), which gradually reveals the possibilities of the child's cognitive sphere.
Independence from adults "(first of all after them. As noted by VS Mukhina, in the field of communication, the need for the cognitive processes acquired in the development process is of great importance, which determines the positive process of personal development.
  It teaches the child to strive for what is possible in the culture to which the child belongs.
Famous Russian psychologists, L. Ս. Vygotsky's students L. I. Bozhovich և L. Ս. Slavina's research proves that the diversity of relationships between high school preschoolers and the surrounding reality is determined by the social motivations created by the whole system of relationships that exist between children and the environment.
  These social motivations depend mainly on the family, the circumstances of the child's life, his / her position at school, his / her inner attitude towards the school, they include the aspirations, needs of the child, which arise from all circumstances of life, are related to the main orientation of the person.
Literature Professional communication is considered to be fast-accurate orientation during communication, which is based on an individual's communication experience.
Communication is an important component of a child's willingness to make his / her speech understandable and to understand the speech of others [2].
Speech disorders have a low level of verbal activity in children, which in turn hinders the development of thinking-cognitive processes, negatively affects individual development և preschool behavior.
  All this complicates communication. There are several main sources for acquiring communication skills: life experience, art, general educational level և special scientific methods [3, 4, 6].
Development of skills.
The problem of children's social communication from the point of view of speech therapy has been studied many times by many psychologists. Bozhovich, I. Kon, L. Ս. Vygotsky, D. Feldstein, D. B. Elkonin, J. Piaget, K. Լևին, Շ. Buhler և others.
  According to many of them, the process of further socialization of the child վելու integration into modern society largely depends on the results of the final development.
 Almost all psychologists agree that communication plays an invaluable role in the development of a child's personality, so it is "fundamentally possible" to study the characteristics of the child.
Taking into account the importance of social communication, the study of literature data և our practical experience և below և are the results of a survey conducted by speech therapists, parents of children with speech disorders, ուսումնասիր our studies among elementary school students։.
A total of 70 people took part in the survey, a speech therapist.
  The participants of the survey are people aged 18-32, belonging to the senior age group, of which 47% are active specialists, 33% are "student" employees, 13% are professionals with professional education, but do not work.
  The following is the comment of the respondents on social communication, in which 81.4% of the participants gave a psychological formulation of communication.
Chart 1. Percentage of respondents' comments on social communication.
56.3% of primary school students (70) are boys and 43.7% are girls.
 73.2% of them mentioned that they easily communicate with their classmates, have many friends, with whom they mainly met at school.
  Within the framework of our survey, pictures indicating certain moods were offered. The children had to choose the picture that expressed the mood they liked at the time. եին Made comparisons with their own moods.
  49.3% of them mentioned that there are cases when it is not possible to express their own thoughts, what they feel, see and hear so well.
Chart 2. The level of self-expression of the surveyed children in percentage.
They mainly mentioned when they have such difficulties. During classes they forget what they were talking about, when talking to teachers, playing, answering questions, when they want to do something, but find it difficult to explain and persuade, talking to strangers, etc. .
  The results of the survey were encouraging until it became clear that 59.2% of pre-school children prefer to play on the phone or computer in their free time, leaving yard games with friends in the background.
  Only 19.7% of them are ready to meet new people on their own initiative.
Thus, analyzing the results of the study, it can be noted that the majority of participants, almost 67.6%, found themselves in a situation where their communication skills were not sufficient for effective communication.
  88.7% of them state that they know people who have social communication problems.
  45.7% of respondents prefer live communication, but many of them spend 2-4 hours a day on the Internet, finding it difficult to answer the question of how much time they spend on live communication.
  71.4% of them state that digital technologies have a negative impact on communication skills.
70% of the respondents think that there is a need for targeted work on children's communication skills.
This question is always urgent in terms of the quality and timing of the child's speech development.
 When a speech therapist's conversation with a parent of a child with a speech impediment makes it clear that the child spends most of the day in front of the screen, he or she has speech impairment not only at the pronunciation and vocabulary level but also at the grammatical structure of speech. is seen as a good way to learn quickly.
  However, this allows us to conclude that no matter how much technological means occupy a large place in the naked world in the 21st century, nevertheless, speech, verbal communication, is still the greatest achievement of human age as a tool of thinking, a means of cognitive development.
  It should be noted that social communication skills disorders can be observed in both children with normal development and developmental disabilities.
  That is why it is purposeful to develop children's social communication skills, which is mentioned by the adult participants in the survey.
  Preventive-corrective speech therapy, especially in our days, when digital technologies have become more applicable in our daily lives than human zoology among both adults and children.
