Naregatsi, exaggeration, modernity, oxymoron, makdir, linguistic, and although the end is perceived as mortal, In other words, the writing of these sofas is alive.
 (Ban DZ, (b) 512) And although as a mortal I must die, But I will remain immortal near Aysmatyan.
 (Ban DZ, (b) 527) One of the secrets of this book being "eternal blood" is language.
Aristotle differs from the famous poet մ in that one tells about what really happened, and the other about everything possible.
He writes in "Poetics": That is why poetry is more philosophical than history և "։" [2].
  Based on this logic, we refer to the examination of the poem "Book of Tragedy" Narekatsulez in terms of the stylistic application of authorial novelties, taking into account the peculiarity of this "miracle".
  It is not only a work of art, its other merits and peculiarities to the peculiarities of art are the philosophy of the history of fiction.
  And the role of pictorial speech is invaluable in this inquiry.
If one of the main features of a writer's language, in general, of fictional language in general, is individuality, then it starts from the use of words, the creation of images.
  Language has many ways to create images.
 "The creation of an image is based on the use of indirect, indirect means, names instead of direct, indirect, indirect names of an object, action, property," the linguist rightly notes.
It is known that imagery is the most characteristic aspect of artistic speech, particularly poetic speech, the main feature of artistic language.
  The writer speaks-narrates with pictures, և on this basis a complete system of imagery is created, which is not typical or less typical of other styles.
  The tasteful choice of means of imagery, the master use make the writer's word beautiful, emotional, influential, purposeful.
To create perfect images, you need vividness, a unique sense of language.
  We were interested in H. Harutyunyan's remarkable analysis of Marquez's testimony. "The picture.
 There is always an image at the core… I must say that I have a huge database of images, which have begun to become, so to speak, meaningful and condensed… ", և concludes," that poetry is pictorial thinking "[3].
  This description is quite typical of Narekatsi's artistic speech.
Yes, "Narek" is a work of art valued for its variety of styles, narrative style, color, sound, high art of seeing the reality of new expressive forms, and freshness of linguistic means of expression.
  In Gorg Jahukyan's book we read that in the Indo-European period the vocabulary of the language was differentiated, rich in means of imagery [4], so it is questionable from history.
  Let us mention that the content of the first works performed in the 5th century by Hr. Acharyan considers the richness of language, eloquence, the elegance of grammatical phrases, etc.
The uniformity, regularity, synonymy in the classification of rules, in the context of which the new words that are constantly created in the language vocabulary stand out, which at this stage of language development are called innovations.
  We know that the emergence of new words and meanings is done in two ways: verbal և semantic.
  The almost inexhaustible possibilities of composing new words in Armenian were manifested with a certain vitality in the Armenian fiction of the old and new periods.
  Individual innovations are of great interest in terms of linguistic examination; they express the world-feeling, world-perception and cognition as much as possible, and the attitude towards it.
In this case, the word refers to Narekatsi's words, which are separated and pointed out by Varag Arakelyan, Gr. In the work dedicated to Narekatsi language and style [1].
 According to the author, who mentions that Narekatsi invented 700-750 new words, their newness is confirmed by the data of "Haykazyan Dictionary".
  We have used the data of the linguist, proceeding from our goal, to reflect on the stylistic role of those words, as the author explains the unprecedented uniqueness of the words created by the poet with stylistic motive.
The richness of Narekatsi's poetic language is made up of the precise elements of the imagery of the language, which are among the factors.
  As it is known, makdir is a stylistic trick, which gives not the non-basic characteristic feature of an object, event or action, but its aesthetic description, combined with the author's will-relational nuances.
 Makdir defines an object or action; it emphasizes some essential feature, quality in them.
  Macdirioche's role is his artistic expression.
  In other words, "the object is a determinant that characterizes an object or phenomenon, which is based on a figurative meaning" [5].
  This is true, but let us consider the uses, which reveal the motive for the great word-formation, the stylists, such as: Other smells, looks, has mercy, Than in the liturgy all-fruit, Served with smoky complexity.
Receive what I have been told for a few hours, for your pleasure, not for your anger.
 (Ban A, 7) In the world section, the capacity of the word և is very significant.
But you will look at him, who is merciful, And you will smell with more love, Than the liturgy is all-offering, which was served with heavy smoke… (Ban A, 5-6) Notice that in the strictly transliterated version with all the new fruits.
is.
  It is preserved in its content: Grgeal grumbled, softened refugee, Cracked table, unresponsive victim, Curser of sweets, father of the testator, traitor of the Testaments, betrayed by the evil man of Moses, genius of many.
 (Ban Kh. (B) 269-270) The example where the used adjective makdir is considered oxymoron in connection with the swearing word is especially interesting.
  And the word table can replace a whole description.
The accumulation of stylistic tricks makes the word more expressive չի does not burden at all.
  The meaning of makdirs is emphasized in contrast to the white-eyed crow's white-winged crow (Ban LA (d), 183).
In the above-mentioned examples, the bear-white markings not only describe the crow's pigeon-feeding, but also describe them. The crow is a bear (dark), that is, evil, and the dove is white, that is, good.
Narekatsi solves several extensive semantic-substantive issues through the Law of Language Saving.
  It is a comparison of Naregatsughegartaneg.
  "Comparison is a stylistic phrase that, by combining two objects or phenomena, defines one with the help of the other on the basis of their similarity or difference." [5]
Author's novelties take an active part in the composition of comparisons in the language of Narekatsi's poem.
The comparison conveys imagery to the word, if it is fresh, new, remarkable, like one… Because of which, when it appears, it is always petted, the devil of pure laughter, and the second, according to the likeness, the dazzling beast of hell, As if dancing with blood in food.
 (Ban Ժ (a), 56-57) eThis in this example represents the devil. It is a wild beast that is filled with blood as food.
In terms of content and style, Dzhokhorovyan is not only new, but also very capacious and pictorial, and the attitude it evokes in comparison is simply incomparable, influential, impressive.
In Narekatsi's poem, exaggeration and anatomy are not widely used, but in the case of few uses, they appear as powerful stylistic tricks that reflect moods and feelings.
  The most accurate type of exaggeration is still the exaggeration (grotesque).
It is known that this stylistic trick is the extreme of exaggeration - the part created by an exaggerated flight, in which the new word has a very typical value.
is.
  Here is Narekatsi, with a great imagination. And now, what worthy I have written according to my gossip.
 (Ban T (a), 51) in combination with V. Gorgyan translates disrespectfully.
Narekatsi's word is rich in contradictions.
We know that the opposite is the transliteration of the whimsical expressions of opposite words.
  Narekatsi uses this means of artistic speech to the fullest extent.
  The complex mental rises and ruins, the differences of the bitter reality և its aspirations with such oppositions, which reveal the phenomena of reality in all their subtleties, density. they are at the same time touching, contagious with the tragic experiences they have caused.
It is created to express the poet, that by means of understanding the opposite objects, phenomena, features, mental states are presented, reinforcing and making them more pronounced.
Here is one of the most influential contrasts in the history of literature in general.
Contrast: Two cups in two hands, Min with blood and the other with milk, Two fragrances of lightning, Min with incense, and the other with fennel, Discs again full, Minn hungry, and the other with bitterness (17) As we can see, in the example given, the newly formed lexical but opposite edges are completely new combinations.
  These are syntactic innovations, which are stylistically and figuratively in terms of style and content.
When the different edges of the word are opposed to each other, the descriptive expressions are more pronounced in all their aspects and nuances.
  It is more obvious when it is formed with an adverbial word.
  For example: Humility in arrogance, truth in falsehood, naivety in childhood, immaculate in evil, decency in impudence (Ban LA, 184) greed, kindness in Naregatsi seeks sharp contradictions of speech, the suddenness of the possible, the suddenness of the sudden To express only this kind of contradiction, that is, the contradiction is created not between different objects and phenomena, but a contradiction between the same personless states, all of which appear almost simultaneously.
  A kind of oxymoron is created, where the opposite features appear in the same person or event.
  In these cases, too, syntactic innovations arise, which make the word very precise and pictorial, such as: Do not let me be in heaven and not give birth, Lament and do not cry, Contemplate and do not sigh, Cloud and do not rain, Walk and not to reach, to call on Me, and not to hear Thee, To mourn, and to be ignored, To mourn, and not to have mercy, To beg, and not to avail me, To sacrifice, and not to gnaw, To see Thee, and to come forth empty.
 (Ban B (c), 15) The personal "human afflictions" of striving for the Most High, of assimilation to Him, of the willingness to serve the whole of humanity "never to give it up" have a more shocking appearance of internal conflicts than in any other fiction.
  In general, the means of depiction in the language of Narekatsi's poem serve to cover certain artistic problems; they are linguistic units characterizing the poet's style.
