Preface.
In addition to overcoming the post-conflict challenges of the society, the unrecognized states face a number of other problems, including the creation of preconditions for the sustainable functioning of state institutions, the provision of necessary conditions,
  However, the first and most important choice that has a direct impact on other components is the choice of management system.
    All three unrecognized states of the South Caucasus have declared their desire to build a democratic state since the declaration of independence, to direct their efforts in that direction in the social sphere, and to consider the process of the region as progress.
  However, in the process of building a state based on real democratic values, unrecognized states face additional difficulties due to the fact that they are not recognized.
The democratization of unrecognized states has been studied by various authors, in particular Caspersen, Kraus, and Utersonk [2, 3, 4, 9], however, little has been done on the impact of democratic processes on the recognition process.
 The above problem is considered in the framework of this work.
  Attempts are being made to identify the factors influencing the democratization process in the post-conflict phase, by the example of Nagorno Karabakh, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, as well as the impact of these processes on international recognition.
Peculiarities of the democratization process in unrecognized states.
As a result, the growing interest in the processes of democratization in conflicting struggles, democracies (recognized, unrecognized) is first and foremost due to the fact that large-scale democracies rule out wars [4].
  The creation of a democratic state is also possible for the simple reason that unrecognized states seek to occupy a system that recognizes them as members of that same system.
  Recently, the unrecognized states will choose the path, which they consider a normative change in the international arena.
  An example is Kosovo's "controlled democracy"; in general, the emphasis is on the democratization process. It concludes that recognition is realistic if effective democratic institutions are established in unrecognized states.
  All this can be of key importance from the state point of view.
  In well-recognized states, recognition is seen as a primary international issue where, as a precondition for its establishment and ultimate goal, it is the main feature of the unrecognized state; it occupies a central position, [3] just as it can be used in political elite programs for propaganda purposes.
  In addition, the political elites of the de facto states believe that the results of the state's vital activity in the process of force democratization can "show" progress in the process of recognition [6].
And it is no coincidence that in recent decades (especially after the end of the Cold War) the theory of democratic peace has been widely circulated in the field of international relations, according to which wars and large-scale military conflicts are unlikely in societies.
Liberal-democratic forms of government, regardless of their limitations, are the best in terms of resolving conflicts or mitigating the political consequences.
  Moreover, in the absence of any other, democratic values ​​really help to avoid any manifestation of violence.
According to the "viable alternative" to democracy, the decision to switch to democracy in the South Caucasus, which is recognized as a Theory of Values, was not accidental at all, as the "era of authoritarianism" of about 70 years was over, during which those territories were first annexed to other states.
  As a result of this policy, the composition of the population was changed, restrictions were imposed on the use of the mother tongue, higher education in that language, and after resettlement, some groups received social benefits.
  Moreover, as a result of metropolitan restrictions, the title-holders have sometimes been deprived of the opportunity to hold high positions, which has led to the marginalization of society.
  Therefore, the prospect of deciding one's own destiny through elections was quite acceptable to the peoples fighting for independence.
There are different views on the efficiency of the activities of the state institutions of Nagorno Karabakh, South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
  These institutions are sometimes perceived as "formal" structures, and the real political processes are actually developed and managed outside those institutions.
  Sometimes the institutions that make up the political system are seen as "underdeveloped" structures that fail to ensure the normal functioning of the state, when in fact the most important decisions are made not by those structures, but by individuals.
It is obvious that in this case we can speak about building a democratic state with great reservations.
However, there are optimistic approaches.
  According to Charles King, the de facto states formed in the early 1990s, which were more active in state-building in the 2000s and were able to form privatized forces, control the state, educate children, and take steps to develop the economy, are sometimes more developed than the recognized states. "Disconnected" [7].
  It is noteworthy that the above refers only to Nagorno Karabakh. According to Freedom House [5], the Nagorno-Karabakh Freedom Report's report considers Karabakh a partially free country and Azerbaijan a non-free one.
According to Kaspersen, since the proclamation in Ossetia, Nagorno Karabakh has really succeeded in establishing effective state institutions, which is directly related to the financial support provided by Armenia and the Diaspora.
    And in Nagorno Karabakh, the army and the military had a great influence on the process of post-state construction in the South.
 The situation in Abkhazia is a bit different, as the army has always had a relatively weak position here; it has not played a major role in domestic politics, despite the fact that, for example, the Trans-Veterans Association has a fairly strong position in society.
The internal political elections are evidenced by the post-conflict elections, as a result of which large numbers of servicemen became members of the legislature in all three unrecognized states.
of the military [2].
  South Caucasus The de facto states of the South Caucasus have all the attributes of statehood, except for international recognition.
 Those states are doing better than can be imagined.
  The successes registered in the process of state-building are directly related to the efforts recognized by the leaders of those countries, and foreign aid is vital today, in the case of Armenia, in the case of South Ossetia, and in the case of Abkhazia, Russia.
  The successes of state-building have been registered in the conditions of blockade, financial and economic instability.
  And it is not at all accidental that in all three cases the high-ranking officials often voice that the states have earned all the opportunities of international recognition, their viability even in such limited conditions.
Elections are an integral part of the democratization process in the process of democratization in the unrecognized states.
Electoral processes, as well as the comprehensive analysis of local pre-election and post-election processes in domestic political life, usually allow to understand the level of public perception of democratic values ​​and the ways in which they are expressed.
  Post-conflict elections can be a turning point in terms of state-building and recognition, as well as in terms of resolving many post-conflict issues.
  In some cases, post-conflict elections are the first step towards peace-building democracy, but more often they are the resumption of action or the establishment of authoritarianism.
lead to war Post-conflict elections can be poorly considered for two main reasons. Firstly, they can be an indicator of the choice of the principle of regulation and organization of public life of an unrecognized state (democracy or authoritarianism), secondly, they can show the extent to which the result of the elections is to overcome the problems of the post-conflict phase.
  Conducted elections based on democratic principles alone can guarantee the stable and effective work of state institutions.
At the same time, post-conflict democratic elections in unrecognized states can help overcome the international process, despite the fact that observation missions are absent. Usually, international organizations do not come to the polls after elections.
The observation missions are mainly carried out not on the basis of official delegations, but on the initiative.
  Most of the international organizations, the results of the elections, pointing out the non-recognition of those states, but in reality it has nothing to do with the international recognition of the state.
 This or that reaction of these organizations is largely conditioned by the fact that they have geopolitical interests in the conflict settlement process or in the region.
  In the end, the elections are fairly democratic.
The purpose of holding elections is first of all to organize the life of the given countries, and the elections appear in the center of attention of the international community only in two cases, firstly, if that state has a great influence on international relations or unpredictable turns take place during the elections.
  No state or international organization shall have the right to take part in any other election or to participate in any elections which may not be conducted within the framework of the Council of Europe (for example, which shall be binding only on those members of the international community).
  From this point of view, the opinions and assessments of different states related to the election recognition process are completely unfounded.
 Overcoming these patterns of attitude of international organizations towards elections in unrecognized countries is possible, as democratization processes, including electoral ones, can be a stimulus to the conflict settlement process.
After 2003.
  First of all, in general, the connection between the "recognition" of democracy became widespread, especially the events in Kosovo. The "Standards for Kosovo" document was published, after which the interest in these three unrecognized states of the South Caucasus increased due to the fact that It may seem obvious to build an effective, democratic or "recognition" of democracy, but such precedents are lacking in international practice today.
  There are many reasons for all this, the most important of which, of course, is the geopolitical "expediency", which was once "proved by the launch of the process of recognition of Kosovo's independence by the Western states", which is the most important, reaffirmed in 2008. After the Russian-Georgian war, after the recognition of Russia's independence from Abkhazia.
South Ossetia However, institutions.
The level of democracy and democratization processes in the "patron state" [2] can have a decisive impact on the democratization process in unrecognized states.
 In this respect, the international Karabakh is in the most advantageous position, the Nagorno-Karabakh organizations qualify the processes taking place in Armenia as democratic.
  Moreover, in 2016 According to the Freedom House report [5], Armenia is considered a partially free country.
  In the case of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, the situation is not so optimistic, taking into account the fact that according to the same report, Russia is among the non-free countries.
  And finally, the nature of the conflict can have a unique impact on the recognition process.
 In the event of self-determination conflicts, the decision to declare independence and later to build a democratic state was made by the titular people.
  In this case, it is easy for the authorities to manage the democratic reforms and processes, there are no problems with nationality, there are no ethnic conflicts, there are no manifestations of ethnic violence.
  Meanwhile, the situation in Abkhazia is different, as the majority of the population are not Abkhazians.
  This circumstance plays a decisive role in the democratization process, which finds its expression in the pre-election, post-election period, when the issue of ethnicity of the candidates is actively discussed, and the election is made on the basis of ethnicity.
There are some peculiarities in the process of objective assessment of the success of the democratization process in the Unrecognized States due to differences.
  Of course, it is very important how that state positions itself or how the "sponsoring state" influences the democratization process.
  At the same time, it is very important to identify the fundamental factors that influence the progress made by international organizations and that process.
Moreover, the peculiarities of regime change, transition from authoritarianism to democracy in the post-conflict phase, the successes achieved or the setbacks can become noticeable only in the case of monitoring and comparative analysis.
Conclusion.
  The connection between state recognition and the process of democratization began to circulate actively in political science circles after the end of the Cold War, however, democratization could not be the only and decisive factor in the process of state recognition.
 Here, among other issues, the influence of different actors, the nature of the conflict, as well as the influence of the "sponsoring state" are primary.
  The unrecognized states of the South Caucasus have made significant progress in the democratization process, but that progress cannot be the only factor in ensuring the success of the recognition process.
  In this case, it can be considered as an additional stimulus, as the democratization process will increase the efficiency of the negotiation process, the possible militarization of the conflict and the prospect of resumption of hostilities will be ruled out.
However, democracy can not be introduced if the necessary financial preconditions, because foreign actors, including individual states, international organizations, international groups or coalitions created to resolve this conflict can promote this process through various tools and factors, but never force it. .
