This methodological development is aimed at increasing the efficiency of geographical nomenclature by students.
  Map և geographical nomenclature is an integral part of geographical culture [1].
Map is considered to be the second language of geography, knowledge is a necessary precondition for mastering geographical knowledge.
  The map performs psycho-psychological-pedagogical thinking, coordination, facilitates their assimilation and memorization, develops existence, memory, observation, formation [2].
  The geospatial thinking function of geography: the organization of the knowledge, the preparation of the knowledge necessary for the mastery of the organized work, the teacher must be free to master the whole volume of the nomination.
 The analysis of the professional literature shows that a great deal of attention is paid to the mapping nomenclature in the teaching of geography.
  It should be noted that the mastery of the geographical nomenclature (a set of terms of geographical toponyms) is necessary not only for the full provision of geographical education, but also for the formation of a common culture.
  It promotes the recognition of religions of different ethnocultures, and the names of water bodies are preserved in endars, a great linguistic value [2].
Therefore, these names should be taken into account. During the pedagogical practice, students discovered an unnecessary level of map և geographical nomenclature, which implies a review of approaches to questioning by specialists.
  In this case, it is necessary to develop methodological approaches և solutions that will allow to ensure the level of students' knowledge.
Effective method of mastering through geographical unsystematic "geographical dictation", which can be carried out by different specialists within each geographical subject of the university, providing a minimum period of work.
Monitoring should be appropriate. We have developed a system of geographical dictation, which aims to increase the quality of geographical knowledge - capabilities, in particular, the quality of geographical naming and application, its verification efficiency.
Geographical themes can be verbal or verbal, numerical, symbolic or symbolic.
1. Verbal or verbal type. The name of the object is inscribed in letters on the outline map (Fig. 1).
2. Digital type. The contour map shows the consecutive numbers of the objects to be displayed (Fig. 2).
3. Symbolic or symbolic type. The outlines of the outline map are marked with geographical symbols (Fig. 3).
Fig. 1. Verbal kamverbalNk. 2. DigitalFig. 3. Symbolic or symbolic Geographical propositions, depending on the organization of the educational activity, can be: 1. frontal or frontal, 2. group.
Geographical locations, depending on the organization of the training, can be: 1. classroom (during the lesson, with the aim of reinforcing the material), 2. extracurricularly (during the consultations, in order to clarify the shortcomings, to prepare for the exam).
Geographical themes, according to the didactic purpose, can be: 1. diagnostic, 2. educational, 3. Trainer, 4. test.
The suggested types of geographical dictations are performed here.
The duration of the dictations can fluctuate between 5-30 minutes, depending on its didactic purpose.
The basis of contour maps 1. Geographical diagnostic dictation is given at the beginning of the academic year, it is organized by frontal or frontal detection.
  The aim of the work is to develop and expand the students' knowledge base on the geographical category.
  The first dictation of the first year contains the stock of school knowledge. It includes the most common names used in grades 6-12.
  Toponyms based on professional knowledge can be considered.
  In order to compile the content of this dictation correctly, it is necessary to have the whole geographical nomination envisaged by the geography school curriculum.
  The methodology of dictation implementation is as follows. Toponyms are dictated by the lecturer, the students record them in outline maps verbally or verbally.
  The time allotted for work is 15-20 minutes.
  From the second year to the fourth year, as in the master's degree program, diagnostic dictations are used again at the beginning of the year.
  They contain the nomination of the previous years.
In order to choose the content of the dictation correctly, you need to take the existing category out of the content, make it a total և Compose the content of the dictation.
  It is expedient to include a hundred place names in the content of the dictation.
In this case, it is more efficient to use the type of dictation to check the degree of magnification in the conditions of minimum time consumption.
  The use of diagnostic deficiencies makes it possible to measure, assess, that is, to make controllable the general level of mastery of the geographical nomenclature by the student, to identify omissions in order to further correct them.
Instructional in the nomenclature of each professional subject system. It is expedient to use geographical dictation during the practical work of the interactive lecture.
 It is organized by frontal group forces.
  The aim of the work is to strengthen the memory of the newly renovated places.
 The method of dictation is as follows: during the interactive lecture, usually at the end, the place names presented during the lesson are dictated by the lecturer, the students write them on the outline maps in verbal or symbolic ways.
Instructional dictation can be done by students.
  In this case, the students take the geographical category out of the presented content, compose the content of the dictation in a small group, an educational dictation for the classmates.
  It is allowed to use a geographical atlas or any cartographic source during the instructional dictation, so that the name of the place in the educational consciousness is memorized, without distortions.
  The time allotted for dictation is 3-5 minutes.
5-10 place names, implements the cartographic skills that train the acquisition. 3. The geographical training dictation is expedient to use during the laboratory-practical works.
  It is organized and implemented by small groups of students.
  It is expedient to use all types of dictation: verbal or verbal, numerical-symbolic or symbolic.
  The aim of the work is to raise the mastery of the nomination to the level of skill.
  The method of implementation of dictation is as follows: students are instructed to regularly remove the geographical category from the content of the lectures presented in the electronic domain, to compile a database of the geographical category individually.
  The peculiarity of the teaching dictation is that the compilation, implementation and verification of the content is carried out exclusively by the students.
 A single group of students can dictate during the same lesson.
  The students of the organizing group are evaluated for the quality of the organization, and the students who are tested, the participants who show the result can be evaluated "as a checker" and as a checker.
  In this case, for the student's final grade.
  Job dictation is formed from the aggregate average grade.
  The time allotted to the work of each group is 3-5 minutes.
As a result of the application of these types and forms of dictation, learners will become fully proficient in the test dictation of participating in technical skills.
will have the capacity 4. Geographical test dictation differs from the previous ones in the volume of content, as it presupposes a comprehensive check of the geographical category included in the subject.
      It is expedient to use the numerical-symbolic types of dictation.
  It is organized by the lecturer during the intermediate examinations, tests and final exams, both during the lesson and during the consultation hours.
  The test dictation is evaluated according to the previously presented criteria.
  For example, dictation consists of fifty place names, each with a value of two points.
 25-30 minutes are allocated to the work.
Types of dictations have their own place in the learning process, ացման to ensure the quality of mastery must be used in the correct order.
The outline map completed as a result of performing geographical dictations can look like this (Fig. 4).
It turned out that after applying the whole system of permanent geographical dictations, relatively high results in the use of maps by students are registered during the pedagogical practice.
  In parallel with their oral speech, they use the possibility of displaying geographical place names more freely, organize school geographical dictations, compile practical tasks for classroom homework.
  It can be deduced from the above that the application of a "developed system" contributes to the effective development of the professional competencies of a geography teacher and to the increase of the efficiency of geography teaching.
"Geographical Dictations Figure 4. Completed outline map The presented system of geographical dictations was tested in the Department of Geography of the ASPU և included in the chair process of "Geography and its teaching methods" as a way of organizing learning ուս.
