H. Tumanyan, Tumanyan studies, literary hypothesis, archetypology, aesthetic ideal, system of archetypes, cultural-literary archetypes, archetypal motives, intertextuality.
On the way to a new conceptualization of research in Tumanyan studies.
  This year marks the 150th anniversary of the great Armenian writer Hovhannes Tumanyan / 1869-1923 /.
  The history of the study of the great literary heritage has passed a century-long way, and it continues today.
Tumanyan studies had great achievements during this period.
  Each new generation of literary critics, while studying the works of great writers, makes new adjustments, new discoveries and interpretations.
The interests of the genius Lori artist's artistic thinking, aesthetic principles, discovery of affinity with national and world literature, and their literary analysis are still preserved today.
  In particular, as a result of our observations, we have come to the conclusion that a number of Tumanyan's works, the manifestations of a number of peculiarities of artistic thinking and worldview, give grounds to discuss them in the sphere of relations with cultural-archetypal archetypes.
Literary critic Azat Yeghiazaryan nowadays has demanded to study the different layers and connections of writer-Tumanyan's creative activity in more depth and in a new way.
  Emphasizing the unique combination of European and Eastern cultures in Tumanyan's works, he writes: "But the list of Eastern relations is not enough to understand Tumanyan.
 A systematic, in-depth examination of these relations is needed.
  Tumanyan, of course, should not be cut off from Europe, European culture and ugliness.
  But one of the most important features of his "literary heritage" of his human personality is that amazing combination of "European" and European. "[2]
Referring to the mention of the fully studied topics of Tumanyan's science, he rightly states: "The reader understands that the problems of studying Tumanyan's work are not exhausted by the listed questions.
  His legacy raises new questions. ”[2]
 And, indeed, we believe that one of the most important topics of such modern significance is the study of archetypes in the works of the great writer.
cultural-literary, possibleCultural-literary archetypes և their system.
In modern humanities, arithmetic has emerged as a branch of science, which is more effectively manifested in the field of literature.
  The study of the inter-paradigms of literature through expressions (in the works of the invariant writer reveals deep connections with the collective unconscious in the historical past, universal cultural values, the resources of artistic experience thinking.
  Variative expression of their functional peculiarities), as well as natural (two-sided) structural nature (for example, Chaos / Cosmos, Village / City / etc.)
  One of the modern theorists studying archetypes states: "Archetypes basic (basic) concepts, characters, ideas - G. Kh.), Which are considered as bases for people, guide them in the process of life cognition և have names ”[7, 48].
We need to study the cultural-literary artifacts in Tumanyan's works because of the fact that within the framework of the writer's relations with world culture and literature, his exceptional close connection with popular worldview, worldview, and folklore in general is obvious.
  And the archetypal notions, that is, the basic philosophical motives that emerged in the sphere of the "collective unconscious" of mankind (K. Jung) appear more directly in the works, especially in myths, mythologems.
 It is known how rich Tumanyan's works are in the life and life of the people, how much they are filled with their vital worries.
  In his high-value prose poems, the unforgettable cruelty and the idyllic aspects perceived by the author.
The rural-rural dances are depicted, his national and universal cherished ideals and dreams were expressed in Tumanyan's artistic world.
  In his literary works the peculiarities of the national spirit were revealed, and in the quatrains the highest and deepest reflections of the literary worker who created him were revealed at a perfect artistic level.
  Such are the best poems, ballads, poems widely known to many generations of Armenian readers.
And here is H. The study of the depiction of cultural archetypes in Tumanyan's works helps to reveal the relations between the writer's psychology and aesthetic principles and the archetypal conception of the "subjectifigura of the creative process" [5, 241].
  Thanks to such research, we can also show a number of aspects (images, images, deep similarities) that have appeared in world art (especially in Europe and the East).
  After all, cultural-literary archetypes, by their very nature, are expressions of the collective unconscious, due to ethno-cultural manifestations in the cultures of all nations, particularly in literature.
The ideas of the universal thinking of the literatures) and later the baritones. And the relations of the highly valuable works of art to the archetypes and the psychology of the writer point out in a peculiar way that the Swiss psychologist, philosopher K., who first put it into wide scientific circulation. Jung.
  Considering archetypes as components of the "collective consciousness" domain, which are in the soul of mankind, he writes: "An individual is incapable of fully developing his powers unless one of the collective ideas which we call the ideal does not come to his aid, the whole force of which the key to the conscious will is usually never able to find on its own" [9, 230].
  Note the following. Jung believed that the writer's task should be in his works as much as possible to fully reveal the powerful orthogonal stereotypes of the parties in their both stable and different (invariant-variant) expressions.
It follows from the creative statement that by making the archetypal characters, motives, and ideas the subject of literary criticism in the writer's work, we can see the deep and comprehensive relations that appear in the cultures of different nations, which are a stimulus, in particular, for Tumanyan.
Literary studies of archetypes make visible the internal contacts that, initially appearing in the layers of world culture in the historical past, take on a unique artistic embodiment in the works of each new great writer.
    "… We, writes A. Bolshakova, we can especially distinguish the cultural unconscious as a sphere where the ideals, the motives, which later play an active role, are 12].
The important role of cultural-literary archetypalism manifested in literature pushed us based on the above-mentioned theoretical, starting point ideas, the application of motifs, motifs and literary national archetypal characters. In Tumanyan's works.
Preliminary Archetypal Works ”to discover through the observations the theoretical themes of archetype in literature have been especially popular in recent decades.
  Modern Russian literary critic A. is particularly significant in that process. The Bolshevik investment.
By studying the peculiarities of the archetypes from the philosophical perspectives of philosophy, culturology, and literature, he also tried to create a systematic idea of ​​the manifestations of the phenomenon.
 According to him, archetypes can be divided into three major groups: (pagan gods, Jesus: divine archetype Christ), b. Natural philosophical archetypes (Cosmos, Chaos, World Flood), c. human archetypes (Mother, Father, Child, Pastor, Poet).
  The basis of such a group is the existence of the spheres of the main interests arising in the course of human thought and psychology in the above-mentioned spheres.
The notions of nature, human existence, the divine have been expressed in different ways (figuratively, with generalizing judgments) in the pre-primitive cultural activities of different ethnic groups, in the depths of people's psyche, which are passed down from generation to generation, as well as through the contacts of different nations.
 According to K. Jung is the domain of the "collective unconscious", where archetypes emerge as primordial characters, ideas, general concepts.
  They are expressed in the artistic culture of different peoples, are uniquely literary developed by writers.
Of course, it is not ruled out that archetypes born with combinations of the main types of archetypes may have arisen (for example, the archetypal image of a holy man as a combination of the divine and human).
Because archetypal characters were first widely used in myths (myths), they are used as archetypal motifs (such as the dragon fight) in literary works in the form of micro-myths.
And here, in our opinion, interesting observations can be made by H. In connection with the unique artistic embodiments of the characters and ideas belonging to the above-mentioned archetypal groups in Tumanyan's works or formed by their combination.
Manifestations of several cultural-literary archetypes H. In Tumanyan's works.
  Cultural-literary archetypes were manifested in Tumanyan's works due to their different features, uniquely revealing a number of remarkable aspects and content of the writer's aesthetic ideal.
  The different components of the archetype system with different combinations (complex archetype, territorial archetype, separate image, archetypal motif) have appeared in the writer's works.
  Here we will refer to the artistic incarnations of some of them in Tumanyan's works.
Each Village / City archetypal couple is portrayed in a different way, both in different nationalities and in Armenian literature.
  Einh. In both Tumanyan's verse and prose works.
  With the above-mentioned content of archetype, it is an internal-external antagonism.
  The poet more often referred to the internal antagonism of the Rural Archetype, depicting on the one hand the cruel reality of the Armenian rural world, the dramatic situations with their tragic consequences, on the other hand, the ideal, idyllic aspects, the manifestations of courage and bravery.
    From the point of view of the external contradictions of the components of the archetypal pair, the village is opposed to the city, to which Tumanyan մասն partially referred.
The rude manners prevailing in the village, social injustice, darkness and ignorance, the tragic consequences of patriarchal manners, "traditions" are depicted in famous poems ("Maron", "Sako of Lori", "Sigh", "Anush"), in the stories "Aghq" Neso's Karabakh "Gail"), in fairy tales ("Brave Nazar", "Death of Kikos", "The Stupid Man").
Let us present one or two examples revealing the cruel reality of the Armenian village.
  The peculiar condensation of the interrogations in the Armenian village due to the fault of the social reality and the tsarist authorities is the mourning and agrarianism of the old man of "Grievance". "Woe is me!
In the story "Honor of the Poor", the beautiful wife of a villager, a craftsman, Simon, is raped in the absence of her husband by one of the young men of the "lot" of the village, Sandro.
  In order to protect the damaged honor of Simon's family, he demands to sue the culprit, refusing in advance to take some money from the offer to solve the problem.
  However, one of the richest people in the village, Petros Aghen, the landlord and even the other villagers insist that he sail the money offered.
  Such an unjust coercion carried out by the rural community forces the defenseless and unmerciful villager to take the money և ashamed and humiliated to leave.
  The honor of the woman who had been raped in the village was sold for money.
 "To shash, go, it's a mufti, put it in your pocket. "If you suffer for a year, put up a wall, you will not work so hard," they say.
  Or, "You say, 'Do something to me, go ahead'" [3, 33].
The other side of the internal structure of the village archetype is to view it as orthodox, idyllic, as well as heroic.
  For Tumanyan, the rural world of Lori, the native village of Dsegh, act as a small homeland, as a birthplace, a circle of close people, where his childhood was spent.
  In the writer's works, the village is presented in an idealistic way, because here he met morally clean, simple and honest, generous, generous people.
  Therefore, the poet, who has left the village, is tired of the people and places he has longed for.
  He expressed his longing for the village, spontaneous longing and love with exceptional warmth in the following part of the poem "Anush". He cries out to the crickets, he cries incessantly to the longing for that wonderful land, sleepless, And the wings are spread out like a master, My soul flies, flies home
                                            Where they have been waiting for me in front of their homeland for a long time, And sitting on a long winter night, They speak of the old brave men of Lori.
The village was attractive for the poet from the point of view of being in close contact with the people, the national life, as well as feeling the direct connection of man with nature, preserving man's kinship with nature, post-eternity living world, maintaining the cosmic sense of unity.
  All these were the essence of the poet's life feeling, his worldview and inner world.
  Therefore, with its geographical peculiarities, especially its birthplace Lori with mountains and valleys, it becomes a means of artistic depiction of painful, sad thoughts, sorrows and worries about the fate of the world, the homeland and the people, the edges of comparison.
  In this respect, his famous poem "Prelude" is remarkable. Mountains, inspired by you again, My soul thunders full of life, And my warm desires, persecuted by luck, fly to you with a fiery flock.
                                             Valleys, valleys, wide open, like deep wounds in my heart. You are also the traces of God's blow, I come to you, I want to sing.
                                             You also spoke, you also told, let you be measured by your abysses, are you also, I see, so great and deep, How terrible is the sorrow of my soul… The patriarchal vicious habits of the rural world were condemned by H. In Tumanyan's literary works of different genres, then the beautiful and honest preserved in the rural community were painted and presented with great inspiration.
  The poem "Anush" is especially significant in this respect.
Anush and Saro's love and exceptional loyalty to each other was expressed in the poem with a typical image of the ancient Armenian folk beliefs, fantastic ideas expressed in folklore.
  After death, the lovers who turned into stars kiss in the sky. They will be devoted to the sublime moment of a wonderful night, From the bottomless, distant depths of Heaven, The stars of the lovers who have died immortally come together, Come, kiss a longing kiss away from the World, in a blue arch.
One of the characteristic aspects of the Village / City archetype pair is the expression of the external, that is, the expression of the tendency to oppose each other in the works of the writer.
  With a few exceptions, the artistic environment in Tumanyan's works is the village.
 In Iserker, the contrast between village and town is an obvious artistic and ideological reality.
  The writer's attention is focused on the depiction of the Armenian rural world, its people, moral and psychological problems, dramatic and tragic realities, at least because the pro-people poet and thinker feels his connection with the majority of the Armenian people in a unique way.
  And most of them in the given historical period (end of the 19th century, beginning of the 20th century), as before, lived mostly in the rural settlements of their homeland.
  No matter how much Tumanyan presented with heartache the backwardness of the Armenian man living in the rural world, the vicious habits with their tragic consequences, he nevertheless saw the realization of some of his ideals in the Armenian villager living in close contact with nature, with high human moral values.
The story "Gikor" is interesting from different points of view of the peasants in terms of presenting the contrast between the village and the city, praising the city, where the negative attitude of Gikor's mother, an Armenian villager who is more or less familiar with the city, is expressed, as well as her husband Hambo's example. "I do not want my corpse child to be taken to the unjust world, I do not want it," the woman was crying.
  But Hambo did not listen. "
  We think that when he expresses himself by chance, he considers it an "unjust world".
  The big city (in the meantime, however, was negatively connected with the "positive, in the case of Tbilissi") of Hamboyik consciousness is not with the villagers, but with the arena of urban perspectives.
  Within the framework of this topic, the fairy tale "Golden City" is also noteworthy, especially from the point of view of describing the typical aspects of the writer's worldview.
 In terms of fairy tales, he referred to A. Yeghiazaryan [1, 32-64].
  We have lost another circumstance.
 Through the images of Divana "Kanakara, Queen Gohar, the inhabitants of the city" depicted in the fairy tale, in fact, Tumanyan's certain dreams about the future of the society and the people are revealed.
  The townspeople are happy, because there is no exploitation here, the queen thinks about the residents living happily.
  And with this it is remarkable that the main occupation of the happy inhabitants of the city, the work activity is represented by gardening, which is mostly the working environment of the rural population.
  The author used everything related to the life of the villager.
  And here in the poem "The Poet and the Muse" the Poet is persecuted and not appreciated by those who cannot appreciate him in the urban environment.
According to worthy poetry, archetypes are generally closely related to the discoveries and artistic depictions of the writers' aesthetic ideal.
  This is one of the most important preconditions for us to address the issue of the expression of literary patterns.
  The above-mentioned works related to the village / city archetypal couple also testify to the fact that they do not, of course, consume the full capacity of the genius Lori-Lusatian ideal.
  Rural imagery in its entirety is, in fact, a way of expressing a complex archetype of the Motherland.
  The different aspects of Tumanyan's aesthetic ideal will be expressed through other archetypal characters.
  Consider the works of the archetypal writer Chaos / Cosmos.
In the works of the couple, Tumanyan scholars have already noticed that some of the writer's poems "Towards the Eternal", in some of the ballads, some of the heroes - are persecuted in the environment of people, transformed into celestial bodies (stars) or birds, resting in nature.
  We believe that the ancient notions of Chaos (disorder, confusion) arising from the collective unconscious were transferred in differentiated expressions to the Chaos manifestation (variant manifestation) that appears in human relations.
  And it was opposed to the notion of the Cosmos (order, the harmonious existence of the universe), which, in contrast to the chaos in public life, was attributed to the patterns of nature.
  It is in this sense that Anush and Saro, persecuted by people, turn into stars after death, saving their love, taking refuge in heaven.
 And in the ballads, persecuted by people, captive to the enemy, innocent, loving each other, longing for freedom, they "transform into natural beings", often turn into birds, find refuge in nature again ("Unfortunate Merchants", "Akhtamar", "The Cursed Bride" , "Orphan", "Parvana", "Aghavnuvank").
We think that the meaning of the artistic trick of such transformations in the above-mentioned works of Tumanyan should be evaluated from the point of view of a value approach.
  In the end, the events that are of great moral value for him and the people (Saro և Anush's mutual devotion shoulders / "Anush"), the idea of ​​freeing the Armenian captives ("Aghavnuvank"), the bride dreaming of living free from the persecution of her evil mother-in-law ("The Cursed Bride") The girl who seeks to get rid of the Turks (the "Orphan"), the brothers who escape the persecution of an evil stepmother, are characters who are the embodiment of such moral and psychological values, the author of which seeks to preserve the Chaos / Cosmos archetype of Cosmos.
("Poghos-Petros") Motherhood In the past, especially in folklore, there were characters with a combination of different archetypal features.
  Such are the images of holy people.
  Literary images of saints, in fact, combine some ideas about theistic archetypes, the appearance and actions of the real man.
  The result of such a comparison is, from the point of view of the general life, the archetypal pair of the Wise Old Man / Old Woman, whose constituent members often appear separately in literary works.
  And in any case, the poet artistically presents his aesthetic ideal through different ideological capacities through the cultural archetypes he has created.
  Thus, for example, "Oghavni Vank" is an archetypal version of the wise old man Ohan of the ballad Dumtserunyan.
  The poet introduced him as a hero of concerned nationalism, praying "for his soul / For his nation, for the world."
  He uses his supernatural abilities to free the captives of his people from the hands of Lenktemur.
 The obsessed "big thief" Lenktemur, who is obsessed with conquering countries, ruling and destroying people, the holy man, the old monk, who is the ideal of the author opposite in the ballad.
 The latter does not think about his welfare, but about the salvation of the captive Armenian people.
  And so, when the Tatar general asks "What do you want, O holy alor, Gandz, power or glorious life?", Father Ohan answers: "I do not need your glory and treasure, I want my people from you, I want you to let them go wherever they want, And let them live their lives freely in this world, come down… The holy man said to the great robber.
In order to fulfill the wish of the holy man, Lenktemur orders that the Armenian captives be released in the amount of people accommodated in only one monastery.
  And here the great Armenian poet contrasted such "generosity" of a treacherous dictator with his God-pleasing, miraculous ability to embody his ideal of a person devoted to national interests.
All the captives who enter the monastery, with the prayer of Father Ohan, turn into doves and fly out of the window.
The Divine was manifested in human form in the form of a vision-like idiot who appeared in the fairy-tale poem "Hazaran Blbul", which is "bright and sublime", "like the vision of the holy J. The step is light, the face is cheerful, and the look is wise. ”
We think that this visionary old man is a wise wise old man.
  It is directly connected with Tumanyan's aesthetic ideal, the idea of ​​expressing his cherished ideas.
  Poemumais the old man appears when, at the request of King Alam, scientists from different parts of the country are unable to restore the royal flower garden, which has turned into thorns and thistles, to its guardians, turned into beasts in their former form, that is, to turn thorns into flowers and beasts into humans.
The visionary old man offers the king the key to solving the problem.
  On his advice, it is possible to make a desired transformation by bringing the Hazaran nightingale bird to the garden, where he will sing in a thousand voices.
  This magical bird in a fairy-tale song, in music, in a show.
 According to the author, it is possible to preserve human features in a person, just as art can make a beastly tender and intelligent person.
In this way, Tumanyan's skepticism about ensuring the development of society through technology and achievements was expressed in the symbolic progress of the arts in general.
The poem emphasizes that the country's famous scientists are unable to find a solution to the proposed problem.
  In particular, in the processes of preserving the human interpersonal, according to the main idea of ​​this poem, the role and significance of music (arts in general) is used.
  In order to confirm this idea in the poem, the author also used the archetypal image of the Wise Old Man (the old man who appeared like a vision).
  Through the effectiveness of the council, the author sought to use the meaning and authority of ideas about art in prehistoric times.
  It is well known, for example, that the song of Orpheus, one of the most famous figures in Greek mythology, had a miraculous effect on the worship of gods and men.
  Due to his enchanting ability to sing, he is able to bring back from the world of the ancient dead to his beloved wife, Eurydice.
 "Orpheus was glorified as a singer, Gerazhisht, whose art was endowed with such a magical influence that not only men but also the gods և obedience obeyed" [8, 262].
From the point of view of using cultural and literary archetypes in Tumanyan's works, the use of the dragon fight, which is a prototype motive, in Prince Tatul's dream described in the poem "Taking Tmkaberd" is remarkable.
It has a unique artistic role in revealing the psychological depths of the main character, the realms of the unconscious through dreams.
  From this point of view, it becomes clear that the hero's premonition of a woman's betrayal at a crucial moment in a dream, as well as the whole content of the motive.
 Such an approach is substantiated by the following idea. "The theory of the unconscious is guided by the fact that the initial self-consciousness of man, knowing everything about himself, can not express it through logic, but only at the socio-cultural level" [6, 12].
It is interesting that he is the subject of the creative process (variant of the invariant), in particular in the poet's poetic-artistic poem Tumanyan's poem "The Taking of Tmkaberd" in the person of the folk troubadour image of an immortal ”(S. Melkonyan) [4, 16].
 The material of the last two topics is extensive, it can be presented in another article.
Thus, in this article, as a literary hypothesis, we offer to study Tumanyan's works from the point of view of depicting cultural and literary archetypes in them.
  Such an approach contributes to the deep-seatedness of the writer տեղ's works դ to turn themes related to intertextuality into national and universal cultural heritage, to point out the various possibilities of expressing literary relations, to discuss them aesthetically.
Wealth is ideologically following the literary version.
