Modern economic research is based, after all, on the principles of the unlimitedness of society's needs and the limitation of the possibilities of satisfying them.
In this regard, the need to redefine the value system և to change the economic way of thinking and practice has become a priority problem for humanity.
Otherwise, humanity may face a dead end in the future. "
Such a forecast is usually based on the existence of such priority issues as an unprecedented demographic explosion, the almost depletion of a number of natural resources, an undesirable disturbance of the ecological balance, and so on.
In the work mentioned above, the phases of the life cycles of the society are studied, drawing corresponding parallels, which are especially noticeable in terms of socio-economic reproduction.
Thus, in the 21st century, the concept of "new economy" was widely used by economists.
In a narrow sense, the "new economy" is the part of the economy that includes high-tech industries - new technologies, as well as information - telecommunications technologies.
  And in a broad sense, "new economy" means a macroeconomic environment based on new technologies, which differs from the "old economy" in terms of both the operation of basic principles and further development.
In terms of opportunities, now more than ever, the idea that the interconnected sustainable progress in all spheres of public life is conditioned not only by the level of economic development of material production in general, but also by the conditions necessary for free and comprehensive human development is gaining new momentum.
Or, as we know, economic development is a much broader concept than economic growth.
  Economic development is based on economic growth, including structural changes in the distribution that imply an improvement in people's living standards.
 In particular, GDP growth per capita, which leads to an increase in the living standards of the population, is mainly associated not only with economic growth, but also with economic development.
When a country's GDP grows faster than its population, the per capita GDP increases.
  As a rule, GDP growth per capita, in turn, qualifies for other, broader indicators of living standards, such as life expectancy, literacy, and health.
If the first representatives of the old classical direction of economics considered the natural capital of the country as the main guarantee of economic growth,, then in the comparative theories of economics, less space is given to natural resources, but instead the emphasis is on the accumulation of physical capital.
In modern economics, human capital is emphasized as a key player in economic development.
  In essence, human capital includes the totality of human knowledge, skills and abilities, which contribute to the increase of his work productivity.
Human capital consists of acquired knowledge, skills, motivations, energy, endowed by human beings, which can be used for a certain period of time to produce goods and services [3].
"As research has shown, economic growth today is highly dependent on human resources, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
 It is now almost universally accepted that investments in human capital, expenditures on healthcare, investments in education, vocational training, etc., are a more viable source of sustainable economic growth.
The growing role of human capital as a key factor in socio-economic development in the conditions of scientific and technological progress makes the orientation of the economy towards the person and the orientation of the social development towards the economy an imperative necessity [4].
բնThe nature of the problem at hand in society can be significantly clarified in the case of interdisciplinary reasoning.
  The parallels of drawing such parallels are especially noticeable in terms of socio-economic reproduction.
"Both the whole whole and the individual as a social society, as an individual, go through the same stages of development during their bio-evolution.  birth,  childhood,  adolescence,  youth,  maturity,  old age,  death.
The only difference is the scale of development, both in terms of time and volume.
As a rule, the period begins. In the early stages of its development, man adapts to the environment, acting as a consumer.
  From the most "productive" youth of life, when he consciously assumes the role of an active producer, both physiologically in terms of reproduction and in terms of economic income, of course, without ceasing to act as a consumer.
  Moreover, over time, in the stage of maturity, the economic function of wealth creation prevails over the function of biological reproduction.
  Towards the end of life, in old age, the individual mainly consumes the wealth created by himself or others.
It is not difficult to notice that human needs in childhood and old age are relatively limited for one reason or another.
  As for the possibilities of satisfaction, in childhood a person still has or does not realize those possibilities, and in old age this process becomes significantly more complicated.
Thus, from the position of a typical individual, the problem of limitations of needs and limitations of opportunities in practice is more active in his life among the youth.
  The content of the problem changes or becomes less important in the stages of maturity, especially in old age.
Such an internal logic of development exists on the scale of society.
Thus, after the emergence of human society, the imaginative economy has dominated for hundreds of thousands of years, and the composition of society has not changed significantly either quantitatively or qualitatively.
In the period of economic development with extended reproduction, which continues in our time, regardless of the specific socio-economic and specific aspects, there are characteristics of the state of the youth. As the world's population grows, so does wealth.
  And yet, it is at this stage that the problem of limited resources intensifies.
 Population growth slows down as society matures, but wealth continues to grow.
In old age, as a rule, the growth of both stops. The society takes care of only the needs of its survival with gradually decreasing opportunities.
The life cycle of both individuals and individual civilizations, of course, can deviate from such a course of events.
  But here, as everywhere, the exceptions only confirm the generality.
The above-mentioned human society in the Conclusion.
  Thus, we conclude from the judgments that in the period of modern development of youth, which, by and large, is not yet threatened with extinction due to old age.
  Nevertheless, it is clear that there are threats due to various objective, subjective reasons and circumstances.
  The alarms about the imminent dangers threatening humanity do not refer to the current problems of the modern society, and their solution is possible only through the joint efforts of all peoples և countries through globalization և human development.
The challenge is evolving organic evolution.
