In the 20th century, one of the pillars of Armenian satire, Ler Kamsar, entered the literary arena.
 The most striking line in his work. The satirist of the satirist has a political nature, with the obvious expression of the consequences typical of the political situation.
  The line is continuous. The writer almost never loses touch with the internal and external events of the country, which is reflected in all his works, regardless of genre differences.
In 2013, on the eve of Ler Kamsar's 125th birthday, his "Theatrical Games" were published.
  Previously, in 2001, the author's play "Severe Communists (Satire with 7 Images)" was published in a separate book.
  The plays in the supposedly separate "Yerker" entitled "Comedies for a small stage".
Let's just add that the writer's manuscripts are still in the process of being decoded and printed, and as a result of all this, it will eventually become clear whether the satirist's feuilletons, diaries or plays will be more numerous.
  Of course, their value is an undeniable fact.
Within the framework of articles, be able to refer to all the works of the writer indiscriminately.
  However, what we are talking about will, in a big way, reveal the main content emphases of the satirists.
Of course, the description, the generality, we do not. Each of these can be considered as a unique node related to the author's biography.
Plenary (1926) Session: Naturally, general information is given here, about their writing, the purpose pursued, why not, the differences between the original and the published, the content, and the analytical speech is done after the audience.
After a few short jokes, Ler Kamsar wrote the "bubble" "The Suspicious Husband" - it was not easy, so to speak, but the comedy, which is a staged work, played many times during the author's lifetime: Tabriz (1921), Yerevan (1923). ), 1939 After the Siberian exile, Armavir, already in Eastern Armenian.
  It was a comedy, a non-political, innocent play that could not break the ideology of the time [3, p. 9].
"The suspicious husband is a joker with 5 characters.
 The events take place where "a man or a woman is found" [3, p. 116].
  The date of writing the comedy is accurate. According to the orthography of the cover of the original notebook, probably 1916-1918. is.
In order to be clearer to the audience, it should be noted that there are several versions of this play with different spellings.
  The one chosen for the collection is more complete, or there is a certain reduction here as well, it refers in particular to the first creator of the case.
LerKamsar wrote the tragicomedy "Assassination attempt on an old author" in 1957. on October 24.
This play is directly related to the biography of the writer, especially his birthday, noting that since the exact date of the poet's birthday is not known, this is probably the basis of the work of the editor Kh. For Poghosyan, who introduced that calendar as the birthday of Ler Kamsar [see 3, page 617].
The characters in the tragicomedy with three pictures are: "LerKamsar - 70 years old, Armenian people - 2000 years old, V. I do not know how old Amirbekyan is, A novice writer ”[3, p. 606].
  Critic Vazgen Amirbekyan և Ler Kamsar's dialogue presents a remarkable picture. Without reading the satirist's works, the critic throws everything in the shoemaker's trash can, confident that the comedian's 45 years of literary merit is the only worthy place.
  One of the points worthy of criticism is V. Amirbekyan considers the violation of the chronological order of the works in the book.
  Mount Kamsar gives a precise answer. "Ությունները Truths do not lose their value when told back and forth" [3, p. 609].
  Then the writer has to present all the positive opinions about his works (H. Acharyan, Av. Isahakyan, H. Kochar, E. Charents, H. Tamrazyan, finally "Ar", "Hedgehog" newspapers, etc.).
In the second vision, the Armenian people mediate for Ler Kamsar Amirbekyan, who was long-awaited by his three satirists, to first find a replacement and then kill him.
  The result does not wait long. Ler Kamsar is thrown out of the literary arena.
In the third vision, the satirist, referring to the bitter experience of his life, addresses the novice writer, uttering the famous saying: “It takes talent to write, and writing to bring light to the world is genius.
  If you have that genius, you are often a writer without moving a pen… ”[3, p. 616].
It should be emphasized that these are points of biographical importance for the satirist, which can be the basis for studying all the works.
Only the plays, but for the first time in the author's book, the large-scale collection "Plays" includes more than two dozen comedies - one drama.
  Mount Kamsarnays with large-scale works.
 The book, in addition to what has to be said, has the archive material "Letter to the director of the Yerevan State Theater Vardan Achemyan", where the writer talks about the fate of his "Child of the Soul" drama.
 By the way, the writer sent the following letter next to the letter to the theater director. "Dear Vartan, if this play is included in Pethrat's 65 plan, it will probably be published.
 In his review, Ado Adoyan gives an excellent grade.
 And imagine, I did not like anything, I liked it too.
  But since all plays must pass under your sword, what does our opinion mean?
  Read the end and say, will he stand still while taking the stage? ”[3, p. 701].
In the days of the First Republic, the writer did not want to, or perhaps did not manage to create his political satires on a political basis, being satisfied only with small satirical novels.
  However, seeing the Bolshevik absurdity, the author voiced his thoughts on reality to call for sobriety somewhere.
  The whole of 1926 It became a rich period for the satirist. One after the other, his "The Shortest Road", "Towards the Hegemony of the Proletariat" and other works are born.
  He said that in 1926 It was a year of theater for Ler Kamsar.
The author called the October "Towards the Hegemony of Proletarian Literature" a "project-play with three images".
  The actors are the chroniclers: N. Zaryan, G. Abov, V. Alazan, E. Charents, G. Maharin, A. Vshtuni և others.
  They are engaged in "creative activity", connecting rhymes with "genius" works.
  The policeman who came in takes thoughts from this or that writer, after which one has nothing left, the other is left with only what… E. It was Charentsin.
  Abovibokok-khrat follows with this. "But I say to you, friends, do not listen to your writings, you will not hear.
  Did you see what surprises will happen? ”[3, p. 336].
In the second picture, Ler Kamsar speaks about the similarities and differences between the old and the modern, noting in particular: "Now the reader is so confident in the poet he has embraced that without reading, those who will consider themselves poets will be declared poets.
 More.
 We are today a staff of poets who will only speak honestly in the end to be a poet ”[3, p. 337].
One of the lines concerning the writers of the time is the satirical conclusion. All proletarians are talents, Their talent often reaches genius.
  These writers are looking for readers.
  Kamsaryan's satire reaches its climax when he retells what Dancho's story. "A week ago, Abov would find a sick man lying in the street, take him home, feed him, clean him, heal him, and read to him for a whole week.
  He called, we went and saw.
  He was a sweet man.
  The more you read, the happier you will be.
  We took out eight of our works and read them for three hours in a row.
  It was only at the end that we realized that this man was born deaf ”[3, p. 352].
And when the proletarians first read Tumanyan's "Anush" in order to gather an audience, only after that they take their books, the people immediately think, "Boy, run away, this is a proletarian," [3, p. 353].
  The case ends with Vshtuni, proposing to the "head" of one of the passers-by, who did not want to listen to the audience, to read their works mercilessly, "let him die", adding: "You idiots, have you not heard of studies?
  This is how they will establish the hegemony of the proletariat… ”[3, p. 354].
An engaging struggle was taking place, the central question of which was the possibility and expectation of building literature.
It is often said that modernism has no prospects for development.
In the 1920s, a number of literary groups appeared to publish their new aesthetic programs, often with vague and vague content.
In front of the proletarian literary groups, a series of associations are organized, around which the writers from the past unite (the "Armenian Writers' Society" in Tbilissi (Georgia), the "Union of Armenian Art Workers" in Yerevan).
 At the same time, the proletarian literary movement is gaining momentum.
  In 1922-1923 the first proletarian literary groups were formed: "Hammer", "Blacksmith", "Quran".
  When they were still in the process of formation, the "Three" group (E. Charents, G. Abov, A. Vshtuni) performed.
 1922 On June 6 (June 14 (D. Gasparyan)) the "Soviet Armenia" newspaper published the Declaration of the "Three", the first literary manifesto in Soviet Armenia [6, p. 59].
It is possible to present an excerpt from the declaration: "We demand: Take the poem out of the rooms to the alleys and masses և from the books to the living word.
Ել Express what is current: movement, class struggle, iron and red… ”[6, p. 59].
Other defining points of this period can be quoted.
  Kostan Zaryan mentions: "By the decision of the government, they create literature; by force of the gun, they compose poetry by party order.
  No one dares to criticize, except the two privileged party members, for fear that the counter-revolution will take place and hinder the cultural work of the workers and peasants ”[1, p. 209].
There are women in politics who involuntarily join the construction of the system, which should have been reflected in the chronology.
  Mount Kamsar writes: "Until 1926, there were no girls in proletarianism, and it could rightly be called poaching.
  Then, however, our writers realized that not only socialism, but also socialism could not take much more universal ideas without a girl, and they opened their doors wide for women…… But what is the use?
"The mixture of girl and 'socialism' is chemically more superphysical" [4, p. 159].
According to Ler Kamsar, one of the reasons for literature being cut off from life is to "write with a prize".
  The thought is summed up by a saying characterizing the period. "In a country, when writing will be rewarded, it will mean that the literature of that country sits halfway like a peasant's donkey" [4, p. 198].
In another case, Ler Kamsar speaks of the heroes of proletarian writers.
  Maintaining the imposed regularity that all the rich's kulaks are not people, their external definition is given. "All the rich bulls are brought out with big, bald ears, ugly bodies and fat bodies" [4, p. 24].
 According to the writer, it is true that when revealing the external essence.
  And the other paragraph is just the expression of their deliberately distorted expression. "If it is true that all the rich will have such a disfigured body, then leave them alone, because that ugliness will already be enough for them, because to say more to punish them is ruthlessness" [4, p. 24].
The author refers to his sincere advice to the writers of all times - to read, to read endlessly.
  What is behind it? although it is true that there are people who write without ever having read, "they are also exceptional proletarians" [4, p. 29].
It is necessary for these thoughts on the literature of the period to be mature and preparatory work, noting that, of course, the undeniable fact that in those years, as if writers "shone" in the literary field, people who had nothing to do with literature, so to speak, were at a proper distance from it.
  It is also undeniable that the author's word refers to the writers.
And here are the proletarians, the sarcasm of a number of other pamphlets of the play "Towards the Hegemony of Proletarianism", 1931. They organize the "purification" of the satirist from their "society".
What is "purification"? A question that needs to be presented to the audience in detail again, what did "cleansing" mean in the typical sense of the word in the modern period in general?
It is simply possible to talk about the circumstances of Ler Kamsar writer's imprisonment, bypassing his "A Story of a Purification" case.
  This is the case where the satirist, preserving the peculiarities of the genre, presents his own being "purified in the first place" in 1931 [2, pp. 35-49] from the ranks (union) of writers [see also 5, p. 111. Al. Solzhenitsyn "refers to this phenomenon, noting: "Ամեն Meanwhile, the most attractive of the lazy, unworthy, whispering collectives… (Realistic artists.
  Oh, paint that canvas. "Purification in the work team"…)].
By the way, the case has three copies.
 The first two were sent to the Republican Committee under the Ministry of Agriculture, the Central Committee, and the third, which is the most responsible at the moment, is related to history.
  The case was completely published in the "Spring" magazine in 2007. In numbers 1-2.
  Consists of separate parts. The first is a description of the situation, what a "beautiful custom" there is in court, whether it was applied to him in the form of an unwritten law.
 Here the well-known proverb brings the writer's law, with some changes. "A judge who has a log in his eye should have the right to pluck it from someone else's eyes" [2, p. 35].
  Then the author talks about the judges, Simak, then the next և chief judge, E. Charents.
  The satirist concludes again with a proverb. "Today all the camel-eaters have gathered to squeeze the mosquito" [2, p. 37].
E. When talking about the Charents-Ler Kamsar relationship, one should keep in mind the fact that two great men were victims of the same period; the emphasis should be on the nature of the writer's satire, appreciating the artistic value of his work.
When referring to the actual purification ceremony, the writer likens it to the trial of Jesus.
  This is with the typical reversals and traces of medieval faith, hence the author's biblical phrase "Khach han zda" [2, p. 39].
"Purification" is logically followed by expulsion from the Writers' Union, and bankruptcy in the true sense of the word.
  The writer is facing starvation. This is the "assessment" of his deeds.
Let us not forget that this was just the beginning of his long journey to Golgotha.
  And the "novel" of Ler Kamsar prison life begins in 1935. since November.
  One of the main accusations of the writer's arrest was the "Plenary Session" satire, which was found by the Chekists during the search.
  He was accused of trying to smuggle his anti-revolutionary article into the newspaper "Soviet Armenia" to name the Soviet country.
Throughout the trial, the judge could barely contain his outburst with a handkerchief when quoting passages from the Plenary.
  Although Ler Kamsar was accused of committing crimes of fascism, counter-revolution, espionage and other sins, the punishment was the minimum - three taribants, then exile to Siberia. The "Plenary Session" had done its job at least at that moment, creating certain predispositions for those present, especially the judge.
The original of the play "Plenary Session" (written in 1926) in 1935. On November 25, the day of the writer's arrest, Cheka confiscated or did not return.
  Later the author tried to restore it by memory, which, however, according to him, was not as successful as the original. The play is not in the collection.
The same poem is presented as written by the author.
The case is in two parts, continuously.
"The assembly is the protocol."
  The President, the People իկը The Storm is talking about the poverty of the state budget.
  The ignorance prevailing in the storm, the slow process of housing construction - a number of other realities are connected with the lack of money.
  And, according to him, the only way to fight poverty is to be rich.
  Zepyur, contrary to the Storm, has another offer. According to him, the budget poverty should be looked for in the Armenian grammar. "Nalog", "package" ոչ none of the other words is in Armenian.
  Or why always collect a head tax և and not, say, a foot tax, which could have been more?
Especially since "the head is the most harmful part of the body, why do they put harmful ideas in the head, thus causing the destruction of the whole body" [3, p. 201].
This is how Ler Kamsar brought anti-Semitism to the forefront, he clearly realized that while the period was punishing the silent ones, then the unconditionally indiscriminate ones.
The satirist must present the incomplete list of plays that have been performed at different times: "The Suspicious Husband", "The Victim". After the independence of Armenia, the Hamazkayin Theater, based on the national narratives of Ler Kamsar, staged the play Yervand Ghazanchyan).
  2011 "Severe Communists" - Henrik Malyan Theater (directed by Movses Stepanyan) [3, page 5].
during life).
One of the most important topics for preparing the audience. Ler Kamsar has generously used all the characteristic means of his chosen art, making the word, the utterance more juicy - exaggeration - contrast, comedic forms - humor and satire.
Inseparable from this type of humor are sadness, sadness, tears, regret, pain, the work got a unique tone, characterized by the expression "laughter through tears".
 Every deviation of the word from its usual course to the nonsense, the violation of semantic and grammatical connections, archeology, novelty, exaggeration, the inconsistency of the tone of the word with the content, the increase or decrease of a side comedy. realities typical of comedy.
dialogues, the tone of the word In the works of the author meet all of the above.
  LerKamsar has a number of comedies, բնական, of course, the comedy of the situation is present in these works of the writer ևs.
  The above-mentioned part of the play "Towards the Hegemony of Proletarianism".
One of the examples can be mentioned. In conclusion, one of the Armenian satirists, Ler Kamsaripies, is already on the reader's table today, moreover, since all the archives are already open, it is easy to bring the students the literary novelty or the sometimes secret materials, plays ”as a study material, it is necessary to include in university programs.
funds, namely.
