In Armenian historiography, the history of the Armenian Masonic lodges has not been thoroughly studied, as well as the activities of some of their members.
  In this sense, he is not an exception. After the end of the First World War, K. The number "Armenian" lodge No. 1185 in the history of the Armenian liberation movement based in the Bera district of Constantinople.
  Little is known about this rather original lodge, which is due to the lack of materials available to us.
  Armenak Fenerchyan, one of the respected masters of the lodge, gives interesting information about the limited, fourth part of the lodge in the "Hayrenik" magazine, which is published in Boston.
  For Armenian historiography, the study of the history of "Hayastan" lodge No. 1185 is very relevant in the following respects. The first "Hayastan" lodge No. 1185 became the Armenian "Tigran" lodge No. 1014, founded in Smyrna in the second half of the 19th century. The "Love" of Constantinople ողը The value of the Masonic activity of the "Euphrates" lodges No. 1078 in Harput, with the direction of spreading the basic ideas of Masonry.
  Secondly, the fact that in December 1994 the Armenian members of the "Great Lodge of the District of Columbia" in the United States of America founded the "Lodge No. 94" "Hayastan" is a proof of the need to have an Armenian lodge called "Armenia".
  Third, there are currently 11 lodges in the Republic of Armenia under the auspices of the "Armenian Supreme Lodge", which recruit more than 200 Armenian freedom fighters1.
 They continue to be a separate subject of study of Armenian freedom fighters in different countries of the world in the past.
Their activities in the Ottoman Empire during the World War II.
  They resumed work only after the Mudros armistice of October 30, 1918, when favorable conditions were created for it.
 After the Mudros ceasefire, no Turkish lodge was working.
  The European lodges based exclusively in Constantinople resumed their activities, in particular, the English ("Oriental") No. 687, the Italian "Reborn Byzantium" ("Byzanzia risorta"), the Greek "Harmony" (French "Harmonia") and the French "Renaissance" ("Larena"). ») Lodges.
The best traditions, stopped the Masonic lodges based on Armenian "Archelyan" in the first years. After the end of the First World War, favorable political conditions were created in Turkey for the creation of a new Armenian Masonic lodge.
 Armenian free masonry "once again, like a phoenix, will take another breath in Turkey" 2.
 The situation in 1918 On December 4, the Armenian Freemasons K. It is the "Hayastan" lodge No. 1185, founded in Constantinople.
  Before the war, the 10 founders of the lodge were members of the French-British lodges operating in Turkey.
  One of them was the French-speaking lodge "La Turguie" in Constantinople in 1909. Torgom Poyachyan և Armenak Fenerchyan, and in 1910 Poghos Alan, Hrant Toghramajyan, Yervand Bekmezyan, Barunak Maghakyan և Yervand Msryan joined.
  The "Turkey" lodge was founded under the auspices of the "Scottish Grand Lodge" in Edinburgh and operates under its auspices3.
 The other founders of "Hayastan" lodge, Arshak Papazyan, Minas Martirosyan, Vahan Peshiryan, represented the English "Ashton Eagerton" lodge, which they joined in 1912.
  The first meeting of the founding members took place in 1918. On December 2, K. In Istanbul, in the office of Armenak Fenerchyan, the secretary of the French-speaking "Turkey" lodge No. 1045.
  They decided to call their lodge "Armenia" and operate under the auspices of the "Great Lodge of Scotland".
  To this end, on December 2, they sent a letter to the Secretary of the "Scottish Lounge" David Reed.
  The fraternal congratulations of the letter և greeted the free masons of Great Britain, Scotland, Ireland, as well as the whole world on the occasion of the end of the First World War.
  According to Masonic ideology, they considered the end of the war "a great victory of justice ... which was achieved in the cosmic world bloody war over the criminal rule of tyranny" 4.
  The Armenian free masons in the letter at the same time emphasized the "unparalleled sufferings and endless losses" of the Armenian people during the war.
 2 Fenerjian A., Free Masonry in Armenia. "Love" lodge - "Homeland", Boston, 1955, September, No. 9, page 94.
3 Fenerjian A., Free Masonry in the Near East, - "Life and Art", Yearbook E year, Paris, 1935, p. 77, Fenerjian A., Liberation in Armenia, "Love" lodge - "Homeland", Boston, 1955, September 9, page 94.
4 "Homeland", 1955, September, number 9, page 95.
The creation of "independent Armenia", which the Armenian Masons considered a "national aspiration", to achieve which they expected the "friendly support" of the "Great Lodge of Scotland" 5.
It was decided to formally apply to the "Great Lodge of Scotland" in order to allow the creation of an Armenian lodge based on the principles of free masonry, which will have "its honorable position in favor of the Armenians" 6, among the sister lodges of thousands of English, Scottish, American, French and other free masons.
  On December 4, A. The founding ceremony of the Armenian lodge took place in Fenerchyan's office7.
  The founding members of the lodge asked Torgom Poyachyan to translate the rituals and ceremonies provided for in the Scottish regulations from English to Armenian, so that they would be guided by them in their activities.
  T. Poyajyan complied with the request of his Mason brothers և In 1919. In Constantinople he published "Internal Code and Obligation to Armenia. 1185 lodges ", which was ratified by the Scottish lodge.
  This is a unique case in the history of Armenian Masonry, when the lodge published the charter.
 None of the Armenian lodges established before had published its internal charter.
  At the December 4 session, it was decided to form the leadership of the lodge from the present founding members.
  As a result of the voting, Torgom Poyajyan, Grand Supervisor, Yervand Msryan, Junior Supervisor, Poghos Alan, Secretary, Armenak Fenerchyan, Treasurer, Yervand Bekmezyan, Junior Deacon, Archbishop Barran, Hran Maghakyan 8.
  It was considered obligatory for the members of the lodge to wear clothes during the "work activity" of the ritual ceremonies.
1918 On December 18, the members of the "Hayastan" lodge convened a meeting for the second time in Scotland.
5 In the same place.
6 In the same place.
7 "Life and Art", 1935, page 778 "Homeland", 1955, September, number 9, page 95.
In order to receive a certificate from the lodge, it was decided to create a temporary divan to supervise the work of the lodge. Poyajyan, treasurer - E. Bekmezyan և Secretary: A. With Fenerjian staff.
  He informed the lodgers that on the occasion of the end of the war, in addition to the "Scottish Grand Lodge", he sent congratulatory letters to the two lodges in Paris, the "Great East of Italy" and the "Grand Lodge of Greece".
  Those present thanked him for that service.
Secretary A. Fenerchyan in 1918 The lodge regular took place on December 27, 2012, to discuss the petition to be submitted to the "Scottish Lounge".
  The English petition was submitted by Arshak Papazyan, a member of the lodge, which was accepted with minor editorial changes.
  Secretary of the lodge A. Fenerjyan was instructed to type the edited text of the petition and sign it to all members of the lodge.
  1919 On May 1, 1945, the Scottish Lounge officially ratified the Hayastan Lodge խնդ և granting it its patent.
  On that occasion, the "Hayastan" lodge decided to send a letter of thanks to the secretary of the main lodge.
invited, with the 12th engine of which in 1919. On June 26, the management of the "Hayastan" lodge applied to the "Scottish Lounge" with a regular petition to clarify a number of issues.
  1919 On December 3, the "Great Lodge of Scotland" gave several instructions to the Armenian Masonic Lodge.
  In particular, it was clarified to the lodge that those Armenians who received the first, second or third degree of free masonry in Turkish versions could not be admitted as members of the "Hayastan" lodge.
  The Secretary General of the Grand Lodge of Scotland alluded to the Masons of the Lodge of the Grand Orient of Turkey, the first Master of which was the Chief Organizer of the Armenian Genocide, Minister of the Interior, Archbishop Talaat Pasha.
  The Secretary General of "Hayastan" 9 Talaat Pasha (1874-1921) was not only a statesman, one of the leaders of the "Union Progress" Young Turkish Party, but also a high-ranking mason.
  He was a member of the "Makedonia Rizorta" lodge in the late 1890s. It became a "youth clarification" that those who wish to join the "Hayastan" lodge are obliged to apply to the lodge in accordance with the established procedure and receive a proper answer.
 The Secretary General of the "Great Lodge of Scotland" drew the attention of the Armenian Masons to the fact that the Armenian members of the Turkish Lodges could not join the Armenian Lodge with the degree they had.
  People with such a desire can become members of the "Hayastan" lodge only on general grounds.
  The Secretary of the Scottish Lodge at the same time instructed that any body belonging to the "Great Lodge of Turkey" with its members could not be recognized as a regular body of the "Armenia" Lodge, therefore it could not be admitted to the "Armenia" Lodge.
  Guided by the same principle, the members of the "Hayastan" lodge were not allowed to carry out any Masonic activity or relationship with that body10.
These instructions were in the interests of the "Armenia" lodge members, they completely corresponded to their position.
 The Armenian Freemasons were well aware that the masterminds of the massacres of Armenians in 1915, the masterminds of the genocide, were the high-ranking members of the "Young Turkey" and "Great East Turkey" Masonic lodges headed by Talaat Pasha, who were the Progress Party.
  The members of the "Hayastan" lodge were aware that the Grand Master of the "Greater Turkey" lodge, and in 1909 In August, he was elected Grand Master of the "Great East Turkey" lodge, which was the invisible government of Turkey.
See Heyd Uriel. Foundation of Turkish Nationalism, London, 1950, p. 98; WalkerChristopher. Armenia.
 The Survival of Nation, New York, 1980, p. 344; Robinson Richard. TheDickran. Armenia.
  The Case for a Forgotten Genocide, Westwood, New Jersey, 1972, p. 98, Ghazaryan H., The Genocide Turk, Beirut, 1968, pp. 316-317, Kirakosyan J., The Young Turks before the Judgment of History, Yerevan, 1982, book one, page 242.
10 "Homeland", 1955, September, No. 9, page 96.
11 See HC Armstrong. Gray Wolf. The Life of Kemal Ataturk. New York, 1961, p. 20; B.1, p. 35; R. Bino, The Extermination of Armenians. German Methodist-Turkish practice, their Mason brothers became victims of the genocide, in particular, the editor of "Sapah" newspaper, Reverend Master Tiran Kelekyan 12, member of Turkish lodges, member of parliament, writer Grigor Zohrap, ARF figure Vardges Seringyulyan 13 Zhurishner.
1920 On Monday, October 18, at 8:30 pm, he was taking the works of Armenia to the solemn "Hayastan" lodge. The opening took place in the house No. 1 on Kuloglu Street in the Bera district of Constantinople.
  More than 200 guests were present at the opening.
  The ceremony was led by Percy Little English, formerly the Most Reverend English Master of the "Oriental" lodge No. 687 in Constantinople14.
"Hayastan" lodge is the only Armenian lodge in the history of Armenian free masonry, which was established before, in the presence of the tricolor flag of the first republic15.
The "Hayastan" lodge No. 1185 stands out from the other Armenian lodges in that it was the lodge with the largest number of exclusively Armenian freedom fighters.
Armenak Fenerjyan, who provided the only information about the number of members of the lodge, presents different numbers.
  He represents the number of Armenian members of the lodge in "Life ր Art" magazine 125 people16, and in an article published in "Hayrenik" magazine he writes that the lodge "had about a hundred members" 17.
  During its years of activity, the "Hayastan" lodge had six Super-Reigning Masters: Torgom Poyajyan, Minas Martirosyan, Armenak Fenerchyan, Tigran Parsamyan, Vahe Hindlyan և Leon Tchgnavoryan 18.
  Otyaki K. Constantinople, 1919, page 49, R. Mevlan Zade, The Dark Folds of the Ottoman Revolution, the Armenian Genocide Programs of Jittihat, Beirut, 1968.
12 "Homeland", 1955, December, number 12, page 81.
13 Kirakosyan J., note work., book one, pages 323-324, book two, Yerevan, 1983, page 74.
14 "Life and Art", 1935, page 77, "Homeland", 1955, September, number 9, pages 97-98.
15 "Homeland", 1955, September, No. 9, page 97.
16 See Life and Art, 1935, p. 78.
17 "Hayrenik", 1955, September, number 9, page 98.
18 Ibid.
During their reign, they carried out "very brilliant activities."
"Hayastan" lodge No. 1185 is the only lodge in Turkey, which was attended by not only secular people but also clergymen.
  The first of them was ordained a member of the lodge, Hovhannes Karapetyan.
  He was the editor of "Hayastani Kochnak" newspaper in 1924 In the October 4 issue, he sent a wish to "Hayastan" lodge entitled "Conscious Love".
The author of this poem, which consists of nine quatrains, expresses a desire to "love the Universe without foundation, to be inseparable from the stars, to love the whole of humanity, a common call for help,… to love art unconditionally, to learn science uninterruptedly. If you want to love the Universe, then "love the sister house first", if you want to love the whole of humanity, then "really love your mourning brother", if you want to love art unconditionally, then first of all "warmly love the simplicity of life".
 Listening to the advice of that voice, the author then writes: "The shining way."
"I loved my house with sincere adoration, I said to the stranger. "You are a brother", I ran before the way of life, And in selfless service, I found spiritual temples without fire "20.
Hovhannes Karapetyan's poem bears the influence of a number of basic tenets of Masonic ideology.
  They are enshrined in the "History of Freemasonry" by 21 masons James Anderson 22 "Free 19" Life and Art ", 1935, p. 78.
20 See John, Conscious Love, The Call of Armenia, New York, October 4, 1924, No. 40, p. 1267.
22 James Anderson (1680-1739), priest of the Scottish Presbyterian Church, theologian, founder of symbolic Freemasonry, revered Mason, Reverend Master of Westminster Abbey, London, 1723. He published a work regulating the activities of Masonic lodges, known as the Anderson Constitution.
  See Ridley J. What is considered an immoral system "25, in the Constitution" 23, "Bible of Freemasonry".
 Freemasonry is "a state of the soul" 24, "a moral doctrine of perpetual perfection wonderful in its beauty" 26.
  Masonry aims to morally ennoble people "to unite them on the basis of brotherly love, equality, mutual aid" and fidelity.
  These provisions are enshrined in the wish of Archimandrite Hovhannes Karapetyan to the "Hayastan" lodge.
  Evidence of this is his use of the expressions "eternal Universe", "inseparable friend", "all of humanity", "Brother Ezdun", "mutual love", "way of life", "art is inexhaustible", "spiritual temple", "shining path" and others. , each of which is a component of the "vocabulary" of Masonic ideology.
  Masonic ideology states that every human being is called to develop his or her abilities freely, to move from darkness to light, from ignorance to knowledge, from death to immortality, which takes place only in the temple of the human spirit or in the Masonic lodge, where all are brothers.
Archimandrite Hovhan Karapetyan was not the only caretaker enrolled in the "Hayastan" lodge.
 1923 On the evening of June 4, 1945, Archbishop Artavazd Surmeyan 29 was "Armenia", which was attended by a large number of members of the lodge.
 1946 He left for Paris as a Plenipotentiary Representative to reorganize the Diocese of Europe.
  He was a manuscript writer, historian and philologist, he published and edited the periodicals "Hay Knar", "Sasun", "Hay Khonnak", "Tat" calendar.
    He has authored a number of historiographical works, collaborated with "Bazmavep", "Handes Amsorya", "Hayastaknakan Hayastani", "Echmiadzin" and other periodicals.
 He was buried in the Pere Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.
See "Call of Armenia", 1946, October 5, No. 40, page 954.
free masonry 30.
  1936 He conducted a liturgy at the Forty Children's Church in Aleppo on the occasion of the 31st death of King George V of England, which was attended by the British Consul and many foreign guests.
  He asked the former Honorable Master of "Hayastan" lodge Armenak Fenerchyan to send the sermon he had read to the "Great Lodge of England" 32.
opportunity 1923 Armenak Fenerchyan was replaced by Tigran Parsamyan on December 17, 2010 in the position of the Honorable Master of "Hayastan" lodge.
 To the new Reverend Master A. Fenerchyan sent a word of congratulations, which is full of different provisions of Masonic ideology.
  It gives a direct idea of ​​the Masonic ritual of passing the position of master in a Masonic lodge from one free mason to another.
  In his wish speech, high-ranking mason A. Fenerchyan, addressing his legal successor, said. "Addressing you, my dear brother, first of all, I would like you to note that this position is the highest honor that the Brotherhood can bestow on any brother in his lodge.
The responsibilities associated with this position are very large and heavy and require a lot of thought and heart.
 To be the next leader, you need to have a lot of subtle skills and strengths.
  And the most prominent of them should be the new Reverend Master, who has respect, consideration and love for his brothers.
  With your thoughts and especially your heart, you will be able to gain the trust and loyalty of your brothers and sisters.
  It is your duty to enlighten their minds with true support, in the form of 30 "Homeland", 1955, September, No. 9, p. 100.
31 George V (1865 ⁄ 1910-1936) - High Mason, monarch of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
  1932 For the first time on December 25, he congratulated his compatriots on the occasion of Christmas on the radio, the text of which was written by the famous English writer Mason Reddard Kipling.
  German composer Paul Hindemith dedicated "Funeral Music" to the king's memory.
  See Harold Nicolson. King George the Fifth; С. Crowns of Victoria Corolla and the first British monarchs XX c.
  Edward VII i32 "Homeland", 1955, September, number 9, page 100.
with wisdom, prudence and moderation; If your attitude and conduct to the high art we have practiced for centuries is corrective, then you will receive the strength and power needed for this position and will be able to unveil the beauty of the secret doctrine that forms the basis of the Free Wall.
The progress of your room is a duty.
  Just as human life takes place in closer cooperation with the body, mind, and soul, so the life of an altar takes place in its close material, moral, and spiritual cooperation.
  Each Free Masonry has to work calmly in its corner, lest it be the sublime invisible temple where you will develop the mental, moral, and spiritual forces that, united in the united efforts of all the brethren, can ultimately shape human perfection.
You, the newly elected Master, will give real meaning to these profound lessons not only in your words, but also in your life, behavior and manners.
  His Eminence must always remember that he is on earth and that his temple is eternal and everlasting. that a man's heart is the temple of peace, purity, strength, mercy and hope.
  The trust placed in you is very high and I am sure that you would not want and would not dare from the responsibilities that were placed on your shoulders tonight, with the votes of brotherhood.
 Before learning, before teaching.
 Obey before ordering.
  Let's understand well before criticizing any problem.
Here are some tips to help you get started:
  Therefore, I wish that we could combine all the qualities of a highly respected master in your person. ”33
According to the Reverend Master Vahe Hindlyan, a decent man, as a "Hayastan" lodge, ceased its activities in 1925, having a "brilliant framework" of activity34.
 This lodge suffered the same fate as Smyrna's "Tigran" No. 1014, K. "Love" of Constantinople և 33 "Homeland", 1955, September, No. 9, pp. 98-99.
34 "Homeland", 1955, September, number 9, page 100.
The "Euphrates" lodges No. 1078 in Harput.
  Each time, due to the unfavorable political conditions created in Turkey, the Armenians were forced to stop their free masons.
He shone like a comet in the Masonic sky and had a short life, yet he left a serious mark in the history of Armenian free masonry.
