The article is based on "European-developed theories of language knowledge / awareness, according to which language teaching presupposes the development of basic competencies, such as linguistic, multilingual-practical, but D. In his observations, Hayms refers to non-linguistic competence as a key component of language learning.
This view was also endorsed by us, which was examined in particular in the article.
The purpose of this article is to use the language-communication competence proposed by CEFR in the language learning process without ignoring the role of language development in communicating the same developmental language, which is the most important component.
In order to communicate in a foreign language, not only linguistic knowledge, but also common language and practical knowledge is used.
  In other words, in order to have an effective conversation, in addition to grammatical, lexical, phonological knowledge, it is necessary to show proper behavior, knowledge-speech process.
    However, it is no less remarkable that extra-linguistic application has a special significance in the implementation of effective communication.
  This is the reason for the urgency of this article.
The mastery of competence, which, from the student's point of view, is necessary to use not only the volume and quality of knowledge, but also the means of memorizing knowledge, their accessibility.
Linguistic competencePolinguistic competence includes the socio-cultural component of language use.
  In this context, it is significant in the different situations of students' language abilities in the learning process.
The use of linguistic precision As far as practical competence is concerned, it is related to the linguistic and cultural norms of the society հետ communication norms և traditions.
In other words, in this context, foreign language competence has a unique role, without which no real communication can take place.
In the field of foreign languages, communicative language competence does not mean the verbal exchange of thoughts of only two people, but includes a set of components of interactive verbal activity.
When teaching foreign languages, the development of communication involves a number of mental processes: perception of new information, memory, cognition, as well as the development of each physical and mental transmission.
  Their abilities and actions are conditioned by a number of factors: the learner's age, mental strength, worldview, general communication-linguistic knowledge, language thinking, language perception, etc.
In terms of communicative-linguistic competence, the theories developed by this Pan-European System of Linguistics / Awareness (CEFR) clearly state: “Linguistic-communicative competence can be considered as a set of components. linguistic, socio-linguistic pra pragmatic, each of which in turn includes knowledge, abilities և skills ”[2, 15-16].
In fact, the term "linguistic competence" is self-relative, as: 1. Different culturists have their own ideas about the correct use of language, each ethnic group has developed its own mechanism for assessing language competence; 3. The level of communication competence may vary depending on the purpose of the communication.
During the demonstration. I. Karasik also categorized several aspects of linguistic competence: real knowledge of the language, • language competence of educated non-educated speakers, competence of foreign speakers, linguists և experts [7, 63-64].
Linguistic competence Linguistic competence includes components that are very important in language teaching methods.
  They are connected with the language ողության thinking, grammar և vocabulary.
He added that in this context, when we say linguistic competence, we mean the ability to use grammatically correct grammatical structures.
  Without words, one can not talk about the formation of meaningful expressions. [10]
As it is known, linguistic competence is related to the acquisition of skills of the linguistic system, that is, phonological, syntactic knowledge.
Possessing this competence, it is possible to compose meaningful sentences.
As for sociolinguistic competence, the latter presupposes knowledge of cultural rules, that is, knowing how to use the language properly.
  The appropriateness depends on the place of communication, the relationship between the topic and the interlocutors.
  Moreover, to be proper means to apply the norms of polite knowledge, as in the case of a corresponding attitude in the case of irony, respect, gratitude.
Symbols of culture that in the case to show respect, for example, A. V. Glukhova views multilingual competence as the ability of students to acquire language resources in a given language situation.
  Here he uses the meanings of the word ակցության word-related in relation to the style of communication ինչպես as well as the practical purpose of communication [4, 206].
According to the Pan-European System of Language Knowledge / Awareness (CEFR), multilingual competence relates to the socio-cultural conditions of language use [2, 16].
A. Arshakyan is of the opinion that multilingual competence refers to the meanings of the relations between linguistic forms, their meaning, which differs from the meaning contained in linguistic awareness.
  If the latter is based on the connection between linguistic signs և their conditional (outside the vocabulary) meaning, the connection between the non-linguistic competence linguistic signs և their signifier on the lexical situation in the given situation.
  One of the components of this awareness is the use of "composed" in the corresponding vocabulary [1, 83-84].
Pragmatic competence is related to the operational use of language resources "in accordance with the mechanisms of language interaction [2, 15-16].
Implementation, verbal act ”- communicative In the light of the above, it can be assumed that the expertise is comprehensive, which is the commonality of the communicative norms և traditions տվյալ of the given language-speaking people և represents the present-day linguistic and cultural community.
Communication Behavior In other words, practical competence is the ability to orient oneself correctly in communication, to take into account the opinion of the interlocutor, to use the most appropriate means of expression, depending on the conditions of communication և goals.
Many researchers have also referred to communicative competence. A. Leont, I. A. Zimnyan, M. Ն. Vatutn, B. Մ. Polonsky, O. Մ. Kazazs are those who think that the latter has the ability to perform verbal activities, to ask questions, to formulate their answers clearly, to pay attention, to give an active critique of the interlocutor's existing problems, as well as the ability to substantiate one's own opinion, listen և listen to other participants' opinions. [3], [9], [6].
is.
  This is supposed to comment, discuss the thoughts. As shown in the diagram, D. Hymes observed a monotony that covered a wider range.
  It is reflected in the social reality due to the skills of the latter. [12]
The result of the activity is intellectual. Hymes' point of view is more acceptable, because we can not distinguish linguistic competence from non-linguistic, which has a special role in interpersonal relations.
Especially when the school is at the core, the main components of non-linguistic communication, the քերի eye և facial expressions, can be guessed from the most important tool դ's facial expressions, whether he has learned the lesson or not, whether the material is clear or not, whether there is truth in it or not.
The student's teacher exchanges ideas.
Figure 1. Communication Competency Template [12] Development CompetenceՋ. In his research, McKay examines foreign languages ​​in a special way, as students first respond to the teacher's foreign language.
  The lesson plan of the day is formed during the first few minutes, when the teachers և students instinctively orientate how the communication should start.
  The teacher's facial expressions, voice, gestures, gestures can inspire confidence, and vice versa [13, 54].
It would therefore be undesirable for language teachers to give equal opportunity to master the use and application of non-language tools in the classroom, especially in high school, when students present role-plays and engage in discussions.
  We have singled out the most practical versions from non-linguistic means. frontal (anger, sadness, joy, fear, contempt և etc.), 2. use of gestures (point, greet or say goodbye, etc.) 3. A look in the eye that can express interest, admiration, confidence, like deception. images և objects that can convey some information about a person or object.
Therefore, it can be stated that through language-communication competence it is possible to transfer basic knowledge to students, abilities reveal who we are, how we communicate with others.
  There is often talk about how a language teacher can be easily distinguished by the gestures he uses in conversation.
While summarizing, it can be concluded that language communication skills include knowledge, skills that learners need to create their own speech behavior programs, and appropriate communication situations.
  The latter is the mastery of all types of verbal activities, as well as the communication conditions learned in the communication process.
Ability to express properly but not lack language proficiency in the learning process.
  Establishes effective communication between the communicating parties through multilingual communication, in case of non-linguistic competence, the communication is carried out by accepting or receiving communication without a word by the communicators.
