The work (professional) is based on experimental results.
Literature, social work, but all the work. In all times of human development, there have been deviations of human behaviors, both in a positive and negative direction, for example, deviations from the norm are considered "gift".
According to the decision of the World Health Organization, gifted children are considered children of the "risk group" - mental retardation, delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse.
  The clever backwardness of their use, the talented, the inclination of children need special educational means and methods, special curricula for personal development, specially trained teachers, special schools [1, p. 381].
Endowment is the totality of human innate qualities, which is a precondition for the development of abilities.
  Great Russian pedagogue V. Ն. Soroka-Rosinski considered the third group of children with difficult upbringing to be the group of gifted children [2, p. 142].
  This group includes children with emotional disorders, who are characterized by aggression, poor emotional management, uniqueness of character traits, anti-disciplinary, anti-social actions, which in some situations or conditions can be transformed into exemplary behaviors.
 At the same time, they have great creative energy, abilities, interests, attitudes and ability to work, different from their children.
The gift of a gifted child can be considered an "idol of the family, a cult" for the family and parents.
  Under this approach, parents over-evaluate their children's abilities, which can often lead to frustration.
It becomes especially dangerous during adolescence.
The children, the parents themselves, record the present or the success of the children, the actions as a fact of the gift endowed by the children.
 They always tell about it.
  All the demands and wishes of the children are fulfilled, everything is allowed for them, some of their actions and omissions in education or other fields are forgiven.
Therefore, it is very important for parents, teachers, social pedagogues and other specialists to correctly identify and diagnose the fact of child donation in time.
"The social pedagogue must first of all remember that no matter how gifted the child is, he must learn" [3, p. 383].
It is used by children in interaction - interactions, social-enabled communication-pedagogical information technologies, through which it is possible to create interactive problems, to satisfy ontological, emotional and material needs, to develop self-knowledge.
 It is used in all (long-term, short-term educational, periodic, urgent-situational) in all social-pedagogical spheres.
Organizational technologies, counseling is carried out to solve with the child.
Understand that talent is a big job.
  Possible failures or slight success will not disappoint the child to give up the goal.
  Social pedagogue և inaccurate relations ել remember that he needs to be educated, taught clarity, love for work, acceptance of self-determination.
The social educator needs help to develop a child talent development program that envisages etiquette teaching.
  It will give an opportunity to determine the child's strengths and weaknesses, to support his interests.
diversity practical ևThe goal of the Talented Child Work Program is to teach you to live in a society that does not always show a benevolent attitude with a different attitude from the average talented one.
  The child needs social skills.
A variety of educational books, CDs, can help here, but it is better to participate in group games, as a talented child needs to communicate with other children.
  The child should not be deprived of childhood.
  Only by studying his attitude towards the child, the social pedagogue can determine his րա relationship.
  Necessary features, which is the reason for his parents' pride.
It should be noted that a talented child blinds his parents. They can oppress him, forgetting that the child does not like oppression.
  That is why conflicts arise in the family.
Understand the uneven behavior of talented children is reflected in the frequent change of mood, impatient in communication, interrupting և correcting the interlocutor, demonstrating self-knowledge, always trying to establish their truth.
All these qualities require, first of all, to cultivate patience և not stickiness.
  Talented children know what kindness, truth, and mercy are, but in practice they often fail to express those qualities.
They need the help of a specialist, social pedagogy.
  Curiosity ձ the desire to know everything, the powerful creative ability turns into a violation of the norms of behavior արում strains relations with the environment.
The experimental part of the article "The role of a social pedagogue in the work of gifted children" was carried out in Vanadzor Daniel Varuzhan N 16, Hovhannes Tumanyan N 3 basic, Vanadzor Mathematics with advanced training in natural sciences "Eureka" special schools, Lori region at the branch.
35 people took part in the research.
The work was carried out in two stages.7. The diagnostic phase is aimed at identifying gifted children.
8. The main research phase - the main methods of social pedagogue working with gifted children were used.
We used different tools during the research. Մեթոդ Viewing method - the aim was to study the children's educational and creative achievements.
Մեթոդ Interview method - used with schools, social pedagogues of the Child Support Center.
The aim was to find out how social educators diagnose gifted children, what problems gifted children face at school, and what methods social educators use to work with gifted children.
Վերլուծ Analysis of social passports - the purpose is to analyze the achievements of the presumed family school year, the benefits and benefits of having children.
Ավորում Testing the detection of children by studying the levels of motivation of intellectual abilities, respectively.
In order to develop creativity, it was aimed at determining the level of readiness to work with "social" children with disabilities. I. Dorovskaya's "Social Pedagogue Readiness Survey" questionnaire [see Appendix 3] և "Educator with a gifted child" questionnaire [see Appendix 4].
Р "TRIZ" technology of the pedagogue - the author is Henrikh Altshuller.
Designed for the development of children's creative, analytical thinking.
  It includes a system of several methods, from which the following are separated: "Mtagroh" և "GUS".
  At the same time, ICT technology was used by the social pedagogy to provide children with the necessary information, help children get answers to their questions, give them the opportunity to debate the issue under discussion, and as a result of the debate, the truth is born.
According to the plan, the social pedagogue works with gifted children, their parents and others.
  For this purpose, we present an example of a social pedagogical work plan (developed own version) [see Annex 1].
In order for the other child to develop, on the contrary, the social pedagogue works with the child's parents.
  Organizes discussions, meetings.
  We have provided an example of such a discussion [see Appendix 2].
The research was carried out for two main purposes: • To identify children endowed in the institutions.
• Identify the main methods that the social pedagogue uses when recruiting gifted children.
The following facts are organized by the educators. .
 Summarizing the results of the interview, it is possible to emphasize the ability of the educators to identify basic examples (questionnaires, interview method, modeling, biographical method), which are designed to diagnose the intellectual abilities of children, the level of creativity.
  Social educators highlighted some of the key issues facing gifted children in school.
  Among them were difficulties in finding close friends, misunderstanding and criticism of the child's creative abilities by those around him, anxiety, which may be due to the fact that children use different tests for different purposes and do not correspond to the characteristics of children.
  The expectations of gifted children from their peers և their communication needs Children have fear of self-expression, in some cases emotional instability.
  In order to solve these similar problems, the social pedagogue works with children.
  One of the works is psychotherapeutic work.
The quality of interest is endowed with և degree.
  The desire of gifted children to read a book in volumes is noticeable.
 They read at night or practice practical skills that are surprising.
 Napoleon stood out with such features.
 Based on these features, the specialists offer gifted therapy through books - bibliotherapy.
  Social pedagogues, while talking about gifted children, presented the diagnostic direction, conversations, trainings and consultations, if necessary, they are a mediator between the "school" of the family.
We have built the first stage of the research work with J. Based on Renzuli's three-model psychodiagnostic system, where endowment is a combination of three components: intellectual abilities, creativity, and motivation.
  According to this model, the children who will register maximum results from all the listed components are considered gifted.
For that purpose, we applied the appropriate: "Intellectual type" "Progressive Matrix of Mathematical Abilities", "Stanford-Binet" test, H. Gardner's Diagnosis "Test, Diagnosis" Method, Ravenny Thorens' "Creative Thinking Diagnosis" Test, E. P. Ilyin's "Motivation for Success", Kuznetsova, Sverch's "How to Discover the Gift" և Savenkov's "Gift Map".
Summing up this stage of the research work, we can say that the identification of gifted children was quite difficult, as there is no complete, specific method by which we can assess the gifted children.
At this stage of the work, we used the main methods used by the social pedagogy, which are necessary to identify the gifted children.
  Analyzing the results, it can be concluded that 4 out of 19 observed students have potential endowments [see Appendix 4].
They had above-average intellectual abilities, high levels of creativity և motivation [see Figure 1].
Diagram 1. Summarizing the experimental work done, we can emphasize that the social pedagogue uses observation, conversation, testing, questioning, biographical methods to diagnose gifted children.
  Of course, these methods are used not only with children but also with their parents.
to the gifted children: Discovering the social pedagogue starts working with the children in accordance with the points of the plan.
  The work of a social pedagogue here is aimed at overcoming the problems of children endowed with the development of children's abilities.
Let us single out some examples of methods with the help of which the social pedagogue works with gifted children.
"Brainstorming" - used to develop children's creative-analytical thinking.
  A problem is proposed that has many solutions.
 The child should express his "Casey Method" thoughts and ideas on the problem.
  Then the options are discussed.
- contributes to the acquisition of necessary knowledge and skills.
  When working with gifted children, the social pedagogue uses a case, the purpose of which is creative abilities, the ability to orientate quickly, the level of motivation.
Gifted children have difficulties in communicating with their peers.
  Social "The method of building ideas".
  Contributes to the definition of a common, general idea of ​​a collective "product".
The effectiveness of working with gifted children is introduced. The "Setting" method adopted in Great Britain is introduced to ensure the creation of a pedagogue, the use of children's close friends.
  It allows children to be included in groups at the level of subject achievement.
Card discussions, seminars, trainings, consulting, and information modeling, game, communication technologies are used by the social pedagogue in schools.
  Working with socially-educated children builds on a blind search model based on a trial-and-error method based on a maze model in which the problem is viewed as a maze, and the process of finding a solution is like walking through a maze.
The "Talent Development Program" model provides an opportunity to increase the cognitive interest of gifted children, to develop their abilities.
It gives an opportunity to determine the child's strengths and weaknesses, to support the development of his abilities.
steghtsagortsakanAshkhatankinkaragrutyun "the round seghanmankavarzhneri ubazmamasnagitakantimi on gifted children" to develop "Gifted children" Gifted children "program" data bankisteghtsumAnketaneri, testeriu anhatakanzruytsneri kirarumTematik conversations knnarkunerikazmakerpumMrtsuytner, Olympiads, intellectual "race" parent meetings, knnarkumnerNpatakePataskhanatuZhamketnerHAVELVATS 1 Sotsialakanmankavarzh, multidisciplinary timOgostosSotsialakanmankavarzh, multidisciplinary team tnorinutyunHogeban , social educatorSocial educator, psychologistAugustSeptemberSeptemberOctoberSeptemberSocial pedagogueOctoberNovemberPedagogues, directorate, multidisciplinary teamOctoberMay (every year) Social pedagogue, psychologistNovember DecemberGive answers to a number of questions: what kind of gift, which children can be considered gifted, what are the signs of giftedness? Types.
Establishment of normative-legal basis, creation of a system for diagnosing gifted children, development of individual works and methods with gifted children.
Identification of gifted children, analysis of social documents, individual folder formation, analysis of learners 'achievements, study of students' interests and abilities.
Contribute to the development of gifted children's cognitive abilities, inform students about the signs of children's giftedness, the development of their abilities, the possible risks of repaying the giftedness of students in the analytical "critical thinking" process in the search and research process.
APPENDIX EXAMPLE OF DISCUSSION WITH PARENTS OF ENVISAGED CHILDREN Objective: To emphasize the role of the family in developing the potential of gifted children.
Working horse-round tableParticipants-parents of gifted children, social pedagogue, psychologistTools-questionnaires for gifted children, psychological-pedagogical literature on giftedness.
Interpretation of the concepts "Endowment", "endowed child" (social pedagogue, psychologist).
• Interpretation of psychological characteristics of gifted children (psychologist).
• The role of the family in identifying gifted children.
  To the counselors (social pedagogue).
• Survey with parents: "How to find out the gift" (psychologist).
• Exhibition of children's works.
  Exchange of opinions, clarification of questions (social pedagogue).
• Summary of the meeting.
  Evaluation of its effectiveness by parents.
APPENDIX 31. What is endowment?
INTERVIEW 2. What features would you like to characterize gifted children?
3. As a social pedagogue, what methods do you use to diagnose gifted children?
4. What problems do gifted children face at school?
5. What methods will you use to work effectively with gifted children?
6. Can you name some other subjects that you can work with to ensure the development of gifted children?
implementation of children 7. How the works of the gifted!
