Hethum II of Cilicia, one of the most mysterious figures of the Middle Ages, appeared in the center of the periodical.
Both his political and cultural activities were the subject of discussion.
For the attention of scholars (1289-1301), the Bible written by his order, The Dinner, is famous. They have a special place in the history of Armenian culture, being distinguished by a number of peculiarities.
Thus, "Hetum II's handwriting is one of the few ancient manuscripts of the Bible that have split heads from beginning to end following the Latin Volgata" [3, p. 135].
ևScoveredHe is interesting և Hetum B. The biographical facts of the king, the historical-political period, the personal tragedy. "Hetum B. During his 18 years in power, the king relinquished his throne six times, entering a monastery, and returning the same number of times.
  Eventually, he converted to Catholicism, joined the Franciscan Congregation, and left the government.
At the same time, he led the Latinist current in the country, demanding that Armenians also convert to Catholicism ”[3, p. 138].
In spite of all this, he created, in the Bible book he had commissioned, ostensibly leaving a memorable line from Haytmo Hetmo to the King of the Pious, written in 1295.
The pious, learning-loving king Hetum B. was especially original and written in memory. In the end, one of the best examples of the Bible, which is ideally chosen by him, is the best example of some of the names of Stephen, on a parchment, a circular, beautifully written in Armenian, and in 1295 փ. THE BLESSING THAT READS, THE GLORY THAT HEARS, GLORY TO THE PAIN, AND THE MEMORY OF THE PEN, EVERYTHING. CHD. WRITTEN "[2, page 42].
By the way, it is memorable that the editorial board of "Ararat" magazine, noticing and using the above-mentioned line from the Bible itself, particularly impressed, emphasizing the author's uniqueness. "Although this memoir is dedicated to the light of the end of the Bible, it is another kind of original, especially the handwritten copy that we have in St. The Apostolic See had a great influence on us as a philologist of public interest ”[2, p. 42].
  This heaven was referred to by the editorial board of "Zion" magazine, publishing it among other memoirs, with the distinction of four-part poets [7, pp. 174-176].
It should be noted that there are some differences in the versions presented by "Ararat" and "Zion" magazines, such as "Brovartakink im pachuchin / Sion / Birov exkoyxm my pachuchik / Ararat /, Naևapays gol yishka / Sion / Sa yapayat gish The beginning of the beginning / Zion / Zor in contrast to the sources of the beginning of the beginning.
which, of course, conditioned (Ararat), comparing Note that the above-mentioned work of Hetum II, being classified as a historical-political viper, was highly praised, even with Nerses Shnorhali's "Novel". "The lines of King Hetum II and Commander Smbat Sparapet have an identical connection with Nerses Shnorhali's" Novel "[6, pp. 156-157].
 The poetic talent of the king of Nakilik was highly appreciated: “King Hethum is a gifted chronicler. In matters of life, he is independent, in taste, he has renounced homosexuality, he has written in parallel.
 This circumstance has had a positive effect on the quality ”[6, p. 156157].
This work is remarkable որպես as a memoir,, as an independent work, a verse work written by a monk-prince.
  In fact, it is a combination of literary genres with a spontaneous and sincere narration.
  Hetum II, presenting the history of the dynasty, speaks on behalf of the repentant monk-king about the given period, personal feelings, and even disagreements over Easter, expressing an interesting, unique worldview and feeling.
 The narration in the spirit of narration is completely immersed in revealing his perception of reality: he is only a king by the name of Heth, a poor and indebted man, For I will call him an Armenian prince, But I am from my ruler.
  The subtle psychological feeling, however, when given place, is a very important feature characteristic of memoirs. With sincerity, repentant people should be presented. We have taken all the quotations comparing the versions in "Zion" and "Ararat" periodicals.
My writing was finished. By the time our number was full, it was seven hundred and forty, and it seemed to be more than four Armenians.
The imagery peculiar to the literary word is "studied" with originality, for example, their dynasty compares the origin of the prince to the smell of Noah, like the flood of Ruben, which descended from Gagka, as the ark of Noah, who opened this land to our family.
  The fact that he has sons with a poetic curiosity is expressed in the word "flower", as "Apai Leon is a martyr", The fact that he had three sons "Because of the birth of Toros and Stephen and Mleh".
  He compares the country of the nation with the turbulent sea, as Ibazahoyl tspans allyats Yorum world kayr yaylazegats մամբ Describes the conquest of the capital with the condensation of colors. It is impossible for us to grieve, for the inconsolable mourning, because we have taken the city of the King, and all that is with him.
The comparisons with the peculiarities of the images stand out, which most express the author's thinking, the originality of the world perception, as if roaring like a lion, like the sparrow's restraint, etc.
The author has created interesting images by referring to the well-known realities in the fables in the Bible, at the same time expressing subtle observation, forming new differential forms, such as: And according to the tomb of the deceased, Brakq is the appearance of my bag.
 Or a flood to sink, A river to stretch out its hand.
  The shepherd threw himself upon the sheep, and left my bones to the shepherds.
The whole work is written in Old Armenian, but there are realities unfamiliar to Old Armenian, for example, the use of the sound F by Stefan, which, if we consider the Armenian features of the period, should be considered normal.
  New semantic applications have been witnessed, for example, the daughter of Zabel the king, Zugial ruled after him, This is the father of King Hetmo, Leonarka, my father.
 In this small passage, the conjugated words are remarkable, one of which is used in Middle Armenian to become [4, h. A, p. 220] in the sense, and the other is known in the Old Armenian to get married in Cilicia [5, h. 1, p. 889] was used in the same sense as the word.
It has been proved to work in a similar way, which we see only in the Radical Dictionary, as a separate unused root, which is related to work, to put together with verbs, forming Grabarian styles - to work, to color - to hurry, to try, to make an effort with meanings [1, h. 1, p. 592]. Many grasping my fortress, massacring the Eucharist.
 That the world was our campaign, It worked three times. He used other Grabarian styles, expressing a delicate poetic taste, for example, For the sake of our nation and our country, he set himself apart as a captive.
   In order to miss, they chose the Fourteenth day.
 Have you judged directly? In order to make the poetic image more impressive, he also used a circle typical of the Middle Armenian language, which is considered to be that of the Mongol-Tatar Tatars, as well-trained archers (see 190), p. 190, p.
 Because you were a mekapastan, the nation was thrown away.
As for the expression of grammatical horses, in this case the Grabarian horses dominate. Thus, the meaning of nergoyakan was mainly expressed in prepositions, such as: I got my heart pounding, Kamok in souganmitar's splint, or, Like a roaring lion, considering Zmezyorovays, but evidenced by a preposition in the Middle Armenian dialect. Blessed be he with his Father, and with the Holy Spirit, Always and forever and ever, Zeris in one nature.
  Moreover, it is obvious from the example whose voice group contributes to the formation of the rhyme.
