 The analysis of the scientific-methodological literature and the practice show that the family plays an important role in solving the problems of children with developmental delays, including preschoolers with visual impairments.
Especially in the process of development of spatial orientation of visually impaired children (V. A. Feoktisova - 1993, V. V. Tkalova - 1998, E. Mastyukova, A. T. Moskovkina - 2004, RN Azaryan - 2008, etc.) .
In recent years, educators, psychologists, and sociologists have been encouraged to provide effective solutions to the educational problems of families with children with visual impairments, including preschoolers with visual impairments.
Studies on the development of specialized spatial orientation skills and skills developed by parents in the process of educating children with visual impairments are complemented by systematic corrective developmental measures.
However, the lack of literature-appropriate skills reduces underdevelopment; the fact that parents do not have the self-efficacy to help երեխանsupport their children արդյունավետ in the face of disability ներում in the face of disability.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of the work carried out in the post-family conditions of the children, it is necessary for the parents to be equipped with theoretical and practical tasks that will be created in the family with favorable conditions for developing the spatial orientation skills of the schoolchildren.
Visually Impaired Knowledge First of all, when organizing or carrying out these activities, it is necessary to develop the ability to be afraid of space in preschool children with visual impairments.
  It is also possible to focus on the direction of the roadmaps ս the ability to remember and focus on objects during hearing movement. In this process, the development of empowerment։.
The process of formation of children's parents' space, of course, on instructions, memory, motor sensations, understanding the meaning of the words "right", "left", "front", "back", etc.
Thus, it becomes apparent that the development of tools, methods, and pedagogical approaches to the development and orientation of people with visual impairments with the help of the visually impaired need to work closely with their parents to help them learn more properly.
Equipping the founders of this work with visually impaired children in a family setting is to equip them with theoretical knowledge and necessary practical skills.
Moreover, the main directions of this work are the development of pedagogical approaches for parents, which will help them to properly organize the spatial orientation of visually impaired preschoolers in the family.
Develop effective tools, methods այման conditions for their application, which will help children with visual impairments to orient themselves in the micro-macro space in the family environment.
In developing solutions to these problems, we have taken into account a number of issues.
  The main problems in the development of տես orientation կարող skills կարող development քում in the family are: spatial preschool 1. Prevent the formation of harmful habits that are associated with visual pathology, negatively affecting the development of the ability to orient.
    For example, tilting the head too far, moving forward or sideways, walking in a crooked manner, stretching the arms while walking, making noisy footsteps, etc., children spatial 2. to develop ճիշտ to develop the correct movements of the head, torso, neck, legs, arms, and to maintain the correct amplitude, which can play a role in orienting oneself in space. to orientate correctly "right", "left", "forward", "back" և when performing other tasks, 4 Develop with micro-macro space injections, memory, attention, verbal touch, ability to orient with voice orientations5. Develop the ability to navigate in different conditions during the movement (straight line, uphill, downhill, uphill).
In order to achieve this goal, it is necessary to use systematic psychological-pedagogical approaches, that is, the problem of spatial orientation must be solved in combination with the development and development of speech, voice perception, memory, intrauterine touch in children with visual impairments.
Based on the above, it becomes obvious that visual impairments in the family environment, parents must have the appropriate knowledge, practical skills and abilities to effectively implement the work aimed at the development and development of spatial orientation skills of preschoolers.
The fact that in a family of multidisciplinary studies, visual impairments and disabilities, work to develop spatial orientation skills of preschoolers is not always effective, and often is not carried out at all.
  The difficulties of this process are mainly due not only to the type of visual impairments of the mentioned children, to the peculiarities of psycho-physical "age development", but also to the lack of parents' low level of awareness about these issues.
The analysis of special scientific-methodological literature aimed at solving these problems also testifies to the incomplete and practical elaboration of this issue.
Frequently absent approaches, experimentally developed և reasoned means for organizing preschool visually impaired spatial orientation, parent-assisted methods and practical economic development tools.
    And in families, such work, as a rule, is carried out on the basis of parents' own experience and knowledge.
We present an exemplary set of spatial orientation skills for preschoolers with visual impairments for those who want to develop and organize at home, which includes the main sections of the "Theoretical Skills" of the work.
Abilities and knowledge "," Practical 1. In the "Theoretical Knowledge" section, we have included such topics as "Psychological, physical and age-specific developmental characteristics of visually impaired preschoolers", "Harmful habits that negatively affect the development of spatial orientation skills", "Requirements for proper mobility" "," Spatial orientations of children with visual impairments, with instructions, memory, touch, etc. ", as well as the use of these verbal abilities in practice.
Oral nature, negative development 2. To be able to take into account the second degree of visual impairment of the child during spatial orientation exercises կատար tasks, to create favorable conditions for their organization, to correct all harmful habits that affect the development of spatial orientation skills նկար (skills development).
We pay great attention to the methods of special exercises aimed at the ability of children to orient themselves in the micro-macro space through verbal instructions, memory, intangible touch, hearing perception, tasks և games և games և chosen by parents և.
  We use the knowledge (skills) of preschoolers to develop the ability to orient themselves in different conditions in space. .
Instructions for developing spatial orientation skills for preschoolers with visual impairments are designed to enable them to gradually master theoretical knowledge and then apply it to practical skills.
In order to check the level of abilities of the parents, we have singled out the set of practical knowledge and practical skills that the parent must possess.
For example, in the "Theoretical Knowledge" section, parents should know: • Psychological, physical, age-specific features of the development of preschoolers with visual impairments: • Harmful habits (head tilted too far, sideways tilt, arms outstretched, uneven gait, etc.) On the development of spatial orientation of preschool children with disabilities. Spatial • to create favorable conditions for safe movement of visually impaired children with low vision. give a clear բան complete verbal instruction, move all unnecessary objects, clear the road ևspeaks, explain ևalignment of objects to children, use voice guides և etc. Present the correct position of the head և torso;
In addition to the above knowledge, test takers should also acquire a number of important practical skills.
They should be able to: • take into account the nature of the child's visual impairment • nature, • the characteristics of the child with secondary disorders, • observe the rules of the exercise during spatial orientation, know the contraindications to certain exercises, etc.
Thus, the development of spatial orientation skills of preschoolers with visual impairments կազմակերպ to organize և to develop և to implement the presented theoretical approaches, perspectives և to improve this work in practice in the family.
  Only in these conditions will it be possible to achieve the development of spatial orientation skills of preschool students with visual impairments in the family.
