The military-patriotic problem of the students organizing the educational work by the state has always been the correct organization of the attention of the educational and military departments to different solutions typical of the given time.
  The educational work, as a continuous "long" process, is quite inclusive, not equal for all educational institutions.
  The process of patriotic education announced by the state serves as a basis for developing short-term, long-term educational and strategic programs.
However, despite this circumstance, the existing watershed between the state order and the expected results of that order is far from desirable.
The patriotic upbringing of the institution's special role for the future citizen's education is one of the main tasks defined by the standard of secondary education.
  The issue of forming a citizen in the society, which will be useful for the state and the society, is at the basis of the state order.
Learn to formulate "patriotism as a system of significant, unsurpassed values ​​characteristic of all spheres of public life և state, which is the most important deep property of a person, characterizes his highest level of development" manifested in the active process of self-realization for the benefit of the motherland "[5].
Enough is enough.
In Armenia, the process in the institutions is carried out in accordance with the central principle of student-teacher education, where the main source of information was teachers.
  Technologies have changed over time, but the transfer of theoretical knowledge is still considered the ultimate goal.
By making a direct comparison with the process of Japanese, Finnish and American education, we can state that the ratio of the transfer of theoretical knowledge to the formation of practical skills in those countries is almost on an equal footing for the patriotic upbringing of social science concepts and subject standards.
"Character education" and value education are basically the two main preconditions for raising members of a democratic society.
 By mastering economics, history, management, etc., students continually learn moral lessons, find themselves faced with moral dilemmas, and reach counter-values ​​(Milson, 2002) ”[1, 56].
  But the basis for military-patriotic education in schools is "NZP", social science, geography, anthropology, the sociology of education, the subjects of educational-preservation objectivity "ASP" and "Physical Culture" in the school curriculum.
 Judging by the above, we can make a partial conclusion that the burden of patriotic education of students falls on the teachers who teach these subjects, regardless of the position of that teacher.
 The problem becomes more complicated when the same teacher, not only with his professional qualities, is not able to satisfy the demand of the state order, but also causes additional problems in that field.
It is undeniable that the problem is becoming more fatal.
  We have conducted a number of studies on the issue.
  In order to gather information, appropriate measures have been taken to find out the ideas of students and teachers about patriotism.
 In 2016, studies were carried out in a number of institutions, in particular, Vanadzor N 4, 25, 27 - basic, N 5, 10, 13 - senior, VSU base school Ն N. Tavush region. In Tsaghkavan secondary schools.
  In total, 200 students, 70 pedagogical teachers took part in the polls conducted by us.
  We set ourselves the task of finding out what the students and teachers think about patriotism.
  90% of the surveyed students defended the "What is patriotism" homeland, and 80% of teachers and pedagogues considered patriotism to be a direct devotion to the homeland.
The answer to the question is whether the most important circumstance in the upbringing of "remarkable patriotism" or "military patriotism" is that the content of the "homeland", "patriotic citizen" model ատվ by that definition is the upbringing of a citizen.
  If there is no unified approach to this issue, at least as a result of effective work, a long-term positive impact is unlikely.
  Because of that, we set ourselves the task of studying the "arbitrary," analyzing the content.
The essence of patriotism, its perception In particular, in the 50s and 60s of the 20th century, he referred to the problems studied by the United States. Likhach, V. Stoletov, Yu. Amirjanyan, A. Sahakyan, V. Sukhomlinsky, S. Khachatryan, S. Petrosyan, G. Shchukina, S. Manukyan, S. Gorgyan, H. Andreasyan, R. Hambardzumyan, V. Atoyan, S. Zakaryan, A. Sargsyan Zhurishner.
  Analyzing more than a dozen literatures, we have presented "Patriotism" (see Pedagogical Thought 1-2 2017, p. 101), what is patriotism, who is the patriot, at the same time the forefront, which will ensure the strengthening of students' "patriotism".
The question of the article "On the patriotism of actions"
Based on the fact that it is from the general education of the Republic of Armenia that the students, completing the general education ideas about the election, we can state that all this has a direct comparative relation to the student's observation as a patriotic citizen.
  This issue is related to both the nine-year and the twelve-year-old secondary և state standard of basic education, which clearly defines the state approach to the content of education, the vision of the public-state demand, the future citizen (see RA Government Decision N 439-N of April 8, 2010) [4].
  In our opinion, the professional orientation of the students, especially the high school students, can be influenced by the family, the environment, the social networks, the public demand, the profession being a source of further financial income.
  "In the age of high school students, a person's moral strengths develop intensively, his mental image is formed, his character traits become certain, his worldview is formed" [3, 201].
The most important component of the government is the education of the students, accepting the fact that meetings.
Successful objective, "subjective reasons" is the provision of appropriate sensitivity through, so it should be noted that from the point of view of students' professional orientation, no motivational activities are carried out in schools for this purpose: lectures, seminars, "masters" admission of "professionals" to "professionals". in all developed countries.
  Based on our observations, we can say that all this is not fully implemented in Armenia.
 Unemployment, non-functioning factories and workshops, jobs in the dominant state and commercial institutions in the labor market have all that.
  Despite the reasons we have listed, students are keenly interested in existing information technologies և, in particular, programming, the profession of programmer.
  The memories are vivid, when for years the most desirable professions among teenagers were the pilot, astronaut, tanker, design manager, accountant, doctor and teacher, but today many from answering.
  Many developed countries, such as Japan, Israel, Germany, China, the United States, etc., in addition to ensuring the recognition of national products as a brand in their own country, attach great importance to working in these institutions [6, 7].
As the employees of such institutions enjoy prestige, the jobs of the respective professions are considered competitive in the choice of profession.
  State military-industrial, technological, aircraft-design institutions also occupy a special place.
  Superstructured, industrialized state-run educational institutions, pursuing a healthy "smooth generational change", at the same time, these countries in every way support the goals of enlisting innovative, creatively rich employees in institutions, thus ensuring the sustainable development of the state institution.
From what has been said, it becomes clear that the problem of choosing Jdra for professional orientation starts from the school years.
Continuing the previous idea, let us mention that all this takes place within the framework of joint activities: mutual visits, thematic conversations, lectures, direct contact with successful specialists, trainings, joint long-term "short-term programs", etc.
  Taking into account the above, we suggest: 1. to organize thematic և mutual visits, 2. periodically invite specialists from the field, 3. create a collaborative platform where students will have the opportunity to present their creative ideas and approaches, 4. Develop alternative ways to encourage learners, 5. to review the essence and content of practical trainings in the general educational institution, 6. activate students' creative skills and abilities as much as possible, 7. Conduct lessons in separate subjects (social sciences, NSP, geography) abroad, in other state-private institutions (according to the topic: local self-government bodies, law enforcement agencies, research institutes, etc.) in enterprises, 8. Involve students in research activities, 9. Introduce special integrated courses.
It is very important to create an atmosphere where learners have an equal opportunity to participate in the above-mentioned activities.
  This is the reason for the organization of the main process of patriotic education of students, during which selflessness and devotion appear.
  "It depends exclusively on the educator, how the teenager sees the world, what excites him, surprises him, arouses sympathy, dislike, love and hatred" [2, 183].
The state institutions were gradually privatized after the independence of Armenia, as a result of which those institutions, not having the motivation to work in many creative cases, gradually began to close.
  As a result, unemployment and a skeptical and indifferent approach to permanent employment arose in the society.
In the context of ever-changing economic-political situations, geopolitical-economic-innovative developments, the IT sphere has more or less developed in Armenia, which includes people endowed with creative abilities.
  The sector is mainly developing due to the sharp increase in domestic orders for goods, services and services.
  Here a certain conclusion can be made, according to which, if the essence of the state order is clarified, regarding the patriotic upbringing of the students, especially the high school students, the index of their upbringing can be conveyed in a more tangible, more effective way.
  First of all 1. Research work to ensure the edges of mutual visits և contact.
  These visits should serve specific purposes. For example, to see, to get acquainted, to know, to know, to be a participant, to become a part of the whole և etc.
perfect 2. To organize meetings with the leaders of the field, aiming to make the activity of those people a subject of inspiration, to use a concrete modern example, to inspire students in the given field. For example, IT, military-industrial, state administrative, power, political, marketing, etc.
3. Introduce joint short-term programs with the aim of creating a direct ղթ chain link between theoretical և practical knowledge ինչպես, as well as promoting the discovery of learners' physical and mental abilities, opportunities, the formation of professional orientation, creating opportunities for self-expression և self-confidence.
4. Introduce such incentives will enable learners to become more recognizable in society.
methodology, 5. In order to ensure the comparative equality of the state standard requirements for secondary education in the institutions, in order to ensure the comparative equality of the state standard requirements for secondary education, the direct involvement of the learners in the analytical and research work of the students.
  In general education institutions, as well as in state bodies, where the cooperation is emphasized in the expenditure part of the institution's budget, allocate a certain amount of money (for example, in the range of 20-100,000 AMD), for the creation and implementation of certain innovative programs by students (for example, marketing, marketing, marketing). offer in the field of industry, programming, military industry, etc.).
  To involve students in the practical work from the pre-school years.
  It is very important not only to cover the right choice of the program, but also the urgency, demand, impartiality and efficiency of the work being organized.
Opportunity to serve as a competitor: 6. Measurement of students' level of upbringing during assessment-practical classes.
  This will allow learners to create an atmosphere in which, in addition to reproducing purely theoretical knowledge in the classroom, the learner will be forced to follow the behavioral lessons of their activities.
to evoke emotions directly in emotional learners7. To make the necessary communicator the goal of the activity of state-administrative-business institutions, which will be a serious stimulus for the students.
8. The free, creative, willing, and conscientious citizenship of the education of students, especially high school students, is the best way to achieve all this by ensuring the regularity of the independent students' independent work.
The goal, according to teenagers 9. Introduction of short-term educational and educational courses in high schools.
  The content of the course should be included in accordance with the emotional-cognitive requirements and age characteristics of the adolescents.
  The aim of these courses is to involve Pitlin learners in a systematic process, using both individual and team work.
  Unfortunately, in our days, to consider military-patriotic education in the foreground, thus creating a misunderstanding, equating patriotic education with military-patriotic education.
  Meanwhile, the military-patriotic education of the students is only a part of the education.
Thus, by ensuring the involvement of government agencies, educational and research institutions in the educational work of students, especially high school students, we expect that in a very short time, without investing large financial resources, it will be possible to solve the problem of students' professional orientation in science, research, IT, patriotism. generation change, supplementing it with the youth of modern creative enthusiasm.
