While studying the curricula of the previous years of the Yerevan State University, we noticed that courses and educational subjects aimed at developing the communication culture and interpersonal competencies of the future teacher were not studied.
 Surveys with stakeholders revealed that they կարիք need to be trained in a communication culture ծրագր interpersonal competency development program.
  Approaches to the design of educational programs aimed at the development of competencies "Development of competencies" developed by the National Center for Strategic Studies in Higher Education.
Mechanisms are presented to determine the structure of the program, to define the relevant competencies, in the methodological guide of the study, methodological training is introduced, development of educational curricula, selection of training methods, improvement of the quality of the programs.
  The determination of the list of educational outcomes is closely linked to the goals and objectives of the qualification profile program provided by the curriculum [4, p. 21].
  Based on the requirements for the educational programs of the universities, we have developed the "Teacher Communication Culture" course program to meet the requirements of students' communication culture and interpersonal competencies in the "Pedagogy-Methodology of Elementary Education" department.
Most of the students need to be motivated to adapt to the educational and cultural environment of the university.
  Therefore, it is necessary not only to apply the skills to involve them in the educational environment, but also to develop communication motivation in students, to develop communication skills, to develop communication skills based on it, which will become the basis for their communication culture.
  Acquisition of pedagogical knowledge is not enough to become a competent pedagogue. ].
  Structural components of communication culture are communication skills, culture of speech, culture of pedagogical activities, culture of behavior [5].
Mastering the culture of first relations, interdisciplinary specialists in the fields According to A. P. To develop Panfilova's student communication competence, it is necessary: "Structural stylization of special rules նորմ communication norms, effective communication techniques և technology, making morally correct decisions, mutual understanding - this is an incomplete list of the main elements of communication competence ..." [8., p. 150].
The content of the teacher's professional competence includes the professional qualities of the professional, the abilities, the creative qualities of the activity [9].
հաջողThe success of the professional activity from the degree of mastering the communication competencies of the student, so that the student becomes theoretically և practically գործում practically competent in overcoming problem and conflict situations in the teacher-student-student relationship after graduation [1].
Depending on them, we offer the study of the "Teacher Communication Culture" course, which is aimed at deepening the knowledge about the essence of the future teacher communication culture.
  The main purpose of the acquisition of theoretical knowledge is the development of a system of knowledge about the means of communication of primary school students, the development of communication and psychological-pedagogical patterns.
The course also contains knowledge about the peculiarities of communication culture, structure, pedagogical conditions, which ensure the successful development of that mental quality of primary school students.
  The main elements of this course are lectures, seminars, practical "laboratory work" is carried out under the guidance of the lecturer, directed to the preparation of reports, reports, individual work, research work.
Introducing the "Teacher Communication Culture" course program, to develop a communication culture in the professional training system, in connection with the new methodology և paradigm of education.
  It is conditioned by the fact that the formation of a person, as a separate value, puts new demands on the professional quality of the teacher.
  The development of subject-subject interactions - self-directed exercises.
In the context of student-teacher education, it significantly enhances the role of the teacher's personal qualities, such as self-mastery of speech-pedagogical interactions, problem-solving skills, and mastery of verbal communication [10].
Behavior culture, culture, culture, culture. The aim of the project is to develop the motivations of students' communication activities during the pedagogical professional training և the culture of appropriate communication, to promote the acquisition of educational components by the students during the future pedagogical activity.
The program of communication culture will contribute to the enrichment of students' professional "personal experience", communication culture, development of professional "interpersonal competencies", mastering of elements of culture of pedagogical activity, formation of worldview, "pedagogical", "utilization of effective" communication potential.
The future "Teacher Communication Culture" elective course with other subjects included in the content of professionally related training, such as "Introduction to Professional Activity", "Pedagogy", "Pedagogical Communication", "Practical Pedagogy" etc.
The aim of the course is to develop and improve the teacher's communication culture, professional and interpersonal competencies.
The objectives of the course are: • Encouraging the process of developing a teacher 's communication culture; • Developing communication, professional and interpersonal competencies; • Developing the ability to overcome problems in the interpersonal relationships of principals, colleagues, students, parents, • Learning to communicate as a learner. .
After studying the mentioned course, the student will be able to: • Define A. Professional knowledge and important element of culture imatsutyunmshakuytihaghordaktsmanorpesmankavarzhakan activities, nature, • describe methods of formation of communicative culture, describe the professional, social, moral and human values, interpersonal and hasarakakanenkalmanevinknatirapetman means to know the culture of communication teacher nerkayatsvoghhamamankavarzhakananhatakanmasnagitakandzevavormanughinern and technologies, patterns, inknachanachmanhaghordaktsmanpahanjnere, Culture • interpret them individually ways of forming components of communication culture, describe communication mechanisms.
b. Practical professional skills in creating a pedagogical environment in the team, positive psychological • be able to develop a culture of communication based on other personal characteristics during the educational ագիտական ​​professional activity, • choose short, clear, meaningful և vividly express ար written համ oral, communicative, fluent, fluent, fluent, fluent to use verbal quick orientation in problematic situations, based on social and human values, to build effective means of communication, to develop learners' communication potential.
c. General, transferable abilities • to master communication-interpersonal competencies, communication technologies, methodology of revealing and solving pedagogical problems, communication reflection.
  Creatively apply the means and means of improving the culture of personal communication.
The course demonstrates the following outcomes after the curriculum: 1. The purpose and objectives of improving the interpretation of the teacher's culture, professional and interpersonal competencies.
Communication 2. Analyze the forms of verbal և non-verbal communication, combine communication styles.
 [3] 3. Creatively use effective means of communication, develop learners' communication potential.
4. Develop a communication culture based on other personal characteristics.
  [2] The following forms and methods of teaching "learning" are used: different forms of teaching, examination, practical methods, methods of team-cooperation.
Evaluation methods and criteria are: 1. current inspection in the form of individual work, 2. Final exam - oral with a maximum value of 100 points.
  Each questionnaire contains 3 questions with a value of 30, 30, 40 points.
Introduce the content of the "Teacher Communication Culture" course, the ways and methods of teaching each topic.
  The course is 48 hours: lecture -18, seminar -18, practical -12.
 Introduction / 2 hours lecture / 1. The culture of pedagogical communication as a socio-pedagogical problem / 2 hours / in the conditions of education.
Culture »Conceptual approaches to the problem of the formation of a teacher communication culture. Conceptual approaches to the definition of communication, culture, realization.
  The culture of communication in the professional activity of the teacher.
  Teacher communication, information, emotional, cognitive, their connection with teaching-upbringing functions.
Humanities "Communication", Functions of Concepts - Culture The Forms and Methods of Teaching Theme - Practical Training, Communication Skills Test, Comparative Analysis of "Communication", "Culture", "Communication Culture" Concepts, Problem Lectures, Debate, Independent Work [7].
The structure of cultural communication2. Teacher /functions / 6h / In the pedagogical process of teacher communication.
activities և professional development Communication activity, speech culture / verbal ևlanguage norms /, ethical norms, communication norms, communication competencies.
Culture Theoretical-methodological approaches to pedagogical communication և teacher communication.
  Levels of motivational, content, reflexive feedback of teacher communication.
Operational-technological, components: provision, cultural-pinnacle Teaching methods and methods - lectures, seminars-presentations, role-playing exercises.
Practical training, "Development of a sample communication plan development plan", pedagogical games, game tasks, organizational-practical games, development of questionnaires to determine the level of formation of pedagogical communication culture, modeling of pedagogical situations [7].
3. Teacher communication culture, social-psychological aspects 3.1. Teacher communication culture as a subsystem of pedagogical culture / 6h / Communication culture is a component that ensures the integrity of the culture of activity.
Forms and methods of teaching the topic - lecture, pedagogical application, communication design of modeling technologies [7].
3.2.Teacher's point of view communication patterns / 4h / psychological / communication psychological characteristics of a person տեսCultureNervous activity type, temperament types, personality activity, temperament characteristics տր introversion աստիճ degree of extraversion, communication activity.
Forms and methods of teaching the topic - problem-solving lecture, situational analysis method, seminars, design technologies, round tables, role-playing exercises [7].
4. Teacher communication culture 4.1. Peculiarities of the principles of teacher culture communication / 4h / professional Teacher principles of culture communication ևCommunication characteristics: functionality, purposefulness, characteristics of structural components.
  Speech culture, verbal և non-verbal means of communication.
Understanding the Principles of Teacher Communication Culture Principles.
  Peculiarities of elementary school teacher communication culture.
Content, Forms and methods of teaching the topic - lecture, pedagogical communication design, modeling - analysis, social games - exercises, communication games - exercises, reflection - self - assessment [7].
4.2. The culture of communication as a socio-cultural phenomenon, the means of its formation / 6 h / ալական the socio-cultural essence of communication as a socio-cultural phenomenon of communication.
 The means of its formation.
The culture of communication, the ways and methods of teaching the topic - collaborative organization, collective co-creation work, essays [6].
Educational work 4.3. Pedagogical communication styles / democratic-authoritarian // 6h / Types of relations between pedagogical subjects.
  Pedagogical communication styles, their comparative characteristics, conditions of application, communication levels.
Processes and methods of teaching the topic - problem lectures, group work, modeling, role-playing games, analysis of pedagogical situations, development of communication strategies [6].
communication exercises, 5. The technology of forming the culture of communication of the teacher 5.1. The stages of forming the culture of communication of the teacher ևPedagogical conditions / 6h / The stage of mastering the stages of forming the culture of communication: preparatory, theoretical, practical formation of knowledge.
  Description of the teacher communication culture.
 Stage of development of communicative-pedagogical skills. stage of formation of speech culture.
Developmental phase, communication conditions, methods and methods of teaching the topic ախոս lectures, practical training, trainings, reflection (development of communication self-control) design, application of modeling technologies [7].
5.2. Teacher communication culture, professional interpersonal competencies technologyTeacher communication culture, professional interpersonal competencies technology acquisition technologies "technology" in the process of communication culture.
Description of the concept, application of technology in the process of developing interpersonal competencies in the organization of pedagogical communication.
The system of interpersonal cooperation.
 Teacher-teacher, teacher-student, teacher-parent interaction technology.
Development of teacher interpersonal competence / 6 hours /.
Professional communication, "Topics and methods of teaching the topic - lecture, seminar, communication skills" skills development exercises.
  Practical games of communication culture formation, և individual development [7].
Scenarios group. Introduce the thematic plan of the course. Theoretical, lecture. Title of the topics Բ SeminarPracticalIntroduction 1. The culture of pedagogical communication as a social-pedagogical problem2. Teacher's communication culture structure ները functions3 Ո Teacher's communication culture ուցsocial և psychological aspects 3.1. The culture of teacher communication as a subsystem of the culture of pedagogical activity 3.2. The psychological aspect of the culture of teacher communication / psychological features of personal communication աչափ Patterns, reflection 4. 4. The culture of teacher communication 4.1 The culture of communication as socio-cultural. Principles and features of teacher communication culture 4.3. Pedagogical communication styles / democratic և authoritarian / 5.
application.
Sovoroghnerimasnagitakan patrastutyanAyspisov formation yevmijandznayin pedagogical communication, cultural competency mankavarzhakanbuherumkarevoraguynkhndirnerits one, so that process ardyunavetutyuneentadrum learning approaches and noraguyntekhnologianerihaghordaktsman culture, "Teacher communication culture developed professional and interpersonal kompetentsianeridzevavormandardznelunpatakov" entrovidasentatsitsragire elementary school future usutschihaghordaktsman culture technology daseridzevere we believe will provide the teacher The uniqueness of pedagogical activity, art, competence Tap.
  The effectiveness of pedagogical activity is conditioned by the level of formation of the teacher's pedagogical communication culture.
  The development of a more effective culture of communication and interpersonal competencies as a process presupposes the use of communication methods and technologies.
