The harmonious coexistence of the ever-changing labor market is not an easy task.
  The latter solution requires the use of both classical and non-standard teaching methods.
 In other words, teacher-student interactions are required, which will teach students to learn, to "see the invisible", to look for creative-innovative ways of solving the problem.
student-student "Shirak M. Nalbandyan State University Foundation (hereinafter referred to as the University) is one of the organizational units of the Center for Library-Educational Consultations, Innovations and Information Technologies (hereinafter referred to as the Center), which coordinates academic consultations in higher educational institutions of the Republic of Armenia.
The starting point of any initiative, of course, is the "development idea", which answers the questions "for what?" And "what?" In accordance with the objective social requirements of the university.
The start of academic consultations is possible on 25.09.18 of the Academic Council of the University. By decision N2 / 1 "ShirakiM. Nalbandyan State Helsinki Foundation ”after the approval of the“ Academic Management Procedure ”(hereinafter referred to as the Work Procedure).
Academic counseling is one of the starting points of the article. 2].
It was said that on the one hand, academic advisors are in the role of active actors in academic counseling, and on the other hand, students are studying under the bachelor's and master's degree programs.
Moreover, academic counseling can not only stimulate the development of human resources of university students, but also the representatives of the teaching staff in the acquisition of general professional knowledge.
From the above definition, it should be noted that academic counseling is aimed at creating a new or quality product or service through problem solving, which will be appreciated by the internal stakeholders of the university.
When providing academic counseling, the university's human resources are valued first, only in the absence of relevant specialists.
Four types of academic counseling in terms of content orientation: 1) scientific literacy consultations, 2) systemic (general) skills-based consultations, 3) research consultations, 4) sub-topics of professional subjects of educational programs, 2 off-page consultations] 2.
According to the above logic, each egg of the academic consultation will be briefly presented.
1) Scientific literacy consultations are aimed at the rules of general methodological presentation of the structure of the work of the departments corresponding to the work prepared by the bachelor և master's educational programs [2, page 3].
The existence of this form of academic counseling is conditioned by the corresponding social work requirements of the students.
(graduation work,) etc.) Students often have a number of questions.
  In particular, during literacy counseling, students have the opportunity to find answers to questions such as the significance of the research to be done, the stages, the content of the work and the logic of constructing the main chapters, the selection of literature, the list of references used and the citations, the presentation of the work and conclusion. answers.
Scientific enrollment In the case of enrollment of forty to fifty students, research literacy counseling is suspended for four academic hours.
One or two research literacy advisors are selected for each faculty of the university.
2) Developing academic counseling in universities հետ Along with understanding the latter as a teaching process in which the student's personality is used, as well as the opportunities to express his / her abilities and opportunities, the choice of life plans, developing academic counseling has emerged.
  Scholars have identified three goals of academic counseling: capacity building, independence development, and student purposefulness development [3, p. 67].
Systematic (general) capacity-based counseling for graduates of the specialization system to support the development of the university's competitive advantage-determining skills in the labor market
Creative-innovative (general) ներիցOne of the urgent problems of Armenian higher education institutions is that it is realistic for graduates to increase their competitiveness in the labor market by ensuring their general capacity to meet the needs of the labor market.
Satisfaction.
  Generic competences, on the other hand, are the skills directly related to the profession needed to carry out various activities (eg, teamwork, decision making, project development, management, etc.) [1, p. 15].
Effective in the field of work is the combination of skills and abilities necessary to solve a specific problem [2, p. 2].
the capacity of knowledge, the highest power.
It is now widely recognized that teaching-learning institutions need to demonstrate that more capable graduates are being trained.
  Accordingly, universities allocate resources to develop the skills mentioned by the graduates.
Spectacular, for example, is the competence of creative thinking, the formation of which is the implementation of a consultative lecture entitled "How to stimulate, develop creative thinking?"
The logic of the specialization of interdisciplinary teams (each team consists of five members) is focused on the specialization, the interactions of the representatives in one place can turn the theoretical knowledge into a tangible result.
The following is the implementation of a series of lectures on interdisciplinary counseling on team-based freedom of thought, in order to organize relations with the teams, to come up with ideas and suggestions.
  And, of course, the formation of ideas-proposals must be followed by their implementation.
  As a result, students understand that both the process and the outcome are equally important, they learn to be proactive, and so on.
 In other words, students turn from a passive object of influence into an active subject.
Provision: advice.
3) In order to build students' social interactions, to create a culture of mutual assistance, research has been established.
  In this case, the academic advisors are the excellent student-volunteers who are working with their undergraduate students [2, p. 7].
It was clear from the definition of research education that research advice is an organized volunteer activity.
  It should be noted that volunteering is a promising form of social activity; the university environment can stimulate the formation of a culture of volunteering, which is needed by the volunteer-student as a result of the activity.
in reality.
  Volunteering: Famous American pedagogue J. Bruner points out that "it is expedient for each student to be able to play the role of a teacher in relation to his or her peers, as teaching students to learn while learning is a justified psychological activity that activates the learning activities of both parties" [4, p. 114].
It is possible that volunteering activates young people's creative initiative [5, p. 82].
In short, by teaching, the student learns, ensures the development of his / her professional potential.
  Moreover, he accumulates social capital based on trust.
4) The Center organizes extracurricular consultations on specialized topics of educational programs, which are aimed at meeting the special needs of students in certain specialized subjects, and providing comprehensive, complete answers to the questions of interest to the student (s) [2, p. 7].
  Only this egg of counseling is paid by the hypocrites.
Students with extracurricular activities often have professional questions that are not answered in the course.
  Therefore, it is logical to give the desired academic advisor the opportunity to search for answers to the questions of interest.
The ongoing final evaluation of the academic counseling will allow you to understand and improve the organizational, content issues, ensuring the achievement of the set goals.
