The provision of human species for the perpetual reproduction of any nation, state, civilization, the other components of the value of their own species reproduction: physical security, level of satisfaction of material and caring needs, level of development of state and society, level of cultural realization are derived only from human nature.
is.
  In other words, from the point of view of Armenia's security, the national challenge of the Republic is the single demographic crisis, which threatens "our physical security in coexistence with our neighbors" and the full development of the nation-state.
  In the current demographic crisis in the Republic of Armenia, it will turn (is already growing) into a demographic catastrophe, which will be reflected in the sad prospect of the nation becoming a national minority with the possibility of physical reproduction.
Own country or the above-mentioned factors determine the urgency and urgency of this research.
The main goal of the research is to reveal the current demographic situation, causes and development prospects in the Republic of Armenia.
  Yelnelovarajadrvats goal, put and solved following hetazotakankhndirnere.batsahaytel paymanavoroghgortsonnere demographic crisis, considering them natural and mekhanikakansharzheri context, knnarkelzhoghovrdagrakanhimnakhndridrsevormanzhamanakakits • Features: • hamemataashkharhagrakanmijotsovbatsahaytel khimnakhndri who have come across similar experiences, • to predict the prospect of the conflict, the upcoming new kanonnerihamatekstum mijazgayinmigratsion policy analysis • To consider the impact of the RA demographic problem in different spheres of public life.
Use comparative geographical, theoretical generalization research methods to solve the proposed research problems.
The results of the research can be used as a basis for overcoming the challenges of the RA demographic problem, scientific prediction of tendencies and perspectives, which through a separate scientific research can ensure the continuity of the proposed scientific problem.
Existence In the demographic crisis in the Republic of Armenia, two layers are clearly distinguished: natural population movement (birth-death ratio), mechanical population movement (immigration-emigration ratio), highly undesirable picture, tendencies.
  And among the reasons we can also distinguish two groups: internal and external.
  With the combined analysis of the reasons for these layers, we will try to analyze the content of the demographic challenge of national security.
The population of Armenia as of 2018 was 2979500 people.
1 With this indicator Armenia ranks 138th in the world, in the Middle East region 2 exceeds only 2 countries: Bahrain (1.5 million) and Qatar (2.7 million), and in the CIS region it occupies the last place in terms of population.
In direct cases, Turkey and Iran, the population is about 30 times smaller, Azerbaijan - 2.7 times, Georgia - 1.5 times.
The picture is much gloomier in terms of the future.
  The priority here is the problem of natural reproduction of the population.
According to scientific research, in order for a nation to be able to change and survive for 25 years, the fertility (reproduction) coefficient must be at least 2.1.
In other words, every woman, family, has 2.1 children, which ensures only simple reproduction, that is, according to national-scientific research, no nation in the world has been able to reproduce in a 1.9 coefficient.
 And in the case of a coefficient of 1.3, reproduction is impossible, because in that case it is necessary for the generation change to take place within 80-100 years.
  It is clear that existence.
According to 1 Statistical Yearbook of Armenia - 2018, Yerevan, 2019, page 23.
2 Middle East geopolitical schemes consider a single geopolitical region, Southwest Asia (17 states), which is already renamed North AfricaArmenia on the big geopolitical board, Vanadzor 2013, p. 284.
is the Great Middle East.
  Nersisyan A., no inclusive economic model expected in the future can implement it.
The fertility rate in the Republic of Armenia in 2017 was 1.6, according to the RA NSS data.
3 Moreover, since 2000, this index was 1.7 only in 2014.
That is, the population of the Republic of Armenia is not even in the stage of simple reproduction.
  Moreover, in case of maintaining similar views, in the near future Armenia will find itself in a much more dangerous situation.
  As 2/3 of the population of Armenia of reproduction is of working age (15-63 years old), ևonly 1/6 is of working age.
 That is, in the future, the population of reproductive age of the population will be constantly reduced, the possibility of population reproduction will decrease.
which in turn leads to a decrease in the coefficient. Charts 1-34Age population of the Republic of Armenia (2018) Most (especially small, remote), where by tradition families have more than 3 օր more children, becoming more and more in rural areas. ., 2019, page 24.
4 See ibid., Pp. 26-28.
Under the influence of urbanization, the number of children is small.
Thus, the population of the Republic of Armenia has typical aging features and is already facing a catastrophe.
Armenia, on the contrary, However, this does not mean that the territory of Armenia will become populated.
The geopolitical demand for the territory will increase in the future due to the "bridge position", "natural resources of drinking water", especially due to the demographic pressures of the Asian region.
  That is, in the future Armenia will be under the demographic pressure of migration flows.
  In case of maintaining the migration logic of the post-independence period, in the future we will be exclusively under the pressure of foreign migrants.
As a state with a share of up to 98.1% of Armenians, the Armenians provided the main share of the negative balance of migration flows during the 5 years of independence.
 That is, in case of maintaining these tendencies, the number of Armenians from the population of Armenia will constantly decrease.
The combination of natural and mechanical movements of the population of Armenia proves that in order to ensure more or less normal social reproduction in the future, there will be a need for labor, which can only be ensured through immigration.
  This is proved by the analysis of demographic indicators, where the key factor is the demographic burden.
 The latter shows the degree of burden of the population on the society's economy, expressed as the ratio of the working age population to the total number of the pre-working age population.
The demographic burden factor directly reflects the financial expenditures made by the state in the social sphere.
5 RA Government, Demography, http.
//www.gov.am/en/demographics/ against the background of population aging, population strength ratio), expresses the population formation The total coefficient of demographic burden in the Republic of Armenia is equal to 38.2%, which is considered relatively low.
6 It shows that the working-age population is more than twice as large as the non-working-age population.
  Such a ratio is a relatively low social burden.
However, we have a low rate of child labor (the ratio of able-bodied to the number of able-bodied population to change.
 It is 24.3%, and the retirement burden is 13.1%.
  It is obvious that in the future, in parallel with the increase of the pension burden coefficient, the "social burden will sharply increase the social burden on the society" economy.
 Working age, especially intensive working age, will be reduced by less and less people, which in turn will lead to labor demand.
  And since the quality of life in Armenia is rather low at present, the view that Armenia can attract only cheap, muscular labor becomes unfounded.
  Already now there is an influx of foreign (mainly Indian) cheap labor in Armenia, which has an obvious tendency to intensify in the future.
coefficients.
  In other words, there is already a historical example of future overload, similar development of the "Child Problem".
And that is Europe.
 In the 80s and 90s of the last century, in parallel with the European economic development, the 4th stage of demographic transition entered.
7 Heads of European countries Problem 6 Calculations of the Demographic Factor are based on the data of the Statistical Yearbook of Armenia, see Statistical Book of Armenia - 2018, Yerevan, 2019, p. 26.
7 Mankind has experienced 4 stages of demographic transition. 1st: High birth rate, high mortality, as a result, natural growth was very low.
  2nd: High birth rate - moderate mortality - high natural growth (demographic explosion).
  3rd: Low birth rate - low mortality - simple reproduction.
  4th, against the background of population aging, low birth rates, relative increase in mortality rate - depopulation.
(The solution was found by the influx of cheap labor from the Muslim world, justifying it by hiding) tolerance և humanitarian approaches.
  The phenomenon of multicultural policy was called to integrate immigrants into their own high culture, civilization, to deprive them of their identity և to provide the labor force of their own countries8.
However, the multicultural policy has already failed, and Europe will not be what it used to be in the near future.
And it is clear that Europe has been the target of political migration by the Muslim world in recent decades, in addition to the influx of labor.
  Because people from many "burning" Greater Middle East countries had to emigrate to a safer, more prosperous place, such as Europe.
  As a result of all this, a secure Europe found itself in the migration crisis, which reached its culmination in 2015.
 It was in that year that new rules of the game of international migration policy began to be developed under the auspices of the UN.
9 The following year, in New York, the 193 UN member states signed the Universal Declaration on Refugees (Migrants), setting a new goal: to finalize a new Universal Pact on Global Migration by the end of 2018 by the UN General Assembly.
8 The idea of ​​a united French-German nation is already a lost illusion.
  The EU estimates that Germany, with a population of 82.5 million, can accommodate 192 million migrants, becoming 274 million, France, with 61 million, 486 million, and Poland, 274 million.
  All this has been calculated taking into account the structure and territory of those countries.
This will lead to the destruction of the indigenous peoples of Europe, but there is no alternative to maintaining the status of one of the key players in the world economy.
9 Since 2016, the UN General Assembly Special Representative for Immigration, Peter Sutherland, has been working on the document.
  However, the preparation of the document started much earlier.
  According to Peter Sutherland, the construction works started in 2006 with the financing of "MacArthur" fund.
  Other sources of funding for the Global Compact include the United States, the governments of Switzerland, Sweden, the George Soros Open Society Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation in New York, and the Columbia University Global Policy Initiative.
2018 The Global Compact on Migration was ratified on December 10 in Marrakesh, Morocco with the participation of 150 UN member states.
The document paves the way for global cooperation, but it contains certain dangers.
  In fact, the leaders of the countries interested in the new pact are taking another step to abandon the traditional notions of national sovereignty.
  According to experts, the agreement not only becomes a tool to influence the policy of countries, but also seeks to transfer certain functions of the state to supranational structures.
  Point 6 of the original document clearly states: "… The Agreement is in the History of Processes from the Perspective of Global Dialogue և International Cooperation".
10 Turnaround Migration Goals Each event starts. The document contains 23 objectives և assumes the fulfillment of about 100 obligations.
  In the proposed "We owe" preamble to be implemented, despite the fact that paragraph 7 of the document mentions the "non-binding" nature of these obligations, "This global document is not a legal mechanism of cooperation և force…, its fulfillment is honorable."
11 Oversight The rating is given to the International Organization for Migration - OIM non-governmental organization.
It is a non-governmental organization established in 1951 under the auspices of the United States, which in 2016 was re-accredited as the "UN Migration Agency".
 The latter will control the entire database, which is intended to be created on the basis of the Global Migration Data Portal (IOMGlobal Migration Data Portal) համաշխարհային World Development Database.
  Thus, the "UN Migration Agency" ումը The UN forum becomes the bodies https.
//ru.euronews.com / 2018/12/06 / global-compact-for-migrationhttps.
//rossaprimavera.ru/article/ae0f45d5 which countries will evaluate from the point of view of Global Compact և must provide guarantees.
The document clearly states that "Migration has been an integral part of the human experience throughout history." We acknowledge that in the context of globalization, it is a factor of prosperity and innovation in a 'sustainable globalized world.'
In the 12 proposed commitments, the document separates several blocks.
In this way, the world has entered a new phase of migration processes.
It is a phenomenon typical of geopolitical turbulent processes, which already had a precedent in world history, known as the "Great Migration of Peoples".
  From then on) the emergence of newcomers to the destruction of civilizations, states, nations.
  According to the UN, today the world's largest population displacement in history is still a worldview.
  At the end of 2016, 65.6 million people were killed in the world. Forced resettlement.
  22.5 million of them are refugees, half of whom are under 18 years old.
  3 million are asylum seekers, and about 40 million are internally displaced persons.
  Today, every minute, about 20 people become 13 IDPs.
Summarizing the above, we can single out the main challenges facing the demographic and service sector in Armenia.12 See ibid. 13 http.
//www.un.org/ru/sections/issues-depth/refugees/• If the current rates of population reproduction are maintained, the prospect of generational change of the Armenian nation in Armenia itself is endangered, almost impossible.
In the Republic of Armenia, if the current trends in migration processes are maintained, we will gradually become a national minority, as emigration is ensured at the expense of ethnic Armenians, and the influx of foreign migrants is noticeable in the logic of immigration.
• In the future, new rules of the global migration game will be established in the world, which will purposefully change the demographic picture of the countries.
  Due to its geopolitical position, Armenia will be in the epicenter of the "Great Migration of Peoples", not only as a transit country.
Due to the "Great Migration of Peoples", the geopolitical geography of the world will change with the Christian governments to deprive us of the possible civilizational alliances that are supposed to exist.
The extremism of the countries is a direct threat to Armenia's security.
General Structure.
Current • Demographic crisis's direct or indirect (already has) impact on other key priorities.  Physical security army.
  Sufficient human resources are needed for effective border protection.
  And the geopolitical simplicity proves that it is impossible to replenish that resource from possible migrants, which European, not only European states do today.
Foreign, զարգ Economic development - improving the quality of life.
Today, Armenia is in a relatively good condition in terms of demographic burden, which, however, does not correspond to the demographic quality of the population (35% poverty rate).
14 That is, the situation of future workload (the ratio of working to non-working age population).
  Therefore, even human resources will not be enough to ensure real economic development.
  According to that, it will be necessary to provide labor flow.
  However, Armenia is a target of cheap labor (muscle inflow) in the future.
  As a result, the quality of services provided will sharply decrease.
  In fact, even the expected improvement of economic quantitative indicators will not lead to an increase in the quality of life.
  We will continue as a typical mining attachment.
Developing countries • In terms of steps to address the demographic problem, today is too late, and tomorrow the solution will become impossible.
DEMOGRAPHIC DISASTER, HORROR ARMENIA.
