Preface.
  Sarsang Reservoir is located in Artsakh, in the Martakert region, downstream of the Tartar River.
  Built in 1970. վել commissioned in 1976.
  The reservoir of Sarsang water reservoir is 2 (capacity - 110 megawatts).
1 Hydro-water, water-powered 2 HPPs - Hydroelectric power station - The station designed to receive energy through water served not only to receive electricity, but also to irrigate the fields.
About 60 km north of Stepanakert are the largest water reservoir in the Artsakh Republic, the Sarsang Reservoir, which provides 60% of the republic's electricity demand.
The height of the dam is 120 meters, the length is 550 meters, and the width of the lower part is about 500 meters.
  Reservoir capacity is about 600 million. cubic meters, of which about 550 million can be used. cubic meters, ie almost 50 million is the volume of the reservoir, which is not allowed to be used for other purposes [1].
There are very few such dams in the world, they simply do not build.
  Concrete was not used during the construction of the dam.
 Jrek consists of two units, each with a capacity of 25 megawatts.
The station is the first water well in Artsakh.
  It provides from 40 to 60% of the republic's electricity demand, and together with new water wells - 70%.
The water is used seasonally.
 From March, the river level starts to rise, respectively, the water level of the reservoir.
The work of the station is seasonal. In winter, when the consumption of electricity increases, the water intake increases.
Less electricity is produced during the hot seasons of the year.
 The irrigation season starts in April and ends in August-September.
 Water is collected during the summer.
Sarsang և Trghe-1 Currently, the Company generates electricity through water jets.
The main asset of the company is Sarsang watershed, which was built in 1976. On the main river of the NKR, Tartar, it is considered to be one of the most equipped water wells with the best equipment of the former USSR.
Sarsang water reservoir is located on Sarsang reservoir.
The latter has 500 million. m 3 effective volume.
  The height and width of the dam are 730 m և 550 m, respectively, which is considered to be one of the highest even among European countries.
"Trghe-1 water well was put into operation in April 2010." The company today makes large-scale investments in the construction of three water wells: Mataghis-1, Mataghis-2, Trghe-2.
Within the framework of the program, it is envisaged to complete the construction of water reservoirs under construction in 2011.
The cost of the construction project of Trghe-1 water intake was about 832.5 million. AMD, which was carried out on the account of the first placement of shares.
Below are the technical indicators of Tghre-1, Trghe-2, Mataghis-1 և Mataghis-2 water reservoirs [2].
In our opinion, in this case, the work of the water utility is urgent, in case of a serious investment, it will solve the issue of access to electricity supply to the whole of Artsakh, which is of enormous importance for Artsakh.
 However, in this case, one must be careful and consistent so as not to cause ecological damage to the Tartar River.
In the huge reservoir with 130 m of soil dam, more than 600 mln. cubic meters of water [3].
The reservoir is now filled with as much water as the risks allow.
  And in order to eliminate the risks, it is necessary to carry out serious rehabilitation works, but it is not enough yet. only the technical shortcomings, according to the preliminary assessment results, 35-40 mln. It will cost dollars.
Table 1.Tghre -1, -2 Trghe, Mataghis -1 and -2 jrek Mataghis media tekhnikakantsutsanishnereBnutagrerChapmanmiavorTrghejrek Trghejrek -1 -1 -2 MataghisMataghisjrek jrek -2 DrvatskayinbnutagrermvtEl.energiayi mijinBazmamyaartadrankmln.kvt / zhamHashvarkayin chnshummHashvarkayin yelkm 3 / vrkTarpkan jrhoskitsavalmln. m3 Number of water units Duration of diversion pipelineDerivation pipeline per unit / mmArtsakh has restored some sections with its own means and now uses it for energy purposes.
We are convinced that if we had the opportunity to fill the reservoir and use that water for irrigation purposes, there would be 7,000 hectares of land in Martakert, we would cultivate it and grow huge yields, the project of which is currently under development.
  However, the deplorable condition of the hydraulic structures of the infrastructures does not allow to do that.
We could get there. As a result of the studies, it became clear that filling the entire reservoir with water is fraught with great dangers.
 And if we do not take into account the dangers, we will fill the reservoir to the end and it will collapse, the consequences will be more catastrophic for Azerbaijan, as there are much more Azerbaijani settlements in those parts than on the Armenian side.
  And the damaged lands will simply become useless.
Our goal should be to transfer the water of the Tartar River mainly to Shan, but so far no steps in that direction are necessary.
The Sarsang water junction, which includes the Sarsangijrambar reservoir, the hydropower plant, the Mataghis reservoir and the irrigation system, with all its canals and water pipes, was put into operation at the end of 1977.
  This water junction was built mainly for irrigation.
The canals fed by the Sarsang reservoir irrigated more than 100 thousand hectares.
  Most of it, however, was outside the borders of the former autonomous region.
  More simply, most of the system was located in the territory of the autonomous region, but its main purpose was to provide irrigation to the areas adjacent to the region.
And the production of electricity was, so to speak, the secondary work of that node.
If in previous years we produced only 92-93 million kWh of electricity, then in 2014 more than 100 million kWh will be produced in Sarsang.
  The index will increase from next year.
 In 2015, we will produce about 112 million.
About 41% of the electricity generated by shaky electricity, more than 47%.
The reservoir is built in the territory of Artsakh, in the middle of the Tartar river.
  Tartar is not only the longest in Artsakh, but also in Armenia.
  Our Arpa originates from the northwestern part of the Syunik plateau, just opposite the eastern part, from almost the same sources, except that the Tartar River starts from the opposite part of the watershed at an altitude of 3100-3200 m.
  The Sarsang Reservoir was built in the middle of this.
 This river corresponds to our Akhuryan river approximately in its length, even a little more.
  But if we can compare Akhuryan և Tartar's expenses with water, compared to being over-stored, Akhuryan's is a little more.
  All reservoirs are of strategic importance because water is stored.
  And in the near future, in the context of global climate change, we need to have a huge strategic importance.
  More in terms of our region, our geopolitical position (we are in a dominant position), we have great advantages over our neighbors, especially Azerbaijan.
  Imagine that the Sarsang Reservoir is located at an altitude of about 1000 m, and when it descends, it flows into the Kura, the territory of Azerbaijan, that is, it is zero, almost 3 m above sea level.
  In such a high position we have accumulated a huge amount of water - about 560 million. cubic meters (500 million is the useful volume, only 60 million is the dead volume).
  If we take all the reservoirs of Armenia together, about 1.2 billion cubic meters of water has been accumulated.
  But only Sarsangin almost 600 million. cubic meters of water.
Imagine what a huge volume it is.
  The total dead volume is the size of our Azat reservoir, about 60 million cubic meters.
  So much water is stored strategically for us and neighboring countries, including Azerbaijan.
 By the way, let me say that today, naturally, this number has been reduced by almost half due to the accumulated military operations. [1]
In our opinion, "Sarsang Reservoir, being a comprehensive structure from the European point of view, being an engineering complex, is considered to be a first-rate structure.
  For the safe operation of the reservoir, it is necessary to carry out operation functions, which are often missed by us. ”
It is the largest reservoir in the territory of the two Armenian republics.
  The largest reservoir in Armenia, Akhuryan, which is used jointly with Turkey, has 525 million. cubic meters, of which 510 million is considered useful. cubic meters (the total volume is divided into useful և dead. there is not, but the first Sarsangiaraj handed over to Artsakh, Saochmialyn is the volume of water that is calculated to be used, and the dead volume is the part that is covered with mud, water and becomes unusable over time).
  Meanwhile, the total volume of 565 million was put into operation in the Martakert region on the Tartar River in 1976. cubic meters, the useful one is 495 million. cubic meters.
  Sarsang Reservoir with a 126 m high dam (length: 550 m) also holds the record.
Up to 70 cubic meters of water can be pumped from the reservoir to "Sarsang" with a diversion system.
 In addition, the reservoir's irrigation valves can, if necessary, be used to extract 30 cubic meters of water per second for ameliorative purposes.
Reservoir (located in our opinion, structures like the Sarsang dam type require constant studies of the dynamics of stability, which we often miss.
The strength and stability of such structures are threatened by changes in the physical and mechanical properties of the dam body և filtration flows through the dam body, which are the main reasons for the collapse of the dams.
Extensive studies have been carried out to determine the volume of crops accumulated during the six decades of Sarsangishash operation, to determine its location along the length of the river, and to predict the development of the water regime.
 In order to carry out these works, it is necessary to have the appearance (section) of the riverbed at the site of the reservoir before the operation of the dam.
  These data were recovered by a group of hydraulic specialists, verified as a result of analyzes and comparisons.
The results of the calculations made for the reservoir are presented in salt. In 2.
During riverbed surveys (June 2012), the reservoir level dropped significantly (to 698-699 m).
 As a result, the water horizon crossed the riverbed in the natural narrowing area in front of the Drumbon mine, exposing about 1/3 of the total length of the reservoir, creating favorable conditions for detailed study of the accumulations, their grain composition and other quantities characterizing the eruption.
  Using the data obtained և the natural features of the riverbed recorded at the study site prior to the reservoir operation at each point of the measurement axis, the maximum thicknesses of the sediments accumulated along the natural bed of the site ետ the volume of these accumulations.
              Table 2. Calculation of the volume of accumulated water in the Sarsang Reservoir Number of the axis Axis width (m) Total length of the site (m) Area of ​​the section (thousand m2) Volume of accumulated areas in the given area (million m3) Total volume (million m3) that amount is about 28.4 million. m3.
As a result of the studies, it was found out that the reservoir was made of groundwater with sand-clay core.
  The sandy loam soils are represented in the 610–670 character range by up to 10% gravel mixtures, and the 670–728 characters are represented by up to 35% mixtures [4].
The inner-upper prisms of the Sarsang Reservoir dam are presented with gravel-ground soils (Fig. 1).
4.28WWi Fig.1 Cutting of Sarsang Reservoir Dam In such a case, the detection of the genesis of anomalies in the observation-technical structures is a complex engineering task.
 It becomes more complicated when the irregularities come from several unrelated causes.
The integral estimation may be incorrect.
  In that case, it is necessary to isolate the possible irregularities, to try the causal connection of each individual violation.
  It is also possible to study the scenario of the development of possible failures, based on the results of the examination of the structure and the assessment of the condition.
Introduce possible failures by building a so-called failure tree, which allows to predict the further development of the process, to assess its impact on the reliability of the structure.
  The reliability of the information analysis և previous research can be found here [4].
Sarsang Reservoir, being the highest ground dam in the continent of Europe, being a comprehensive structure from an engineering point of view, carried out in complex engineering conditions, is considered to be a first-rate structure at its own risk.
  There is no need to worry too much, but for the safe operation of the reservoir it is necessary to perform operation functions, which are often omitted from the naked side.
It should be noted that there are three reservoirs on the Varanda River at once: Varanda-1, Varanda-2, Varanda-3. All of them were built during the pre-Soviet years.
  The first one is at the lowest point. At the moment it accumulates non-accumulating water coming out in the others.
in which Varanda-1 and Varanda-2 are built by direct resurrection.
A single project will be launched in the Sarsang-Mataghis section this year, within the framework of which more than $ 100 million will be invested by local and foreign companies.
As a result, reservoirs will be built, which will be used for electricity and tourism purposes [1].
Fish production, 12 million years ago in Kashatagh region. The construction of a reservoir with a capacity of 5.5 megawatts will be completed this year. Moreover, this is the first case of construction of a hydroelectric power plant with a reservoir in the history of independent Armenia.
  The reservoir will be used by Fishery Gorgoman, a foreign-owned investor who has spent tens of millions of dollars on the project.
for purposes.
  Remarkable conclusion.
 Sarsang Reservoir is not only an important part of the republic's economy, but also a strategic object.
Our main task today is to direct the water of Sarsang Reservoir to the regions of Armenia, which will allow us to fully exploit the reservoir, which is the largest reservoir, so that there is no need to buy it from abroad.
Today, about 9 billion cubic meters flow from our territory to the territories of depim neighbors, of which we can store only 1.5 billion, and over the years that number is decreasing.
And in the near future, in the context of global climate change, we must have a huge amount of reservoir water, which will be of strategic importance, especially for our region.
Structures such as the Sarsang dam type require constant studies of the dynamics of stability, which are often missed by us, մեծ we must pay close attention to this issue.
