It is necessary not only to know the consumer completely, but also to satisfy his desires before he expresses himself about it… Maybe it gives food for thought?
  And if we think about that question mark, are the needs of consumers appreciated?
 Will we solve the problem of achieving the desired level of competitiveness set by the organizations in the modern conditions only by assessing?
  Isn't the maximization of profit the priority for the weak organizations?
 Certainly not.
The issue of consumer needs assessment is one of the most discussed topics nowadays, to which any organization pays attention.
  The questions related to the mentioned problem are reflected in the works of domestic and foreign researchers, in particular: J. Hoffmeier, b. Rice, J. Lissy, N .; Qano, N. Ghukasyan և others.
Disclosure An organization can only survive when it is once satisfied with the customer, and certain measures are constantly being developed to satisfy the customer, with the aim of meeting their needs to the maximum.
  In the Armenian reality, there is a "petrified" human psychology, the so-called "best" principle, according to which every organization assumes that the one who has the best service in the realm is also the issuer of quality products, while the labeling of the organization should be left only to the consumer. As a result of satisfaction it is possible to create effective competition, to become competitive.
 Therefore, our goal is to identify the needs of consumers և in the system of competitiveness of their evaluation.
  In order to achieve this goal, a number of issues have been studied, including methods for assessing consumer needs, the consequences of their application, measures aimed at meeting their own needs by consumers, as well as an analysis. Consumer satisfaction was assessed by the example of Araratbank Gyumri branch.
The role of organizations A number of literatures have been studied in the above-mentioned, including Russian scientific-psychological, analysis articles, series of books, main economic, educational websites, which are presented in the list of literary works.
The area of ​​the organization is the demand management in the marketing system, which is effective only when we know who the consumers are and what they want.
  Many organizations do not pay attention to this seemingly insignificant phenomenon.
 Organizations operating in the service sector need to have demographic information about their customers, such as their age, gender, employment, income, lifestyle, and much more.
  Similarly, information is only time consuming, but also costly, and the materials collected may not always be economically justified.
  On the one hand, every organization must know in advance what information it needs about consumers, on the other hand, any information about consumers can significantly increase the organization մրց competitiveness և reputation [1].
  In the context of marketing, it is possible to anticipate the preferences and desires of consumers և to develop strategic steps that will meet their needs.
  For all this, the consumer must be "recognized". [2]
The analysis of the international experience of many companies (Coca Cola, McDonald's, Louis Voitton, Iqos (Philip Morris), Heinz, Aliexpress, Amazon, etc.) as a psychological factor can distinguish the color, logo, design, packaging, product. Being a brand, the seller's customer's influence through pleasant service, the circumstances of the customer's weakness towards that brand.
Any organization during its activity to manage the needs of consumers in one way or another.
From the emergence of demands to demands until they are met.
 Depending on the significance of these needs and the scale of the assessment, starting with the activities of the relevant organization's organization, the methods of gathering the information needed for the assessment are different.
  Needs assessment is usually done in time to understand the consumers, the market, the segments in which the organization will operate.
During the analysis of the requirements, thousands of requirements may appear, from which the primary one should be separated և focus only on the saturation of those requirements.
  In this case, a simple method can be used, the degree of effectiveness of the requirements, after which, by coordinating the data obtained, we can come to the appropriate conclusion [3].
Evaluate the appearance of the product with requirements. In contrast to the product market, marketing differences in the service sector.
 Thus, if customer attraction in the product market is the benefits, design, packaging, brand, public opinion of the brand, by which the consumer becomes a loyal customer, the product or organization is competitive, consumer needs are satisfied, then, for example, friendly and literate service to employees, banking quality ratio և many other factors [4].
Knowledge of professional clients in the field, banking engagement. Consumers, as we know, often encounter poor service in the service sector, which is associated with the staff, the culture of communication with customers և speaking style.
  In addition, the "quality of service, like him" can assess his own satisfaction based on how important the service was for him.
Customer service In international practice, a number of methods of needs assessment, management, satisfaction, models are used.
  We studied the Consumer Satisfaction Index (CSI). [5]
CSI calculation is based on customer surveys.
  Before an organization can assess customer needs, it must first answer two important questions: what do we have and what should we have?
In order to assess the needs of consumers in the field of service, they use the complex assessment used in the product market, which allows to find out the significance of a specific service through surveys, to compare the results with the real satisfaction of consumers. By satisfaction, we mean how satisfied consumers are with the services.
The next method of assessing consumer needs is the "cryptocurrency", the essence of which is that the researcher visits the organization as a customer, expresses an opinion on the quality of employee service from his / her subject, after which the organization is compared with other organizations.
Thus, before implementing marketing activities, it is possible to find out who the potential consumers of the organization are, what their main needs are.
  The results of these studies will enable to carry out correct marketing.
In the current conditions of competition in the banking system, the role of marketing and the measures aimed at its implementation are strongly emphasized.
  Banks pay special attention to both marketing and customer needs, which are analyzed and conducted through surveys.
Based on the Consumer Satisfaction Index for Internationally Used Demands, we have calculated the consumer satisfaction of Araratbank Gyumri branch.
In practice, we used the questionnaire compiled by ourselves as the basis for calculating the index, and the questions included in the questionnaire were selected based on their usefulness for the Bank.
Love card. Dear customer, please provide some minutes ացնել fill in the questionnaire.
1. For Araratbank you are considered: 1) Old customer, 2) New customer, 3) Corporate customer.
2. What type of services did you use (you can choose the amount): 1) Deposit, 2) Loan, 3) Cards, account service, 4) Transfers, 5) Other (utility payments, UCO borrower, etc.) 3 . Are you satisfied with our services?
1) I am not satisfied at all, 2) Not so much, 3) I am satisfied (satisfied), 4) I find it difficult to answer.
4. What do you like in our bank?
1) Speed ​​of employee service, 2) Staff, 3) Quick solution of my problem, 4) Bank-customer feedback, 5) Other ___________________________________5. Did our staff provide a solution to your problem?
1) They did not help at all, 2) Partially, 3) They helped, 4) I find it difficult to answer.
6. Do the prices of our services correspond to the quality of delivery?
1) They do not correspond, 2) Partially, 3) They correspond, 4) I find it difficult to answer.
7. Will you contact us again?
1) I will not apply, 2) In case of extreme necessity, 3) I will definitely apply, 4) I find it difficult to answer.
8. Would you recommend your friends to use our bank?
1) Never, 2) Maybe, 3) Definitely, 4) I find it difficult to answer.
The analysis of the survey results showed that the vast majority of customers were satisfied with the services provided by the Bank, moreover, they especially liked the speed of service of employees, professional skills, speed in resolving customer issues և willingness to help.
  According to the customers, the services provided by the Bank correspond to the prices, which the Bank was striving to achieve.
The survey results are presented in Table 1.
Summarizing the results of the survey, the branch's Consumer Satisfaction Index - CSi - was 63.36%, which speaks of the literate work of consumers and employees.
 Thus, we can say that Araratbank OJSC in Armenia has a wide range of satisfied consumers, compliance with service tariffs, quality staff, high level of service.
