Ongoing reforms in the education system require a new methodological approach to solving problems of organizational and content importance, which will contribute to improving the quality of education.
Considering the concept of "quality of education", we should mention that it is multi-layered, therefore, it needs to be interpreted, depending on which issues are especially emphasized. a) the content of education, b) the strategy, tactics, c) the structural և operational components, d) the objective և subjective factors influencing the organization of the educational process, e) the social-psychological և pedagogical) etc.
Environmental features: Referring to the motivations for learning, let us note that their development can be achieved through the proper organization of the learning process.
  Quoting M. V. Stepanov's statement that the educational process should be constructed in such a way as to promote the development of children's thinking, the search for and application of the necessary knowledge [4, p. 15], should add that it will guide students to use their creative abilities and develop research skills.
The purpose of this article is to introduce one of the ways of organizing the learning process, which is carried out with the help of integrated learning.
  Using our experience in the use of integrated learning technology in the proper organization of the learning process.
  In their time, a number of pedagogues expressed ideas about integrated education. A. Komensky, Y. H. Pestalotsin, V. Sukhomlinsky, I. P. To Podlas.
 Teaching integrated into modern pedagogy is presented through observations.
  It is evolving in nature, multi-component in content, with students with disabilities, both the use of interdisciplinary connections and the processes taking place in multidisciplinary classrooms.
 As mentioned by E. A. Ekzhanova, "Integrated education, based on the principles of special general education, should have a developing, educating profile, which implies the inclusion of students' moral ideas, all participants in the educational process" [5, p. 52].
Equivalent processing: Behavioral, taking into account the fact that, according to: V. V. According to Krasky, the decline in the progress of schoolchildren is a global problem, for the solution of which a scientific approach is needed, moreover, not only pedagogical [1, p. 93], we should mention that the use of integrated teaching is used more as a factor of improving the quality of education.
  Agreeing with him, V. V. Krasky's view, according to which the solution of this problem is multi-layered, requires sociologists, pedagogues-educators of different psychologists, the intervention of specialists in the process of teaching.
Significance depends on the size of the reaction on the subject, and the development of the learning curve.
Developer In our article, we will look at the component of integrated learning, which, based on the use of interdisciplinary connections, acts as a training that develops learners' potential, promoting their natural cognitive motivation.
Below is a description of a biology class conducted with the help of "Integrated Learning" technology in the 10th grade of the secondary school of Beniamin village, Shirak region.
  During the study of the topic "Protein biosynthesis, translation", the lesson included the development of theoretical analysis skills.
  The lesson process is preceded by the summation of the ertema and the test work, then the lesson process with its content is a class of study and transmission of new material.
Problem teaching, the purpose of the knowledge lesson! Multi-layer comprehension of educational material, combination of learners' knowledge, experiences և skills, formation of scientific worldview.
It should be noted that in the pre-pedagogical assignment, the students were prepared with a practical task to make models of different amino acids, which were used as observation items, illustrating the reaction of protein synthesis.
  Note that the correct construction of the models was facilitated by the spatial notions that the students had received in the lessons of geometry and technology.
Presenting the student models made of batons, the pedagogue presented the reaction to the types of chemical bonds most commonly studied in the chemistry course during the chemistry class.
  Referring to the concept of "peptide bond" synthesis, the nature of which was depicted by recording amino acid-coupling reactions as a way of obtaining a protein biopolymer. At ° C, it is not possible to cook an egg in such boiling water at all, as the protein does not harden at temperatures below 100 ° C, by which it simultaneously affirms the concepts of "atmospheric pressure", "boiling temperature", "hardening temperature" taught in physics.
A problematic question was raised by the pedagogue. "Why does it boil? After different answers, an explanation was given, according to which the catapult was conditioned by the existence of high-molecular substances contained in it, including proteins, which, when combined for three hours, form a polymer layer, closing the way of bubbles.
"Students are falling."
milk, and then synthesized, the Washington pedagogue made a historical overview of artificially obtained protein intake by a group of biologists at the University of Toronto.
 The pedagogue noted that this protein is able to stop intercellular communication in cancer, which, according to researchers, will reduce the growth of cancer.
  With this quotation, the pedagogue brought the lesson closer to life, to the discovery of the way that is considered the evil of the century.
In the last part of the lesson, a computational problem related to the topic was solved. Problem. The ratio of DNA to adenine-guanine nitrogen bases is 0.6, and the sum of all bases is 3200.
Determine the number of nitrogen bases in the DNA separately.
In order to solve the problem, taking into account the principle of "complementarity" known in the DNA molecule, according to which the number of nitrogen bases in Aden is equal to the bases of the team, the amount of guanine in the cytosine, appointments were made. With X, A և T, with Y, C ն.
Solution. Note A = T-X, C = Ց-Y Taking into account that the ratio of bases A և C is 0.6, and the sum of all bases must be 3200, a system A = T-X = 600 was formed, C = Ց-Y = Summing up, it should be noted that the organization of the teaching process through integrated teaching enabled the pedagogue to carry out purposeful work, motivating the learners to perform logically connected actions: comparison, generalization, comparison, combination, classification, analysis.
 The mentioned actions provided the valuable and multi-layered perception of the transmitted material, deepening, expanding the range of students' perceptions of the subject, making the learning process more interesting.
  And the emergence of interest in the learning process itself contributes to the development of students' learning motivation, which is the main problem of the modern educational system.
  In other words, the pedagogue was able to solve the problem of didactics through integrated teaching, the development of students' cognitive qualities, giving a creative nature to the teaching process.
It should be added that the implementation of the lesson with integrated teaching is characterized by a number of regularities, among which the following should be singled out: • Conducting a lesson process with the participation of both one and more teachers, who can act as counselors-pedagogues.
As a result of the implementation of integrated learning, conditions were created for the learners to apply their practical skills, to express themselves while acquiring stable knowledge.
  The latter will promote the formation of individuals endowed with adaptive ability, flexible thinking, because according to V. Kumarin: "The salvation of the school և general education system is the training of competitive personnel, the problem of adaptable pedagogy" [2, p. 2].
  Assessing the combination of cultural values ​​and the value of education, we must accept that education can lead to social thinking, spiritual and moral development.
training, ensuring the development of research skills, creative abilities in various subjects, the implementation of their sustainable development on their basis.
  According to N. Ն. According to Marfinin, sustainable development is a way of life organization, when the transition from problem solving to conflict management, action planning to overcome or weaken them [3, p. 13].
This will become the main guarantee of the formation of a new society.
