Preface.
  One of our historians, Pavstos Buzand և Movses Khorenatsi, describes in great detail the atrocities committed by the traitor Meruzhan Artsruni, who denied in Armenia during the Armenian-Persian wars of the 4th century.
Nevertheless, they describe Meruzhan's death in different ways.
  According to Pavstos Buzand, Meruzhan Artsruni was killed during the fight with Manvel Mamikonyan by his comrades-in-arms, and according to Movses Khorenatsi, the crowned knight Smbat Bagratuni had arrested him, made a wreath with red-hot iron skewers and "crowned" the crown with it.
The purpose of the article is to first clarify the accuracy of this information received by Khorenatsi, then to find the reasons for the differences between the reports of the two historians, to substantiate through etymologies that the Crown Knight inherited a position inherited from their ancestors, and finally to locate the Bagratuni.
These issues are very topical. The complex problems of the Armenian history.
to address the issuesH. Acharyan, G. Srvandztyants, S. T. Yeremyan, N. Adonts և others.
The number mentioned in the article, as one of our historians Pavstos Buzand Մեր Movses Khorenatsin, describes in detail the atrocities committed by the traitor Meruzhan Artsruni, who denied in Armenia during the Armenian-Persian wars of the IV century.
 However, they describe Meruzhan's death in different ways.
According to Pavstos Buzand, Meruzhan Artsruni was killed during a fight with Manvel Mamikonyan by his comrades-in-arms.
  Manvel was the commander of Great Armenia իչը the governor in 378384. between [6, pp. 108-109].
  Buzand probably used the Mamikonyan family traditions when describing the case.
  According to him, in the hustle and bustle of the battle, Manvel, recognizing Meruzhan, calls him to a fight.
  The spearmen "when the spears were taxed, because they were two kingdoms, they both fell to the ground on horseback, and from there Babik, who was like a spear, reached the province of Syunik, and the spear was thrown from side to side, and there were no seams along the river."
  The commander-in-chief, Manuel, took out his barracks and cut off Meruzhan's head openly "[17, book E., ch. Խգ].
in the program M. Abeghyan sees the influence of the "Persian War" folk novel.
  He writes: "The last time the Persian king sent troops led by the traitor Meruzhan to the Armenians.
  Meruzhan was killed during the battle, his whole army was massacred… And with this success of the Armenians the war from Persia ends. "
 [1, pp. 274-275] According to Movses Khorenatsi, along with the fleeing Persians who had lost the Battle of Dzirav (371), Meruzhan Artsruni "tried to leave, but the crowned knight Smbat Bagratuni, who had reached him in Kogovit province, decided to arrest him as Uranats". to execute him here and there without trial.
  Moreover, he chose a unique way to carry out the execution. He heated the iron skewer until it glowed, twisting two turns as a crown on the traitor's head.
  It is better to look for the explanation in the following lines with Khorenatsi. "All as a crown, and a beautiful creature said: "I will marry you, Mehruzhan, because you wanted to rule the Armenians. and I ought to crown you, my knight, according to the usual authority of my homeland. "
  And while it was still hot, it was hot on the head of Mehruzhan, and thus the evil one died. "
[12, book C, ch. It is difficult to say to what extent this information received by Khorenatsi in Armenia corresponds to the reality, because, as we have seen, Pavstos Buzand presented the death of Meruzhan Artsruni in a different way at a different time.
  We believe that the creator of this story was a representative of the Bagratuni dynasty, and Movses Khorenatsi had passed on the legend to his patron Sahak Bagratuni [12, book A, ch. a] through.
  If the author of the Khorenatsian version of Meruzhan Artsrunuvakhchan was inspired by the apostate's desire to co-punish the traitor through Bagratuni's crowned knight, then, in our opinion, the fact that the word skewer has two different meanings in Old Armenian served as a basis for it.
  According to the story of Smbat's execution of Meruzhan, the presence of barbeque makers is Smbat Bagratuni. With a barbecue iron bottle.
Naturally, Smbat Bagratuni was familiar with the old meaning of the trumpet, because in parallel with the act of "crowning" Meruzhan, he said: "According to the usual government of the homeland."
  The old meaning of "skewer" is present in its derivative word "skewer".
  Shamprak means "crown woven, crown", [14, p. 464.
] and Shampur means "crown" in the other name of the constellation Orion known as Hayk (n) because of its contour arrangement. "June 14. Maybe Hayk is Shampur."
[2, p. 492] The word "crowned" used by Gr. Magistros comes from the meaning of "crown, crown" of Shamprak.
  [2, p. 493] The shaprak version of Shamprak together with it is explained by the medieval "Armenian Book" as a "crown ornament".
  [5, pp. 247, 248] The second meaning of the word "skewer" is "a sharp iron or wooden stick, which is passed through a layer of grilled meat", "a sharp iron or wooden stick, a barbecue bottle".
[14, p. 464; 2, p. 492; Hmmt. brb. "Remind« thin rod "of the week հիշShapoy" rod "10, pp. 490, 500]
Shambhat (according to Movses Khorenatsi) և Parazian (according to the anonymous narrator) are inseparable from the word "crown, crown" Տեղ Shampur Տեղ in its meaning.
  The Sabbath is different from the Hebrew word for "rest" շաբաթ և is a worn-out snow * in the original * ամբ ամբ ամբ]]]]] ամբ ամբ ամբ ամբ ամբ ամբ ամբ]]] համար The emergence of Aspat * from the origin of Aspapat և The emergence of Byurat * from Byurapatnakhadz (hence the name of the fairy-tale character called Byrapatik) [16, pp. 186-188].
 According to this, the shambat * of shambat was to mean "crowning, crowning, crowning."
  Hmt. In Armenian, the word "wrap" comes from the root patel, to wrap the verb "wrap" [3, pp. 32-33].
  It is noteworthy that the anonymous historian uses the verb to be crowned in connection with the traditional orthodoxy-pavagharshak kingdom.
 "Bagarat Parazyan's sons came forward with a big smile on their faces.
  Serve him with gold and silver. And adorn him with sandals and scarves. crown him to the throne. And he shall set him upon the top of the golden place.
[15, ch. B, page 9; Movses Khorenatsi calls the kings of Armenian origin "native crown prince" 12, A, ib] To crown means "to decorate a crown. to give a crown to pay glory ", [14, p. 662]" to adorn one's head with a wreath "," to put a crown on someone's head - to put a crown ", [11, p. 122] [14, p. 661].
 He would not be a personal name like Shambat - the title of Bagarat Parazian, which լինելու would be given to him, the meaning of the word crowned.
  At its core we see the worn-out egg worn by the Iranian borrowed word "ribbon" [3, p. 490], to which the suffix -yan was added (in the word the accented and -s spelling is regular in Armenian, if only the glorious "noble" did not take place [3). , page 482] under the influence of the word).
Apparently, it was not the only case related to Meruzhan Artsruni putting a red-hot incandescent skewer-rod instead of a skewer.
  According to Hovhan Mamikonyan, the Persian general Tigran, who invaded Taron with his army, demanded from Smbat Mamikonyan to hand over the bones of the enemies of the Persian king, the late Mushegh-Vahan Mamikonyan.
  In return, he promised "a crown on your head and an Armenian who will protect you."
  Not being tempted by the promise, Smbat said to the "Kalez deputy" with a rifle skewer of iron and a wreath around his head. "Let me see what reward I have for you because I gave you a crown."
 [13, pp. 253-254] In this case, "this crown is not called a skewer, but the fact that instead of a crown they put a red-hot skewer (iron rod) on the enemy's head, it makes clear the existence of a play on the" skewer-rod "of the skewer.
 This time the person who used the death penalty is called Smbat, but he is not from Bagratuni, he is from Mamikonyan, the son of Gayl Vahan, the winner of the Persian generals Suren-Tigran in the battles of the beginning of the 7th century
  By the way, this is the only Mamikonyan to bear that name among the 149 Smbats known to our history [4, pp. 538-563].
  As M. Abeghyan had noticed long ago, "The name of Vahan's son Smbat reminds Smbat Bagratuni.
  There is a story about him (Smbat Mamikonyan - SP, AM) about Smbat Bagratuni's marriage to Mehruzhan… This name of Smbat is just a response to Smbat in the old novel, as և Mushegh is the Mushegh of the old novel "[1, p. 307] .
  Մ. Abeghyan singles out the old novel "The Persian War" and the new novel "The War of Taron" [1, pp. 181-302 և 303324].
Since the agency of the crowned knight has continued the monopoly of the Bagratuni dynasty for centuries, the issue of the Bagratuni dynasty's initial establishment could be resolved through him.
  During the reign of Trdat I, as S. Yeremyan writes. "The native estate of the Bagratunis was located in Tmorik or Kordrikunas.
The original territory of the Bagratuni is known in the "Geography" of Ptolemy (90-168).
  This composition of the Bagratuni dynasty is confirmed by a program by Movses Khorenatsi, although he attributes it to the period of Artashes (probably Artashes I, 189-160 BC).
  He writes: "Smbat Bagratuni went to Assyria with his conquest, voluntarily consolidating his power over the Armenians, while the zealous Artavazd.
He ordered Artashis to live in Tmoris, which he now calls Kordrik, a captive crowd of Alkinstudzal. For she was a woman of old age, a woman of the creation of the land of Egypt, whom she loved very much, and dwelt by her side "[12, book B, ch. ծգ].
  Of course, Smbati did not settle in Tmorik-Kordrik by the king's order or because he loved the woman of Irasorestan very much.
  These are the ultimate explanations.
  The reason would be that leaving the post of commander of the Armenian army, he was satisfied with the post of crown knight, to whom the hereditary dominion in the two regions of Ptolemy was the region called Sambatai ethnos ("nation of Shambatai") [8], Tmorik-Kordrikov.
  And the word Shambat, as we have seen, means "crown".
The kings ruled until the Assyrians. Based on a report by an anonymous historian about the descendants of the Angeghtnishkhans descending from Aramanyak, they attributed it to the Bagratunis, considering their hereditary domain the Angeghtun province of Greater Armenia [18, p. 413] (considered "one of the world" in "Geography", p. 107].
According to an anonymous historian, the Armenians once died in "Assyrian Sennacherib, then rebelled from the service of the kings."
  And over them reigned Zareh the son of Aramenak, then Parnavaz.
 This gave birth to Bagam and Bagarat. Bagarat was born in Byurat, and Byurat was born in Aspat.
  And the sons of Bagarat inherited their inheritance from the west side: this is the house of the angel, for it is called Bagrat and Angegh, which at that time the barbarians of that nation called god.
 [15, ch. A, page 7; Movses Khorenatsi calls our kings of Armenian origin "native crown princes" [12, A, ib].
As we see, the anonymous historian speaks not about the Bagratunis, but about the hereditary domain of the Angeltan princes, "that is, Angeghtan".
 And that the hereditary domain of the Bagratuni was Alki with its surrounding lands, is also evidenced by the well-known Smbataberdanun from the same areaBagratuni "land of manual power" in Sper, 9, p. 44].
Smbatanun, which was previously repeated many times in the Bagratuni dynasty, is not on the list of Angeghtan princes.
[Hmmt. The name of Smbatavan in Ezrarang.
 Thus, the stories told by historians about the death of Meruzhan Artsruni, bearing the influence of the popular novel "The Persian War", leave unknown the real circumstances of his death.
  In our opinion, the basis for the Khorenatsian hypothesis was the circumstance of the word skewer having two different meanings in Old Armenian.
  The presence of the barbeque maker is Smbat Bagratuni, probably considering the two meanings of the word soups, to play evil games on Meruzhan's head (in the true sense of the word), to crown him not with the skewer of the Armenian kingdom promised by the king of Persia,
  Naturally, Smbat Bagratuni is familiar with the old meaning of the word elshampur, because in parallel with the act of "crowning" Meruzhan, he said: "According to the usual government of the homeland."
  It turns out that the Shambat և Parazian suffixes of the person who is traditionally considered the first crown prince of Armenia, Bagrat, are the old equivalents of the words crowned, crowned, whose heirs were Tmorik-Kordrik.
Bagratuni. Last sentence Meruzana unique education.
