With the rapid development of the modern world, the demands on reading to make it accessible to students are changing.
  Along with electronic և digital publishing, an effective means of developing public intellectual and creative capacities, cultivating and satisfying new curiosity in the latter have become of great importance.
  The regional libraries in Armenia have many problems that do not allow them to serve their ultimate purpose, including physical condition, book libraries - lack of staffing, interior, lack of skilled staff, partial and incomplete library activities.
  However, studies show that the experience of the world's most innovative libraries can be successfully applied in the Armenian reality and one can think about the development of one's own norms, which is a dictation of time [1, p. 26].
  In particular, there is talk of how the library can become a means of organizing student discussions, of communicating the best literature in the world to the student, of providing the student with library work, as it is said of the idea of ​​mobile libraries.
The processes in the field of education, which will increase the quality and efficiency of education, are extremely important in the changes taking place in our country.
Improving the quality of education will ensure the training of professionals with high professional abilities and skills, which Armenia needs today more than ever.
As a mother tongue teacher, we are concerned about the fundamental problems of teaching.
  The idea has spread that in our time children do not want to learn, to read, that they have other interests and shy away from books.
 But let us go a little deeper into the surface, and a number of very important circumstances will be clearly outlined, which, without hesitation, can be said to hinder learning by direct "indirect means."
  First of all, it is necessary to separate the textbook provided, subject programs, the amount of time provided for mastering the material, the material and technical base of the subjects, the activity of highly specialized pedagogues, etc.
  It should also be noted that the existence of laboratories, libraries, research bases that ensure the effectiveness of teaching subjects becomes especially for the organization of extracurricular and extracurricular activities.
In particular, we should single out the condition of school libraries (especially rural schools) in the country, most of which the building conditions, the book fund, the lack of reading rooms, the non-modern interior hinder their purposeful activity.
 Our observations have shown that these problems are particularly evident in rural schools, although urban school libraries also need to incorporate the successful experience of the world's advanced libraries or develop new approaches based on the latter.
It is simply impossible to imagine a child's development without communicating the latest achievements in science, technology, and culture.
And teaching the native language without books լրացուցիչ additional library resources.
  The observations show that the extracurricular activities that complement the teaching process, the existence of effective school libraries, laboratories, research bases.
In order to complete the formation of cognitive interests, it is necessary to ensure the student's connection to the book աշխարհ the world of books, which will contribute to the expansion and deepening of the learner's knowledge.
Therefore, they do not, according to G. I. Shchukina's inquisitiveness and curiosity of students are satisfied with the right և directed extracurricular and extracurricular activities, which in their various ways ensure the interaction of student upbringing and teaching [3, p. 46].
According to our observations (visits to dozens of libraries in Shirak region), rural school and community libraries are in a particularly poor condition, even many of them have ceased to function long ago, so it is difficult to imagine how limited learning activity becomes in the extracurricular process.
In our opinion, the system of education issues should still include the issues of modernization, typology of the library network structure, principles of librarianship, as well as replenishment of library funds, description of printed works, classification and preservation.
We consider it the "activity" of librarians trained by librarians in the field of librarianship. development [2, p. 36].
a secured approach to reading.
It is no secret that the best libraries in the world use innovative approaches, such as the preparation of recipes by visitors, by the appropriate preparation specialists.
  For example, in the Alpabet Soup Library, one of the top ten most innovative libraries (founded with the support of the Scottish Government in 2014), school ևOlder children can not only use the rich list of books, but also learn to make simple recipes as accessible as possible. .
 In addition, free library days for reading fairy tales are organized with the help of IT solutions.
  Healthy lifestyle issues are a priority not only in developing but also in developed countries, where the number of overweight children is significant.
  In our opinion, a similar experience can be applied in the public libraries of the Republic of Armenia, taking into account the fact that in rural and community areas, own gardens, orchards, and consequently the additional food expenses can be reduced or fully compensated.
It will be useful for the learner if the e-section of the school is created and maintained with events dedicated to the authors, so that the learner has the opportunity to watch them while reading.
In many regional libraries, taking into account the lack of proper bookkeeping and care (most of the books are in poor condition), a section can be posted on dasaran.am, where each school will present a periodical.
updating the student's information about the books in the library, as well as the book registration and archiving process.
  Thanks to IT solutions, the student should be able to access online books, which will be available in audio / video format from a number of popular websites, such as "LibrDrive", "BBC Learning Center", "Librivox", "Lit2Go", etc.
 Many internationally renowned books are available in Armenian today, and audio / video books will be of great help to students studying foreign languages.
  In addition, audio books are read by special specialists, which will make the material more interesting, accessible from the point of view of foreign language accent, spelling and usage.
High school students can be encouraged by volunteering in the latest library work for paid or paid work.
Such experience has long been used at the American University of Armenia, the French University, and almost all high schools in the world (High school).
Based on successful experience, community schools can also encourage the involvement of high school students in volunteer or paid work in libraries.
  The approach assumes a number of advantages: 1. The student will gain experience in less stressful working conditions before moving on to a job where the demands on the employee are greater, 2. The student will have the opportunity to interact with different age groups և Develop interpersonal skills 3. The student will be more interested in reading.
Moreover, the school can replace the salary by providing free textbooks to the student, and by providing free participation in the excursions and study visits to the students who have read the most books.
The reader should be able to have an interesting design, including comfort, lighting, and technical equipment.
  Participate in many countries to organize discussions or participate in debates, for which there should be reading rooms or separate rooms.
  The best examples of libraries are mobile libraries, especially for school-age readers, which is used in countries with world-class schools.
After reading the book, as the basic role of the school in our country has been undermined over the past few decades, but its bent back must be corrected in order for the comprehensive process of education of the young generation to become a reality.
  This should become the ultimate goal of education, in this regard, libraries can և provide a key role and significance.
Summing up our visits to regional libraries և studies, clearly outlined all the problems, challenges and key առs still used և have an impact on improving the quality of education and especially the level of reading.
  In particular, as a result of our observations, the problems of the unsatisfactory physical condition of some libraries of the region, the lack of books and the unattractive appearance of the libraries were singled out, the possibilities of which, the lack of specialists, are essential in the issue of reading.
  One of the issues that requires special attention is the relevant experience of working in the library - the lack of modern technical possibilities - the use of the library.
  However, it should be noted that as a result of the work done, it became clear that such innovative approaches can be applied in the republic, especially in the regional libraries, which have been developed for a long time. "Implemented in different countries of the world" continue to surprise the readers.
