Preface.
  In every period of human society development, the role of physical culture has always been used to prepare students for the future of schooling and to defend the country.
However, experts are deeply concerned about the fact that 63% of schoolchildren have abnormal postures, 43% have chronic diseases, and 65% often suffer from colds.
  Only 7% of school graduates in Belarus can be considered healthy.
Alternative physical education programs are created in foreign countries in order to improve the health condition of students և physical fitness, more purposeful physical education is planned in the subject of "physical education education" "physical and multidisciplinary technologies are developed, sports are developed and developed.
 We are considering the circumstances that the reconstruction of the physical education system of schoolchildren should include the organization of independent physical education classes, in particular the independent development of motor skills.
The process, the added hours, the purpose of the research. Identify high school students' readiness to develop their own motor skills.
Study, analysis և generalization, questioning of documents, self-assessment of research sources.
Scientific-methodological analysis of the questionnaire, methods. Scientific novelty. The composition of the means of developing the motor skills of high school boys and girls is revealed.
self-assessment level - development.
The results of the research are mobile. The physical faculties of physical education are the abilities to perform movements that develop physiologically and genetically. [1]
By saying "NKR" education, it means the development of motor skills.
  As we can see, the development of motor skills is considered in the theory of physical education as a fundamental, extremely important issue.
Genetic-physical-physical education [5] states that self-esteem skills begin to develop in the preschool years.
 At present, it is very possible for learners to be able to accurately assess their own abilities, physical and mental potential.
  Children can not master it on their own.
Experts [4, 2] believe that teachers should teach children about self-assessment, self-control, content.
Our research revealed that in old age a special task was set for schoolchildren - the ability to self-assess the level of development of their own motor skills.
In order to achieve the purpose of the work, we conducted a questionnaire among 150 high school students (see Table 1).
Of the 6 motor skills we proposed, both boys and girls rated mobility relatively high (boys - 55.3%, girls - 44%), agility (boys - 44.6%, girls - 39.3%).
However, motor skills such as muscle strength, endurance և balance, were rated more than satisfactory by respondents.
  In this case, it is necessary to take into account the fact that the opinion of each person is always high by their own personality, which is especially evident during the self-assessment.
Therefore, the results recorded by us may in fact even differ from reality.
It is interesting that 69.8% of boys and 50.6% of girls know what human mobility is.
  However, when it was suggested to list those abilities, it turned out that 31.1% were able to list five abilities, մեկը none more.
Surprisingly, no one pointed out the balance, the coordination, the accuracy.
33.9% of boys listed up to 4 abilities, 26.6% - up to 3 abilities, 4.9% - 2 և 3.7% - 1.
  The girls were 27.4, 28.3, 19.4, 17 և 7.8 percent, respectively.
Table 1. Self-assessment of motor skills development by high school students (%) Motor skills 1. Agility 2. Durability 3. Flexibility 4. Agility 5. Muscle Strength Balance Respondents Gender Girl Girl Girl Girl Girl Girl Good Good. Bad.
  On the other hand, a low level of knowledge was revealed in other issues related to mobility.
  Thus, they were asked to write the means by which they can work out the results of these Surveys.
The following tools were listed by the boys to develop agility աշարժ 29.7% mentioned running, sports, 33.7% - boxing, karate, fencing, 21.9% - jumping rope, long jump, 14.7% - wrote any exercise.
motor analysis skills.
Girls, compared to boys, reported less resources, with 19.8% reporting running, volleyball, 26.3% swimming, gymnastics, 21.6% moving games, jumping, and 22.3% dancing. և 10% - tourism.
  The following means have been proposed by the boys for the development of force. 59.1% - exercises with balls, exercises on exercise equipment, presses from the floor, stretching from the spinning rod, 21.8% - weight lifting, climbing, 17.1% - transporting heavy objects, 2% wrote in the form of a cane.
40.8% of the girls mentioned exercises with balls, exercises on exercise equipment, push-ups from the floor, 31% - squats, 11.2% - sports games, 17% - gymnastics.
The analysis of the survey results shows that students prefer limited means to develop their own strength. It is worrying that the majority of learners are not fully ready to develop their own motor skills on their own.
The following measures were proposed by the high school boys to develop flexibility. 55.1% - general development exercises, exercises on exercise equipment, 36.4% - sports games, throws, 8.5% - running.
 39.9% of the girls mentioned exercises on exercise equipment, just fitness, 29.7% - gymnastics, figure skating, 20.3% - sports, volleyball, 10% - just jumping.
The following measures were nominated: 67.3% - running, sports, 22% - cycling, wrestling, 9.3% - tourism, walking, 13% did not mention anything.
The results of the Resilience Survey show that boys generally choose the right tools for developing resilience, but the number of tools listed is small.
However, in order to develop endurance, we expected more resources to be included in the sub-standard program, which included swimming, skiing, and athletic exercises.
65.3% of the girls mentioned running, sports, 19.3% - jumping rope, tourism, 11.3% - fitness, 4.1% - general developmental exercises for the development of "Physical Culture" subject.
50.6% of boys suggested running, sports training, 2.6% - wrestling, 15.3% - overcoming obstacles, gymnastics, mainly on the spinning wheel, 10.6% - cycling, hiking, climbing, 29% did not answer this question.
  39.3% of the girls mentioned games, sports games, 35.3% - gymnastics, 20% - cycling, jumping, 5.4% answered questions.
  Therefore, it is very important to clarify what (new) information teachers receive about learners' motor skills, whether they pass on this new knowledge to develop this or that motor skills on their own.
For a comprehensive study of the problem under study, a content analysis (content analysis) of the journal "Physical Culture in School" was performed.
  Experts note that this method in the field of physical culture և sports allows to receive valuable information, the direction of development of scientific ideas.
  The mentioned journal is considered to be the scientific-methodological information source of physical culture.
Only 35 articles on eight mobility skills have been published in the journal Physical Culture at School for Primary School Teachers over the past decade, of which 15 or 42.8 percent are related to mobility development, 9 or 25.7 percent are average և 3 or 8.5 percent are senior. .
  The remaining 8 or 22.8% refer to the general problems of developing mobility skills.
  There are few published materials by specialists on methods of developing students' balance, flexibility, agility, coordination tools.
  Therefore, the teachers did not receive appropriate methodological materials on the ways and means of integrating students' mobility skills.
 They do not adequately formulate motivations, necessary knowledge in learners to develop this or that mobility on their own.
Conclusion.
  The analysis of the survey results shows the following correlated image.1. The level of theoretical knowledge of high school students is too low to develop this or that motor skills on their own.
2. Some high school students find appropriate means to develop mobility skills, and most find it difficult to choose a wide range of means, even when those means are too broadly represented in the general school standard physical education curriculum.
to raise learners 3. The question has arisen that it is necessary to take complex measures, the level of physical education, including the many forms of work organization: assignment of referential work, discussion of textbooks, intellectual competitions, debates, homework, group work, in other words, self-schooling.
