In this age of enormous technological advances and growing environmental issues, intergenerational justice is increasingly being talked about.
  Discussions become more heated when the issue of taking responsibility for future generations is raised.
  The latter, it is clear, is aimed at one goal, which is to create favorable conditions for the welfare of future generations.
 The aim of the work is to identify the cornerstones that are the impetus for the discussion of the socio-philosophical topic of responsibility towards future generations, as well as the analysis of different conceptual approaches.
The problem as the future of the moonlight.
Thoughts on intergenerational relations are quite remarkable in terms of our current and future generations' responsibility.
  The point is that the question of responsibility or any obligation to future generations has gradually separated from the general discussion of responsibility, becoming a separate topic of public discussion, receiving much more attention than before.
That is to say, actions are economic and technological. Since the last century, mankind has become more aware of the ever-increasing problems of the environment, which have arisen in part as a result of development.
  It is outlined that this destructive process is accelerating, and in the future the problems will be even more severe.
In this context, the key concern is whether our ability to produce negative consequences somehow obliges us to change our own actions.
Needless to say, for example, some of our current actions may harm generations living a hundred years after us.
  The question arises as to whether this is a sufficient reason for us to reconsider such questions leading to the controversial question of responsibility to future generations, as well as how that responsibility may affect the actions of present-day people.
  We will never meet future generations, but they will form an idea of ​​us, judging by the world we leave them.
  Another group of thematic scholars, called historians, argues that there is no need to reconsider or change our actions, as there are some general trends in human history that will ultimately benefit the next generation.
 This optimism, of course, should not be overstated in the way of other generations.
Talking about the responsibility.
  There are four main arguments, which are in favor of the above-mentioned optimism.
-Technological progress. According to many thinkers, this is a reasonable assumption that humans, being smart enough, will be able to solve most of the environmental problems with the help of technology.
- Replacement or compensation: any natural resource can be replaced by other natural resources or man-made resources.
- Lack will change the motives. The economic assertion says that the scarcity of resources will become economically fertile ground for creating new tools or changing the current situation, that is, one form of behavior will become more favorable than the other types.
Intergenerational transfer of resources - Accumulation of wealth. It is an indisputable fact that they have made the generations of capitalists richer than the previous ones (by the way, among the accumulated resources is also mentioned the human knowledge).
  Due to the accumulation, future generations will be able to overcome the environmental costs, as well as the need for significant technical investments.
The above four arguments assume that future generations will be richer and better off than we are, at least they will be in the same situation as we are, but never worse.
 [4] The existence of these arguments does not mean that we should not talk about responsibility for future generations.
  Moreover, we must consider the counter-arguments that try to strengthen our imperative to be responsible for future generations.
Throughout history, mankind has always developed new tools, and the development of industry has given the opportunity to invent, produce and use tools in a more efficient way.
  This is an inalienable fact of the current human condition.
However, historical trends may not continue into the future, so there may be limitations as to what tools can be invented and what impact they will have.
Technology products have restrictions. it cannot solve the problems of mankind forever.
  Irreversible declines and decays are possible in the future.
It has been used to minimize the effects of the powers that be on mankind but the full force of action.
Technological advances can control that prediction.
The question here is how often it happens in practice.
  Sometimes it is necessary to replace a natural resource with several natural or man-made resources.
 In that case, it is not right to say that the resource has been completely replaced.
It should be noted that it takes time for motivations and trends to change, and negative trends can continue for a long time until steps are taken to change them.
  As a result, the negative tendency may be reversible.
As for the accumulation of wealth, it is certainly true that the investments and savings of previous generations have made many of us safer.
  The question is whether this historical tendency will make future generations more secure.
  The answer to the possibility.
If it is more than the future environmental costs, the wealth of the older generations, then it is even unnecessary to talk about the generations living in better conditions.
In this work, the American thinker Hans Jonas, in his book The Commandment of Responsibility, discusses in detail the intergenerational responsibility, noting that over time, present and future generations must become more and more inclined to take responsibility for future generations.
The author explains such a position by several conditioning factors. One of them is the increased potential of modern technologies to expand the spectrum of human beings to influence the destiny of nature.
  What was once left to fate is now entering the realm of human control.
  The other factor is human, particularly related to early detection of dangers and risks.
  According to Jonas, the above-mentioned tendencies inevitably lead to the expansion of responsibility.
  Awareness of the possible consequences of current actions, as well as refraining from many actions, forces us to assume irresponsible responsibility.
 "We are not responsible for the future of human beings, but for the idea of ​​man (Idea ofMan), which is such that it requires its presence in the world."
  Our responsibility is to the idea of ​​humanity, which is an ontological idea, to the idea of ​​what must exist, which is imperatively created in order for humanity to continue to exist.
According to Jonas, the justification of responsibility for future generations becomes imperative for the existence of future generations, as they are part of the ontological idea that demands responsibility.
  However, the thinker emphasizes that there is a subjective component of responsibility. People really feel responsible and ready to act.
  In Jonas' mindset of responsibility for future generations, special attention should be paid to the fact that, according to him, humanity should educate itself in such a way that it cares for future generations, being ready to act, making their existence secure.
It should be noted that Jonas claims that our responsibility to future generations presupposes the following normative requirement.
 "Act in such a way that your actions are compatible with the continuity of your life."
  [3] According to Jonas, we must preserve the freedom of choice for future generations.
Central to this is the idea of ​​human freedom, which he associates with human thinking and the responsibility for future generations.
  According to Jonas, freedom is a necessary condition of responsibility. It allows people to care for one another and for other creatures.
 "A temporary loss of freedom may be tolerated, but a permanent loss is never acceptable," Jonas said.
Tremel seems to continue Jonas's thought: "As knowledge grows, so does power, but at the same time, so does responsibility."
  Tremel, in fact, means the fact that human knowledge is conditioned by the growth of human knowledge by nature, as a result of which the level of responsibility necessarily increases.
Inevitably, How can a question arise? At the level of human beings, we have a definite responsibility for the future or the identity of the latter is not even determined.
  Such a question is completely justified.
  Presenting arguments in favor of even a strange numerical problem in the daily life of human activity.
  In the philosophical context, however, it is often stated that being in this arbitrary point of space is not the most important moral feature of a person, which will determine the value of an individual, therefore, the time factor should not be considered as such either.
 That is, regardless of what part of the time the individual is, the responsibility towards the latter is inviolable.
  In this case, the uncertainty of the identity of future men is just a result of not being urgent.
 From the above it can be assumed that the identity of the latter will be determined when viewed in the appropriate conditions of urgency.
to feel responsible for the victims of the mass fires that broke out in Australia at the beginning of the year or for the victims of the virus that spread in China in the last period, that is, we feel morally responsible, somewhere to lighten the tragedy of people living in another part of the planet.
  The same pattern applies to future generations of compassion. We can be held responsible for the question, regardless of the factors of time and identity uncertainty.
  Tremel rightly notes that "we often feel obligated to indeterminate people; it's not possible whether they were born or not."
  Partridge explains the above in a relatively simpler way.
  "If I dig a demining hole, I must fill it with soil at the end so that no one will suffer in the future." [5]
 And that, according to Partridge, has nothing to do with whether a person has already been born who can suffer if he does not fulfill his obligations.
The idea of ​​ethics, however, raises objections to the future. Some critics argue that this idea of ​​future ethics leads to anonymity in the long run.
  Responsibility becomes extremely vague if, without taking into account the complexity of the role relationship, it is directed at people who are considered abstract, homogeneous individuals whom we do not even know we will not be able to, because they will live in the distant future.
  Other critics limit themselves to the pragmatic point of view of problem-solving, focusing on the question of whether in real moral-psychological conditions one can expect an individual to show loyalty not only in word but also in deed.
Among those mentioned is one of the modern political thinkers, Avner de Shalit, who is also inclined to think that the present generations have obligations to future generations. To strengthen this judgment, the philosopher presents two arguments, the first and most important of which is the communist emphasis.
  According to de Shalit, we owe it to ourselves to be fair to all members of the community, regardless of their current status, as they have a number of moral characteristics that we carry.
 This, by the way, is the case when the obligations arise from the inter-community relations.
  The thinker presents his second argument, which, unlike the first, is not related to totalitarian relations.
  "There is an obligation to non-members, which implies that we must refrain from harming other people."
  "This duty is called philanthropy, it refers to the welfare of the Euryish" [1].
 De Shalit believes that it is immoral to ignore the suffering of others, regardless of their spatial-temporal status.
  In fact, de Shalit presents our obligations to future generations in the form of a bowl of justice, of humanity, using their proper balance and distribution.
In addition, it should be noted that De Shalit sees the need for international justice for generations.
    This need is based on the fact that communities are also interconnected.
If one community takes steps to ensure the resources and well-being of its future members, the other community can do anything to thwart those steps.
  Conflicts of interest arise between different communities, which have almost the same goal, which is to ensure the welfare of generations.
That is why international justice is necessary between the generations, according to the thinker.
  It is obvious that there is a great demand for some kind of international cooperation in connection with the responsibility towards future generations.
 [4] However, this is the other side of the issue and not so relevant to our topic.
Returning to our problem, we can single out optimistic "pessimistic paradigms" of responsibility for future generations.
  The optimistic paradigm considers responsibility for future generations primarily as a commitment, a process that ensures more or less reliable progress that begins now և will continue in the future.
  According to this paradigm, our responsibility towards future generations guarantees a definite progress, which will be used by future generations.
  This paradigm, where future generations will generally turn to philosophical perversions of the Enlightenment, liberal political philosophy in general, including John Rolls's theory of justice (the current generation in the latter case, characterize it as the next chapter).
 Despite the differences, the representatives of these schools share the view that it will lead to a future of increasing perfection (Condorcet), prosperity (Rolls, neoclassicism), or reduction of labor suffering (Marx).
In contrast to the optimistic paradigm, the pessimist sees future generations in a worse situation than the current generations.
    "In this case, the responsibility for future generations is of a conservative nature. The instruction to preserve the former, be it of a technological, economic or cultural nature." [7]
  The pessimistic paradigm becomes the basis for the emergence of Malthusianism in the 19th century, as well as Eugenics in the 20th century, in which the main concern is the hope of future generations deteriorating rather than improving.
The main concern within Malthusianism, as we know, is the problem of unlimited population growth, and in Eugenics, the degeneration of the genetic fund.
The status quo is precedent with technology, including: We are, in fact, living in an age where, along with unsustainable progress, we are dealing with a number of negative consequences: climate problems, resource depletion, and so on.
  Such a situation gives rise to thoughts about the welfare of future generations.
  In this case, we are dealing with intergenerational relations, which give rise to conflicting opinions and theories.
In the context of intergenerational justice, many theorists are optimistic about the responsibility of future generations, relying on technological advances and other advanced human capabilities, so we tend to have a responsibility to future generations.
  Contrary to this, a large number of thinkers think that we, nevertheless, have a certain responsibility.
  In this context, the issue is discussed that in the opinion of the present generations, they should not be asked in what conditions the future generations will live in comparison with those generations.
  It can be noticed, however, that attitudes towards future generations are normative in nature.
