Preface.
  The socio-economic, political and educational reforms taking place in the republic in the modern period place even higher demands on the health of schoolchildren, comprehensive training, and social physical activity.
  On the other hand, the circumstance of disturbing schoolchildren is that the interest in physical culture and sports is less and less.
They do not actively participate in organized և self-physical training.
A pandemic has been declared by the World Health Organization since March 2020 due to the rapid spread of the coronavirus.
  According to the WHO, self-isolation, as a consequence of lack of mobility, can lead to undesirable problems, damaging the physical and mental health of the population.
  In these conditions, it is very important to maintain the movement regime of schoolchildren.
It is very possible to organize independent physical education classes for students.
If we consider the circumstance, the activation of such trainings is possible if they are built in accordance with the increase of the physical education of the students, their preferences, interests, desires.
  On the other hand, this issue is still poorly developed in the theory of schoolchildren's physical education, although some issues are covered [2, 3, 4, 5].
The aim of our work is to reveal the level of theoretical and practical readiness of schoolchildren's independent physical culture classes.
In order to achieve the above-mentioned goal, it was proposed to solve the following problems ․1. To find out the level of readiness of independent school children for physical education classes.
2. To specify the content, means and means of the schoolchildren's own physical education classes.
For the implementation and solution of research problems, we have chosen the science-based "applied" methods. Study of scientific sources, analysis և Generalization, 2. pedagogical review, 3. questionnaire survey, 4. Document analysis, 5. self-assessment.
It is accepted in psychology [1] that ability is a type of human experience, which includes, on the one hand, certain knowledge-skills, on the other hand, applying them in new conditions, using them to achieve a new goal, a process of activity.
Abilities are both processes of knowledge and skills.
  The acquisition of skills by a person is a difficult, complex process, carried out during the training of the learner.
The ability to detect certain motor skills based on senior motor experience is the ability to self-control movements non-spontaneously.
  One of the main problems of our work is the mobility of schoolchildren և to apply the mechanisms in practice.
Leaning on it, schoolchildren have to show their abilities, form different complexes and apply them in practice.
In order to reveal the above, let's conduct a questionnaire in the region, the results of which are given in Table 1.
Thus, the analysis of the results of the Knowledge Survey shows that there is a certain connection between the interconnected abilities of the high school students, to form concise (concepts) of the internships, to implement them in practice.
This connection is noticeable in three tasks: in the composition of morning sports complexes (51%) և performance (85%), in composition of physical education complexes (63%) և performance (92%), in composition of general development complexes (58%) և performance (89%).
It is a worrying fact that only 27% of students can make a brief summary of independent physical education classes.
  We want to pay special attention to the fact that the issues of theoretical assignments are as many as the practical lessons of schoolchildren (we mean to increase the grades from the complexes, the composition).
  Therefore, we can state that currently high school students choose their own physical exercises as "imperfect" theoretical training (ie, the formation of complexes).
The preparation of high school students for independent physical education classes is done on a random basis Table 1.HartseribovandakutyuneKarogh you inknuruynkazmelPataskhanitarberaknereAyoOchHartseri bovandakutyuneKarogh you inknuruynkatarelAravotyan higienikmarmnamarzutyun Fizkultdadar Self katarelfizkulturayinparapmunk PataskhanitarberaknereAyoOchEndhanur zargatsnoghvarzhutyunner sepakansharzhoghakan ability to independently develop training marzasarkeriognutyamb figure dzevavormanvarzhutyunner morning gymnastics complexes Fizkultdadari complexes for individual sports complexes zargatsnoghvarzhutyunneri parapmunknerikonspektner Global Select exercises to develop their motor abilities Preparation vramarzvelo hamalirnerKetsvatski dzevavormanhamalirner work arandznakienkushadrutyundardzrelhartsvoghneri own sports classes.to classes.to classes.
It is clear that the classical forms of independent physical training are still preserved.
  The survey showed that 5.3% of schoolchildren regularly exercise in the morning, 57.0% do it occasionally, 6.7% do not do it at all.
  In the case of coronavirus, meanwhile, schoolchildren need to exercise in the morning, as it is the best and irreplaceable way to strengthen the health of the nervous, respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
  Moreover, if it is done outdoors, then the blood is enriched with oxygen, արդյունավետ the efficiency of training increases.
Students' independent physical education classes can be theoretical or practical.
  Schoolchildren need to know exactly what work they are going to do, what goal they are pursuing, what problems they will solve, when they will start, when they will finish, what tricks they will use, how they will control their own How will the performance of the work be analyzed?
We have registered lower results regarding the holding of physical education breaks.
 Thus, only 3.3% of students do it regularly, 52.6% do it on a case-by-case basis, and 44.1% do not do it at all.
Independent schoolchildren For our work, the other question is very important - to find out when to do 45-50 minutes or more of physical exercises.
  The survey revealed that the vast majority of students do it very rarely, and 18% do not do it at all.
  At the same time, it is noticeable that the mobility regime of schoolchildren decreases sharply in the conditions of the coronavirus epidemic.
  Meanwhile, the norms of movement activity of the schoolchildren defined by the hygienists. Children aged 7-10 should take 15,000-200,000 steps a day, 11-14 year olds should take 18,000-25,000 steps, boys aged 15-17 should take 25,000,300,000 steps, and girls should take 20,000-25,000 steps.
In order to carry out independent physical education classes, students should keep a self-monitoring diary: indicators of periodic improvement, physical fitness and well-being.
  The analysis of the results of our survey revealed that neither boys nor girls keep such diaries.
  Students are not as interested in the issues of self-control as they are required to be.
 We are very interested in self-control (boys - 62.6%, girls - 73.4%), height (boys - 54.1%, girls - 64.4%).
  Girls are more likely to fall behind (9.3%).
The analysis of the survey results showed that a significant proportion of learners (34.7%) than boys do not follow the process of physical development, others do not see the need to improve these indicators, and those who want to improve do not know how to do it.
Studies show that the majority of schoolchildren are unaware that they can correct their physical disabilities through exercise.
Several types of independent work can be distinguished: • Independent work to acquire new knowledge.
  In this case, on the instruction of the teacher or on his own initiative, they study the educational sections of the "Physical Culture" subject standard program: knowledge bases, gymnastic exercises, athletics exercises, relevant literature related to games.
  Makes sense of the acquired knowledge և applies during lessons, independent lessons.
• Motor skills և skills to acquire independent work (strengthen, maintain).
  Such activities are carried out during independent physical training classes, during physical education classes in the gym, playground, yard.
• Self-creation These are carried out in the above-mentioned places, with friends, while performing various activities, in extracurricular, extracurricular activities, mass physical-sports activities, physical-cultural cottages.
works.
• Work with a textbook.
 This is a method of independent work, which is used in accordance with the curriculum.
In order to better understand the mentioned, we have suggestions on how to organize those independent works.
The indicators obtained as a result of the research are a matter of deep concern in the sense that at present in the theory of physical education of students of higher education institutions - it is clearly stated in the methodology that students should master the method of independent physical education.
  In particular, they must be able to independently develop their own motor skills, self-control the process, evaluate their effectiveness.
 Therefore, it is emphasized that the abilities and skills to perform independent physical-cultural activities should be developed during the school years.
