1. Introduction.
  Differential equations play a very important role in applications in modern mathematics [1].
  The general theory of differential equations includes two basic classes with common partial derivatives.
  With the development of both accurate (analytical) and digital solutions of differential equations, a number of computer systems (Mathematica, Mathcad, Maple, Matlab, etc.) are now widely available, which enable the solution of both simple and complex problems.
  However, Wolfram Research's Mathematica multifunctional integrated package is one of the leaders in its computational and graphic visualization capabilities.
Computer media [2,3].
This work is devoted to introducing differential possibilities in the Mathematica environment.
  To this end, a number of interesting problems are considered [13,14], which are solved by their application.
 At the same time, graphic visualization tools are used, which make the teaching process more effective.
  The work is of methodological interest. It is based on the teaching experience of the Mathematica package and can be used in the further teaching process.
standard solutions in Mathematica environment.
 DSolve և NDSolve operators are available in Mathematica to solve both ordinary and partial differential equations and their systems.
  DSolve operator with following encoding dimensions [6-8] .2. Analytical solution of ordinary differential equation with unknown function of differential equations - obtains the solution of ordinary differential equation with unknown function [
- gets in the range], gets the analytical solution of the system of variable equations, ordinary independent differential - gets the solution of the differential equation with partial derivatives, returns the solution of the differential equation with partial derivatives in the domain.
In all the above cases, the general solutions of the differential equations or their systems containing the constants of c [k] integration are expressed.
 In the case of finite և / or preconditions, the latter are attached as equations to the differential equation or their system, as a result of which the private solutions are already used.
Note the DSolve related features: provides solutions for, replacing equations with, we get solutions for.
• Differential edge terms are entered as <left> == <right>, and the derivatives involved can be written using D or Darivative operators.
The system of equations participating in's can also contain algebraic equations that act as additional terms, as well as particular edge and / or initial terms.
differential equations.
 In the case of decelerating differential equations, the initial functions are given in the form of deceleration.
can-solve sometimes expresses supposed solutions through Solve.
The solutions provided by the company sometimes contain integrals for which it is not possible to determine the default functions.
• WhenEvent [event, action] can be included in the equations, indicating the action that takes place when the event takes place.
There are some options that apply to the DSolve operator that regulate computing processes.
  Assumptions - allows you to set conditions with և independent variation of parameters, GaneratedParameters - allows you to change the integration constant by specifying the appropriate identifier.
The encoding parameters of the NDSolve operator are [6-8]. Normal equation in the range of the differential equation - partial solution of the differential equation in the rectangular domain takes part.
The solution of a system of differential equations.
- gets in the partial derivative domain.
- gets the equation analysis with partial derivatives. Note that:
  The operator emits a numeric solution, so this operator is only applicable in the case of a private solution, ie when terminal և / or preconditions are given.
the result in the form of InterpolatingFunction.
 There are a number of choices that apply to this operator that interfere with the calculation process.
Return to Operator 3. In the environment of differential equations և their systems.
Possibilities of solution 3.1. Ordinary differential equations.
Solve the Riquatilogist equation where:
, և build the schedule.
In the Mathematica environment we will solve it as follows: Construct the graph for different initial values ​​by giving a to different values. The graph shown in Figure 1 will be used.
 3.1.2 Examine the phase image of a dynamic system. Solve the system of differential equations.
As a result, we will then display the graphs of the solutions. 2.
3.2. Hybrid differential equations.
3.2.1 Consider the problem of correction of the graphs of the sine graph. Let us construct the graph of the result: Fig. Fig. 3.
3.2.2. Construct the model of a ball jumping down the stairs. Constructing the corresponding graph, we will get fig. 4. Presence of certain elemental inertia (for example, electrical signal), 3.3. Slowing differential equations.
  Many processes based on mass, energy, information transfer are accompanied by slowing down or delay.
  This slowdown can have a variety of causes: limitation of the rate of propagation of the interaction, "non-instantaneous" of the "human-machine" nervous-muscular signals (for example, in chains), technological induction, limited speed of processes (eg, combustion), etc.
  For this reason, some processes cannot be described by ordinary differential equations.
In connection with this, there is a need to consider equations in which the unknown function appears in the case of different values ​​of the argument.
  One of such equations is the differential equations with decelerating argument, the solutions of which we will refer to.
Let's study the beginning of chaos in a dynamic system, which is characterized by a slowing differential equation. The result is Fig. 5.
3.4. Differential equations with partial derivatives.
3.4.1 Solve the given condition satisfying the differential equation with partial derivatives: Construct the corresponding 3D graph. 6.
3.4.2 Solve the given condition satisfying the differential equation with partial derivatives: Construct the corresponding three-dimensional graph. 7.
3.4.3 Solve the given condition satisfying the differential equation with partial derivatives: Then we get the graph (Fig. 8).
Let's also show the corresponding contour graph (Fig. 9). 3.4.4 Present an example of a solution of a differential equation with partial derivatives և Construct the graph (Fig. 10). Note that in the Mathematica environment the differential equations with partial derivatives with 4 variables are not solved.
3.5. Systems of differential equations.
3.5.1 Present solutions of systems of equilibrium homogeneous differential equations.
by coefficientsBuilding the graph, we will get fig. 11.3.3.2. Let us present examples of solving systems of linear inequalities.
differentialLet's build the graph, we will get fig. 13.
Solution options 4. Conclusion.
  Mathematica environment is a system of ordinary "partial differential equations" systems.
The examples presented in the work reveal են present these possibilities in an accessible way և can be applied during the Mathematica package.
Of particular importance is the fact that graphical visualization capabilities are used in conjunction with the work to make the results of the differential equation analysis more accessible and visible.
 The work is methodologically valuable.
