Preface.
  The study of the problems of children with special educational needs (SEN), the possibilities of their solutions, the technologies of solution in modern conditions are considered important pedagogical issues և are in the center of study of the pedagogical-scientific community due to the general inclusion of education, the need for inclusive society.
  One of these issues is the issues related to overcoming the disability of children with SEN, as adaptation can be the cause of many other problems, such as isolation, restriction of activity, inadequate outreach, and so on.
    Social pedagogical work with SEN children is of great importance in solving these problems.
Considering adaptation as a social-pedagogical problem, our goal is to study the possibilities of SEN children's preservation, the role of the social pedagogue in that process, the peculiarities of his activity.
Coping First, let's look at the different interpretations of "disinfection".
ևTheir goalsB. Ն. Almazov perceives "adaptation" as human inadequacy of the results of achievement, inability to adapt to the conditions of the proposed activity.
 Human capabilities are different in different situations, they can change են depending on the capabilities of the environment.
 Low levels of human resilience are characterized by such phenomena as adaptation.
A. L. Ryan և Ya. L. Kalominski considers "adaptation" to be a disorder of the interaction of human մարդու social environment [8].
  It can be conditioned by the peculiarities of the environment, as well as by the level of the child's personal development.
As we can see, these authors view "adaptation" from the point of view of disruption of human activity in the environment, from the point of view of low level of possibilities of adaptation.
  The incompatibility of the social-psychological-psycho-physiological status of a person with the requirements necessary for vital activity [6].
And according to L. V. Human "'s adaptation" Thus, we can describe adaptation as a low level of adaptation opportunities, which disturbs the balance of the person-environment relationship, endangers the normal functioning of the person.
The main problems of SEN are mainly of social, medical, psychological and pedagogical nature.
Social problems of child abortion are conditioned by the social status of the child, his family, parents, their low chances of adaptation.
Problems of a medical nature are conditioned by pathological deviations of the child's health condition, mental traumas.
Due to the lack of psychological care and parental care, the lack of love or compassion in the formal relationship with early deprivation.
The problems arise in the case of adults, mainly due to social-pedagogical neglect, educational problems, and the fact of dropping out of education. [9]
problems of a natural nature [3].
  This is the process of identifying the specifics, interests, desires and aspirations of children with SEN, their knowledge, abilities, skills, habits, which are formed in the development of the disability, the development of the disability, the development of the child. The goals and means of teaching are best adapted to the needs, requirements and opportunities of the learners.
  The unisocial pedagogue could play a role in these works.
  We are convinced that conditions are created for such processes to prevent and overcome the disability of children with SEN.
  Moreover, any social-pedagogical activity carried out for this purpose can contribute to the provision of a sufficient level of vital activity for children with SEN.
Social-pedagogical activities are considered as a system of support with multifaceted public significance. It is a pedagogical activity aimed at solving the existing social and pedagogical problems in different environments [4].
Auxiliary complex և The social pedagogue performs many functions during his activity.
  Examining the professional literature [1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9], we singled out the following important functions: information-analytical, coordinating-communication, predetermination, social-preventive, social-organizational, social-rehabilitation, strengthening, changing family relations, Diagnostic, educational, control-protective, psychotherapeutic և etc.
Our professional literature studies, observations, and sociological surveys confirm these important functions.
During the research we came to the conclusion that these functions in the process of overcoming child preservation.
  Suggests to review this content from the point of view of overcoming the disability of children. Information-analytical function is provided որը Information collection-analytical function, which assumes information collection և Decomposition analysis, information on various social-educational, health, sports, rehabilitation institutions, development institutions, is studied ևThe importance of overcoming their activity is analyzed.
 Coordination-communication function, conditions և opportunities of various educational, medical, health-rehabilitation, rehabilitation institutions, social services, local self-government, regional structures, non-governmental organizations կազմակերպ cooperation, establishment of contacts, restoration of damaged relations, re-establishment in their system, which will facilitate overcoming problems, activating the activities of the parents of such children.
։ Predetermination function, which enables based on the analysis of the collected information, through contacts with different institutions, of course, taking into account the individual characteristics of the child, developmental opportunities, providing social-pedagogical assistance։ assistance in overcoming delays.
 Social-preventive function, in the implementation of which it is possible to establish humanitarian, healthy, educational relations between different institutions, which can contribute to the emergence of dangerous situations, the prevention of disarmament in time.
 Social-organizational function, which is aimed at solving various problems, creating a pedagogically organized environment, organizing various events, including recreation, including various social institutions in the process of socializing a child with SEN, which are important in overcoming preservation.
։ Social-rehabilitation function, which implies the creation of conditions that can provide the whole system of services related to the rehabilitation process.
socialև Function of strengthening family relations, which is aimed at the regulation and healing of interpersonal relationships in the family, the overcoming of children, the organization of control over children in need of social and pedagogical support, their families, which can help prevent and overcome divorce.
Isolation ոփոխ Change is the most important function performed to overcome the disenfranchisement of children. When such children have problems or difficulties with adjustment, the social educator can make significant changes in their value system, behaviors, and relationships, which allows them to quickly re-evaluate ].
The efficiency of the implementation of the above-mentioned functions is certainly conditioned by the level of social pedagogical-professional knowledge, the personal qualities of the specialist, the implementation of activities in accordance with the presented requirements.
In the framework of this research, we conducted an sociological survey, which aims to determine the role of the social pedagogue, to clarify the functions of the social pedagogue, the scope of his cooperation with various specialists in overcoming the child preservation of SEN.
The polls were conducted in schools N 2, 7, 11, 23 of Gyumri, 68 pedagogues who work with children with SEN participated in the survey.
  The following questions were asked: 1. What qualities should a social pedagogue have?
2. List the basic functions of a pedagogue and social.
3. Indicate the functions of the social pedagogue, which are aimed at overcoming the children with disabilities. ena / information-analytical, b / coordinative-communicative, c / social-rehabilitative, d / social-organizational.
4. Which specialists can help more effectively in overcoming the disability of children with SEN? A) teacher, b) social pedagogue, c) social worker, d) psychologist, e) speech therapist.
5. With whom does the social pedagogue cooperate in order to overcome the disenfranchisement of children with SEN?
The majority of the respondents answered the first question as follows: humane, empathetic, supportive, friendly, cooperative.
  This proves that the social pedagogue must have the ability to overcome the above-mentioned children during his activity.
Qualities that will help the respondents to the second question to mainly list the following functions: educational, rehabilitative, informational, coordinating, therapeutic.
  The answers to this question indicate that the social pedagogues in the schools mainly perform the above-mentioned functions, only the respondents have ideas about them.
In the answers to the third question, the respondents mainly mentioned the information-analytical, coordinating-communication functions (see line 1).
 This proves that the functions offered by the naked party are not used in overcoming the disability of children with SEN.
broadlyChart 1. The following answers were given to the fourth question: a) teacher-12b / social pedagogue - 50g / social worker - 3d / psychologist - 3e / speech therapist - 0 The role of the pedagogue interviewed by the results of the analysis of the answers (see Figure 2).
The majority of the respondents were from the social, Figure 2. pedagogues, the respondents on the fifth question separated quite a wide range.
  The following answers were given: with students, community, principal, community, city, regional, public, various international organizations.
  The answers given indicate that the social pedagogue has a wide range of opportunities for cooperation, հարց the respondents should be informed about it.
Conclusion.
Thus, studies of parents, comprehensive professional literature, and analysis of the results of sociological surveys have shown that: • The maladaptation of children with SEN can lead to many other problems that can limit the possibilities.
• The effectiveness of the functions performed by the social pedagogue depends on the professional and personal qualities of the social pedagogue.
• A number of functions performed by a social pedagogue can also be aimed at overcoming SEN children.
• The social pedagogue has a great role in overcoming the disenfranchisement of children with SEN.
    Collaborations with different specialists are possible in this case.
