Preface.
In the conditions of the independence of the Republic of Armenia, further economic liberalization, the educational system has always been one of the key spheres of the state and economic development, as the general education school is one of the actors in ensuring the development of the society and forming a new society.
  Significant general education directly influences about half a million people, either as learners or as educators.
  A competitive state presupposes a competitive educational and scientific system.
  This is evidenced by the allocations of the RA budget, where education ranks fifth after social protection, general public services, economic relations [1].
From the point of view of coordinating the development of human resources involved in the education system, ,motivation directly affects the quality of general education, the learning of students with pre-defined educational outcomes.
նպThe purpose of the work is to study the means of motivating the pedagogical staff of the school, to outline the impact of the characteristics of their application on the professional activity.
  Work on the topic includes not only publications from national sources, but also studies by various foreign authors on staff motivation [2], employee behavior [4], and human resource motivation management [3].
The novelty of the teachers' work is that in this work the means of motivation are presented in a comprehensive way, in particular the peculiarities of application in the process of motivation of the pedagogical staff of the school.
The key to the development of their skills in each field, as well as in general education, are human resources with their knowledge and abilities.
  The role of employee motivation is important in the effectiveness of performance.
  Through teacher motivation it is possible to increase the quality of services provided by general education, as it is the effective teaching staff of general education.
The motivation to increase activity and work motivation is characterized as a personal psychological force that determines the direction of donor behavior in the organization [4].
  Motivation is considered as a psychological force that determines a person's level of effort.
Motivation is the strongest driving force of a person, a set of internal-external factors, which pushes a person to take actions to get satisfaction from the course of action.
Motivation to Achieve Objectives to Obtain Objectives Motivation is one of the most effective means of influencing employee behavior և The most important factor influencing the increase of work productivity. In the absence of money, the progress of the organization would be impossible.
  It is not right to think that using the same means of motivation can motivate all employees.
In motivating the school pedagogical staff, the school management, taking into account a number of features, can use the presented means, due to which it will not only increase the motivation of the teachers, but will also contribute to the increase of their pedagogical and professional activity.
  It is suggested to use the means presented below in the motivation of pedagogical staff in schools.
• Conducting job interviews ․ The main purpose of conducting work interviews is to establish contact with teachers, to provide information about school goals and programs.
  Regularly և Conducting effective work interviews can be motivating if the supervisor sensibly combines both the emphasis on the strengths and weaknesses of the teacher and the steps to eliminate the weaknesses.
How much is the satisfaction?
և Career career, • Ensuring career advancement. Teacher's self-satisfaction in a career-driven career advancement as a professional development, provides job motivation, financial stability, and .
  Opportunities for the development of a teacher և professional։ career should be equal, accessible to every educator, and the task of the school leadership should be to provide teachers with equal access to those conditions.
only assignments • Coordination of objectives. The agreement of the goals is the biggest stimulus for increasing the work efficiency, the description.
Goals describe what should be achieved as a result of work, not how to achieve it.
Motivation is striving to achieve organizational goals.
  The organization strives to create the pursuit of goals, which in turn will help increase the ultimate organizational efficiency.
  The goals of the employee organization become acceptable when the employee achieves the goals set by the organization by meeting the goals set by him / her, satisfying his / her own needs.
• Feedback - on feedback.
  Offline is a way to exchange information.
  Through feedback, the employees are informed about their work, the work of the organization would go blindly, without the possibility of progress or improvement.
  Everyone needs feedback on their performance, through which it is possible.
  Feedback is also needed to motivate the pedagogical staff, due to which the strengths and weaknesses of the professional-pedagogical activity become more obvious to the teacher.
Improve feedback • Ensure educators' participation in school decision-making ․ The participation of the pedagogical staff in the strategic planning, the study of the needs, needs of the pedagogical staff, the discussions on the steps aimed at improving the educational process will enable the pedagogues to express their positions on the existing problems, and the school administration to find effective solutions.
Involve the pedagogical staff in the strategic management of the school, in particular, in the process.
The participation of pedagogical staff in the above-mentioned processes will increase their self-esteem as a part of the school, their desire to be dedicated to pedagogical work and school.
  In case of making a joint decision, the solutions to the problems, omissions and challenges will be more realistic and effective.
• The organization's information policy - the organization's effective information policy can significantly increase employee motivation.
  Employees should not feel that they are aware of the events taking place in the organization, they are provided.
  When motivating the pedagogical staff, the school management should provide continuous, timely և detailed information to the teachers about everything related to the steps, goals, and activities of the educational institution.
Accurate information is self-motivated. • Delegation of assignments և competencies ացումը Delegation of assignments և delegations և Competence of pedagogical staff implies promotion of teachers' work by revealing their own merits and providing independence.
Delegation of assignments և competencies is not only a means of motivating employees, but also a management philosophy [3].
  Trusting the teacher, the school management motivates the teachers, increases the work performance.
• Promoting teamwork. Teamwork is one of the guarantees of the organization's progress and development ներից guarantees of employee motivation.
  The teamwork of the school pedagogical staff is even more important for the effectiveness of the whole educational process, as many pedagogues are involved in the teaching and upbringing of the students.
Raise Teachers' Awareness of Teamwork - Each member of the teaching staff will actively participate in the learning process, considering each achievement of the school's students as their own.
spirit of what • Financial incentives. Financial incentives are primarily aimed at meeting the physiological needs of employees.
 If the teacher does not receive enough money for the work, he will not have enough motivation to work, but if he receives enough money to meet the needs, it does not mean that he will work more motivated.
  Receiving financial resources creates a feeling of short-term job satisfaction for the employee.
Pedagogical • Professional Skills Development ․ The school administration should contribute to the teacher's training of skills, the organization of seminars or the participation of teachers, the existence of a diversity of literature, as the teacher's motivation to study with students is conditioned by the teacher's pedagogical-professional knowledge.
process effectiveness ման pedagogical skills, development, knowledge, school-wide և • Stimulation of creativity և initiative խ Stimulation of teacher creativity includes positive attitude of school leadership, support and appreciation of teacher creative approaches.
  The school administration should not ignore any positive innovative idea by the teacher. should support the latter, even if it is related to the joint efforts of the school staff.
  The school administration should encourage the teacher's initiative.
  Within the framework of the conditions for promoting the teacher's initiative, the school-assisted teacher should help the leadership to bring to life the independence of work, which in turn will lead to the initiative of the teacher.
• Creating favorable working conditions ․ If the working conditions are favorable, the employees are happy to go to work.
  If the school administration does not always follow the conditions, lighting, temperature in the classrooms or cleanliness, the motivation of the teachers in the given school will decrease.
  Providing favorable working conditions helps the normal course of the educational process.
at least when appropriate.
If • Conflict Management ․ Work conflicts, because people's opinions and inevitable interests are not properly managed in schools. It will be pedagogical. employee motivation.
demotivation.
constructive staffing.
• Creating a motivating organizational culture. The culture that contributes to the development of teacher professional motivation is multifactorial, but it is facilitated by the existence of a motivating educational environment and the formation of organizational culture.
  The organizational cultural elements of the school are the values, norms, motto, traditions accepted by the institution.
  The school management should create such an educational environment through the organizational culture, for the development of professional motivation.
• Assessment of work և monitoring ․ evaluation of pedagogical activities is an integral part of the quality assurance system of the educational institution.
  Assessment of work and monitoring will enable teachers to account for the results of their work, as well as to identify shortcomings and directions for reform.
 It is desirable that all stakeholders in the educational process participate in the monitoring of pedagogical activities: students, colleagues, school administration, parents, etc.
  Conducting self-monitoring activities to increase the motivation of pedagogical activities.
Causes a teacher և capacity և • Management style ․ The application of each style of management can have a particular effect on employee motivation.
The use of an authoritarian style of government can demotivate educators unnecessarily, with control.
  Although the liberal style of governance implies the possibility of large-scale freedom, the latter is also not applicable in intra-school governance, as lack of control, indifference of the leadership, passivity of the motivational system and lack of motivation also do not contribute to the motivation of the pedagogical staff.
  The most effective way to manage schools is to use a democratic style, which, with extreme approaches, helps to increase the motivation of the pedagogical staff.
Conclusion.
  There are many ways to motivate the pedagogical staff.
  The task of the school management is to identify, in the case of a small number of staff, individually, the group characteristics ել to apply the appropriate motivation measure, as the motivation of the students to learn due to the motivation of the teaching staff ությունը The effectiveness of the educational process.
