In criminology, forensic science traditionally has a special place for a "criminal".
  That theory is of interest to criminals who used to work for law enforcement agencies.
is closely related to the theory mentioned in the literature. Many theorists single out a number of features that characterize a criminal, so based on these considerations, we will present the approaches of individual theorists in that issue, then try to construct the main groups of features by adding or excluding them.
The goal.
  We will consider the problem of criminals of that group in the context of the general doctrine of the "criminal person" in order to fully and comprehensively reveal the characteristics of former law enforcement officers by their criminal, criminological and criminal-enforcement aspects.
Timeliness.
The implementation of this direction is conditioned by two main factors: urgency - the need for research, the question of the framework is debatable) in the doctrine of the "criminal" the structure of the person.
  Different authors distinguish between different characteristics of a person, and in the same group, sometimes they also have different characteristics and qualities. B) When studying the structure of a "criminal" it is necessary, in our opinion, to agree with the approach of a number of criminologists. The content of the whole formation, as the interconnection of the individual և social environment (the environment in which a person lives, is brought up, in which he develops himself), reflects the unity of all qualities and qualities of the latter.
  In that case, no individual quality determines առանձին can not determine the behavior, the content of the behavior.
In particular, in criminal criminology, the "criminal person" is considered as an object of research in a general sense, that is, as a subject of crime in general, և in a specific sense, according to the types of crimes or groups of criminals (eg military, juveniles, etc.).
  Of course, it is not a research task to comprehensively summarize all the basic issues in criminology, especially since they have been studied in depth in the theory since the Soviet era [1,10,11].
  In this doctrine we are interested in the definition of the concept of "criminal person" և its individual characteristic elements.
In other words, we will refer to the general theory only in part, which refers to the concept of "criminal person".
  This scientific notion should be the basis for revealing the notion of a criminal who is a former employee of the law enforcement bodies of the "criminal" theory.
One of the theoretical issues traditionally discussed in the theory of a "criminal person" is the combination of characteristics that characterize that person, which makes up the elements, features և characteristics of his criminal image.
  However, we will consider this issue not in the context of the general teaching of the criminal, but in the context of studies dedicated to the investigation of certain groups of criminals.
The analysis of the theoretical researches shows that there are no general researches dedicated to the criminal group of former law enforcement officers, but researches on the personality traits of criminal employees (servants) of separate law enforcement spheres [2,8,12].
We will try to combine the elements of the description of criminals (investigators, nominated state traffic inspectors, etc.) in the investigations by obtaining the most complete and complete element of the convict's criminal law.
  We are interested in all these elements, first to build a criminal profile of a former law enforcement officer, and then to build a research methodology for the investigation of former law enforcement officers sentenced to imprisonment in the group corresponding to those elements.
  In addition, the well-known criminological theory should be taken into account that the characteristics of a criminal individual, person and characteristics allow to determine the nature of the crime աստիճ the degree of public danger, identify the causes of a specific crime հանց crime in general, develop a scientifically based prediction և complex crime prevention measures.
"Crime" is one of the most complex concepts in criminology [3,13].
descriptive [4].
  These qualities and traits are one of the elements of the "criminal person" theory, the combination of the characteristic features of that person.
  This theoretical question is of great practical importance, as the analysis of a criminal implies the necessary "sufficient criminological information on the qualities and characteristics of a person who has committed a crime" in the doctrine of a "criminal". Sufficient preventive measures.
  Therefore, we consider it necessary to focus on the research of the structure of the criminal person or the elements of the criminal character, the issue that characterizes the person (the range of qualities).
  The urgency of conducting research in this direction The necessity is conditioned by two main factors: the question of the framework is debatable) the structural elements of the person in the teaching of the "criminal person".
  Different authors distinguish different groups of personality traits, and in the same group sometimes they also have different characteristics and qualities. B) When studying the structure of a "criminal" it is necessary, in our opinion, to agree with the approach of a number of criminologists that "any person should be considered a starting point." As the content of the complete formation, as the interconnection of the individual և social environment (the environment in which the person is brought up, in which he expresses himself), the unity of the characteristics of all the qualities that reflect the latter.
  In that case, no individual quality determines և can determine the content of the behavior, in particular, the criminal behavior.
Thus, to present the theoretical diversity of the range of traits of a criminal person, the approaches of individual theorists in that issue, and then to construct the main groups of those traits by the methods of supplementation or exclusion, including the scope of each of them, try the traits.
  According to one of the approaches, identification of the three main components of the criminal's criminological identity (study: description includes) socio-demographic characteristics (gender, age, social origin, status, family, official status, national, professional, characteristics, level of material characteristics, level of material security). Positions ևExpectations, character և temperament, level of moral գիտLegal consciousness, needs, interests, views, beliefs և habits that underlie the motives of delinquent behavior), c) Criminal description (nature, content and motives of the criminal activity, content or motives;data on its continuity and intensity) [4].
Professors A. R. Ratinov և G. Kh. Efremov summarizes the features of a criminal in three groups of components. a) social status (gender, age, marital status, educational level, etc.), b) social functions, which are expressed in terms of real manifestations in the main spheres of individual activity (professional-work, social-cultural, social-domestic), attitudes, moral and psychological positions, which express basic human beings (attitude towards law, work, family, cultural values, etc.) [5].
Prof. A. B. Sakharov singles out the following elements of the criminological description of criminal activity: a) socio-demographic features, b) criminal-legal characteristics, c) psychophysical features, d) psychological features [6].
Criminologists K. A. Prokhorov և E. A. Bryatsan, observing prof. A. B. These groups with specific characteristics of the characteristics of a criminal proposed by Sakharov, agree with the scope of his proposed classification, but consider it necessary to supplement them [7, 8].
  K. A. Prof. Prokhorovne A. B. To supplement the content of Sakharov's criminal personality traits with the characteristics of committing a crime in a penitentiary, motivated and drunk state.
  E. A. Bryts also suggested that mental health be included in the list of characteristics, such as not only being drunk but also committing a crime under the influence of drugs.
the following characteristics, K. A. Prokhorov և E. A. Bryce's approaches are distinguished by the fact that they offer to add the criminal characteristics of that person to the list of characteristics of a criminal.
 This approach can be considered acceptable, because it complements the characteristics of the criminal, which include not only the totality of the characteristic of the crime, the so-called retroactive features, but also the attitude towards the sentence, especially the punishment, the process of its execution.
  Among the characteristics of a criminal, penitentiary features include: A. Fesunov [9] և a number of other theorists.
  V. A. Fesunov does not make a special subject of discussion the question of the scope of groups of former law enforcement officers as criminals in each group, but at the same time presents the socio-demographic indicators, criminal-legal, penitentiary features, special psychological peculiarities of these criminals.
The suggestion to consider drunkenness as a characteristic of a criminal can be said to have an irrational meaning, but it should be borne in mind that this feature can not be included in all crimes committed in all places. ) subjects of crime, types of crimes, demographic peculiarities.
Thus, let us try to summarize by enumeration the groups of features proposed in the structure of a criminal person (including law enforcement officers) proposed by various scholars: socio-demographic (features of this group of criminal person A. R. Ratinov և G. Kh. Sakharov redefines this characteristic as a group of "psychophysical and psychological features" [6], criminal, social functions, committing a crime in a state of penitentiary, motive, drunkenness or drug use.
As a last feature, we have already excluded from the list of criminal descriptions of former law enforcement officers in the Republic of Armenia.
  Among the listed features a special place is occupied by social functions առ motives of crime - components of the structure.
 "Social functions" as a structural element of the criminal suggest A. R. Ratinov և G. Kh. Efremov: professional, work, socio-cultural, social-domestic qualities [5].
By including it in the criminal group, as a result of the study, it becomes obvious that this group, as a structural element of a criminal, մի some of the characteristics of the socio-demographic example included by other scientists: profession, work, education, etc.
  So, we think that there is no need to separate these features in the special group.
  On the other hand, this study refers to the criminal-structural elements of a former law enforcement officer, which are united by one social function. All of them had a unifying feature in the past or at the time of the crime, to work in one of the law enforcement agencies.
  Thus, on a professional basis, there is no fundamental difference between these persons, as may be the case, for example, with a group of criminals who have committed premeditated murder.
As for the criminal motives, which K. offers as a structural part of the character of a criminal. A. Prokhorov [7], in our opinion, if the motives of a criminal crime are already singled out among the criminal-structural characteristics, the motives of the legal crime are already included in this group, and in some cases the criminal law considers them a feature of either a crime or a crime.
Therefore, there is no need to separate or consider that one feature as a separate element of the criminal person's structure.
Thus, in summing up, we can consider elements of the description or structure of convicts and former criminal law enforcement officers: a) socio-demographic features, b) moral-psychological features, c) criminal-legal features, d) penitentiary features.
Conclusion.
  The set of characteristics of a former law enforcement officer consists of: a) socio-demographic characteristics, b) moral-psychological characteristics, c) criminal-legal characteristics, d) penitentiary characteristics.
In building this group, we used the provisions proposed by the individual scholars on the elements of the structure of the criminal person, which were developed on the basis of certain, almost coincident criteria of classification.
  By localizing these classifications to demographic characteristics, along with the criminal characteristics of a former law enforcement officer, it was possible to construct an average description of the structure of this group of criminals.
  However, it should be borne in mind that in the criminological literature there are other conceptual criteria for the classification of criminal personal structural elements, which differ significantly from the approaches of the theorists mentioned above.
слова.
