Preface.
  Probiotics-rich dairy products are successfully used as a synthesis of various metabolic vitamins in gastrointestinal diseases, enhance immunity, promote the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases, as well as reduce the negative effects of antibiotics on the body, etc. [1]
Lactobacilli and bifidobacteria are the main probiotics in dairy products [2-3].
  Dairy products also use plant-derived oligosaccharides և fibrins, which promote the growth of these bacteria, as well as fruit supplements containing herbs [4-5], which, in part, regulate the body's resistance to metabolic supplements.
  Enrichment of medicinal dairy products with additives, including fruit extracts, allows to increase the biological value of the product.
  At the same time, the taste of the filler is added to the food.
Although the usefulness of "probiotics" and "fillers" in the prevention of gastrointestinal diseases is well known.
The aim of the above-mentioned work was to study the effect of a number of lactic acid bacteria կենտրոնում in the extracts of various fruits and berries extracted in Armenia on the development of pathogens in vitro.
Materials և Research methods.
  Lactobacillus acidophilus '' Narine '' 317/402, L. helveticus 6, L. jugurti Л11п, L. bulgaricus var. mazuni K2, L. casei 36 probiotic bacteria, which are certified and patented at the Bacterial Inoculation Center of the National Academy of Sciences [7].
Strains of pathogenic, conditionally pathogenic bacteria E. were taken from the Bacteria Deposit Center of the National Academy of Sciences [7], and Staphilacoccus aureus-209 strains were taken from A.B. From the collection of the Aleksanyan Institute of Epidemiology, Virology and Medical Research.
The effect of pH on the development of lactic acid bacteria was determined by changing the pH of milk from pH = 3.9 to pH = 8.59.0.
  The effect of pH on the development of pathogenic bacteria was determined in meatpeptone agar at pH 3.5 to 8.5-9.0.
The antibiotic effect of lactic acid bacteria on pathogenic bacteria has been evaluated by diffusion on the meat-peptone agar medium [8-9].
Extracts of fruits: apple, apricot, quince, plum, peach, pomegranate, fig, lemon-orange, and berries of there, currant, blackberry, strawberry are obtained from 2 ml of a mixture of fresh extracts of different varieties found in Armenia.
  The effect of fruit և berry extracts on bacterial ryegrass was studied by adding an extract of 0.1 ml / ml to the test medium.
 The pH of the extracts was previously brought to 6.8 with 1.0 M HCl.
արկումDiscussion of research results.
  Certain conditions are required for bacterial growth.
  A neutral or weak basal environment is normal for the growth of many cells, although there are pathogenic bacteria that grow and multiply in an extremely acidic basal environment.
Our research revealed that pathogenic bacteria: P. aeruginosa, S. marcescens, E. coli, P. vulgaricus, S. paratyphi, S. dysenteriae և B. subtilis bacteria at pH 4.0-5.0 under weak conditions, և grows normally և multiplies at pH 6.0-7.5 (Table 1).
  Subsequent experiments revealed that the studied fruit extracts had a different bactericidal effect on the pathogenic bacteria we were discussing (Table 2).
Thus, studies show that ունի apricot has a bactericidal effect against 209 strains of B. subtilis,  apple against intestinal pathogen E. coli,  pomegranate against B. mesentericus, B. subtilis, որը plum, probably Due to the variety of acids it contains, it suppresses all the pathogens we have studied (Table 2).
Հատ Forest berries - cranberries, strawberries, currants, etc. - suppress the development of staphylococci.
Fruits and berries contain pectins.
 They are known to remove heavy metals, radionuclides and many harmful substances from the body.
  In addition, the acids contained in fruits and berries have a different effect on the development of pathogenic and conditionally pathogenic bacteria (Table 2).
  Low pH itself kills many microorganisms, but on the other hand increases the activity of nalizosomal enzymes.
The latter destroy the bacterial membrane and lead to cell death.
 Acetic acid is known to have the strongest effect on pathogenic staphylococci, and gynic acid on E. coli.
  That is, appropriate symbiotic therapy can be offered for specific infections.
In particular, it was found that, for example, apricot has a bactericidal effect on B. subtilis, apple on intestinal pathogen E. coli, pomegranate on B. mesentericus և B. subtilis, plum suppresses all studied Pathogenic bacteria, berries such as cranberries, strawberries, currants, etc., suppress the development of staphylococci.
Based on the above experiments in benzoic acid.
 Thus, the effects of lactic acid bacteria տարբեր extracts of various fruits and berries of Armenia on the development of a number of pathogenic bacteria will be studied in vitro.
  It turned out that the extracts of the studied fruits have different bactericidal effects on the pathogenic bacteria.
 On the other hand, the acids contained in the berries of fruits have different effects on the development of pathogenic and conditionally pathogenic bacteria.
Based on the above studies, it can be concluded that the concomitant use of probiotic lactic acid bacteria և fruit berry extracts in tablets may contribute to the effectiveness of the tablets, but effective combination requires a well-grounded scientific approach to tablet bacteria և extracts.
