Preface.
Physics, one of the general subjects taught in schools, has a special place in the general educational system, its content, in the conditions of modern scientific and technical progress, must be constantly updated and enriched.
  The physics teacher is required to make extensive use of additional sources of information, the latest technologies (multimedia) to stimulate students' cognitive interests and creative activities, as well as homemade devices and demonstration experiments, of course, combining both revised and modernized versions of traditional teaching methods. .
  They will facilitate the mastery of physical concepts, laws, technical applications, will contribute to the formation of sustainable interests, which is the goal of this work.
Let us try to briefly present a material that allows the teacher to introduce students to the new magnetic hydrodynamic method of determining the absolute values ​​of the magnetic field vector without breaking the logical process of learning.
The determination of the vector magnitude of induction characterizing a magnetic field is of great practical importance.
  The operation of most measuring devices for this purpose is based on electromagnetic induction.
  The magnitude of the induction vector is determined experimentally using magnetic field effects on a small current-carrying circuit.
  The fact that the magnetic field effect is observed not only on solid but also on liquid-plasma conductors [1-3] led us to the conclusion that the magnitude of the induction vector could be measured in a different way using the magnetic field of the liquid medium (in our experiment mercury). 5], on the basis of which in this work we propose the magnetohydrodynamic method of measuring the vector magnitude of magnetic induction, giving the principle of operation of the simplest device used for this purpose and the scheme of the structure.
  The basis of the work of a homemade device is the special case of magnetohydrodynamics, when we are dealing with equilibrium.
 The latter is known to have quite wide applications.
It should be noted that the proposed devices have practical significance, especially for measuring the magnitude of induction of strong magnetic fields, which is conditioned by the urgency of the work.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of a self-made device Glass tubes The device we used is shown in Figure 1.
  It consists of 10x20x40 mm organic glass (1), in which the open sockets are lined with 3'4 mm inner diameter և 50'60mm (2), which communicate with each other.
 Copper electrodes with a diameter of 1'1.5 mm (3) are coated in organic glass-opened mounds.
  The connecting vessel is half filled with the liquid transmitter, mercury (4), ազատ its free ends are closed with a rubber tube (6).
  The device is mounted on a ruler (5) with millimeter sections.
  To determine the magnitude of the magnetic induction vector with this device, we place it vertically between the poles of a fixed magnet (electromagnet) so that the field strength lines are perpendicular to the electrodes.
  In the absence of electricity, the mercury surfaces in both knees of the conductor will be at the same level.
  When the electrodes are connected to a direct current source by means of clamps, an electric current (10'15 A) will be transmitted through a liquid conductor.
Theoretical analysis.
  As it is known, the current-carrying transmitter located in the magnetic field is affected by a force, the direction of which is determined by the rule of the left hand.
  Since the directions of the magnetic field's current are perpendicular to each other, the magnitude (Cloud strength) will be determined by this relation: the distance between the electrodes is where the magnetic field induction values ​​of the current are.
  In our experiment, the distance is equal to the inside line of the barometric tube.
  and during a constant current between the electrodes, an equilibrium state is established in the system, when the cloud pressure is balanced by the difference between the hydrostatic pressures in the communicating vessels, resulting in the following expression for the magnetic induction vector modulus.
n is the density of mercury, is the product of mercury columns (2) - is a constant value under experimental conditions.
 If we mean that expression, then Equation (2) will finally look like this: With this formula we can experimentally determine the magnitude of the magnetic induction vector, since և նրա on the left side is measurable and k is a known number for the data device. .
Given the magnitude of the field vector, we can also determine the magnitude of the clouds with respect to (1).
In the conclusion of magnetic induction.
  The use of our own և tested homemade device in the physics teaching process allows the teacher to: 1. To achieve a deeper mastery of the topic of "Magnetism", to use it as an in-depth teaching of that topic ² F = IBddIB, 90, 1sind, 4dghBIhgd41k.
hBkIhI means to increase efficiency.
2. In case of applying this methodological elaboration of the material in the school physics course, it is possible to increase the students' interest in the subject "Physics", and consequently to increase the teaching efficiency.
3. The non-complex structure of the device presented in the work allows to express hope that the preparation, testing և use of such devices is possible in the conditions of a school physics laboratory.
The work was done thanks to the financial support provided by the University within the framework of № ShSU SCI-02-2020 scientific topic.
parameters.
