The issue of relations between the generations remains a topic of discussion in various fields, which, however, does not accept final answers.
  Forming its theoretical embryos on the concept of environmental, health, as well as economic problems, undertaking the imperative of clarifying many ethical issues and dilemmas related to human identity and personality, in the already socio-philosophical context.
  A wide range of normative issues are discussed in the latter, such as the issues of assuming responsibility for future generations, the issues of future generations having rights, etc.
  The questions of the above-mentioned generations are discussed comprehensively in the work "The Morality of Justice in Rolls, in particular, the Future, Relatively Represented Industry", where the thinker tries to present the problems of taking responsibility for future generations in the discussion.
The role of the American thinker John Rawls in the concept of the idea of ​​intergenerational justice is undeniable in the well-known principles of etymology.
 "Rolls was the first to introduce the idea of ​​intergenerational justice in a systematic discussion."
  The thinker's ideas about intergenerational justice, as already mentioned in "Theory of Justice", have largely found their way into the conceptual framework of work, which is based on justice as impartiality.
"Discussing justice as impartiality would be incomplete without discussing this important issue (justice between the generations)," the thinker writes.
    Rolls's idea of ​​"justice as impartiality" is based on the concept of impartiality in the primordial position of equality, which develops into a formulation of the principles of justice.
  According to him, their use in public institutions should be a fair deal. [6]
  A question arises. What kind of society would they choose in the initial position of rational equality? They started to develop a system of cooperation.
  To explain all this in more detail, Rawls turns to the idea of ​​a public alliance.
"The idea of ​​justice as impartiality is an example of what I call a social contract."
  According to the thinker, the social contract is an adequate model for the manifestation of the principles of justice, as the impartiality of the agreement is ensured by the fact that the participants agree on the principles to which they must follow.
  The idea of ​​the "justice as impartiality" theory is that justice is presented here as an object of agreement.
 In the framework of social cooperation, people in the initial position of equality, lead to fair results, people of independence, choose the principles that serve the creation and development of the structure of society.
But for Rawls, the social contract is of a different nature.
"My aim is to present a concept of justice that generalizes to a high level of abstraction the well-known concepts of the social contract that exist with Locke, Rousseau, and Kant."
The purpose of the agreement is to determine the principles of justice from a state of equality.
  Rolls's theory somehow identifies the natural state we know և the initial position, but Rolls's initial position does not appear to be a period of historical existence. it is purely hypothetical, leading to the formation of the concept of justice.
As for the state of nature, Rawls thinks that the state of equality is not the same for all, because some people have more natural talents, initial resources, more power or sales dominance.
  Such people, of course, are able to have greater privileges after making forced concessions.
  Such determinants of nature affect everyone, but there are people who are better able to find a way out of a difficult situation, so the latter will not agree to apply for a social contract until nature fixes their natural advantages.
  Such a fact, of course, is unfair, according to Rolls.
  And since such (initial) advantages are undesirable, they should not in any way give a person privilege or deprive him of the principles of justice.
 Therefore, something new was needed to prevent people from taking advantage of their own will.
  Rolls gives the key to this by revealing his famous "veil of ignorance" idea.
On this occasion, Rawls presents a mental experiment according to which individuals who formulate the principles of justice did not have comprehensive information about themselves.
  The veil of the above-mentioned information excludes the awareness of people about their position, profession, talent, health, physical strength, class affiliation, merits and abilities, individual concept of good.
All this, in turn, will exclude, according to Rolls, any special advocacy or internal agreement to the detriment of the minority.
  Rolls also refers to political parties, writing: "Political parties do not know the private circumstances of their society, that is, they do not know the economic and political situation of the society, the level of development of culture and civilization.
 The only thing that the parties see is that their society is subject to justice, everything that it implies.
 "There is no doubt that they know what society, political and economic relations are."
However, those who sign a contract in the initial position have two main characteristics: a sense of justice; the idea of ​​a "veil of ignorance" of the good system provides the conditions for impartiality in order to reach a consensus.
ability.
  Thus, it should be noted that the mask of ignorance underlies the four stages of the process of emergence of just institutions.
During each of these stages, the veil of ignorance gradually disappears, giving the participants of the supposed contract a fuller knowledge of the society, about themselves, and in the last, fourth stage, the veil disappears completely.
In the second chapter of The Theory of Justice, Rolls presents the two principles of justice, which, according to the subjugation, will be chosen naturally; they are principles that apply to institutions.
 The first principle states that every individual should have an equal right to a fundamental right to maximum inclusion compatible with equality.
  According to the second principle, social and economic inequalities must be organized in such a way that they are "in the greatest favor of the least successful," attached to positions open to all and equal to those in office. [5]
If we try to explain more clearly, then we can say that the second principle requires that on the one hand social ևeconomic inequalities be regulated in such a way that the least successful can expect maximum benefits but at the same time positions և public positions are open to the principle of equal opportunities.
From socio-economic inequalities, that is, to be honestly protected. As it is already clear, the first refers to the principle of equality of opportunity in fundamental rights.
  These two principles make up J. The main content of Rolls's concept of justice.
Freedom of Moderate Inequality, Second: Developing a mainstream theory of justice, Rolls did not ignore the issue of justice between different generations.
  When the author focuses on the issue of intergenerational justice, he unites the interests of future generations, not returning them to their original position, but changing his assumptions about the interests and identities of the people in the social contract.
 The above-mentioned people are now fathers of families who have to take care of their heirs as well as represent their own family interests in the process of social contracting.
interests In this context, the American thinker puts forward a fair savings principle.
  The author discusses the principle of the latter savings in the framework of the analysis of the idea of ​​social minimum.
  "The principle of fair savings requires that we leave sufficient capital resources for future generations by starting to make transfers to today's poor (this is what the principle of difference demands).
  Therefore, in this way, a certain balance can be gradually achieved. "[1]
    The thinker, in essence, represents a two-stage perception of justice between the generations; the first is the stage of accumulation, where the provision of the material basis necessary for the establishment and maintenance of just institutions is evenly and fairly distributed among different generations; no savings are required.
The stable stage, the second stage, the two principles.
  According to Ays Rolls, this problem arises because the question remains whether the social system in general, the competitive economy can meet the answer to the question of justice to some extent depends on the level at which the social minimum is set.
  Thus, the author tries to find the social minimum, the level convenient for the society.
 Common sense may be satisfied with the fact that the real minimum level depends on the wealth of the world.
  That is, the higher the level of the country's average wealth, the higher the social minimum.
Another option is to set the social minimum according to customary expectations.
  Rolls, however, notes that none of this is satisfactory.
 "The first is not accurate enough because it does not say how the minimum depends on the average wealth, nor does it take into account other important aspects, such as [5].
  The second option, according to the thinker, does not offer any criteria for determining when normal expectations are reasonable.
 Rolls goes on to say, "When the minimum social difference should be set at the point where, taking into account wages, it maximizes the expectations of the lowest success group."
  According to Rolls, the principle of equitable austerity should include the preservation of cultural and civilizational achievements by each generation, the inviolability of existing institutions, the accumulation of real capital over time, such as investments in mechanization or education.
Returning to the ideas of Rolls-Royce ignorance and the social contract, it can be noted that in the theory of the thinker, the people in the contract can not know whether the previous generation has saved or not.
  Rolls attributes this to the so-called motivational assumption that people in a social contract (Rolls calls them contractors) treat their heirs somewhat well, take care of them, and therefore will no doubt agree to savings. to do for their successors, regardless of whether their predecessors made any savings or not. [3]
are.
"Rolls Advantage The author seems to be creating a contradiction here, thus departing from his original assumption that people in a social contract give interests and interests to individuals, especially those who care about their heirs," Thompson wrote.
  It is already clear that the principle of fair savings leads to problems.
  The first is the so-called derivation problem ․ The question here is how the similar construction of the original position described by the author, which is based on universality և mutual interest, creates a two-stage principle of savings.
  In connection with this difficulty, the modern American thinker Roger Paden, trying to defend Rolls and correct the latter's point of view, notes that the justification of the qualification phase is in contradiction with the stable phase, the justification based on justice.
  Paden urges to abandon the implementation of the principle of austerity, which is a way to maximize expectations.
  Instead, both phases of the principle of equitable austerity should be based on a sense of justice (4).
justice), not the principle of self-understanding in the position of the self-employed. According to the next problem of incompatibility, the principle of difference of savings appears.
  While the principle of difference states that the less successful will be able to expect the maximum benefits, the principle of savings is opposed to the principle of diversity, failing to maximize the position of the less successful group in the current generation of conflict.
 Rolls "writes" on this occasion "The complete assertion of the principle of difference includes the principle of savings as an obstacle."
  It turns out that without the application of the principle of savings, the situation of a less successful group of society would be better, therefore, savings contradicts the main rationale for the principle of difference.
 "While the first principle of justice, the principle of just opportunity, precedes the principle of difference between generations, the principle of thrift limits its scope among them," says Rawls.
If the principle of difference has no intergenerational component, we can exploit those who benefit the least from future generations for the same degree of benefit as those who benefit the least today.
  It is not surprising that Rolls later redefines the second principle ․ "Social and economic inequalities should be regulated so that the less successful can expect the maximum benefits in line with the principle of equitable austerity."
Thus, it is already clear that under the guise of awareness in the initial position, the people, by the latter, form the principle of fair savings.
  However, the burden of capital accumulation, of "raising the level of civilization of culture, which, in fact, must be divided among generations", does not imply an unequivocal answer.
  Rawls continues to base his theory on the notion of experimentation, stating that ignorant people, such as parties, do not know that they are the descendants of the hunter or that the society in which they live is civilized.
  This only happens in the initial position of equality, where, according to Rawls, every generation is represented.
  In order to achieve the desired result, one simply has to accept that the family line is in the initial position, due to which they take care of the coming generations.
  It may be noted that this principle proposed by Rolls is a rule which, for each level of advancement, prescribes the accumulation parties presenting an appropriate rate.
  So, if people are poor and it is difficult to save, then a relatively low level of accumulation should be required.
  However, in a richer society, one can reasonably expect greater savings, as the burden on the latter is less.
To what extent the above-mentioned vision is applied nowadays is the other side of the question.
  Once the just institutions are finally established,, all the basic freedoms are effectively realized, the required accumulation rate will become zero, as at this stage the society fulfills its duty of justice by supporting the just institutions while preserving their material basis.
  In other words, the sole purpose of the principle of equitable austerity is to establish and maintain just institutions;
According to Rolls, by defining the principle of fair austerity, we will have a perfect democratic solution that meets the demands of a generation.
  "Moreover, it immediately becomes apparent that every generation, except the first, comes out victorious if the reasonable norm of savings is maintained." [5]
  It is noteworthy that Rolsinchartes is not concerned about the fact that the first generation in this chain of generational justice suffers a little compared to other generations.
Each Rolls, in fact, tries to bring the society to a point where there will be no other need for savings through the principle of fair savings.
  The significance of the last stage of the society, however, should not be misinterpreted.
While all generations are fulfilling their mission to achieve a state of justice where no savings are required, this stage should not be seen as a separate phase that gives meaning and purpose to the whole process.
"On the contrary," says Rolls, "every generation has its own goals."
  That is, none of them's institutions are subject to the other ․ No generation has greater aspirations than the other.
  "People's lives are imagined as a scheme of cooperation spread in historical times.
  It should be governed by the same concept of justice that և regulates cooperation between contemporaries. ”[5]
  Do not use ևs ատ According to Rolls, justice does not require that future generations be directly enriched by the savings of earlier generations.
  "Savings are required as a condition for achieving the full realization of equal freedoms," writes the thinker.
Thus, referring to intergenerational relations, Rawls insists that we must take responsibility for future generations.
  Therefore, it is proposed to define a social minimum, which should be guided by the principle of fair savings, ensuring the well-being of future generations.
  Moreover, this principle consists of two important stages, in the first of which the generations make equal savings for the creation and maintenance of just institutions, and in the second there is no need for savings!
  It should be noted that, regardless of everything, the principle of fair savings contradicts the principle of discrimination.
