We have seen migration as a basis for inclusive social inclusion, which brings with it new opportunities for development.
  In the article, we examined the mobility of Shirak and the well-being of migrants.
  As a positive motivation, individual socio-economic development, political maturity, technological development, achievement.
  In the article presented to the social attention, we have singled out a number of issues: to achieve the goal completely, to conduct comprehensive analyzes within the topic, to show the reliability of the data. The positive և negative aspects of educational, socio-demographic, economic և political development,  develop և submit proposals to minimize the negative effects of youth migration from Shirak region և rural areas.
ևTechnological back.
We live in an era of globalization, constant change.
  That is, the search for better professional, economic opportunities, better welfare among the youth.
  These contextual analyzes և Surveys conducted in Shirak marz in particular show that youth influx is related to global economic, social, political Surveys.
  Young people living in rural areas mainly want to change their place of residence.
  38% of young people living in villages and 10% of young people living in Gyumri plan to move to another place.
 The data is the result of our personal research (the surveys will be conducted within the framework of the candidate work).
  The young people of both internal and external migration mentioned the following reasons: striving for a more prosperous life of transformation, having better job opportunities, having better education, meeting the minimum needs of the family, and the geopolitical situation.
35% of young people prefer Russia, 24% - the United States, 13% - France, 10% - England, and 10% - Germany.
  By the way, most of the young men prefer Russia, and women - Europe և USA.
  If we combine the reasons for leaving the country, it seems that young people prefer the United States to have a more prosperous life, and Russia to find a job.
  Half of those preparing to leave Armenia have not yet taken steps, and every third have already established contact with their relatives living abroad.
14% of young people raise money to organize their emigration, and 9% participate in various youth programs.
As we know, youth is considered to be the driving force of the society, at the same time the main link that carries the social changes.
  [3] Both urban and rural youth have many problems due to territorial, social, economic, educational factors and lack of opportunities.
  The researches carried out և the references of the experts show that the young people born and raised in the orphanage differ from the young people living and living in the city with their needs, programs, problems and the concept they have about all that.
The first expressive gap is the problem of employment.
The youth of the region point to the high level of unemployment in the communities as one of the key problems of the youth.
  According to a survey conducted in the rural communities of Shirak, the majority of young people consider themselves unemployed, pointing out the fact that they do not have a permanent job.
  Based on this, rural young people with permanent jobs and young people with temporary jobs are distinguished.
Examining these provisions, it should be noted that, according to the RA legislation, the residents living in rural areas are not considered unemployed on the grounds of having their own land or the supposed benefit from that land [3].
  Most of the young people living in the villages are involved in agricultural work, which is considered their main occupation.
This is evidenced by the focus group interviews conducted by the community leaders with their employees. They most vividly refer to the fact that regardless of the level of education, the main occupation of most of the rural youth is agriculture.
  This is where the main problem of the country of origin, in this case the Republic of Armenia (particularly the rural communities of Shirak region) arises - human capital, which is an irreplaceable resource.
90% mentioned the lack of jobs due to youth unemployment in rural areas, and the remaining 10% added low wages.
  The main workplaces in rural areas are municipalities, schools, medical centers, companies, shops, banks, police departments.
  According to our sociological surveys, the data are mainly slightly different in the communities near which there are factories and enterprises, which provide a large number of jobs for young people.
Kindergartens in private communities explain how an overwhelming segment of the youth considers out-of-work work to be one of the most pressing issues in rural communities, which is due to the high level of motivation, level of employment and interest in 2019-2020.
  According to our recent research, those who go abroad for work do not have the appropriate education to work in the public or private sector, and in the community they are mainly engaged in construction, agriculture, and similar high-paying jobs in other countries (mainly Russia and the USA).
According to the latest research, 30% of young people who go to work seasonally for work և continue to return to the village.
  However, the situation does not alleviate the situation, as the number of young people leaving for work, who prefer to live with their families in Russia and the United States, is growing every year.
The decrease of the population in the villages of Shirak region is conditioned by the high rates of both external and internal migration.
  From this perspective, internal migration is presented as a process of relocation of rural communities from their villages to urban areas in order to establish permanent residence.
The rate of internal migration is very high, especially among young people, who, not having adequate resources, opportunities to organize, leave for nearby cities, settle in the city, find a job, start a family, and in some cases move to the city with their families.
Work in the presence of leisure universities In addition to all this, the fact that young people receive education contributes to the migration from the village to the city.
  [7] According to a comprehensive survey, even in the provinces (universities and vocational schools operate only in Gyumri), 50-60% of young people prefer to be educated in the capital.
  As a reason for getting higher education in the capital, most of the respondents mentioned the lack of professional choice, the quality of education, as well as the cooperation between the university and the employer, which is better organized in the capital according to them (according to the surveyed residents).
Thus, due to the circumstances, the young participants of the survey were moved to the capital, and after graduation were taken to the rest of the family.
 In such cases, very few return to the village (some because of work at school, preschool, or some because of problems at the self-employment workplace).
Today, the young people of Shirak region are going to be hired to work abroad, due to the fact that they do not have the opportunity to express themselves in the local self-government bodies.
  From this point of view, migration is considered to be an opportunity to adapt, because young people have the opportunity to express themselves freely and to exercise their rights.
  And young people who have problems at work, when they return, find it easier to self-organize in the homeland, easily start their own small business or find a suitable job.
We viewed migration not only as a negative phenomenon. On the other hand, it can provide development, for example, by investing the resources of the Diaspora in Armenia or by implementing many other programs.
  For countries with an outflow of population, the benefit is that when they return, these people bring their savings, which they can invest in their business.
  Immigrants contribute to the normal functioning of some labor-intensive industries that are in low demand by the population.
Now in some countries the share of foreign workers working in this field is so large (about 32% that they simply can not refuse their services, Normal, smooth operation requires more and more immigrants.
Another benefit for migrant host countries is that they save money at the expense of their own qualified staff in their own country.
  In addition, as a rule, such employees already have work experience և established in the best place in the same workplace.
Countries, exporters of labor resources, benefit from the reduction of unemployment in this country.
  Numerous studies in the field show that the outflow of part of the labor force has a positive effect on the labor market, եկ migrant middle-income immigrants gain new knowledge և experience in various fields that they can apply in their country.
  They master new technologies, join the new standards of production organization.
  Returning to the homeland, the level increases abroad.
they can socio-economic development in general.
Improve the production process ևMigrants' remittances play an important role.
  They send a part of the earned money to their family, relatives, which is spent by the relatives who, of course, are already in the territory of their country.
  Such transfers are of great importance for the economies of poor countries, they contribute to the improvement of the financial situation.
According to the results of the research, young people see the solution of their own problems mainly in the support of state or international organizations.
Some young people (three percent of the respondents) see the solution to the problem mostly only with the support of state or international organizations.
  Five of them think that the solution of the problem is connected with the activities of the young people who took the initiative.
Only forty (40) percent of the young people who took part in the survey see the solution of the problems within the framework of their own ideas, abilities and skills.
  Even the rural youth of globalization have a problem with receiving and disseminating information.
  Both state infrastructures and sources of information յուղ do not operate.
  Here it is necessary to point out the fact that there is no print media in the rural communities.
  Due to the tendencies of spreading the Internet only, the Internet is more accessible for the youth of the rural communities, but especially the majority of the rural youth do not have basic knowledge about information about living in the countryside.
The culture of using the Internet is still ingrained in most young people.
 According to our results, for many young people, the Internet is not a way to get information, but to communicate with friends and relatives.
  Lack of information among the villagers leads to the spread of rural youth, both from the social, political and other processes of everyday life, which could be a measure for raising the standard of living.
In the research conducted within the framework of the article, the stereotypes of the community youth were more interesting, which were mainly related to the role distribution of girls and boys, where the rural community itself created individual elements, the non-fulfillment of which is considered unacceptable.
The passivity of the community youth is very much connected with the lack of self-confidence and communication.
  Here it is necessary to note the family upbringing, which plays a big role in the lack of self-confidence of the youth.
Self-confidence comes from manifestations of self-expression, but the young man, who is under the control of the perpetrators,'s financially dependent on the dependents, automatically loses his independence, the opportunity to express himself, which leads to distrust of the owners.
Due to this, many young people (especially the sexes) apply for both external and internal migration in order to become independent.
  This independence is first of all expressed through the profession մասն work, and the person provided with work otherwise becomes the main resident of the given country.
Only the necessary obstacle.
Even today, there are many differences when compared to rural communities.
  18% of the young people surveyed consider the geographical location to be a factor of development և status change and its impact from the point of view of remote, mountainous villages, which are in an extremely bad socio-economic situation.
  The main part of such villages is located in the foothills, where there is a similar cut.
  The young people who took part in the survey mentioned that there is not even a food store in the villages, as the difficult social situation of the villagers does not stimulate entrepreneurship.
In the current situation of the Republic of Armenia, in the regulation of rural youth migration, in addition to the "planned events" and actions carried out by the state, we think it is necessary first of all to show political will.
  This is especially necessary to eliminate the subjective reasons for the ongoing emigration of the population from Armenia.
  The corruption system in the country, the monopoly situation in different sectors of the economy, the authoritarian tendencies of the political authorities to govern; The level of poverty in Shirak region is quite high.
  Unemployment rate The difficult economic situation contributes to the rise of poverty.
  Poverty rate especially in high rural communities due to lack of jobs, lack of infrastructure, poor socio-economic conditions.
  And all this leaves its direct impact on the youth, in building their future in another city or in another country.
In the interest of the RA state - national security.
As a result of the research done on the following. In the coming years, the migration tendencies of the population will continue until the socio-economic-political factors and conditions that shape migration flows are eliminated.
  In particular, the migration activity of the rural-rural area will increase in the structure of migration flows in the Shirak region.
  This means that in the case of developing socio-economic development programs (investments, new jobs and infrastructure, tax regulation concepts) aimed at reducing emigration, it is necessary to take into account the regional peculiarities of the Republic of Armenia.
Thus, from the researches and analyzes, we conclude that migration is predetermined, becoming the main impetus for the political development of the world, the need for sustainable socio-economic development of rural areas, the social demographic reproduction of rural communities, the modern socio-educational environment of rural population. with problems.
The peculiarities presented by us lead to the external flow of the active part of the youth of the village, the insufficient efficiency of the cooperation between the authorities, the disproportion of the motivation of the youth to the formation of living conditions.
Business բովանդակ Based on the content of our research և the relevance of the topic, we make the following suggestions:  Promote the participation of community youth in political, economic and cultural life; ,  to promote non-formal education,։ to involve the youth in all spheres of society.
