That the teaching of the word "Maccabees" is given in the 8th grade of the general education school is a topic of seven lessons, however, there is no reference to macabre ambiguity in school textbooks.
  In that sense, to refer to the theoretical and practical ambiguity in the hour of repetition and strengthening of interest.
Within the boundaries, the mastery of the subject is given to the fact that the adjectives in the applied sense indicate the adjectives of the verbs։.
  The transmission of complete knowledge about these words, in particular the imagery of students learning macabre wisdom in the process of enriching their thinking.
  According to our proposed approach, the theoretical-especially practical-oriented works on macabre-meaningful words can significantly contribute to the conscious mastery of grammatical material.
The semantic types of macabre words.
  They are classified according to the expression of the relationship [1].
We remind the students of various grammatical words that, according to S. According to Abrahamyan, "The most common use of Maccabi is to give an attribute of an action, then to put it on the verb" [2].
According to L. According to Khachatryan, "Macbay, with some reservations, is a part of the inflected word, which has a unique word structure, at the syntactic level it performs the function of a footnote, expressing a feature of an action or situation, a feature of a feature" [3].
Ed. Aghayan calls macabas the words that indicate the adjectives of verbs.
  The practical feature of these words, according to him, is to act as a determinant or as a predicate [1].
Referring to the teaching of multi-meaning horse macabres, we reject the fact that multi-meaning macabres in all their meanings show the inner (qualitative) feature of performing an action: divinely - 1. divinely, 2. pkhb. Extraordinary, exceptionally concise - 1. with mallet, 2. pkhb. weak, dimly theatrically - 1. typical of the theater, 2. pkhb. fake, falsely - 1. to the boy in a special way, 2. pkhb. inexperiencedly - 1. like a rock, 2. pkhb. invincibly, invincibly pagan - 1. in the manner characteristic of the pagan, 2. barbaric.
The external-vocal feature of the action is shown by the hiccup (1. slowly, heavily, 2. carefully, 3. gently).
Multiple time macabres. The word permanence of time (1. eternally, 2. pkhb. Long, shows eternally).
Based on the effectiveness of teaching, let's divide the class into two cooperative groups.
  Based on the basic knowledge of the learners about the types of macabre, one of the groups is given the following judgment on macabre after L. Khachatryan. "Maccabees, with some reservations, is a part of the inflected word that has a unique word structure, at the syntactic level it performs the function of a case, expressing an attribute of an action or situation, a feature of a feature" [1].
  To the second group, Ed. Aghayan's judgment, according to which the words that show the adjectives of the verbs are considered macabre.
  The two groups of students discuss the judgments of the bilingualists separately.
  Then the groups mix and pass the judgments to each other.
  Then, from the new groups, the word group of multi-meaning horse macaques starts, the other - the word group of multi-meaning general macaques.
  Discussion is going on in both groups, which contributes to the identification of the mentioned word groups.
  From the semantic groups of the Maccabees, horses, like the general species, show ambiguity.
When learning general macabres, learners should be made aware that general macabres express different meanings in the same way or express different meanings in different uses, which is an expression of the interspecific ambiguity of macabres [4].
The size of a horse. malicious - 1. extremely evil in a cruel way (internal - qualitative feature), 2. severe (the meaning of size with the sharpening of the feature).
You's time macabre. premature - 1. untimely, premature, 2. late, late time.
The place of time with - 1. to the back (partiality of the present or the other side of the object, as if to the place), 2. later (determined time).
Learners have already acquired knowledge within the framework of adjective polysemous words. about exchange rates.
In this case, it is expedient to teach long-term words of macabre origin in the adjective // ​​macabre equivalents, as well as the long-term words na-macbay // connection.
Ած .// մկբ. late - 1. late, late (m.), 2. late time (m.), 3. late (a.).
Մկբ .// կապ. adj - 1. continuous, uninterrupted (m.), 2. adjacent, next to (k.), 3. like (k.).
Գոյ .// մկբ .// կապ. down - 1. down (m.), 2. down the side (c.), 3. to the bottom (m. / k.).
From the point of view of inter-verbal semantic relations, ambiguous macabas are mainly synonymous-antonym.
Synonymous macabres are: Eternal (1. forever, 2. pkhb. Long և, always, constantly) -har (1. continuous, always, uninterrupted (m.), Adjacent, next to (k.).
Evil (1. cruel, 2. cruel) - pagan (like pagan, 2. barbaric).
Spicy (1. with a spicy taste (a.), 2. stinging, biting, insulting (a. / M.) - bitter (1. bitter (a.), 2. puffy, unpleasant, unpleasant (a. / M. ), 3. heavy (a. / M), 4. sad (a. / M.) Adjective / macabre's expressive words are synonyms according to macabre meanings.
Thus he's naked, naked - 1. without clothes, 2. poor, without clothes, 3. poor.
Tasteless (1. tasteless, 2. tasteless) - anal (1. salty, 2. tasteless, unpleasant, 3. tasteless boring) և etc.
The principle of teaching the antidote of ambiguous macabres is to express a conceptual contradiction. in various antonyms.
Hasty (1. hasty, 2. not fully done due to haste) -hushik (1. slowly, 2. carefully, 3. gently).
Late (1. late (m.), 2. late time (k), 3. late time (a.).
The multi-meaning word ներով with the mentioned meanings is an antonym of hasty.
The word naum (1. slow, 2. tartam) contradicts the latter.
Hushik macbay in its second sense is an antonym of the word pagan (1. like a pagan, 2. pkhb. Barbarically), according to the mentioned meaning, and in the third sense it is an antonym of hord (1. varar, 2. hordaratmakbayan.
('s .// mcb.) according to the word) Dalkoren (1. dalkuk, 2. pkhb. dim, in a weak way) - hard (1. alcohol a lot, 2. dark, dense, 3. strong, severely - ats./ մկբ.).
The word dalkoren in the mentioned sense is an antonym of na-rock-rock (1. like a rock, 2. pkb. Indestructible, invincible).
In order for learners to acquire practical skills, it is required to use those words first in word combinations and then in sentences.
  They consider their meanings և once համոզ make sure that those words have multiple meanings.
Considering such semantic manifestations of macabres, learners come to the conclusion that such macabres express ambiguity in the general meanings of horse և size, horse ևtime, place և place.
At this stage of the summary, it is suggested to perform exercises that make the acquired knowledge more conscious.
Exercise 1. Determine the types of polysemy used in the passage according to the meaning և Interpret.
The air here was so stuffy that people could hardly breathe.
  The whispers stopped for a moment.
  The doctor calmly informed him of the arrival of his son.
  He is sad, without children.
  It seemed that he had separated from them long, long ago, as if he had been separated from them forever.
He did not think about returning to Moscow yet.
 (Al. Shir.).
Exercise 2. Night - day, forever, soon, early, never use the adverbs of time in sentences.
Exercise 3. Underline the polysemous macabres in the given phrases.
  Explain the meaning of the phrase և use them in sentences. To fall in the door, put down your weapon, fly up, God forbid.
Exercise 4. Introduce horse's time, time's multifaceted macabres.
  Use them in localities և interpret the meanings.
According to the peculiarities of special education, their methodological-linguistic bases, the following conclusions can be made. It is necessary to introduce the learners to the parts of the characteristic speech in depth, especially to compare the adjective umakbay և their multiplicity, which will contribute to the enrichment of the students' pictorial vocabulary.
to the formation of thinking, 2. In the process of teaching Macbeth's ambiguous words, giving the course theoretical-practical significance to the course, it is necessary to reach the conscious mastery of the learners.
The knowledge gained about the semantic types of Macbeths will lead to the development of students' pictorial verbal skills.
In the multifaceted process, students acquire knowledge about the semantic groups of words, apply their skills in practice, differentiate between synonymous words, and master the patterns of construction.
The main goal of the trainer within the framework of the teaching of the topic of artistic teaching is to be the attitude of the students of the Armenian language, in particular the students of polysyllabic verbs և to strengthen the knowledge of polysemous polysyllabic words through various tasks.
  Develop skills in students to use artistic originals, to work around the original.
