The German-speaking process requires new approaches և the development of a methodological basis for German as a foreign language course.
Therefore, the urgency of this article is conditioned by the need to establish a new methodological basis for the in-university course.
  The purpose of this article is to illustrate the system-specific features of the German-language approach with an example.
The latter allow the teacher to achieve effective grammar training.
  To achieve this goal, the article addresses the following issues: Due to the grammar of teaching • Demonstrate the peculiarities of teaching German grammar; • Identify the systematic nature of German grammar by example; • Introduce the practical significance of German grammar in German
The need to teach grammar in German as a foreign language has recently been met with controversy.
  The grammar system of German is considered complex, և such a stereotypical approach often creates obstacles in the learning process.
  In this case, the relevant methodological basis plays an essential role.
  In the modern German language course, the old methods have been replaced by new, modern methods, which are not only aimed at the effective teaching of grammar, but also at the development of a positive predisposition in other students [4].
  However, there are questions that cast doubt on the importance of teaching grammar ներն import methods and methods.
 Learners of German as a foreign language may be bored or have language comprehension problems as they constantly face issues, as the emphasis is often on the subject.
 For example, in addition to learning the meaning of words, especially nouns, one should also pay attention to a number of other phenomena, such as the noun joint, the plural form of the verb, and in some cases the type of conjugation.
  Therefore, in the case of teaching on horse, grammatically valuable phenomena, the seeming shortcomings that complicate and slow down the learning process in the later stages of language learning become the cornerstone on which the whole foreign language learning process is built.
  To ensure the effectiveness of the grammar learning process, a combined grammar teaching horse can be used, according to which grammatical elements are introduced through appropriate linguistic materials, texts, creating an internal connection between the language և content և, which significantly contributes to the development of the communicative component of the German course.
Thus, the students are at the center with their personal needs.
  Therefore, the planning of the objectives, methods, and methods of each class should be tailored to the relevant group needs and requirements.
By localizing the issue under discussion, let us limit ourselves to a university course in German only, where we are talking about German as a foreign language or as a second foreign language course.
  In this case, the need to teach grammar is no longer debatable for the simple reason that German as a first or second language learner cannot be deprived of a theoretical foundation in German.
  The German language component of the course becomes a priority, especially for first-language learners, in order to form a complete typological description of the native languages, as well as to form an idea of ​​the features of the English language system at different stages of language development.
  In this case, the introduction of basic linguistic knowledge aims to develop a systematic approach among learners, creating preconditions for linguistic research in the later stages of learning.
Thus, the German approach to teaching grammar in German as a foreign language or as a second foreign language in higher education is considered.
  In this article, the feature of systematics is presented as the ethical-grammatical relations, the systemic internal relations serve as a positive factor for the formation of a new methodological basis, ensuring the efficiency of the learning process.
by the example of the principle of systematicity.
The paradigm of nouns is richly represented in German.
  It is classified according to the hallmark.
  There are many approaches to the traditional system of nouns.
  Without referring to them, let us mention that we accept the 4 types of conjugation for the noun, which are more general in all grammars, according to which, we distinguish engo-syllable, mixed types.
Strong, weak, sloping German, the German language has a complex connotation.
  In German, the noun has 4 syllables: direct, sexual, tragic, accusative, each of which has its functions և acts in a certain syntactic position.
  The conjugation of a noun is closely related to the conjugation of an adjective, as with some types of pronouns, the conjugation of an adjective.
  Moreover, the conjugation of the noun is directly related to the order of the gender է It is derived from it: masculine, feminine, neutral.
  Holov, as a grammatical order of the noun, expresses the syntactic function of the latter [1].
Referring to all the types of suffixes of the noun, we should mention that only the nouns of the neuter gender belong to the strong suffix, the main feature of which is the suffix -es in the gender suffix.
  The feminine noun belongs to the feminine nouns, the characteristic of which is the absence of the suffix in all the syllables.
  Weak conjugation uses exclusively singular nouns, the index of which is the ending -en in the sexual, tragic, and accusative conjunctions.
  Mixed consonants are a limited number, և the main feature in 3 consonants, with the exception of the direct, as in the '-s ending in the consonant, combining weak և strong consonant endings.
  This conjugation also includes genitive nouns, with the exception of the noun das Herz, which, however, indicates a special type of conjugation, leaving a mixed conjugation in the conjugation.
Based on the experience gained in the course of German as a foreign language, it should be stated that the spelling of a certain article is of primary importance here, which creates the whole theoretical basis on which the spelling paradigm of German is built.
  In this respect, it is considered to be the starting point due to the sophisticated trailer system, which shows perfect equivalence with the inclusion of 4 trailers.
  The absence of other syllables in Armenian is supplemented in German by prepositional structures, which allow to present the ending in the language, that is, the grammatical meanings and relations.
  The introduction of certain horse-drawn carriages should be reinforced in the learners through a system of appropriate exercises, making the mastery of the given topic more effective and interesting.
The indefinite article should be combined with the indefinite article, showing the basic principle by which teaching indefinite article will not require extra effort on the part of the learner.
  In other words, it should be noted that the corresponding suffixes are attached to the indefinite article by the analogy of a certain article, forming the indefinite article suffix system, emphasizing the generality of masculine "neuter" gender syllables in the suffix system .
The plural absence of the indefinite article should be emphasized here.
According to the same principle, negative (kein, kein, keine, keine (Pl.)), Receipt (mein, mein, meine, meine (Pl.) Եւ etc.), index (dieser, dieses, diese, diese (Pl.) Are imported. , jener, jenes, jene, jene (Pl.)) և interjection of interrogative pronouns (welcher, welches, welche, welche (Pl.)).
  All this, however, does not presuppose the simultaneous introduction of the given topics, but on the principle of sequence, gradually joining the features of the group.
It should be noted, however, that in modern textbooks the principle of grammatical systematization is not observed;
  Therefore, in this case, the whole burden of teaching grammar remains with the teacher, whose task is to combine different textbooks, to present the grammar in the correct sequence, based on the peculiarities of the group.
Thus, the systematicity typical of the German language system, which becomes the main provision of German as a foreign language university course.
  This circumstance plays an essential role in the development of the methodology of introducing German grammar, the use of the latter in one of the foreign language courses becomes one of the cornerstones.
  Therefore, the need to introduce in-depth knowledge of grammar can never be questioned, in this case the only question remains the choice of methodology.
  German grammar, with all its complexity, mentions systemic features that make it possible to develop a methodological basis for teaching German as a foreign language.
Effective German-language approaches to achieve language acquisition.
