Mankind has always witnessed military operations, bearing the direct consequences.
  We are not left out in the second decade of the 21st century, when, although the whole world seems to be living in the golden age of civilization, shots are still heard.
There is a similar situation in the Republic of Armenia and Artsakh today, which proves that this topic is more than relevant.
Despite the existence of norms, there are many military conflicts in our region, from which the civilians suffer.
The work discussed not only the existing legal regulations, but also the issues arising from them in practice.
  This is the protection of persons with "levee en masse" status, which in many contexts is discussed in international humanitarian law and raises issues of international humanitarian law.
  As a result of the work research, the situation in our region was referred to.
In the light of the statistical data published by the ICRC Office գրասենյ International Federation for Human Rights, the legal protection of civilians killed or injured as a result of armed conflict in our region was discussed.
The peculiarity of the work is emphasized especially in the recent period of tense military situation in our region.
  The novelty of the study is that there are very few studies on the topic in the domestic literature, we believe that the analyzes made in the work աջThe suggestions can be used for further scientific research, as well as for legal analysis during hostilities in our region.
 The work was done using a combination of historical and comparative methods.
  The study was carried out as a result of a comprehensive analysis of conventions, precedent decisions, as well as military initiatives, declarations and international legal acts of a number of states.
There are three main principles in the theory of both Armenian and International Humanitarian Law (IHR) that govern the conduct of hostilities by participants in an armed conflict. [1]
  These are the principles of differentiation, proportionality and warning, the purpose of which is to protect the civilian population from the effects of the conflict.
  It is also designed to protect against unnecessary suffering or injury that protects balanced targets.
  These principles were enshrined in the First Protocol, which was annexed to the Conventions, but before that they existed in the customary international non-aggression armed conflict, were popular, and were applied by the participants in the armed conflict.
The principle stipulates that in the event of armed conflict between differentiated combatants, the parties to the conflict are obliged to separate the participants in the armed conflict.
  Accordingly, they can be conventionally divided into two groups: combatants (combatants) and non-combatants (non-combatants).
  The parties to the conflict must distinguish between the civilian population and the objects և, respectively, the military objects when carrying out their actions during military conflicts.
  The party to an armed conflict may only directly attack combatants and / or military facilities.
  It should be noted that each member of the armed forces is qualified as a combatant in military operations, in addition to all combatants are required to comply with the norms of international law applicable during armed conflicts, however, violations of these norms do not deprive them of the right to be considered combatants.
  Combatants must always be different from civilians during hostilities.
  However, during logically armed conflicts, situations may arise where the combatant cannot be distinguished from the civilian population.
For such situations, it has been determined that the combatant must carry his weapon openly from the medical staff.
  Religious - in any military conflict, • when he is in the eyes of the adversary - in the course of the pre-offensive campaign in which he is to take part.
Attacks on combatants and / or military facilities must always be carried out in accordance with the principle of proportionality.
  In other words, military facilities can be attacked only after the conclusion that the losses suffered by the civilian population from the facilities do not outweigh the expected military advantage.
The use of weapons, artillery, methods of warfare և means that may cause excessive suffering or injury is prohibited.
  Combatants will not be able to use weapons that are not acceptable from the point of view of MMI և can cause unnecessary pain.
According to Article 50 of the First Additional Protocol, any person belonging to any of the other categories is a civilian.
  In case of doubt, the data is considered a civilian.
  The civilian population consists of all persons considered to be civilians.
 The presence of individuals not considered under the definition of civilians does not, in the end, deprive the civilian population of its civic characterization.
 In our opinion, the Convention, in fact, gives a negative definition of the term, without detailing the peculiarities of this status.
A document entitled "The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Guidelines for Direct Participation in the Conflict in 2009 (ICRC)" states that civilians are considered to be direct participants in armed conflicts when they carry out special operations that are directly related to armed conflict.
  Include retaliatory actions by civilians, at least as a direct criterion for direct participation in conflicts. The action to be taken must reach a certain threshold of damage.
2. There must be a causal link between the action վնաս damage և done.
3. A belligerent appointment means to the belligerent side of the preconceived notion to the detriment of another.
(belligerent nexus) The presence of an orbital to achieve a certain threshold of harm. The action is necessary.
  Moreover, preparatory measures for such operations are considered as direct involvement in hostilities.
Each side of a military conflict has the right to choose the means and methods of waging war.
  There is a fair question as to how to distinguish between the weapons used. "
  The International Court of Justice has addressed this issue in an advisory opinion, [5] noting that this is primarily aimed at protecting the "objects" of the civilian population, "clearly distinguishes between combatants 'and non-combatants', so the belligerent side should They were aimed at the direct participants of the hostilities as much as possible, excluding the civilian population from becoming a possible target of the objects.
The court, recognizing this provision, recognizes "priority attention to the civilian population."
for military development.
  Moreover, in 1969, the Israeli military court ruled in Qasem's case [7] that it recognized the immunity of civilians from direct attack, considering this to be the cornerstone of the MMI.
  This decision became the starting point for the IAU.
  Article 13 2 2 of the Additional Protocol stipulates that the civilian population, as well as individual civilians, should not be the object of an attack [9].
  It is forbidden to threaten the civilian population with the main purpose of intimidating.
  This provision prohibits not only the civilian population, but also individuals from being attacked.
  This implies that even in cases where a civilian does not engage in violence with other members of the civilian population during a given military conflict (the term population is perceived as a mass of people), he or she is protected by the provision of the IOM.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) defined the civilian population in 2000 as Prosecutor v. Tihomir Blaskiˇc as persons who are either non-members of the armed forces or have ceased to be members.
  This, in comparison with the above definitions, logically emphasizes how many civilians have been in the armed forces since the beginning of the military conflict.
 However, experience shows that it is acceptable for the MMI that civilians do not take part in armed conflicts in any way.
  From the moment a civilian becomes an participant in an armed conflict, he loses the protection he had as a civilian.
"Levee enmasse" is defined as an exception to this principle.
  This term refers to the situation when the inhabitants of the settlements, which are not yet occupied by the enemy, gradually take up arms spontaneously approaching the enemy in order to resist the enemy, without having a specific time to form an armed force.
  Very recently, a similar situation took place in Artsakh, when the residents of the city of Hadrut used self-propelled guns for self-defense, resisting the militant fighters. [11]
  According to the convention, these individuals become combatants from the moment they take up arms openly;
 This is enshrined in the Hague Convention on the Third Convention.
  In particular, according to the Convention, the inhabitants of the unoccupied territory, who naturally take up arms when the enemy approaches, to fight against the invading forces, but have not yet managed to form a regular army, if they carry weapons openly, observe the laws of war.
  In this sense, the customs of the Convention are considered prisoners of war.
  In this regard, a number of military initiatives point to the fact that there may be cases where civilians working in military facilities, such as factories, do not actually take part in armed conflict, but actually run the potential risk of being involved in the military.
We believe that in fact, during the armed conflict, it is a rather difficult և systemic task to differentiate the status of people in the MMI.
  In our view, those with "levee en masse" status should not be given the status of a combatant, but should continue to enjoy civilian status, as such persons should not be overlooked from the outset, waging war, causing harm to the adversary, and therefore lacking the ICRC criteria, in case of at least one of which a civilian is considered a combatant.
  We are convinced that such people do not have a specific goal of waging a war, they take part in the armed conflict regardless of their will, objectively defending themselves, their family, the settlement, which is not protected by the organized army.
  In fact, such persons should be considered the only exception to the Convention definition.
  Therefore, they should use the protection provided to the civilian, as it is wider.
be primary.
  According to the official website of some ICRC, civilian casualties have been the victims of armed conflicts for the past 60 years.
  Subsequently, in armed conflicts, the protection of civilians has been deliberately attacked by civilians, subjected to horrific atrocities, in violation of the norms of international conventions, and respect for human beings.
The International Federation for Human Rights also referred to the tense situation.
  According to the periodicals published in our region, the Armenian side suffered 92 casualties during the hostilities in April 2016, including 4 civilians.
 This is a proof that we will maintain our norms in the region, civilians in general.
The civilian population has the right to the protection of its life, dignity, personal rights, and respect for political and religious beliefs.
  They should not be subjected to degrading treatment or punishment և should be protected from all forms of violence or retaliation.
There have been many cases in the history of MMI that have been tortured, brutally tortured, and civilians have been injured or killed as a result of hostilities.
  As an example, we can cite the case of the Prosecutor v. Dusko Tadic [17], which is a precedent for the IHR not only for the fact that it referred to the protection of civilians, but also for the fact that for the first time in this decision conflict.
  The military tribunal in this case condemns the use of force against Bosnian civilians by the Bosnian Serb armed forces, which was accompanied by the use of weapons.
Humanitarian International Summing up the study, we can state that human rights violations are not committed because of the lack of norms, but because there is no desire to apply those norms.
In addition, from a practical point of view, the legal protection measures designed to protect the civilian population from hostilities are rather weak.
As a result of the violation of other principles of humanitarian law, the right to receive civil protection granted to the civilian population participating in hostilities, while we believe that the population with such a status should continue to enjoy the protection afforded to the civilian.
The article was presented at the Student Conference of 29.09.2020.
